A MODERN VIEW Of such PARTS of EUROPE: That has lately been and still are the
places of great Transactions, Viz.

ITALY with all its Principalities. FRANCE with all its Provinces and
Bishoprics.

GERMANY with the Dukedom of Lorrain, and all the Electorates, and Lordships
of the Empire.

SPAIN, With all its Dominions, etc.

Wherein is showed the Present State of all those Countries, with Curious
Remarks of Antiquity Interwoven.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by J. Bird, at the Sun near the King's Bench in
Westminster Hall. 1689.

TO THE Candid Reader.
THis Treatise exposes to your view the most eminent Things and Transactions
of this World, concerning Ecclesiastical States, Monarchies, Republics, the
varieties of Sects and Religions, the Origin of Arts and Sciences, several
unparalled Accidents, variety of Recherches in Antiquity and Memoires,
containing the Combats, Battles, Sieges, surprizal or taking of Towns, and the
most signalized and memorable Actions that have happened in this Modern Age.

If any curious Reader shall oppose the Digressions of this Tract, I must
desire him to consider that they are both useful and necessary; and so far from
exposing him to Fatigue and Trouble, that they will prove a grand Satisfaction
and Diversion. I must confess I have in this Composition discovered several
gross Errors in some Authors, whom I have forborne to recite, because I scorn
to shame them: but if any Critics desire a more regugular Method than herein
is chalked out, (which is a thing of more than ordinary difficulty in a
Business of this nature, and in so great variety of Matter) I desire them to
take into their consideration, that this Natural way of Writing will be, by all
Persons of Ingenuity, preferred before any Scholastic Dissertation or
Disputation whatsoever.

I have no more to say but this: You will herein find Variety, the Comfort and
Satisfaction of Mankind; that Gravity, which will please the Serious; that
Diversion, which will gratify the Curious; that Variety, which can displease
none, but such as are void and destitute both of Sense and Reason: And
therefore I shall detain you no longer from the perusal of this Treatise; only
give me leave to acquaint you, that there is herein contained nothing but what
is grounded upon Truth, and gathered from the most Authentic Writers, and
present State of this Modern Age.

Yours, Gidion Pontier.

A TABLE OF THE Contents of this Book.
Of ITALY.
THe Papacy page 1 The Etymology of the Name Cardinal; his Institution and his
Habits 10 The Continuation of the Actions of Pope Innocent the Eleventh 13 The
Singularities, and curious remarkable Actions of some Popes 15 Observations on
the reducement of Jubiles, under what Popes, and in what times 22 The opening
of the Jubilee 25 The splendid Ceremonies, and the Honor of Rome 29 St.
Austin's three Desires ibid. The Dominion of the Pope 30 Places of Pleasure
ibid. Ornaments of Rome 32 The chief Towns of Italy, with their Epithets and
Elogies 33 The chief Rivers of Italy 35 Popes by birth Frenchmen, and Passages
of their Lives 36 The future Popes, how conformable to the Prophecies 54 The
chief Princes of Italy, after the Popes, are five. First the Duke of Savoy 55
Secondly, the Great Duke of Tuscany 62 Thirdly, the Duke of Mantua 67 Fourthly,
the Duke of Modena 69 Fifthly, the Bishop of Trent 71 The Figure of Italy, and
its length ibid. An Itinerary 72
Of FRANCE 75
THe Dolphin of France and his Marriage 79 The Duke of Orleans 81 The Prince of
Conde, and the Duke d'Enguien 83 Prince Henry de la Tour d'Auvergne, Vicount de
Turenne 84 The ancient Marshals of France living An. 1680. 86 The Ministers and
Secretaries of State ibid. The Chancellor 87 M. de la Villiere 89 M. de Louvois
90 M. Colbert 91 M. Colbert Croissi 93 The Councils 94 France the Mountain of
the Muses 97 King of France his places of Residence 98 The Louvre ibid. The
Tuilleries 100 Fontainbleau ibid. Versailles 101 Paris 103 College Mazarin,
its Institution, Library, and Academy 109 The House of President Perrot 112
Houses of Pleasure about Paris 116 Houses and Places of Devotion near Paris 118
The Treasury of St. Dennis 120 The Tombs of the Kings of France 124 Other
famous places of Devotion and Pilgrimages greatly frequented in the Kingdom 125
The twelve ancient general Governments of the Provinces, called together at
Paris under Louis the Thirteenth, according to their rank and place in the
States General 129 The Governors of the Provinces 130 Conquered Countries 133
The Fertility of France 134 The Channel of Languedoc 135 The chief Towns of
France 138 The most considerable Maritime Towns ibid. The great Rivers 142 The
Epithites of the great Rivers 144 The principal small Rivers 145 Pont du Guard
150 A Catalogue of the Archbish. and Bishops of France, containing the number
and name of the first and last Bishop of each Diocese, to An. 1680. 153 The
Archbishopric of Rheims ibid. The Archbishopric of Narbonne 156 The
Archbishopric of Bourges 159 The Archbishopric of Vienne 160 The
Archbishopric of Tolose 162 The Archbishopric of Rouen 163 The Archbishopric
of Sens 164 The Bishops of Bethlem 165 The Archbishopric of Lions 167 The
Archbishopric of Bourdeaux 169 The Archbishopric of Arles 170 The
Archbishopric of Ambrun 172 The Archbishopric of Tours 174 The Archbishopric
of Aix 176 The Archbishopric of Paris 177 The Archbishopric of Albi 179 The
Archbishopric of Cambray 181 The Archbishopric of Bezancon 183 The Rank and
Seats of the Prelates 184 Agents General of the Clergy of France 185 The
ordinary List of the Parliaments of France, and the time of their erection 187
The Countries of State 193 Remarkable things of these times, happening from the
year 1672, to the beginning of 1680. 193 Of the Peace betwixt France, Holland,
Spain, the Emperor, the Elector of Brandenburg, and Denmark 203 The Marriage
of the Princess Mary Louise of Orleans with the King of Spain 205 A
Continuation of Affairs to this time 206
Of LORAIN 208
THe chief Towns in Lorain 210 Those of the Duchy of Bar ibid. Mausoleums of
the Dukes of Lorain ibid. The Marriage of Prince Charles of Lorain 213
Of GERMANY 214
OF the City of Vienna 215, 221 The chief Houses of Pleasure in the Country 215
The Coronation of the Emperor, with the signification of the three Crowns 216
The Golden Bull 217 Prerogatives of the Emperor 219 Fourteen Emperors of the
House of Austria ibid. The chief Towns of Germany 220 The Cities of Prague and
Presburg 222 Of Aix-la-Chappelle and Ratisbonne 223 Of Erfort, Munic, and
Strasburg 224 The Tower, Clock, Bridge, and famous Trees of Strasburg 225 The
Ceremonies of Electing the Bishop of Strasburg 226 The number and Residence of
the Canons of Strasburg 227 The ancient Entrance of the Bishop of Strasburg,
and the number of Bishops it has had 228 Of the Cities of Hamburg and Munster
229 The Cities of Magdeburg, Nuremburg, and Ausbourg 231 The Cities of
Francsort, Passau, Visbourg, Brunswick, Inspruc, Bremen, Hanover, Spire 232,
233 The Imperial Maritime and Hans-Towns 233 The Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics of Germany 235 The Principalities and Lordships of the Empire, and
its Division 236 The chief Rivers in Germany 237 The Electors of the Empire 239
The Archbishop and Elector of Mayence 240 Boniface condemned the Bishop of
Saltzbourg for an Heretic, for believing the Antipodes. Of the Towers of Rats
242 The Invention of Printing 243 The first Bible that was printed 245 The
Archbishop and Elector of Treves 247 The Archbishop and Elector of Cologne 249
The Homage to the Elector of Cologne 250 An Observation on the three
Ecclesiastical Electors 254 An Observation on the Lay-Electors ibid. The
Electoral Habit 255 The Treaties of Peace betwixt England, France, and Holland,
by Sir Joseph Williamson, etc. at Cologne 256. Of Treaties of Peace in the
years 1678 and 1679 257 The Elector and King of Bohemia 258 The Elector of
Bavaria 261 Dr. Vossius Prebend of Windsor his MS. 262 The Electory of Saxony
264 Of Martin Luther of Wittemberg 265 The Elector of Brandenburg 267 Taking of
Stetin, Stralsont, and Gripswal Anno 1677, and 1678. of Anclan 1679. 270 Prince
Louis of Brandenburg married, Anno 1681. 273 The Elector Palatine 274 The
Consecration of the new Church at Frederickbourg, 1680. 278 Of the number of
the Electors, and other Circumstances 279 The Invention of Powder and Cannon
280
Of SPAIN 282
THe chief Houses of Pleasure that belong to the King, and out of Madrid 283
The chief places of Devotion 285 The Division of the Spanish Monarchy 287
Catalonia, Portugal, etc. 288 The Towns of Spain ibid. Madrid, Toledo, Sevil,
Grenada 289 Sarragossa, Valencia, Compostella, Salamanca, Cordona, Barcelona,
Cadiz 290, 291 The Rivers of ancient Spain 291 The Archbishopricks of Spain 293
The Castillian Language 297 The King of Spain his Letter to Don John, December
24. 1676. 298 The Queen Mother her Letter to Don John, December 27. 1676. 299
Don John of Austria's Answer 300 Marquess of Villa banished An. 1678. restored
An. 1681. 301 Don John of Austria died 1680. ibid. The King of Spain's
Marriage. 302
A New Survey OF THE STATE of the WORLD.
ITALY.
The PAPACY.
INnocent the Eleventh, Vicar of Jesus Christ on the Earth, and Bishop of Rome,
formerly Benedict Odescalchi, was born in the year 1613. at Como in the Country
of Millain: was created Cardinal under the Title of St. Onuphrius, in the year
1645. by Innocent the Tenth, whose name he bears by way of acknowledgment.

He was elected Pope, Anno 1676. the 21 of September, being the day and Feast
of St. Matthew; was exalted the 4th of October following: Cardinal Maldachin,
first Deacon of the Sacred College, performed the Ceremony of the Proclamation.

The 8th of November this Prelate went from St. Peter's Church to St. John
Laterans, where he received at entrance the two Keys, the one of Gold, the
other of Silver, from the hands of Cardinal Chisi, who is Archpriest, after
having first kissed the Cross, which his Eminency presented him. There were
carried in this Cavalcade, according to custom, the vacant Hats, which were at
that time to the number of six. There was vacant a twenty third place in the
Sacred College, by the death of Cardinal Bernardino Rocci, which happened at
the end of the month November, 1680.

The Arms of his Holiness's House are in a Field Argent six Salvers Gules,
three in chief, two in flank or in fess, and one in point or in base: These
surmounted by three Bars of the same, debrused with an Escutcheon Argent,
charged with a Lion Passant Gardant Gules: Lastly, a Chief, Or, thereon a
single Eagle displayed, Sable.

His Prophetic Motto was, Bellua insatiabilis; because this Pope has in his
Arms the Eagle and the Lion, insatiable Animals, with Salvers; or else because
he has continually with him in his principal actions Cardinal Cibo, which
signifies Food; who follows him in his Chapel, in the Church, in the
Consistory, and elsewhere. See the Allusion. Wherefore after that Innocent had
declared his Eminency his first Minister and Secretary of State, some person
writ, Vere bellua insatiabilis, quia sine Cibo nunquam vivere potest. We may
and ought better to understand insatiable of the salvation of Souls, and in a
word, of his Zeal for the House of God, conformably to the Motto of the Royal
Prophet, Zelus domus tuoe Comedit me: and to see the glory of God, the only
thing that can satisfy, as the same King and Prophet says, Satiabor cum
apparuerit gloria tua. The Prophetic Motto of Pope Urban the Third, called
before his Exaltation, Lambert Cribelli, was, Sus in Cribo, because his Arms
were a Sow in a Sieve, and that he was of Millain, where its Founders lighted
on a Sow covered the one half with Wool, and the other with Hair; whence is
come the word Mediolana and de Medio-lanum. The Prophetic device of Eugenius
the Fourth was Lupa Coelestina, the Wolf Coelestine, because he had for Arms a
Wolf, and had been a religious man of the Coelestins. The four Evangelists are
mystically represented under the Figures of four Animals; St. Matthew has for
Emblem a Man, St. Mark the Lion, St. Luke the Ox, and St. John the Eagle. These
are the four Animals that the Prophet Ezekiah saw in a Vision, which carried
the Throne of God. Jesus Christ is called the Lion of the Tribe of Juda; Vicit
Leo de Tribu Juda.

The Papal Scutcheon, which is Gules, consists of a long Cap, or Headpiece,
Or, surmounted with a Cross pearled and garnished with three Royal Crowns, with
the two Keys of St. Peter placed in Saltier.

Boniface the Eighth was the first that wore the Tiara with a double Crown, and
Urban the Fifth made it triple in the form of a Cap, adorned with a triple
circle of Gold, for some Mystery that is contained in it: They call it the
Regnum, because it denotes the dignity and power of Priest and Emperor. The
Popes never wear it on their heads in doing their Office; it may be upon the
Altar, but they make use of Miters: the Tiara serves but at the Coronation of
the Pope, and other Solemnities going and returning from the Church. It was
typified by that of the great Priest of the Hebrews, of which Josephus says,
that it was called Aurea Corona Pontificis in triplicem fabricata seriem.

No Pope in his Exaltation has dared to take the name of Peter, through respect
to the first Vicar of Jesus Christ.

The ordinary place of Residence of the Popes is Rome, pleasantly watered with
the River Tiber, which divides it into two unequal parts.

The day of their Coronation, the Master of Ceremonies kneeling on the ground,
burns Flax in their presence, and says to them thrice with a loud voice, Pater
Sancte, sic transit gloria Mundi: Holy Father, behold the continuance of this
fire, thus passes the glory of this world. It is reported, that they say to
them also in this Ceremony, Non videbis dies Petri; that is to say, Peter lived
twenty five years, you will not live so long: And in reality it is observed,
that since S. Peter no Pope has ever passed twenty five years in his sovereign
Pastorship, whether he were elected young or old. Adrian the First, and St.
Sylvester the First, Romans, and Urban the Eighth a Florentine, came nearest to
it. Adrian held the Government of the Church twenty three years, ten months,
and seventeen days; the other two about twenty two years each, and then they
were fain to leave the World. Urban the Eighth was of the Noble Family of the
Barbarins.

As soon as Innocent was raised to the supreme dignity of the Apostleship, he
resolved on twenty eight Articles of Reformation, which were signed by all the
Cardinals; and he caused a Consistorial Bull to be made of these Orders, that
the Popes his Successors might not so easily derogate from them. His most
Christian Majesty having been well informed from a long time of his merit,
desired his Election, though he were a natural Subject to the King of Spain.

His Holiness lessened above half of the Officers and Domestics belonging to
the Household of the last sovereign Pastors. Being made acquainted that the
Venetians had made choice of four Ambassadors of Obedience to come and
complement him according to custom, he signified to the Senate that he
dispensed with their Civility, and thankt them for having admitted his House
amongst the number of the Nobles of Venice.

He sent to the King of Poland sums of Money to maintain the War against the
Turks and Tartars, and assisted that Kingdom with his own Purse even before his
Exaltation, and daily does surprising and admirable things. It Is a truth known
at Rome, that Benedict Odescalchi during his Cardinalship, often threw Purses
of Money in cognito into houses of persons in want. A Gentleman of Liege having
been robbed, and desiring his assistance in his necessity, he gave him a Bill
to receive 4000 Crowns, having first told him that he had seen him somewhere.
The Gentleman thinking that he should not be paid so great a sum, presented him
the Bill to know whether his Eminency had not mistaken in writing it; he
answered him, You will be readily paid it; and do not divulge what I have done,
I wish I could do somewhat more.

The 19th of October 1679. his Holiness held a Consistory, where he gave in
charge to the Cardinals Barberin, Cibo, Ottoboni, and Albritio, to inform
themselves aright of the desert of persons to be raised to the Episcopal
dignity; and exhorted Princes who have the Nomination to Prelateships, to
present persons endowed with Pastoral qualities.

The 4th of December 1676. his Holiness caused a Bull of Universal Jubilee to be
published in Rome, at the entrance of his Pontificate, in which he gave fifteen
days for obtaining it, on condition that they should pray to God to grant his
Person all necessary assistances for the well-government of the Holy Catholic
Church; and that they should beg also, that he would inspire Christian Princes
to live in good peace and concord, and what else is expressed in the Bull:
because at Rome they gain the Jubilee before it be sent into the States of other
Christian Princes; Innocent the Eleventh sent the Bull of the great Jubilee into
France, and elsewhere, which continued two Months in the Diocese of Paris,
which received these two Jubiles at the same time.

Clement the Tenth his Predecessor granted to the faithful three universal
Jubiles; the first was at his coming to his Pontificate; the second in favor
of the Polanders, to implore the Divine Assistance against the Turks; the third
was the great Jubilee of the Holy year, fixed and ordinary, which happens now
from twenty five years to twenty five years.

The Fourth of January 1677, the Body of Innocent the Tenth being taken up in
St. Peter's Church, with the ordinary Ceremonies, and carried into that of St.
Agnes. Innocent the Eleventh gave order for building him a most magnificent
Mausoleum.

The twenty fifth of February of the same year, his Holiness made an
exhortation in the Apostolic Palace, to all the Curats of the City of Rome,
concerning the necessity and indispensable duty of Teaching the People.

The Third of March he Blessed and distributed the Ashes, and heard Mass
celebrated by Cardinal Ludovisio, and the Sermon of one Father Theatin.

The Twelfth he Instructed the Preachers to preach the Gospel with simplicity,
and without far-sought Embellishments: and in reality, it is a vain thing to
study points of Wit and Flowers to adorn that which shines enough of it self.
Good Friday he heard the Sermon of the Passion of the Son of God, which was
made by the Father Recanati, Capuchin.

The Ninth of November his Holiness caused the Corn to be seized, whereof some
particular persons had made Magazines, to sell it at an excessive rate, and to
make an advantage of the scarcity wherewith many places of Italy were
afflicted: his Holiness laboring for the comfort of the poor, regulated its
price, and distribution after such a manner, that drew public Blessings upon
him.

An. 1678. the Ninth of June, the Pope made a Decree, strictly forbidding the
Prelates of the Congregation of Riti to take other fees in Canonizations than
those specified by this Decree; which much moderates the Charges that have been
usually made in these Ceremonies.

The Ninth of July his Holiness received, to his extreme comfort, the news sent
him by the Nuncio of Turin, that by the Cares of the Duchess of Savoy, above
Four hundred persons in the Valley of Lucern, within her Territories, were
brought back into the bosom of the Church, and particularly the Minister
Danas, who made his Abjuration in the Cathedral Church, in the presence of
their Highnesses.

The Fourteenth of August his Holiness caused two Edicts to be published against
the Luxury of Clothes: Queen Christian of Sweden began the first to put them in
execution, the Roman Ladies presently followed her example.

In the same year Commissaries were appointed by Innocent the Eleventh, to
examine some Bulls set forth by his Predecessors, concerning some Office and
Indulgence, to consider whether these Bulls were observed according to their
tenor.

An. 1679. at the beginning of the year, a Decree was passed in the Vatican for
retrenching from Cardinals a multiplicity of Places, and for bestowing them on
others who had not any; it being not just that one should have all, and the
others nothing.

The Pope some days after appointed Commissaries for examining the Bull of
Sixtus the Fifth, who determined the number of Cardinals to Seventy; and the
report was, he had a design to reduce them to Fifty, in case this change might
be found advantageous to the Church. The Council of Constance limited them to
Twenty four. Pope Sixtus the Fourth to Thirty. Alexander the Sixth to Fifty.
Leo the Tenth to Sixty five. Pius the Fourth to Seventy six; and Sixtus the
Fifth to the number of Seventy, answering to the Seventy Elders given to Moses,
for his assistants in the Government of the Synagogue; time was, there were but
Twelve, according to the example of the Apostles.

The Etymology of the Name Cardinal: his Institution and his Habit.
THe word Cardinal comes from this, that the first and principal Churches of
Rome were called Ecclesiae Cardinales. St. Austin calls the principal
Donatists, Cardinales Donatistas. The first Cardinals were so called, because
they were the first and Chief Priests of their Churches.

They were appointed in so many streets of the City of Rome, for taking care of
the poor, under Pope Sylvester. After the death of this Prelate, whilst things
were calm in the Church, they took upon them the care of the Baptism and Burial
of the Faithful, and always reserved to themselves the Jurisdiction they had on
the Priests and Clerks of their Parish, when the Popes sent them abroad as
Legates. They continued in this state till Gregory the Seventh, at which time
Henry the Fourth Emperor of Germany was excluded from the Election of the
Popes, who were chosen by the Clergy and by the People, just as Bishops were.
Claudius Vaurus says on this subject, in his Book Entitled The Court of Rome,
that when these Priests, Cardinals, Curats of Rome, were Consecrated Bishops,
their dignity of Cardinal became void, as inferior to the Episcopacy.
Nevertheless, in succession of time seeing themselves Bishops, they desired of
the Popes to leave them the Title of Cardinals: the honorary Title of Cardinal
has been given since to those that assist the Pope with their Councels in the
Government of the Church.

St. Bernard, in a Letter that he writ to Pope Eugenius, calls them
Collaterales and Coadjutores Pontificis, de toto orb Judicaturos, de toto orb
diligendes, conformably to the words that the Pope pronounces at their
Creation, in these terms; Maxima dilectissimi filii, and Excellentissima
dignitate donati, estis ad Consilium Apostolorum vocati consiliarii nostri, and
Conjudices orbis terrarum, eritis Successores Apostolorum, circa thronum
sedebitis.

According to the same Claudius Vaurus, they never wear Velvet nor Satin, and
are ordinarily clothed but of two colors, Red and Violet: they are in Violet
during Advent and Lent, from Septuagesima, except the third Sunday of Advent,
and the first Sunday of Lent, days mixed of joy and sadness; in which they wear
the color of dried Roses, participating of red and violet; they are also in
violet every Friday, on Vigils, at the four times, and the day of the
Commemoration of the Dead, and wear no robe of silk. There is an exception to
this Rubric, because they wear the red color at the four times after
Pentecoste, on all the double Feasts that fall on Fridays out of Advent and
Lent, on the Vigil of the Nativity of the Son of God, on the Creation and
Coronation of the Pope, in what ever time it happens; on the Feast of St.
Peter's Chair at Rome, and at other solemn Feasts, and on days of public joy,
for victories obtained, and the like things. The Cardinals that are Monks, wear
always the color of their Order, except the Hat, and the Red Cap.

We do not comprize the Cardinals Jesuits amongst the Monks, because they are
none. Cardinal Bellarmine, the ornament of the Purpurated College, was habited
with Red, as the others according to the time that then was; with this
difference, that he wore the Habit of Jesuit underneath.

When a Cardinal is created Pope, he has 24000 Ducats of Revenue every day.

The Continuation of the Actions of Pope Innocent the Eleventh.
IN the Month of March of the fore said year, 1679. he caused all the Bishops
of Italy to be writ to, and enjoined them to examine with great care all those
that presented themselves to receive Holy Orders, and not to give them but to
fit persons, and when the Church had need of them.

He presented Medals of Gold and Silver, with his Picture on them, to the
Captains of the Dutch Vessels that brought Corn to Civita-Vechia.

According to the ordinary custom, though tired, on Holy Thursday, in the Dukes
Hall, he performed the Ceremony of washing the feet of Thirteen poor Foreign
Priests, habited with white Cloth; to each of which his Holiness gave
afterward a Medal of Gold and of Silver, and waited on them some time at Table.

The Twenty first of June, he sent to his Internuncio at Brussels, the Sum of
60000 Livres, for the subsistence of the Colleges which the English Catholics
have in Flanders; and sometime after, 60000 Crowns to be distributed to the
Catholics of England retired thither.

An. 1679. the fifteenth of October, the Pope visited the Church dell Anima, of
the German Nation, where he granted a Plenary Indulgence in form of a Jubilee,
to pray to God to deliver from the Plague the Town of Vienna in Austria, and
the other Towns of Germany.

The Seventeenth, the Pope called before him the Congregation established by
Clement the Eighth, for the Examination of Bishops for Italy, and there caused
to be examined the Father Gaetano Mirabello Theatin, whom he nominated for the
Archbishopric of Amalfi; Dom Carlo Berlinguier, whom he nominated to the
Archbishopric of St. Severin, and Dom Francisco Mogale for the Bishopric of
Isola: during their Examination, they answered always on their knees to all the
questions that were made them by the Cardinals, Prelates, and Divines, that
were of the Congregation, and afterward they were precognized in the first
Consistory for their due capacity. In France, by the Concordat betwixt Leo the
Tenth, and Francis the First, those that are nominated to Bishoprics are not
examined, because they are all Doctors or Licentiats in Divinity, in one of the
Laws Canon or Civil, which is a mark of their Capacity; they make only a
Profession of their Faith betwixt the hands of the Popes Nuncio, or of the
Metropolitan* Princes destinated to the Episcopacy, are dispensed from taking
the Degree in the University, nevertheless they are the first to study.

At the beginning of the year 1680, his Holiness caused all the Preachers to
come to the Palace, and exhorted them to preach particularly by their Example.

Singularities, and curious and remarkable Actions of some Popes.
ST. Clement the First instituted the College of Apostolical Protonotaries for
writing the Lives of Martyrs, and of all the other Saints. Claudius, surnamed
Vaurus, writes, that in his time a participant Protonotaries place was sold for
7000 Crowns of Gold, and that it yielded of yearly Revenue 3 or 4000 Crowns:
that the participant Protonotaries, which are in number twelve, are ordinarily
Masters of Requests for both Seals: that they have rank and place in the Popes
Chapel, are clothed with Violet, wear the Rochet, and the Hat, with the
Violet Band and Border; have precedence of Prelates which are not consecrated,
are present in the half public Consistory, at the Canonization of Saints, and
other great Actions of the Pope; have power to give the Cap of Doctor, and to
create Apostolical Protonotaries without the Walls of Rome. The same Claudius
Vaurus says, that if the Apostolical Protonotaries are not much esteemed in
France, it is because they are somewhat idle in performing their Function;
though happily this idleness be not blamable in them, because there is want of
matter for them to exercise themselves, there being but few Martyrs and Saints
at present within our Kingdom, that oblige the Protonotaries to write their
Lives.

St. Cletus was the first that inserted in his Letters these words: Salutem and
Benedictionem Apostolicum.

St. Anacletus ordained, that Ecclesiastics should wear their hair short; and
confirmed by a new Decree, that Bishops should be consecrated by three other
Bishops. Telesphorus, a Grecian by Nation, enjoined the use of singing at Mass
the Canticle of the Angels, Gloria in excelsis Deo; and empowered Priests to
say three Masses on Christmass-day.

St. Zephyrinus made the Decree of receiving the Communion at least once a
year; and not to proceed in Law against a Bishop accused of any Crime
whatsoever, without the authority of the holy See.

St. Lucius ordained, that a Bishop should be always accompanied with some
Priest, to the end that his presence should oblige him to lead a regular life.

St. Sylvester the First, the thirty fourth Pope, was the first that erected an
Altar of Stone; which he consecrated, and anointed with holy Oil. Before him
they were made of Wood, and portable, by reason of the persecuation that the
Christians underwent under the Pagan Emperors; which was so great, that the
thirty three first Popes suffered Martyrdom. He was raised to the Pontificate
in the beginning of the Empire of Constantine the Great, who embracing
Christianity, gave joy and tranquillity to the Church, and a secure Settlement
after so many troubles and afflictions. This Emperor after he was baptized,
enlarged the Christian Religion, built Churches, made Foundations for
entertaining its Ministers with splendor, and freed the Clergy from Taxes: He
transported the Seat of his Empire into Thracia, to the Town of Bysantium,
called since by him Constantinople.

St. Damasus suppressed the Corepiscopi: they were Priests whom the Bishops
were wont to send into diverse Villages and Buroughs of their Diocesses, with a
particular power to preach the the Word of God, and to establish Ecclesiastical
Discipline. They were called Corepiscopi. They were suppressed, because they
went often beyond their Commission, doing Functions that belonged but to the
Bishops themselves. Some of them had the Episcopal Character.

St. Gregory the Great was the first who qualified himself Servus servorum Dei,
the Servant of the servants of God. He took this Title, to check the boldness
of John the Faster, Patriarch of Constantinople, who took the Title of
Universal Bishop. The Emperor Phocas condemned the Arrogance of this Prelate,
declaring by an Edict the contrary, according to the judgment of the ancient
Fathers and Councils, who owned the Church of Rome to be the Head of all others.

Pope Boniface the Third, according to the common opinion, introduced the use
of Bells in the Church, Anno 606. The learned Genebrard ascribes the Invention
to Pope Sabinianus, who ordained, Anno 604. that they should be rung at
Canonical hours, and at Mass. The Bell is called Campana, from a Province of
Italy called Campania, where it is thought they began. They were introduced into
Greece, Anno 865. by those that the Venetians sent to the Emperor Michael.
Baron. 865. the Bell is made speak thus: 1. Laudo Deum verum. 2. Plebem voco.
3. Convoce Clerum. 4. Defunctos ploro. 5. Pestem fugo. 6. Festa decoro. Those
that have a mind to know more, may read Paluoti.

Sergius the First caused the Agnus Dei to be sung at Mass.

Adrian the First ordained that the Papal Bulls should be sealed with Lead, and
not with Wax, for the longer continuance of the Seals.

Leo the Tenth made the famous Concordat with Francis the First, Anno 1515.
according to which it is permitted to the Kings of France to have the
Nomination to Bishoprics and Abbeys. These Benefices are called Consistorial,
because their vacancy is proposed in the Consistory to be provided for. The
Pope reserves to himself a years Revenue from each of these Benefices; and it
is that which is called the Law of first Fruits, which is paid when the Bulls
are taken up.

Gregory the ninth caused the Book of Decretals to be couched in writing,
containing the Constitutions of the Popes, to serve for the Canon Law, which is
read in Catholic Universities.

Paul the Third obliged the Jews to wear the Yellow Cap, to distinguish them
from the Christians.

Gregory the Thirteenth reformed the Calendar, Anno 1582. by cutting off ten
days in October from the fifth of the said month to the 14th inolusively: so
that after the fourth of October the ten days following were leapt over, and
they counted the 15th the day after. England, Sweden, Denmark, and other
Northern Countries that disown the Pope, do not make use of this Calendar,
which is called otherwise the Gregorian year; but retain the ancient way of
counting. Thence it is, that when Catholic Countries are at fourteen in the
month, the others count four, and say in their dates, the ancient or new Style.
Famous Astrologers and Mathematicians were employed in reforming this Calendar,
to take care that the points of the Equinoxes and Solstices should not change
place for the future, which had caused a disorder in the day sixth for the Feast
of Easter, which ought always to be the Sunday after the full Moon of the
Equinox of March. Pope Victor the First made a Decree to avoid concurring with
the Jews, and others who were called Quarto-decumans, because they celebrated
it the 14th of the Moon on whatever day of the Week it happened. The Decree of
this Prelate was confirmed in the first General Council of Nice. Anno 1679, the
Elector of Saxony caused a form to be presented to the Diet of Ratisbone, for
agreeing on a Calendar to be received throughout the Empire of Germany.

Gregory the Thirteenth ordained that the Cardinals of Religious Orders who
wore a black Cap, or of the color of their Order, should wear it red like the
others. It was Innocent the Twelfth who gave the Cardinals in the Council of
Lions the red Cap, as an Hieroglifick that they ought to pour forth their blood
for the support of the Church; as it results from the words which the Pope uses
in putting it on their heads, in these terms.

Ad laudem Omnipotentis Dei and Sanctae Sedis Apostolicae, ornamentum accipe
Galerum rubrum, Insigne singular dignitatis Cardinalatus, per quod designatur,
quod usque ad mortem and sanguinis effusionem inclusive, pro exaltatione
Sanctae Fidei, pace and quiet populi Christiani, augmento and statu
sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae te intrepidum exhibere debeas. In nomine Patris,
and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti.

His Holiness sends the red Cap with a Brief to those that are not present at
Rome in the Consistory.

As to the Hat, it is given kneeling, from the hand of the Pope, unless a
person be employed in some important Embassy to the holy See; in this case the
Pope sends it to the Cardinal newly created, to authorize him the more, and
render him more venerable. His Holiness's Courrier that carries the Hat from
Rome, carries with it the form of the Oath of Fidelity, and delivers all into
the hands of the Prelate appointed to perform that Ceremony, which is splendid.
You must observe, that Cardinals that have not received the Hat, cannot be
Legates of the holy See till they have first taken it, as the abovementioned
Claudius Vaurus informs us.

In the Ceremony of opening the Mouth, that is to say, in the permission the
Pope gives to new Cardinals to opine, and to give their Votes and Suffrages, he
says to them, Aperimus vobis os tam in collationibus quam in Consiliis, atque
in electione summi Pontificis, and in omnibus actibus tam in Consistorio, quam
extra qui ad Cardinales spectant, and quos soliti sunt exercere: In nomine
Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti. Amen.

You must observe, it was in use above an Age, that if a Pope died whilst a new
Cardinal had his mouth shut, he might enter, if he please, into the Conclave;
but he could not be elected Pope, nor give his Suffrage for any person, unless
the sacred College (the Sea being vacant) by a special Act of Grace gave him
an Active and Passive Voice; as it did to Cardinal Conty. Pope Pius the Fifth
has declared since by a Decree of the 26th of January 1571, That this closing
of the mouth does not deprive the new Cardinal of his power and principal
Function, which consists in the Election of the Pope.

Gregory the Fifteenth brought in use the Election of Popes by secret
Suffrages, that the Cardinals might be more free in giving their Votes.
Formerly 'twas said, Non fit bis in die Scrutinium: Now it is performed in the
morning after Mass, and in the Evening after the Hymn of the Holy Ghost.

Urban the Eighth gave Cardinals the Title Eminentissiums; he caused the body
and writings of Marc. Anthony de Dominis to be burnt after his death, for an
example: Dominis was Archbishop of Spalathra, anciently Salona in Dalmatia.

Alexander the Seventh received Christan, Queen of Sweden, into the Communion
of the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church.

Observations on the reducement of Jubiles, under what Popes, and in what times.
BOniface the Eighth, Anno 1300. ordained, that the celebration of the Jubilee
should be performed every hundred years, both to pay to God solemn acts of
Thanksgivings at the end of each Age, and that Christian Rome should not have
less acknowledgment for the true God, than Profane Rome showed heretofore to
its Idols, by the centenary sports or games which it solemnized with an
extraordinary concourse of people.

Clement the Sixth established it for the time to come, from fifty to fifty
years, answering to that of the Hebrews, and in consideration of the number of
fifty consecrated by the visible descent of the Holy Ghost; and also by reason
of the shortness of man's life, because few persons enjoyed the benefit of this
great Treasure.

Urban the Sixth, as Gretserus tells us, reduced it to thirty three years, in
memory of the thirty three years that the Son of God passed on the Earth.

Paulus the Eleventh desiring that every man should partake of so great a
favor, abbreviated the time, and established it from twenty five to twenty
five years. Thomas Friard in his Book of the Jubilee, taxes this of falsehood,
alleging that Paul was dead three or four years before this reducement; and
that it was Sixtus the Fourth his Successor, before General of the Cordeliers,
who fixed it at this number of years. If this Writer had dived to the bottom of
this matter, and had read the Popes Bullary thereon, he had found that Paul
ordained it, as it appears by his Bull. It is true that he could not celebrate
it, because death prevented him. In a word, he had seen that the one ordained
it, the other confirmed and executed it, Anno 1473. Du Chesne has it express in
his History of the Popes: And the Abbot Le Maire Chaplain in Ordinary to the
Queen, Doctor of Sorbonne, great Vicar and Archdeacon of Chartres, a learned
and most eloquent man, understands it so in his Book of the Jubilee. This Jubilee
has ever since been observed and practiced to this time.

Besides the ordinary and set Jubiles at certain times, there are some
extraordinary ones, which the Church opens in her urgent necessities, to obtain
some favor from Heaven.

We shall remark here cursorily, that what Boniface called a plenary Indulgence
of all sins, Clement the Sixth and his Successors have given it the name of
Jubilee; which marks a public rejoicing in God, Liberty, Remission, time of
Propitiation according to Josephus, and according to the Septuagint. Under the
ancient Law the Jubilee was published with a sort of Trumpet made of a Rams horn.

Having proposed to my self in this Work to give an account of some curious and
remarkable things in the States of each Sovereign on the Earth, I shall briefly
note here the Ceremony that is used at Rome at the Opening and Close of the
Jubilee, and other things worthy memory.

The Opening of the Jubilee.
THe opening of it is performed ordinarily the 24th day of December, on
Christmaseve, by the opening of the holy Door; which is so called, because by
its opening and entrance we enter into Grace, and become holy, by practicing
what is ordained by the Bull of the Jubilee.

On the day and Feast of the Ascension of the Son of God which precedes the
holy Year, two Priests after having read the Gospel, read the Bull, the one in
Latin, and the other in Italian, and publish the approaching Jubilee.

His Holiness on the Christmas-eve following goes a general Procession; the
Cardinals, the Secular and Regular Clergy, the Ambassadors of Christian
Princes, and the Officers of the City of Rome, and all the common people
accompany him: and about noon he comes to the door of St. Peter of the Vatican,
which is walled up: then the Pope strikes three strokes with a silver Hammer
against this Wall, which is presently thrown down, the door is washed with holy
Water, it is opened, the Company enters into the Church, they sing Vesperas with
all solemnity; and at the same time the Pope sends three Cardinals to open the
doors of the Churches of St. Paul, of St. John Lateran, of St. Mary Major;
where the same Ceremonies are used.

The Silver Hammer is a Symbol of the Popes power, which Jesus Christ gave him,
by giving him the Keys of St. Peter; the Hammer was formerly of Massy Gold.

The Penitentiaries in such Solemnities, are near the Popes Person, to show
that he communicates his Jurisdiction to Confessors, to whom he gives the power
of Absolving from all Crimes, and even in cases that are reserved to himself.

The opening of the Holy Door is an Hieroglyphick of the opening of the
Churches Treasure, whereof the Pope is the dispenser: four doors are opened, to
show that persons are called from the four parts of the world. The Doors are
washed, to intimate that those persons gain the Jubilee, who are cleansed from
their faults and defilement by the virtue of the Sacraments, and by the
application of the Merits of Jesus Christ: over the Holy Door they set the Name
of the Pope that opened it last, and the time.

The shutting up of the Jubilee.
THe end of the year of Jubilee being elapsed, the Pope on Christ mass-Eve goes
in Procession from the Apostolic Palace to St. Peter's Church, where after
Vesperas are sung, his Holiness appoints three Cardinals to go and shut the
other three holy doors: and at the same time himself, accompanied with the
Clergy, and with all that is great and splendid in Rome, marches
processionally, goes forth at the holy door, blesses the Materials appointed to
wall it up, (which is not opened but the year of the Jubilee) lays the first
stone with some pieces of Gold and of Silver, and says in Latin, what I turn
into English: Through the Faith, and through the virtue of our Lord Jesus
Christ Son of the living God, who said to the Prince of the Apostles, Thou art
Peter, and on this Rock I will build my Church; we lay this first stone for
shutting this Holy Door, which ought to be again thus shut in this year of
Jubilee: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

In what sense the Title of Holiness is attributed to the Pope, against the
Protestants.
THe Pretenders to Religion, who love always to cavil, and to mix Controversy
in their Discourse, conformable to what is said by the Latin Poet,

Navita de ventis, de Bobus narrat Arator, Enumerat Miles vulnera, Pastor oves.
not able to endure that we give the Pope the Title of Holiness, nor that we
call the Doors before mentioned Holy, thinking it a Blasphemy; I answer them,
that they blame what they do not understand: they ought to consider, that there
are three sorts of Holiness: the first by Nature and Essence, which is
increated, infinite, incomprehensible, and incommunicable to all other persons,
but to those of the most Holy Trinity. The second by Consecration, which is
found in animate and inanimate things: it is diversely caused, by Prayers and
Blessings, by Oil, and by Unction. The third Holiness consists in an Habitual
Grace inviolable to sin. The Catholics do not say that the Pope is Holy by a
Holiness of Nature, or of Essence, which belongs but to God alone, who is the
sole Original and final Sovraign of all Holiness; the Popes understand it so;
they own themselves sinners before God, implore his mercy, and make a
confession of their sins. When we call the Pope the Holy Father, it is by
Consecration; the Priests, the Prophets, and the Kings were Anointed and
Consecrated under the ancient Law, as well as the new; and now the Popes and
the Abbots are blessed: Churches, Altars, Tabernacles, Crosses, Chalices, and
Bells, are holy things, with a Holiness of Consecration, which is an exterior
Sanctification. If the Roman Church be called Holy, why shall we not call him
Holy that presides in it? If the Body be called Holy, the Head is not Profane.
The great Priest Aaron wore on his Tiara a Plate of Gold, where these words
were Engraven, Holiness to the Lord. Let us proceed to the other remarks and
disquisitions.

Other Splendid Ceremonies.
It Is at Rome where we see Seven other very curious and remarkable Ceremonies
the Canonization of Saints, the Coronation of the Pope, that of the Emperor,
of Kings, of Empresses, of Queens, and the Creation of Cardinals.

A touch in the Honor of Rome.
IF it be said of this Capital of the world, that at present Rome is sought for
in Rome, because it has lost that vain splendor which it drew from its ancient
Roman Emperors; we say also, that what she holds no longer by her Arms, she
possesses by Religion.

Seeds Roma Petri, quae Pastoralis honoris,

Facta Caput Mundi quicquid non possidet Armis,

Religione tenet. --

It Is said of St. Peter's Church at Rome, and of St. Sernin at Tolouse,

Non est in toto Sanctior orb locus.

Three desires of St. Austin.
ST. Austin wished to see Three things: Jesus Christ on the Earth, St. Paul in
the Chair, and Rom^ the Triumphante.

The Dominion of the Pope.
THe Vatican, which is the Palace of St. Peter, the Palace of St. John Lateran,
Castelgandolphi, Mont-Cavallo, otherwise Montquirinal, and the Castle St.
Angelo, belong to the Pope: he possesses the Patrimony of St. Peter, the
Dukedom of Spoleto, Marcha Anconitana, Romandiola, the Duchy of Benevent in
the Kingdom of Naples, the Dukedoms of Ferrara and of Vrbin, Ceneda in the
Marca Trevisano, Montaldo, and San Stephano, on the side of the River of Genoa,
and the Country of Avignon in France, etc. You must observe, that the Countess
Mathilda made the Holy Sea Heir to her Lands, which have since been called St.
Peter's Patrimony. When the Roman Emperor is at Rome, he lodges in the Vatican,
which is the Imperial Palace: Civita Vecchia is famous for it is Port; its there
where his Holinesses Galleys are: they are no longer at Ancona, because they
were too remote from Rome.

Places of Pleasure.
TIvoli, Fra^scati, the Villa of Pamphilio, those of Burghesi, of Farnesi, of
Aldobrandini, of Montalto, of Ludovisio, of the Duke of Florence, of the Prince
Palestrini, and of Matthei, are very famous places of pleasure. We see there
the Gardens adorned with all rare pieces, the Lodgings richly furnished, the
Galleries and privy Closets full of all that is curious and splendid in Rome.
Mazarini's Palace is of the number of the most beautiful; it belongs at present
to the Duke of Nevers.

Pope Clement the Tenth much embellisht the Bridge St. Angelo by causing to be
placed on it twelve fair Statues of white Marble, admirably well done, and of a
great height, each on its Pedestals: St. Peter and St. Paul stand first, and on
each side of them, at fit distances to the end, we see five Angels holding in
their hands some Instrument of the Passion of our Savior. This Bridge has two
fair Galleries with Iron Ballisters. The Gate del Populo, formerly called
Flavius Gate, is at present a Masterpiece: they call it the Gate of the
People, because of its nearness to the Monastery of St. Mary of the People: it
is of the invention of Michael Angelo. The Town Hall was formerly the Capitol.

The Castle St. Angelo is called by this name, because an Angel appeared on the
top of it with a naked Sword in his hand, which he put up in its Scabbard;
showing by that, that God was appeased. This Apparation happened on a day that
St. Gregory the Great carried in a solemn Procession the Image of the Virgin,
at a time when the Plague wholly dispeopl'd Rome. This Scourge ceased as soon
as the Angel had sheathed his Sword. There is to be seen since in that place
the Figure of an Angel in Marble. The Emperor Adrian, a great lover of
Building, caused this Fortress to be built; which was the place where he was
buried. Pope Sixtus the V. left there five millions of Gold, with a Bull
defending all Popes, under pain of Excommunication, to alienate them, but in
the extremest necessity, for the defense of the Popes and of the City. Pope
Urban the Eighth caused this Castle to be well fortified, placing in it the
fairest pieces of Cannon that are any where to be seen: there are six which
were given by a King of England; some of them are made of many Statues of the
false Gods melted. The Tower in the middle of it is so elevated, that it
commands all the approaches of the Town. The Coridor of the Vatican-Palace,
reaching to the Castle St. Angelo, is very convenient for the retreat of the
Popes in times of War, or of Sedition.

Other Ornaments of Rome.
IN Rome, the beautiful Churches, the fair Pillars, the Antiquities, the Popes
Court, the Aquoeducts, the large Streets, the Obelisks, the Mausolea, the
Catacombi, the Library of the Vatican, draw the admiration of all men. There is
so great a number of Fountains, that it is thought if they ran all into one
Channel, they would make a River; and some think, large enough to bear Vessels.
The Vatican draws its Etymology from Answers or Oracles, which the Latins call
Vaticinia. Its Library is described by the Sieur le Gallois in his book
entitled, Traite des plus belles Bibliotheques de l'Europe: It contains
excellent Disquisitions and Curiosities. It was printed at Paris, An. 1680.

The Rota is a famous Tribunal composed of twelve Auditors of different
Nations, the jurisdiction whereof extends it self on beneficiary and profane
causes. It Is thought they are so called, because they sit in a Circle, and roll
about the most important differences of the Christian World. Their Judgments
are called Decisions of the Rota; and to express well their force and
authority, it suffices to say, The Rota has thus determined.

The chief Towns of Italy, with their Epithetes and Elogies, are,
ROme the Holy, Roma la Santa; Naples the Noble, Napoli la Gentile; Venice the
Rich, Venetia la Ricca; Genoa the Proud, Genova la Superba, for its Palaces and
Buildings; Milan the Great, Milano la Grando; Bolonia the Fat, Bolonia la
Grassa, for the fertility of its Soil; Ravenna the Ancient, Ravenna l' Antica;
Padua the Learned, Padua la Dotta, for its University, because good learning
has always flourisht there. According to Sabellicus, we may place Mantua in
parallel with Ravenna, for Antiquity; and with Bolonia, for the goodness of its
Soil. Italy is called the Garden of Europe, for its charming Delights and
Beauty; and according to the Proverb, A man has seen no fine Country, if he has
not seen Italy.

I cannot end this Paragraph of the remarkable Towns of Italy, without naming
that of Melphi in the Kingdom of Naples, which is famous for having brought
forth Flavio, to whom is attributed the invention of the Sea-Compass, which
shows Pilots the course they ought to steer, the place whence they come, and
that whither they are going, and where they are. According to the common
Opinion, this Flavio of Melphi invented it the year of our Salvation 1300. It
was called Boussole, from Buxus or Buxeolus, because those of the West put it
at first in a Case of Box. The Sieur Faucher, President of the Mint-concern,
says, that it was called in France for above 400 years, the Marinotte. Some
persons, over-speculative, think it may be presumed to have been in use in the
time of the Children of Noah, because they had Iron, and the Lodestone proper
to compose it, and the knowledge of the Mathematics. Levinus and Pineda say,
that Solomon's Pilots made use of it to go to the Islands of Tharsis and of
Ophir. The Scripture notes, that Solomon having equipt a Fleet on the Coast of
the Red Sea* Hiram King of Tire furnished him with his Seamen skilled in the
Art of Navigation. The Greek Poet writes, that the Pole was observed in
Navigation in the time of the Trojan War: And the Latin Poet, that men
observed the Stars. And thence some think that this could not be done without
the Sea-Compass; not considering, that men before did nothing but coast about
upon the Sea, and sail in Roads.

After having mentioned the Town of Melphi on the account of Flavio, that of
Ferrara comes into my mind on the occasion of a great Lover of Learning, viz.
Coelius Calcagninus a Noble Person of Ferrara, living Anno 1249. it was his
will to be buried in his Library, which has this Inscription on the door: Index
tumuli Coelii Calcagnini, qui ibidem voluit sepeliri ubi semper vixit.

The chief Rivers.
THe River Po, the Tiber, Ticinus, Doero, Laddo, Rubicon, called now Pisatello;
Menzo, Garrigliano, Offranto in Pouille, Arnus, and others. The Po is called by
the Greeks Eridanus; it passes at Turin, Cazal, and Valentia near Milan, and at
other places. This River is famous amongst the Poets for the fabulous fall of
young Phaeton; its source is in the highest Mountain of the Alps, called
Montviso; on the side of Piedmont it receives thirty Rivers into its Channel,
and a great many Lakes and Ponds: its course is from the West to the East.

Popes by birth Frenchmen; and some passages of their Lives.
SYlvester the Second, Urban the Second, Calixtus the Second, Urban the Fourth,
Clement the Fourth, Innocent the Fifth, Martin the Fourth, Clement the Fifth,
John the Twenty second, Benedict the Eleventh, Clement the Sixth, Innocent the
Sixth, Urban the Fifth, Gregory the Eleventh.

Sylvester the second of the name, called before Gilbert, or Gerbert, born in
Aquitain, was a Religious man, and Benedictine of St. Gerard of Aurillac in the
Diocese of St. Flour, and Tutor to Robert King of France, and to the Emperor
Otho the Third, who raised him to the sovereign Pontificate: He was first
Archbishop of Rheims, and then of Ravenna, and lastly Pope; which gave occasion
for this Verse to be made on him:

Scandit ab R. Gerbertus in R. post Papa Regens est. He was a great
Mathematician, which caused his Enemies to accuse him of Magic. He was falsely
charged for having in his Closet a Head of Brass, by which the Devil answered
what he asked. He died the 12th day of May, 1003. Pope Sergius, his Successor,
writ his Epitaph, which is yet to be seen, and shows that he lived and died a
holy man.

Urban the second of the name was born at Chastillon on Marne, Son of Milon. He
was called before his Exaltation, Cardinal Otho Bishop of Ostia. He
excommunicated the Diocese of Compostella for having put their Bishop in
prison; and governed the Ship of St. Peter eleven years, four months, and
eighteen days: some say eleven years and a half. He called into his Council St.
Bruno, Founder of the Order of the Charthusians. He called the Council of
Clairmont in Auvergne, where he made the Enterprise of the holy War succeed;
which he called the Croizade, because those that listed themselves were all
crossed, wearing a Cross sewn on their Habits. He died An. 1110.

Calixtus the Second was named Guy; others say, Guigue: He was a Burgundian;
Uncle to Adelais Queen of France, and near Cousin to the Emperor. Henry. He
was Archbishop of Vienne in Daulphine.

Sugar Abbot of St. Dennis, says, that the night before his Election, he saw,
as a Prognostic of his future Election, a great Person that gave him the Moon
to keep under his Archiepiscopal Cope, fearing lest the Church might incur some
danger by the death of Pope Gelasius. He soon found the truth of this Vision,
seeing himself sovereign Pontife. His Election was made whilst he was in the
Abbey of Clugny. An Antipope appeared at that time in Italy, called Bourdin,
who was taken notwithstanding his intrenching and fortifying himself: the
Soldiers that took him mounted him on an old Camel, and walked him about the
Streets publicly in derision, with his face turned toward the Tail, which
they made him hold as a Bridle; and afterward he was confined to a perpetual
imprisonment. Calixtus assembled a Council at Rheims, possessed the Holy See
about six years, died the 19th of December 1124. In the time of his Pontificate
St. Norbert founded his Order called Proemonstratensis, from the place where he
retired himself, which is in the Diocese of Laon.

Urban the Second, of the Town of Troy in Champagne, was the Son of a Cobbler,
and called James Pantaleon; he recompensed the defaults of his birth by the
eminency of his Learning and Virtue. After having been Canon and Archdeacon of
Laon, and afterward of Liege, he was made Bishop of Verdun; from Bishop he
became Patriark of Jerusalem, from Patriark Legate in diverse places, and then
afterward Pope. The Prophetic Motto was, Jerusalem Campaniae. When any one
reproached him with the lowness and obscureness of his Birth, he answered, That
the Nobility which is acquired by the gifts of the Understanding, is more
valuable than that which comes from Birth alone, and that it consists in
Virtue. Those that are born Noble, may say to their advantage, and with truth,
that Jesus Christ was a Gentleman, and the holy Virgin a Gentlewoman. It is
very true, when Nobleness of Blood is joined with that of Virtue, it is
Perfection. Superiors of an ignoble Birth may object, that St. Peter who had
the government of the Church, was no Gentleman. This Prelate after three years
of the Pontificate, left this mortal life the last day of September; and
according to Onuphrius, the second day of October 1264.

Clement the Fourth, called before Guy Foucaut, according to du Chesne, was
Native of the Town St. Gilles in Languedoc; and according to Father Gautruche a
Jesuit, of a Village near Narbonne. He was Bishop of Puy, Archbishop of
Narbonne, and Cardinal by the Title of St. Sabine, and Legate in England: St.
Louis made him Counselor of State, because he was greatly skilled in the Laws.
Some think that he was elected Pope the 5th or 11th of February 1265. He
crowned at Rome, Charles of Anjou King of Naples and of Sicily, with the
ordinary Ceremonies, in St. John Lateran's. He had in his Arms an Eagle holding
a Dragon in his Talons. His Prophetic Motto was, Draco depressus. He died the
29th of November 1268. after three years and a half being Pope.

Martin the Fourth, formerly Simon de Brie, was Native of Mont-pince, or of the
Village de Suci. He founded the Chapter of Champeaux, which is in the Diocese
of Paris. He was Treasurer and Canon of St. Martins of Tours, and Cardinal by
the Title of St. Cecil; was elected Pope the 22th of February 1282. Under his
Pontificate, the year of his Election, the French had their Throats cut
throughout all Sicily. This Massacre was called the Sicilian Vesperas, because
it was committed at the hour of Vesperas on an Easter Day: O cruel Vesperas!
Peter of Arragon having an Army on foot under pretext of going into the Holy
Land, usurpt the Country at the solicitation and detestable enterprise of a
young Italian Gentleman, a sworn Enemy to the French. The Pope struck with a
mortal grief, excommunicated the Sicilians and those of Arragon for their
Attempt and black Treason. This Prelate created many Cardinals, amongst others
the Dean of the Church of Nostre Dame at Paris, called Geofry de Barbo a
Burgundian. The Prophetic saying on this Pope was, Ex Telonio Liliacei,
because he was Treasurer of St. Martins of Tours: others say, Liliacei Martini,
believing that this Church was adjudged the midst and the center of France, the
Kingdom of Flower-de-luces. God took him out of this World at Peruse the 28th
or 29th day of March 1285. Two Miracles happened at his Burial.

Clement the Fifth, born at Bourdeaux, had for his Father Beraud Chevalier,
Lord of Villandrault. Before his Exaltation he was called Bertrand Gout de
Gutto. He had in his Arms three Bars Gules in a Field Or; the Prophecy was, de
Festis Aquitanicis. The Cardinals continued ten months in the Conclave for the
creation of this Prelate, before Bishop of Cominges, then Archbishop of
Bourdeaux; whereof he performed the Function even till they had brought him the
Decree of his Election, with the Letters of the whole College. He took
solemnly possession of the Apostolical Chair at Bourdeaux in the
Cathedral-Church of St. Andrews; caused himself to be crowned at Lions; the
greatest part of the Cardinals rendered themselves there pursuant to his
Orders; the Kings of France, of England, and of Arragon, assisted at this
Ceremony. The Italian Cardinals thinking to lead him to Rome, he transferred
the Holy Sea to Avignon, where it continued seventy years, or seventy two, from
Clement to Gregory the Eleventh, who re-established it at Rome, Anno 1375. At
his first promotion of Cardinals, he created ten, all Frenchmen: In the third,
he made Cardinal William de Maudagout Archbishop of Embrun, who was born at
Sevenes above the Town Vigan. The Castle of Maudagout is at present Protestant,
and encompassed with Chesnut-trees. His Arms are yet to be seen over the great
Gate. Clement built the Castles of Villandrault, Budos, and la Bread. He
governed the Church eight years, ten months, and some days; died Anno 1314. in
the Castle of Roguemaure situated on the Rhone, in the Diocese of Avignon, and
not of Nismes, as some persons have said. His Body reposes in Guyenne, in the
Church of the Canons of Vzeste, whereof this Prelate was the Founder.

See here a remarkable thing related by Andrew de Chesue, in the Life of the
Popes. Clement, whilst he was yet Archbishop of Bourdeaux, having deposed
Gautier de Bruge. Cordelier Bishop of Poitiers, Gautier in the bitterness of
spirit, appealed to the future Council, and caused a promise to be made him,
that at the Article of his death, his Appeal should be put into his hands;
which was executed: his Body was carried into the Cordeliers Church, where some
Miracles have since been wrought. Clement coming to Poitiers, and knowing that
Gautier had carried his Appeal with him, caused his Tomb to be opened to take
it away; for this intent, he made an Archdeacon enter into it at Midnight, who
found the Appeal in the hands of the defunct; which he could not possibly take
from him, till he had first sworn to restore it him, with the consent of him
that had Deposed him. This being done, Gautier opened his hands, and the
Archdeacon taking the Appeal, gave it the Pope; but endeavoring to go forth of
the Sepulcher, he found he could not stir, and said there was somewhat which
withheld him, till he had returned the Appeal into the hands of the Bishop
deceased: then he came forth with ease; and the Pope conceiving a respect for
the dead, honored from thenceforwards his memory, and enricht his Tomb.
Gautier was deposed, because he was more inclined for the Archbishop of
Bourges, than for him of Bourdeaux, who contested for the Primacy of Aquitain.
Clement revoked two Decrees of Boniface passed against France: under him there
rise a great disturbance betwixt the Vatican and the Louvre. Boniface was so
animated against the Gibelins, and those of their Party, that he showed it
openly in the person of the Archbishop of Genoa, on an Ashwednesday. Under the
said Clement the Fifth, the Errors of the Beguines and Begards, or Begands of
Germany were condemned; and it is from thence that the word Bigot comes: these
Heretics, under the Mask of Religion, with a serious and hypocritical
countenance, play the good companions. Clement the Fifth removing the Holy Sea
to Avignon, transported thither the the Vatican Library; and Martin the Fifth
caused it to be carried back to the Vatican, where it has continued since.

John the Twenty first or Twenty second, of the Town of Cahors in Quercy, Son
of Arnaud d'Eusa, or Dossa, a Cobbler, was called James. The Prophecy was, De
sutore Osseo. Du Chesne says, that the Holy Sea having been vacant two years
and some days, and that the Cardinals not agreeing in the Creation of a Pope,
they all consented to accept and receive him whom James d'Eusa Cardinal, Bishop
of Port, should nominate; which James seeing, he named himself; and the
Nomination was approved and confirmed by the Cardinals, fearing lest they might
have another that would less please them. Father Gautruche says this is a
Faole, and that the Cardinals did not remit themselves to his judgment, to
choose whom he thought fit, and that he did not name himself. It Is a thing well
known, that by the way of Scrutiny and of Access, it is descended under pain of
Nullity of Election to choose a Man's self. The way of Scrutiny and of Access
both together, is the most practiced; that of Inspiration and of Compromise,
are but rare, and little used: we call the way of Inspiration. when all the
Cardinals freely concur to acknowledge and proclaim unanimously one person for
Pope. The way of Compromise is, when the Cardinals either at entrance into the
Conclave, or tired with the length of it, refer themselves to one or to many
amongst them, to whom they give the power in the name of all, to give a common
Father to Christianity. None of the Compromisaries can give his voice for
himself, but his Election will be void. These three ways of Election contain
many circumstances and conditions. John was Bishop of Frejus, and some time
afterward Archbishop of Avignon. Pope Clement the Fifth made him Cardinal. He
made many good Foundations in the place of his Birth, amongst others he founded
the University, the House of Carthusians, and built a Bridge, with a lofty
Tower at one end of it, on the River Lot, on the side of the Capuchins. It is
he that introduced into the Church the custom of ringing thrice each day the
Angelical Salutation. He believed for some time, that the Souls of the dead did
not enjoy the Vision of God till after the General Judgment. He made no
Decree, and retracted this Error. Louis de Bavieres going to make himself
Emperor against the forms, and in contempt of the Holy Sea, raised him an
Antipope, an Apostate of his Order, called Peter de Corbare. A Prelate has
styled him the stinking Crow, which had no place in the Ark. The Emperor after
having received from his hands the Imperial Crown, being constrained to quit
Italy, and to retire himself into Germany, left this Ghost of a Pope to the
mercy of the Guelphs, who carried him to Avignon, where he ended his days in
Prison. Pope John the Twenty second raised in France and elsewhere, Abbeys and
Bishoprics into Archbishopricks. He divided the Diocese of Tolouse into six,
that of Poitiers into three, viz. that of Poitiers, of Mailezais, and of Lucon.
The Sea of Mailezais is at present at Rochelle, since its reddition. According
to du Chesne, this Prelate held the Government of the Church eighteen years,
three months, and twenty days; and according to Father Gautruche, ten years and
a half: he dyed the third of December, An. 1334. being 90 years of age. He left
after his decease 25 Millions, to make War against the Infidels in the Holy
Land. There have been more Popes of this name, than of any other; they count
twenty three. You must observe, that the Pretenders to Religion endeavor to
render ridiculous the Constitutions which John the twenty second made and
compiled, because he entitled them Extravagants; not considering that they
were so called, because they were not included in the body of those of Clement,
which he published together.

Benedict the Eleventh, some say Twelfth, Native of Saverdun in the County of
Fois, in the Diocese of Pamiers, Son of a Joyner, was called before James du
Four, otherwise surnamed Novelli, of the Order of the Cistertians, was Abbot of
Fontfroide: The Prophecy was Frigidus Abbas. He was Bishop of Pamiers. John the
Twenty second made him Cardinal. For some time they called him the white
Cardinal, because of the color of his ancient Religious Habit. When his
Exaltation was signified to him, he said through humility, they had made choice
of an Ass (though he was very learhed, and Doctor of Divinity in the faculty of
Paris) because he feared that he knew not well how to govern. He did not suffer
himself to be led by his Relations in the distribution of his Favors. When his
Niece was to be married, he gave her a Portion but answerable to her condition.
He founded the Church and College of the Bernardins in Paris. He held the Holy
See seven years and three months, and died with a very good fame, Anno 1342.

Clement the Sixth of Malmont in Limosin, was called Peter Roger or Rosier, of
the House of Beaufort. He took occasion to bear Roses in his Arms, for having
been baptized in the Parish de Rosiers. He was Bishop of Arras. The Prophecy
was, de Rosa Attrebatensi. He was also Archibishop of Sens, and then of Rouen;
and Cardinal sub titulo SS. Nerei and Achillei. He was chosen Head of the
Church the 5th of May, 1343. He made Cardinal Bernard de la Tour of Auvergne in
the Diocese of Clermont. He remembered that having been ill used in the Woods of
Randan in Auvergne, in the Diocese of Clermont, by Robbers who stripped him
(being at that time a Scholar, and returning from his Studies at the University
of Paris) he was charitably assisted by Stephen Aldebrand, Pryor and Curate of
Thuret, a Religious man of the Order of St. Benedict, of the Abbey of St.
Allire* near Clermont; who received him at his house, and gave him a suit of
Clothes, and Money to conduct him to the Abbey de la Chaize-Dieu, whereof he
was a professed Religious man. Peter Roger giving thanks to his Benefactor, and
saying to him, When should he be able to acquit himself of the Obligation he
had to him, he prophetically answered him, It shall be when you come to be
Pope. He no sooner was entered into the Apostolical Chair, but he sent for him:
as soon as he saw him, he created him one of the first Officers of his Court,
and some time after Archbishop of Tolouse, and afterward Cardinal. He was
called Cardinalis de Thureto. The adventure of Peter Rosier fallen into the
hands of Robbers, with the good reception and entertainment that he found in
the Monastery of Thuret, is taken from the Archives of the Abbey of St. Allire,
by the Father Vialard, who is there a Religious man, and who has also been
Pryor and Curate of Thuret. Messire Claudius de Brouez, Pryor and Lord of
Dorcet, formerly first President in the General Election of la Basse Auvergne
at Clermont, furnished me with this Memoire and Extract. In the Abbey of St.
Allire, they say Peter Rosier, and not Roger, though the Register in Latin
says Rogerius. Clement the Sixth passed from this mortal life to the immortal,
the 6th of December 1351. Three Cardinals of his nearest Relations caused his
body to be carried to the Abbey de la Chaize-Dieu, according to his last Will
and Testament. It is held by Tradition, that this Pope in his youth was
Pensioner at Paris in the College of Narbonne.

Innocent the Sixth, of the Mountains of the Country Limosin, formerly Steven
Aubert, or Albert, was Bishop of Noyon, and Cardinal by the Title of St.
Pammachus. Father Gautruche says, that he was placed on the Episcopal See of
Clermont in Auvergne. He had six Mountains in his Arms; the Prophecy says, de
Montibus Pammachii. Pope Clement the Sixth took him into the sacred College of
Cardinals. Being come to the Papacy, he created Cardinal A^din Albert, his
Nephew, then Bishop of Maguelone or Montpelier. He succeeded Clement the Sixth
the 18th of December 1352. In one of his Promotions he made Cardinal the Bishop
of Nismes, called Johannes de Blandiaco. John de Bla^^^^ of the Diocese of
Vzes, gave up his soul to God in the Town of Avignon, the 12th of September
1372. his body was carried into the house of the Carthusians of Villeneuve,
where he had chosen his Sepulcher in his lifetime. Most persons render the
Latin words, Blandiacum by Blandiac: the people of the Country turn it, and
pronounce it Blauzac, and not Blandiac. The Castle is Calvinist, and the
Village almost entirely. Before Messire James de Grignan was Bishop of Vzes,
the Catholics and Hugenots buried in this Village, and at Chalmete, and in
some other places of this Diocese, in the same Churchyard, one amongst
another: This Prelate remedied this abuse, not thinking it reasonable that the
Dead should be put in holy ground, who during their lifetime would not come to
Church to participate of its Sacraments. M. Philippeaux de la Verilliere,
Doctor of Sorbonne, succeeded him for some time, as far as the year 1677. in
which he mounted into the Patriarchal Chair of Bourges. Cardinal Vrsin
recommended him in the Consistory.

Urban the Fifth, called before William Grimoard of Grisac, issued from the
Illustrious and ancient House of Roure, whose Earl at present, Messire Peter
Scipion Grimoard de Beauvoir, Earl of Roure, Marquess of Grisac, Baron of
Bariac, and other Baronies, Lord of Banes, and many other places, is
Lieutenant General for the King in his Armies and Provinces of Languedoc, and
particular Governor of the Town and Bridge du St. Esprit on the Rhone, and
other places. This Prelate had for Father N. Grismoard Lord of Grisac, in the
Diocese of Mande in Givodan; and for Mother, Dame Amphilize de Montferrand. He
was first a Religious man of the Order of St. Benedict in the Conventual Priory
of Chirac, Abbot of St. Germains of Auxerre, and then of St. Victor of
Marseilles. Innocent the Sixth having sent him into Italy on very important
Affairs, he acquired such a Reputation, that the Sea being vacant, the
Cardinals assembled at Avignon in the Conclave, elected him Pope with a common
Consent the 27th day of September 1562, according to Onuphrius: and because he
was at that time in Italy, fearing lest he should be kept there, they sent to
him to come away presently; but without signifying to him his Election, till
his return in the Town of Marseilles, which was the 27th day of October, as it
appears by the Chronicle of the Abbey of St. Victor. He was consecrated and
crowned at Avignon, in the month of November following, being about twenty five
years of age. The Prophecy was, Gallus Vicecomes. When he received the news of
his Election, he pronounced the words of the Psalmist, A Domino factum est
istud, and est mirabile in oculis nostris. We find in his Arms in the Popes
Armorial, an Oak forked, Or, in a Field Azure, the name Roure signifying an Oak
in the Gascoign Tongue. The Country of his birth was exempted from Tributes by
the Kings of France, to honor the merit of his person. He founded many
Monasteries, Churches and Colleges; built two beautiful Palaces in Italy, one
at Orvietto, and the other at Montefiasco. He transported himself to Rome, to
allay some disorders; and excommunicated Bernaboue Viscount of Milan, for
having burnt two holy Religious men who had reprehended him with all sort of
respect for his debaucht and tyrannical life, causing his Subjects eyes to be
torn out of their heads, and to be strangled, that hunted in his Lands contrary
to his command, whom he constrained to keep for him five or six thousand Dogs.
This great Prelate showed to the people the heads of St. Peter and of St. Paul;
crowned Charles of Luxemburg Emperor: St. Brigit Princess of Sweden, received
from him the confirmation of her Order. We may see at large the good and
admirable actions of this Pope in Platina, du Chesne, Coulomb, Gautruche, and
others. He governed the Ship of St. Peter eight years and four months. His body
lies at Marseilles, in the Church of the Abbey of St. Victor, after having
first continued eleven months deposited in the Church of Nostre dame de Dons at
Avignon; where he died the 19th of December of the year 1370. The Cardinals
celebrated his Obsequies with the accustomed Ceremonies. He is in the Catalogue
of canonized Saints. In the House of Roure there have been two other Popes,
viz. Sixtus the Fourth, and Julius the Eleventh, both of Genoa.

Gregory the Eleventh of Limosin, called formerly Peter Roger, of the House of
Beaufort, which subsists still in that of the Marquess of Canilhac in Auvergne,
was Son of William Earl of Beaufort, and of Jane Sister to Pope Clement the
Sixth. Before his Exaltation, he was Canon of the Church of Paris, Dean of the
Cathedral of Bayeux, and then afterward Cardinal by the Title of St. Mary la
Neuve. His Prophecy was, Novus de Virgin fortis. It is he that founded for
perpetuity in the Church of Nostre dame of Paris, the station that is daily
kept there at nine a clock in the morning, before the Altar of the Virgin. He
died at Rome the 27th of March of the year 1372. some say, Anno 1376. others,
Anno 1378. Two hundred years after his death the Italians erected a new
Monument of Marble in his memory, in the Church where he was buried, as an
acknowledgment of the Benefits received from him; and caused to be graved on it
this Epitaph in great Letters.

Christi Saluti. Gregorius XI. Lemovicensi, humanitate and doctrina pietateque
admirabili, qui ut Italiae seditionibus laboranti mederetur, sedem Pontificiam
Avenione diu translatam divini afflatus numine, hominumque maximo plausu, post
Annos LXX. Romam, foeliciter perduxit, Pontificatus sui de Anno VII. S. P. Q.
R. tantoe Religionis and Beneficii non Immemor Gre. XIII. P. Opt. Max.
comprobante, An. ab or be Redempto MDLXXXIV.
The Italians call the time during which the Holy See was at Avignon till its
re-establishment in Rome, the years of the Transmigration of Babylon.

The Church had two hundred forty four Popes, from Saint Peter to Innocent the
Eleventh: There remains yet to come twenty five, according to the Prophecies of
St. Malachie Primate of Ireland; and then will happen the great day of the
General Judgment, which will close the door of Time, and open that of Eternity.
These Prophecies are not proposed as Articles of Faith: for who is the man that
can know the times and the moments? This is reserved to God alone. Jesus Christ
said to his Apostles, that no body knows the hour of this great Day. All that
is said, is grounded on conjectures, and on adjusted senses: because the Law of
Nature lasted two thousand years, the written Law two thousand years, it is
thought that the Evangelical Law will continue so long. Nothing can be said
thereon for certain, nor concerning the Popes to come, before their creation.

The future Popes, conformably to the Prophecies mentioned, are these.
1. POenitentia Gloriosa. 2. Rastrum in Porta. 3. Flores Circumdati. 4. De Bona
Religione. 5. Miles in bello. 6. Columna excelsa. 7. Animal Rurale. 8. Rosa
Vmbriae. 9. Vrsus velox. 10. Peregrinus Apostolicus. 11. Aquila rapax. 12.
Canis and Coluber. 13. Vir Religiosus. 14. De Balneis Etruriae. 15. Crux de
Cruce. 16. Lumen in Coelo. 17. Ignis Ardens. 18. Religio de Populata. 19. Fides
Intrepida. 20. Pastor Angelicus. 21. Pastor ex Nauta. 22. Flos Florum. 23. De
Medietate Lunae. 24. De Labor solis. 25. Gloria Olivae.

These Prophecies are inserted in a book called Lignum Vitae, composed by
Arnold Vvion, Benedictin. St. Malachie began them by Coelestin the Second, to
the coming of Antichrist, and died Anno 1298. in the Abbey of Clairvaux, in the
arms of St. Bernard, who has writ his Life. These two great persons are buried
the one by the other behind the High Altar.

The chief Princes of Italy, after the Pope, are the five following.

The Duke of Savoy.
VIctor-Ame, the second of the name, Duke of Savoy, Prince of Piemont, Marquess
of Saluzze, etc. was born Anno 1666. professes the Catholic Religion: he shows
in the tenderness of his age a viril Judgment, which raises admiration in
Foreign Ministers, and gives great hopes that he will one day be Master of the
excellent Qualities of his Father, which will live in him by the care of his
Mother Regent; who being ignorant of nothing that ought to be known, took care
of his Estates during his minority, and appointed him persons whom she made
choice of for forming his Manners and Conduct. The Duchess laid down the
Regency Anno 1680, into the hands of her Son. This Prince gave her his thanks
for the care she had taken of his Person and of his Estates, and prayed her to
continue to assist him in the Government.

I shall set down but part of his Coat of Arms, though very excellent and most
noble, because his Scutcheon is extremely charged: They may be seen at large in
some good book of Heraldry, and those of other crowned heads. I shall say
only, that the Dukes of Savoy bear the silver Cross; for having relieved the
Isle of Rhodes. and repelled the Turks An. 1315. and that for acknowledgment
the Knights gave them the Cross, with this Motto, FERT; which signifies,
Fortitudo ejus Rhodum tenuit. I shall also say, that these Dukes bear the Arms
of the Kingdom of Cyprus: This Crown gives them the Title of Royal Highness.
They are descended from the ancient House of Saxony. They were called in the
first place Earls of Morienne, then Earls of Savoy, till Amedee the Eighth,
whom the Emperor Sigismond created Duke Anno 1416, or 1417. It was Ame the
Fifth, surnamed the Great, who caused Mahomet the second of the name, Emperor
of the Turks, to raise his Siege from before the City of Rhodes.

The House of Savoy has been acknowledged Sovereign for above six hundred
years; it has assorded many Empresses and Queens.

Turin in the Plain of Piemont on the Bank of the Po, is the capital City of
the Dukes Territories. Chamberry is of Savoy, and has a Parliament. The Court
of this Prince is very splendid; his Royal Highness holds it at Turin, where
there is a great Garrison. The Dukes new Palace is one of the finest of Italy;
it is composed of four Pavillions, with great piles of Lodgings joining to it;
and in a great Court is seen the brazen Figure of Charles Emanuel the Second,
on a Horse of Marble represented to the life. The old Palace flankt with four
great round. Towers, guarded with a large Trench, and which faces a large void
space, is embellished with a fair Gallery filled with excellent Pictures, which
represent the Christian Princes, and the Genealogy of the Dukes of Savoy. The
little Chariot, with six horses in their harness, all covered with precious
Stones, is an Ornament; and many other Rarieties.

The Metropolitan Church called the Dome, dedicated to St. John, is the
depository of the holy face-cloath, on which we see imprinted the face and
other parts of the body of the Son of God. The other Towns of Piemont are
Vercelli, Susa, Turee, Mondevis, Ast, Carignan, Carmagnolo, St. Tas. Susa is
the first that is found at the entrance of Italy at the foot of the Alps, ten
leagues from Turin. Pompey established there a Colony, which gives testimony of
its antiquity. It has passed for the Capitol of the small Principality of the
little King Coetius. This Country is fertile; Provisions are cheap, and Silver
scarce, because there is no Trade. Susa which is in Persia is more renowned
than that beforementioned, because the great Assuerus who commanded from the
Indies even to Aethiopia, an hundred twenty seven Provinces, and other Kings,
have held there their Court. Piemont has two or three Rivers whose banks afford
Gold; it is found divided into slender parcels called Threads: The way of
gathering it is noted in a book entitled Conversations de l'Academie de l'Abbe
Bourdelot, in the Chapter of the Philosophers Stone, which was the subject of a
long Conference.

The principal Towns of Savoy after Chamberry, are Anneci, St. John de
Morienne, Monstier in Tarentaise, and others: Montmebian is the strongest place.

Savoy was called by this name, as who would say, Sauve-voye, or safe-way; and
this since it was purged of Way-Robbers and Murderers, who rendered the ways
dangerous and unpassable: or else from a Village called Sabbatie or Sabaudie,
which Ptolomy and other Geographers place under the Alps. According to the
opinion most followed, it took its name from Sabaudus Archbishop of Arles, who
made it Catholic.

Its Mountains bring forth many Monkeys: These Animals sleep six months of the
year; they have the mussel and ears of a Squiril, and four long and sharp
teeth; the legs short, great nails on their feet, and the hair rough.
Chimney-sweepers bring of them to Paris; they are easily taken when they are
asleep. The Latins call this Animal Mus Alpinus. There are a great many in the
Mountains of Switzerland. Chateauniere deGrenaille tells us, that persons that
cannot sleep, or that are tormented with the Cholick, find themselves relieved
by rubbing their belleys with their fat.

Many Mountaineers get Strumous swellings by drinking Snow-water, which by its
erudity and ill quality, causes the glandulous swelling about the throat.

Mount Cenis and little St. Bernard, are the principal passages of the Alps for
Italy: Great Mount Cenis is the ordinary Road of the Posts of France; and
little Mount Cenis is a shorter way, but more uneasy. We find there the
invention of a sort of Sled, on which a man sitting, advances in less than half
a quarter of an hour a league, by sliding on the Snow from the top of the
Mountain to the bottom. There are persons trained to this exercise called
Sled-drivers, who guide the Sled by stopping it when it is necessary, with a
great Prong of iron, which they fix in the way. On the top of the Mountain
there are houses which they call the Ramass, where the Sled-drivers are, by
whom men cause themselves to be driven on a Sled when they go to Lasueburg.

We find on the right hand the Chapel into which those persons are carried who
are killed by the extremity of the cold in their Journey, and on whom is found
no mark of their Religion. When persons so killed are discovered to be
Catholics, they are buried in the next Catholic Churchyard: If they are
Protestants, they are carried into the next Churchyard of theirs. Those that go
into this Chapel, fancy they are in the Kingdom of the Dead; the Air is so
subtle, that those bodies do not putrify; there are many of them entire, with
their flesh, skin, and hair, without having changed but a very little of their
color. They are placed in order upright against the walls of this Chapel, a
place of sadness and melancholy. Mount St. Gothard, which is the passage from
Switzerland, has also a Chapel of persons frozen to death: Our Lady of
Laghette is very famous, two leagues from Nice. The greatest part of the Tombs
of the Dukes of Savoy, are in the rich Abbey of Haute-combe, on the Lake
Bourget.

The Dominions of this Prince may be seventy leagues in length, and thirty or
forty in breadth; and in some parts above fifty. Spain would have swallowed
them up in the minority of Charles Emanuel the Second; but France opposing it,
made them give over the Attempt.

His Royal Highness has four houses of pleasure about Turin, which must not be
forgotten, to wit, that de la Grande Venerie Royal, that of Valentin, and those
of Mirefleur, and of Rovili. Purpurat must also be added to the number: Nor
must we omit la Generale, which belongs to President Truchy a Minister of
State, of a great understanding, and equally zealous for the service of his
Prince.

At the beginning of the year 1679, the Abbot d Estrade at his return from his
Embassy from Venice, where he resided three years, was sent to this Court with
the Character of Ambassador of France: his entry was very solemn. He succeeded
to Duke Villars chosen for the Embassy of Spain, where he formerly was; and
the Marquess Ferrero was appointed Ambassador of Savoy with the most Christian
King.

The Ratification of the Marriage of the Duke of Savoy with the Infanta of
Portugal, was at Lisbone the 18th of Aug. 1679.

The 19th of September following, the Sieur of the Red hat Deputy, and first
Syndick of the Town of Geneva, accompanied with Sieur Pittet and others, had
Audience of Madam Royal, to give her satisfaction concerning some subjects of
complaint that she had made against that Town at the beginning of her Regency.
He gave her to understand in a fine discourse, how sorry his Masters were for
all that had happened; that their-intentions had never been to do any thing
that was disagreeable to so great a Princess; and that they humbly supplied her
to forget all that was past, by a motion of Generosity, and to let them feel
the effects of her good will toward them. He addressed himself afterward to
his Royal Highness, and gave him to understand the desire the Town of Geneva
had to merit his good will, and the part they took in the glory that the Prince
acquired by his Marriage with the Infanta of Portugal, Heiress of so great a
Kingdom. These Deputies were presented each, before their departure, with a
Chain of Gold.

The Great Duke of Tuscany.
Cosmus the Third, Great Duke of Tuscany, of the House of Medices, Cath. He
bears Or, with five Roundles, Gules, and one in chief, Azure, charged with
three Flower-de-luces, Or.

This Prince is Son of Ferdinand the Second, and of Victoria de la Rouere: he
married the 19th of April 1661. by Proxy, the Princess Louise Marguerite of
Orleans, Daughter of late Gaston of France, Duke of Orleans, and of the
deceased Marguerite of Lorain. Cardinal Bonzi performed the Ceremony in the
Chapel of the Louvre. From this Marriage are issued two Princes and a Princess.

Anno 1531. Florence changed its Popular Government into a Monarchical, under
the authority of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and had for Prince Alexander
de Medices, Nephew to Pope Clement the Seventh. And Anno 1569, Pope Pius the
Fifth gave to Cosmus, Successor of Alexander, the Title of Great Duke of
Tuscany, for having sent into France bands of Soldiers against those of the
pretented Religion, the Authors of the first Wars of Religion; and made him see
his Bulls executed.

Florence is the Capital of the whole State on the River Arne, and the place of
abode of the Great Dukes. This Town has two strong Castles and a Citadel. The
Duke lives in the Palace, on the Model of which that of Luxemburg at Paris was
built. Its Galleries are very curious and very rich; there are seen in a Hall
Chairs of silver, a Service of massy gold, two Spheres, the one of the
Heavens, and the other of the Earth, both of cast Brass, artistically made; the
barrel of a Gun and its battery, of Gold, made by one of its Dukes; great
Candlesticks with feet of Amber; a great Loadstone: And in another Hall, a
great many of the Works of Titian, of Michael Angelo, and of Raphael Vrbin; and
an infinite number of other Wonders. The Garden contains many excellent
Figures; those of Adam and Eve are accomplished Pieces: it has large and
beautiful Walks, excellent Knots, large Trees, pleasant Fountains, great
Cisterns, and fine Flowers.

The Chapel of St. Laurence is the Mausoleum of the Dukes; it is very large,
and of a round figure; in the inside they have not spared Jasper, Porphire,
Alabaster, Pearls, etc. the outside is of the fairest Marble that could be got.
Under the Chapel is the Vault, where are many Tombs. In the Chapel is placed
a Tabernacle made of Saphirs, Diamonds, Emeralds, and Rubies, which was
formerly kept in a Cabinet in one of the Great Dukes Galleries, and dazeled the
eyes of the Spectators.

The Palace of Strosses is famous for its structure.

The Great Dukes Houses of Pleasure about Florence, are Pratolino, Prato
Petraria, Baroncelli, Carregio, Poggio Imperiale, and Poggio Cajano.

Florence has the Title of Archbishopric: Cardinal Nerli, heretofore Nuncio in
France, is seated in it: The Cordeliers keep there in their Church the Robe of
St. Francis. Sienna and Pisa are also Archiepiscopal Seats.

The Academy of Florence has given the Public a Dictionary which rectifies the
Italian Tongue. A certain person said once pleasantly on this subject, That as
the Searce separates the Flour from the Bran, this Academy has purified by its
Dictionary the Tongue of the Country, separating the good terms from those that
are not so. He that would know the origin of the word Academy, may consider,
that it is on the occasion of a place near Athens which Academus gave to Plato
to teach Philosophy in, that the name of Academy is since given by way of
excellency to illustrious Assemblies, where Sciences are cultivated. You must
observe, that this name is general; Plato had his Academy. Aristotle his
Lyceum, Zeno his Porticus, Epicurus his Gardens; diverse Sciences were there
taught.

The principal Towns near Florence are Sienna, Pisa, Legorn a strong place and
a Seaport, Pistoya, Volaterra, Fiorenzola, Radicofanis, and Portferraya
another Seaport.

By reason of the liberty of Conscience that is at Legorn, there are several
sorts of Nations, Jews, Greeks, Turks, Armenians, and Christians, walk all
together there in the great Piazza.

Four Popes have issued from the House of Medecis; Steven the Tenth, Leo the
Tenth, Clement the Seventh, and Leo the Eleventh: two Empresses, and two
Princesses who have been Queens of France; to wit, Katherine de Medecis,
married to Henry the Second, Mother of three Kings; Mary de Medecis, Spouse of
Henry the Fourth, called the Great. This Princess will never die in the memory
of the people: She gave excellent Fountains throughout all Paris; caused the
Queens Court to be planted with a great number of Trees, which have been
augmented by Louis the Great; and caused that august Palace of Luxembourg to be
built, which is visited and frequented not only by Parisians, but likewise by
Strangers, who admire the Structure and Symmetry with the rest. It is inhabited
by two great Princesses of the Royal Blood, Mademoiselle de Montpensier,
Sovereign of Dombes; and Madam de Guise, Duchess of Alencon.

Tuscany has afforded many Popes: the sole Town of Sienna has given Alexander
the Third, of the Family of Bandinellis; Pius the Second, and Pius the Third,
of the House of Picolominy; Alexander the Seventh, of that of Chisi; Clement
the Ninth was Native of Pistoya. A Historiographer of Brandenburg relates, that
Pope Pius the Fourth having an intention to give the quality of King to a Duke
of Florence, the Emperor being advertised of it by an Ambassador, answered,
Italia non habet Regem nisi Caesarem. Others believe that this Answer was given
by Charles the Fifth, when he was spoken to concerning the restitution of the
Town of Milain to Duke Ludovick Sforce, who had deposited it in his hands.

Some think that the Italian Tongue is more pure at Sienna than in the rest of
Italy. Many think that those persons talk much after the same rate, as those
who say that better French is spoken at Blois and at Saumur, than at Paris;
which seems a Paradox: for there where the Court is, the French Academy, the
greatest Preachers of the Kingdom, and a most renowned Bar, the Language ought
to be most pure and polite. This may be a little Problematical, because the
diversity of Nations that are at Paris cause the corruption of the Language.
You must observe, that Sienna has a flourishing Academy, and that almost all
the Towns of Italy have Academies; we see them mentioned in a book of the
Academy of the Abbot Bourdelot, containing diverse Researches: It is to be had
at Thomas Moettes in Harp-street, at the sign of St. Alexis.

The Duke of Mantua.
Charles the Third, of the House of Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, Cath. His Arms are
Argent a Cross Pattee Gules between four Eagles Sable, on the whole an
Escutcheon, quarterly first gives a Lion Rampant Or, and 3 Bars Sable. He
resides at Mantua, a very large, strong, and pleasant City, which was built by
Manto the Prophetess, Daughter of Tiresias. It is esteemed more ancient than
Rome by 670 years: It is situated on the Lake Benar, which has ten leagues
circumference.

This Town has some Bridges on which a man may walk guarded from the Rain in
some places; that of St. George is five hundred paces in length.

Mantua was made a Marquisate, An. 1433. by the Emperor Sigismond; and a
Duchy, Anno 1530. by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, in favor of Frederick de
Gonzaga.

The Dukes Palace is very beautiful; it is at one of the ends of the Town.
Montferrat at the foot of the Alps is of his dependancies, whereof Cazal is the
Capital; it is a very large Fortress: its Cavalry are esteemed throughout all
Italy. Part of Montferrat was yielded to the Duke of Savoy by the Treaty of
Peace at Quiras. The Duke of Mantua possesses Cazal:

The Country is very fertile, but very small; they are there courteous and
officious, particularly to the French, in remembrance of the assistance they
afforded them in time of need.

The two famous Poets, Virgil and Tasso, were of Mantua.

The Cathedral-Church called St. Andrews, is remarkable for its Pictures and
Tombs. Under the Quire is a vast Chapel, where is preserved the Blood of the
Son of God, gathered by St. Longis on Mount Calvary.

Some little Soveraignties have been dismembered from the Duchy of Mantua, to
make Portions of Lands for younger Brothers: Bozola, Mirandula, Sabioneta,
Novalara, Gustala, and others, are of the number. The Duchy yields its Prince
a million yearly.

The Body of the Jews there living is composed of above two thousand, who are
rich by reason of their great Trade; the Duke gets a great Tribute from them.

Strangers that go to Mantua, if they are curious, should not return without
visiting Marmirol, a Country House of Pleasure belonging to the Duke: This
place is charming for its Marble, for its Grotto's, for its Conduits, for its
Gardens, for its Fountains and Jet d'eaus, for its Paintings, Sculptures, and
Figures.

This State is said to be 35 miles from North to South, and 50 from East to
West.

The Po, the Seiche, the Ogli, and the Mince, are its most considerable Rivers.

A Relation of the 23th of August 1679. tells us that a Gentleman was cured at
Mantua of a Tertian Ague by an extraordinary Remedy, in the strongest time of
the Fit: He was covered with pieces of Ice in his bed, and this freezing Remedy
cured him at the first application; but he remained so weak, that he had much
ado to set himself right again. The Physicians of the East Indies on the Coast
of Coromandel, and even at Surat, take near the same course with those that
have Agues. The Spaniards drink with Ice at the strongest time of the Fit.

The Duke of Modena.
Alphonsus d'Est the third of the name, Duke of Modena. Besides this Quality,
he takes that of Duke of Regio, of Prince of Carpi and of Corregio, of Marquess
d'Est, and of Rovigni, Cath.

His Arms are Azure, an Eagle Argent, crowned, billed, and membred Or.

Modena is the Capital of the Duchy of this name, and the ordinary place of
residence of its Duke: Its Bulwarks are made of the ancient fashion.

If this State be small, it is good.

Renaud Cardinal d'Est Bishop of Regio, was Protector of some Crowns at the
Court of Rome.

The Dukal Dignity began in the House of Modena, An. 1452. under the Emperor
Frederick the Third.

The ancient Houses of Brunswick in Germany, and of Modena in Italy, are of the
same Stock, and make good their Descent almost from the year 800.

The Duke of Parma and of Placentia.
Rainutio Farnesis Duke of Parma and of Placentia, Cath.

His Arms are Or, with six Flower-de-luces Azure.

Petro Luigi Farnesis was the first Duke of Parma. Alexander Farnesis, youngest
Son of Pedro Luigi, was one of the greatest Captains of his Age. Pope Paul the
Sixth, born at Farnesis, began the Council of Trent.

Parma is the Capital of the Duchy, and the ordinary place of residence of the
Duke.

The Dukes Palace is beautiful, the Citadel is not amiss: the Soil is good, it
contains in many places excellent Fields and sat Pastures for feeding all sorts
of Cattle, and particularly Cows. Its great Parmesan-Cheeses are very famous;
they are sent in so great a number into all parts of Europe, that this sole
Merchandise is able to enrich the Inhabitants. The Country is so fertile, that
all things necessary and commodious for the life of man are there found. The
Po, the Trebeia, and the Taro, water it.

This State has not much above 25 leagues in length, and 20 in breadth.

The Bishop of Trent.
THe Bishop and Prince of Trent is called Alberti: he was made Bishop Anno
1677. The Cathedral Church is dedicated to St. Vigil; it is built of great
Freestone, even to its high Steeple: its Canons are all of Noble extraction,
and have the right of choosing their Bishop. The Town of Trent, besides its
Antiquity, is famous throughout the World for its General and Ecumenical
Council held under three Popes. It began under Paul the Third, Anno 1545.
continued under Julius the Third, and ended under Pius the Fourth, 1563. It
continued a long time, because it was interrupted on the occasion of Troubles
and Wars betwixt Christian Princes. All Churchmen ought to read continually
this Council. Trentin is a Province near the Alps.

Its Capital City is on the River Adige.

This Principality is under the protection of the House of Austria, as the
Principality of Mourgue or Monacho is under that of France.

The Figure of Italy, and its Length.
ITaly has the figure of a Cavalier's Boot, and is 300 common leagues of France
in length, from Chamberry to Regio, which is at the farthest part of Calabria.
As for its wideness, it is small, and unequal; in some places it is 30, in
others 50, and elsewhere 100 French leagues wide. The Alps divide it from
France and Germany. Lombardy is included in Italy. The States of Savoy,
Piemont, Milain, Genoa, and Montferrat, are in Upper Lombardy.

The States of Venice, Mantua, Parma, Modena, Trent, etc. are of Lower Lombardy.

Before we proceed farther, I have thought it proper to give here the following
little Itinerary, for distinguishing the different Leagues of diverse States, as
serving for Topical History.

An Itinerary.
THe Italians make their leagues of 1000 paces; they count by the mile.

The common league of France is of 3000 paces, and in places about Paris of
1500. In Gascoigne they equal those of Germany; those of Limosin and Berne
exceed them.

The ordinary leagues of Germany and Poland are of 4000 paces, and in Hungary
of 6000, and in Switzerland of 5000.

In Spain and in Portugal they contain 3000 paces, and are of a different
length, as in France.

In England they comprize 1250.

In Sweden and in Norway 8000. These are the longest of all; in some places
they are of 6000 paces.

In Muscovy they include 800 Geometrical paces: two ordinary paces make the
Geometrical. The Russians and Muscovites call leagues Verstes.

The Jews count by furlongs: their league is composed of 15 furlongs; each
furlong contains 125 paces, whereof each is five foot. Stadium, according to
its Etymology, signifies station, or rest.

The Greek furlong is likewise of 25 Geometrical paces.

The Egyptians measure their leagues by Schoenes or furlongs.

The Moguls by Cosses, which are of 1500 paces.

The Persians by Parasanga's, which are 30 furlongs. Authors differ about the
measure of Parasanga's.

The Chinese league is of 2500 paces.

Antonius, Andrew Resendius, Gretserus, Merula, Rabbi Benjamin, Count de
Brinne, Peter de la Vallee a Roman Gentleman, John Baptista de Rocole, and
others, have made Itineraries.

Some Astrologers speaking of Leagues, have taken occasion to say, that the Sun
goes in an hour 290921 leagues of the greatest of France. According to this
computation, he must go as quick or swifter than an Arrow out of a Bow, or as a
Bullet shot out of a Musket, by reason of the greatness of the way he passes
day and night.

On this ground it has been asserted, that in case a Carrier could go post from
the Earth to Heaven, he would not reach to the Starry Heaven in 1300 years, if
he went not more than 16 or 17 German leagues each day.

Hesiod says in his Theogonia, that it would require nine days and nine nights
for an Anvil of Iron to fall from the Heaven of the Moon to the Earth, and that
it would arrive on it the tenth. Let us leave the consideration of these
matters to Astrologers.

FRANCE.
LOVIS the Fourteenth, King of France and Navarre, surnamed the Great, came
into the World the Fifth of September, An. 1638. was declared of Age the
Seventh of September, 1651. Crowned at Rheims the Seventh of June, 1654. and
was Married at St. John's de Luz, An. 1660. the Ninth of June, to Mary Theresa
of Austrich, Infanta of Spain, Daughter of Philip the Fourth, and of Elizabeth
of France. This great Princess is a Mirror of Piety, and the Mother of the
People. Those that have the honor to behold her Countenance, have the
happiness to find there all the Graces which have taken pleasure to seat
themselves in it.

The Twenty fourth of August of the same year, their Majesty's made their Royal
Entry into Paris, accompanied with Princes, Ambassadors, and Foreign
Ministers, with all the Pomp and Magnificence imaginable. Heaven has blessed this
Marriage by the Birth of Monseigneur le Dauphin.

Louis is the Most Christian King, and the Eldest Son of the Church.

He has for Motto, Consiliis armisque potens.

And also this, Nec pluribus Impar.

He bears Azure Three Flower-de-luces, Or, which formerly were Seem, or without
number, and reduced to Three by Charles the Sixth. The Scutcheon is Environed
with the Collars of The Orders of S. Michael, and of the Holy Ghost, Ensigned
with a Helmet, Or, entirely open, thereon a Crown closed after the manner of ^n
Imperial Crown, with eight in arched Rays, topt with a double Flower-de-luce;
and this is the Crest: for Supporters, two Angels habited as Levites, the whole
under a Pavilion Royal, Seem of France, Lined Ermines, with these words, Ex
omnibus floribus elegi mihi Lilium. Lilia non laborant neque nent.

These terms, The Lillies do not spin, import, That the Flower-de-luces, which
represent the Crown of France, never fall to the Distaff, and that the Female
Sex cannot inherit according to the Salick Law; as it is amongst the Chaldeans,
Egyptians, Persians, Chinese, Turks, Tartars, and Parthians. Women have
sometimes succeeded in Spain, England, Sicily, and in Sweden; but never in
France.

The Arms of Navarre are Gules, Chains of Gold interlaced, parted into Orles,
Pales, Fesses, Counterbands, or Saltiers.

The Livery of the most Christian King is of a Blew color.

This Monarch has a Physiognomy more Divine than Humane, which moves a most
profound respect; and we perceive in his Countenance a sweetness which tempers
his Majesty: he is gifted with the Sublime Science of Governing; he is another
Solomon, in rendering the Oracles of his Judgments. Mounting on Horfeback, he
puts himself in the head of his Armies, which he conducts as another David, or
as another Alexander the Great; whose presence imports more than Millions of
Captains, and an entire Army. He takes whole Provinces in all seasons, and in a
day Four Towns together: there is little difference with him betwixt the Design
and the Execution: what has he not done before these important places, Lille,
Mastrich, Valenciennes, Cambray, Gaunt, Ipres, and others, for their
reducement? He has performed the Office of a General, and of a Captain, and has
toyled as a simple Soldier. He has been all at once King, General of an Army,
Marshal of the Camp, Sergeant of the Battle, Captain, Soldier, Engineer, and
Cannoneer. He holds all his Enemies play; and the more he has, the more he puts
to the Rout. He has gotten so many Palms and Laurels, that the fires of joy and
public rejoycings have shown themselves throughout the whole Kingdom. His
Adventures are a Concatenation of Victories, Triumphs and Prodigies. He is
worthy the Empire of the whole Earth: the great Armies which he keeps on foot,
and his yearly Revenue above one hundred Millions, render him formidable to the
opposers of his glory. We are sheltered under his Royal Mantle seem de lis,
which is so long and large, that it is capable of giving shelter and security,
not only to his own State, but also to Foreigners.

If the Kings of Spain glory in the Title of Catholic, the Kings of France
merited it before them. Philip de Valois was honored with it, An. 1329. for
having upheld the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: Its Lous the Great particularly,
who extends Christianity even into the new world by his care, in maintaining
Evangelical Laborers, where they cry, Vive le Roy de France.

We shall observe here, that this custom of crying Vive le Roy, comes from the
Hebrews: when Solomon was proclaimed King by the sound of the Trumpet, the
people cried often, Let the King live. On this occasion the Romans cried at the
Proclamation of their Emperors, The Gods protect and keep you for ever.
Froissard and Enguerand de Monstrelet, cited by Peter de Romuald, say, that it
is not yet 200 years since that in France, instead of crying Vive le Roy, they
cried Noel, Noel; that is, as though they said Hosanna, which signifies Salus
and Gloria: Blessed be him that comes in the Name of the Lord. It Is to the
Kings of France that Heaven sent the Holy Vial for their Consecration, in the
person of Clovis: An ancient Poet made these Verses on this Subject.

Remigius sacris Regem dum lavit in undis, Attulit e sacro Chrisma Columba
polo. It is those who have the power and virtue of curing the Kings Evil, by
the touch of their Royal hands, and making the sign of the Cross on the
Patient, and saying, The King touches, and God cures. How redoubtable to
Infidels has been the Royal Standart, or Banner, which some think to have been
sent from Heaven to Clovis! I shall say no more; the splendor of the Majesty
of Louis the Great dazles me: I have not the Eyes of an Eagle to look fixtly on
the Sun. I shall only add something concerning the Education of Monsieur le
Dauphin.

The Dolphin of France, and his Marriage.
THis Prince came into the world the first day of November, 1661. The King has
enlightened the steps of his youth, and has given him a meet Education, and
inspired into him, that he must never be Absolute but in Reason and Justice.
These are the firm Pillars of a State. His Majesty considering that it is to
infect the head of a public Fountain, to corrupt the Soul of a Prince that may
one day be seated on the Throne; for this reason removes from his company
Flatterers and Libertines, who might render obscure the precious gifts and rare
qualities which Heaven pours with full hands on this Royal Soul; which rejoices
France, which increases every day more and more, by the noble cares, by the
high lights, and by the incomparable Conduct of the Illustrious Persons who
have governed and instructed him. This Prince in his Orient is the admiration
of the whole Court, of Ambassadors and of Foreign Ministers; and will be one
day the Model of the greatest Heroes. We see this Divine Plant to grow and rise
it self every day to the admiration and glory of France, and of the Church.
Anno 1668, Pope Clement the Ninth sent into France Prince Louis, Cardinal
Deacon, Duke of Vendome, Legate a Latere, to Louis the Fourteenth, for the
Solemnity and Ceremony of the Baptism of Monsieur le Dauphin. His Holiness was
Godfather, and he was named Louis August. This Prince has Married the Electoral
Princess of Bavaria, Mary-Ann-Victoir-Christian. People admire her Perfections,
the excellency of her Understanding, her Majestic Air, the evenness of her
Humor, and generally all the excellent qualities that she possesses; which
yet, as eminent as they are, are much beneath the Christian Virtues wherewith
her fair Soul is endowed. This great Princess will give her Spouse Heirs to the
Crown, and he in exchange will Crown her with Palms and Laurels. The Church and
the State will gather the fruits of Glory and of Benediction. The 7th of March,
1680, Cardinal Bouillon, great Almoner of France, gave them the second
Benediction of Marriage at Chalons on Marn. Lilia florebunt, the Lillies will
flourish, and diffuse their agreeable odor over all the earth. I have spoken
of the August Electoral House of Bavaria, in the Tract of the Princes Electors
of the Empire.

The Duke of Orleans.
MOnfieur the only Brother of the King, did not fail to signalize his Courage
before Lisle and Mastrich when they were reduced, and to take Towns on other
occasions. Before he reduced St. Omer to the Kings Obedience, he surpast
himself on the eleventh of April of the year 1677. at the Battle which he
fought a^ Cassel, being assisted by the Marshals d'Humieres, and de Luxembourg;
where he gained a very great and very famous Victory over the Spanish and Dutch
Troops commanded by the Prince of Orange. The Chevalier de Lorain was always
near his person in the Fight; and his Brother the Chevalier d'Harcourt may be
looked upon as a second David, after having killed at the Battle of Raab the
Turkish Goliath, who insolently insulted over the Christian Army. Cassel is
known in History to have been the field of Battle of three Sons of France, all
called Philip; the first was overcome, the other two were Conquerers.

This last and glorious day was remarkable for many singular actions: the
Cavalry contributed extremely by their vigor, to the gaining of this great
Battle: they had the advantage to give the beginning to the Victory,
overthrowing at first onset the left Wing of the Enemy. We may say that the
first Squadron, composed, of Scotch and English, was not of those that
signalized themselves least, by the advantage it had to begin, and almost to
end this great day; it was led by the Count de Broe, more known by the name de
la Guette. His firmness was like to have cost him his life in the last Charge;
his sole Squadron, which was well kept in order, being attackt by five
Squadrons of the Enemy. This Count, Captain-Lieutenant of the English Soldiery
for his most Christian Majesty, was very fortunate, in that it cost him but his
liberty: even his Enemies rendered Justice to his Merit, by treating him with as
much Civility as he could wish. The Musketeers came very seasonably at the
instant that the Victory hanged in doubt; they made themselves Masters of the
Barricado of Cassel. The Commander de Fourbin, whose Illustrious and Ancient
House has furnished great Captains and learned Politicians to the State, whom
our Kings have caressed and honored with the greatest Employs of the Kingdom,
and so esteemed them, that they have been pleased to have them for their safety
as well as for their Council near their Royal persons: it is the Elogy of their
Family, The Wise and Valiant Fourbins; gave a testimony of both in this
dangerous and important occasion: and his Majesty showed his generous
acknowledgment, by the reception he made him at his glorious return, even to
give him his Picture which he took from his arm, and which the Sieur Commander
Captain-Lieutenant of the first Company had more in his heart than all the
Pictures that could be given him. The Sieur de Hautfaye, Lord of Jonvel,
Captain-Lieutenant of the second Company, did his part well there. The
Chevalier de Lussan in this famous Battle lost one Arm by a Cannon-shot, in the
service of his King and Country. The Count d' Avejan, Captain of the Guards,
bestirred himself vigorously according to his wont.

The Prince of Conde and the Duke d'Enguien.
FRance has always been provided with great Men in all Ages, and in all kinds.
It has not been at a loss for great Captains, men of Brain and execution, good
for War and for Peace, for Battles and for Treaties; such as have not been like
the Emperor Domitian, who amused himself in running through flies with a
Golden Bodkin; or Aropas King of Macedon, who made Lanterns; or Hartabus, King
of the Hircans, who caught Moles; or Biantes King of the Lydians, who ran Frogs
through: It has in this Age Louis de Bourbon Prince of Conde, and the Duke
d'Enguien, Sons of Mars and Bellona, to whom the nu^^er of Enemies does but add
courage, bloody occasions being their divertisements: and for this reason they
have done actions that might better be imagined than written. Their Swords have
painted them much more lively with the blood of the Spaniards and other
Nations, than they may be represented with a Quill. The most intelligent know
well, that these are not chance-blows, but ordinary effects of their dexterity
and courage. The famous and bloody Battle of Senef Crowns their Military
Exploits. They have joined Learning with Arms, and have an excellent Library,
where there are rare Greek and Latin Manuscripts. The Father and the Son are
living Libraries.

Prince Henry de la Tour d'Auvergne, Vicount de Turenne.
FRance has its Marshals and its Captains, and an infinite number of valiant
and flesht Soldiers, the greatest part of them capable of commanding; and he
that has commanded them so long time, and so gloriously, Henry de la Tour
d'Auvergne, Vicount de Turenne, Marshal-General of the Kings Camps and Armies,
and Colonel-General of the French Cavalry, is recommendable for his famous
Exploits, and for the important Victories that he has gained over the Enemies
of the State; and more in this happy day, that renouncing the Error in which
he was born, and in which he had lived, he embraced with a sincere heart the
Catholic Faith, which leads to Eternal Salvation, the Church Militant has not
had less joy than the Triumphant. Though Learning was familiar to this Prince,
and that he has been heard to say very convincing things for the proof and
maintaining of Catholic Truths; the Church is obliged to Cardinal de Bo^illon,
his Nephew, for having contributed to so illustrious a Conquest. Italian
Princes were heard to say to his Highness at his promotion to the Cardinalship,
La promotion di vestra Altezza al Cardinalato Colmo d'honore il Sacro Collegio.

I shall not omit, that if the said Henry de la Tour left the Earth the Twenty
first of July, 1675. to rest from his labors, being killed by a Cannon-shot
near Satzbach, as he went to take a view of a Post of the Imperial Army, to the
end to give it Battle; after the loss of so great a Man, the King, to comfort
himself, made Nine Marshals of France; the Count d'Estrade, the Duke de
Navailles, the Count de Schomberg, the Duke de Duras, the Duke de Vivonne, the
Duke de la Feuillade, the Duke de Luxembourg, the Marquess de Rochefort, and
the Count de Lorge. His Majesty honored them with the dignity of the Marshals
staff the Thirtieth of July of the same year of Vicount Turenne's death.

The Ancientest M^rsh^ls of France living, Anno 1680. are these.
THe Marshal Duke de Villeroy, the Marshal Duke de la Ferte-Seneterre; the
Marshal de Crequi, the Marshal de Bellefond, and the Marshal d'Humieres; these
three last are of the penultimate Promotion. The Marshal de Rochefort dyed An.
1676. he quitted the life Military for the glorious.

The Ministers and Secretaries of State.
IF the King be the Soul of the Monarchy, his Ministers are the Organs by which
he works. His Majesty has carried the glory of France to so high a point, that
it may hope all things, and its Enemies fear all. Its Ministers and Secretaries
of State are indefatigable in their precious vigilance, and in the cares they
take for the rest of the Kingdom. They have all signalized themselves: their
spirit is filled with lights so shining, that there is no cloud that they do
not pierce, nor no Foreign or Domestic Factions which they do not dissipate
and subvert: their experience is universal. A very famous Preacher, who is an
Archbishop, Preaching in Sorbon on the day of St. Vrsula, the Patroness Feast
of that College, in the presence of Anne of Austriche, Queen of France, said,
that Cardinal Richlieu had the Spirit of the Prophet Elias, and Cardinal
Mazarine that of the Prophet Elizeas. I believe that these have the Spirit of
Elias and Elizeas, Richlieu and Mazarine. Nor is it to be wondered at, all their
lights being but necessary and favorable emanations of the great splendor of
the Sun, who animates and enlightens them.

The Chancellor.
MEssire Michael de Tellier, Chevalier, Chancellor and Keeper of the Seals of
France, Commander of the Kings Orders, Lord of Chavilles, Barbezieux, and other
places, excels in Council, Understanding, and Integrity; he is consummated in
the decision of affairs of greatest difficulty. Italy has been the Theater of
his great Actions, as well as France. For this reason, Louis the Thirteenth
made him Secretary of State, and Louis the Fourteenth Created him Chancellor
and Keeper of the Seals, for the faithful and important Services that he has
rendered his Majesty for above thirty six years, in the functions of Minister
and Secretary of State. He has the esteem of all great persons, and the
applause of the people: his Memory will be preserved eternally in the
Chronicles of France. The Arms of his House are Three Lizards, which are
friendly to Man. That which renders particularly eminent the Office of
Chancellor, (which this person possesses, is, that he is Chief Minister of the
Kings Justice, and of his Council: it is he, who like another Legislatour
Moses, ascends into the Mountain; he enters into the Cloud which environs the
Throne of his Prince, where the Rays and Lightning of Royal Majesty display
themselves, and where he receives the Laws and Ordinances which he afterward
pronounces to all the people.

He never wears Mourning, because in some sort he deposes his own person, to
represent for the future naught but Justice; it being not decent for this
virtue, which is wholly Divine, to show a feeling of humane infirmities. He has
for exterior mark of his high dignity, on his Scutcheon a Cap of Honor of
Cloth of Gold, faced with Ermines, topt with the figure of a Queen, the
Hieroglyphick of France, with the Scepter in the right hand, and the Seals of
the Kingdom in the left; and behind the Scutcheon two great Maces of Silver
gilt placed in Saltier, with a Mantle like those of the Dukes and Peers of
France, adorned with rays of Gold toward the top, and lined with Ermins,
which encompass all the Scutcheon. The doorkeepers of the Chancery-Court
carrying a Mace of Silver gilt on their Shoulders, march before him, and the
other door-keepers in order.

In the Book entitled l'Estat de la France, Printed An. 1678. page 199. I
found these following Lords ranged in this following manner, as I place them.
If I have not well followed the order, there will be no contest betwixt them
for precedence, each of them knowing very well his right and duty, they
teaching them to others.

M. de la Vrilliere.
MEssire Louis Phelipeaux, Chevalier, Lord of Vrilliere, Marquess of
Chasteaux-Neuf on Loire, and of Tanlai, Count de S. Florentin, Baron de Hervi,
and the ancientest Secretary of State, was Sworn to his Office, An. 1629. He
has a great zeal for the welfare of the Church: the general affairs of the
pretended Reformed Religion are committed to him, and many others. Languedoc,
the County of Foix, Guienne, Rovergne, and Quercy, Brouage, and the Country of
Aunis, Touraine, Anjou, le Main, and le Perch, Normandy, Burgundy, and Breast,
and all that is under his charge, gives testimony of his Virtue and Merit. He
has a Son who possesses the Sea of the Patriarchal, Archiepiscopal, and private
Church of Bourges. Messire Pierre Balthazar Phelipeaux de la Vrilliere,
Marquess of Chasteau-Neuf, who has the Reversion of the place of Secretary of
State, and of the Kings Orders, treads in the glorious footsteps of his Father:
the marks which he daily gives, are proofs of what he will be hereafter.

M. de Louvois.
MEssire Francois Michel de Tellier, Chevalier, Marquess of Louvois, and of
Courtanvau, Councellor in ordinary to the King in his Councels, Chancellor of
his Orders, Minister and Secretary of State, and of his Majesty's commands,
Vicar General of the Order of Nostre Dame du Mount Carmel, and of St. Lazarus
of Jerusalem, great Postmaster, and Superintendant of the Posts and Stages of
France, etc. has given an infinite number of manifest proofs of his Consummated
skill in Military Discipline. It seems as though he had exercised himself in it
all his lifetime: this shows that great men are capable of all things: his
name is known throughout the whole Earth: the Hollanders, Spaniards, and
others, when the War was at the highest, declared that he went like Lightning,
when the Service of his King and Country called upon him. He possesses the
eminent qualities of his Father the Chancellor of France. Poitou, la March,
Lionnois, Dauphine, Catalognia, and Roussillon, Pignerol, Lorrain, Alsatia, the
places Conquered and yielded, the Fortifications of these Generalities, the
War, the Taxes raised for the support of the Soldiery, and the Artillery, are
things belonging to his Charge.

M. Colbert.
MEssire John Baptist Colbert, Chevalier, Marquess of Seignelay, Baron of
Moneteau, Beaumont, Cheni, Ormois, Sceaux, and other places; Counselor in
ordinary to the King in his Councils, and of the Royal Council; General
Controuler of the Kings Revenue, Superintendant of the Navy, Arts, and
Manufactures of France; Minister and Secretary of State. He has acted
vigorously for the subsistence of the Armies of the French Monarchy, in finding
means to raise such Moneys as were necessary, which are the Nerves of War. He
has the prudence of the Serpent, as it is expressed in his Arms. Cardinal
Mazarine considering his Desert, before he died wished the King to make use of
him as his Minister, for his fidelity, and for his service. His admirable
Conduct daily manifests it self, both in general and in particular, even to the
education of his Children, and of his Illustrious Relations. Messire Charles
Edouard Colbert, Marquess of Seignelay, is the eldest of the House: he makes
himself daily admired in the diversity of his Employs and Affairs wherewith he
is taken up in his Majesty's service: he is Secretary of State, Superintendant
of the Maritine affairs, both in the East and West. I saw, Anno 1677. Messire
Julius Armandus Colbert, Lord of Ormais, at the age of fourteen years, defend
public and general Theses of Philosophy in the University of Paris, under the
Presidency of his Brother, the Abbot Messire Jacques Nicolas, then Prior of
Sorbonne, to the admiration of all that there is of Great and Learned in the
Kingdom. I cannot hold from saying of this noble Defender in his Orient, what
was said of St. John Baptist at his birth, Quis putas puer iste erit? It Is a
rare thing to see a Brother perform that Office under a Brother, and with so
wonderful a presence of understanding. These are Prodigies, and Marks of their
great Genius. It may well be said on this occasion, Fortes creantur fortibus;
and with the Oracle, Corona senum filii filiorum, and gloria filiorum patres
eorum. I shall not be more large, lest I offend the modesty of the Father and
of his Children: I shall only say, that this wise Manager of the Kings Revenue
has in his division Paris, the Isle of France, and the Country of Soissons, as
far as Noyon, Orleanois, Blezois, the Kings House, the Clergy, what regards the
Sea, Trade, and Manufactures. As I write this Article, the admirable and
elegant Sermon which the Illustrious Abbot his Brother made one day on the
Feast of St. John Baptist, comes into my mind: Paris rendered it self that day
at Sceaux to hear it: This Sermon was followed with many others in the Capital
City of the Kingdom, and always with excellent success. This Abbot is Doctor of
the House and Society of Sorbonne, and Coadjutor to the Archbishop of Rouen,
since the second of Feb. 1680.

M. Colbert Croissi.
MEssire Charles Colbert, Chevalier, Marquess of Croissi, Minister and
Secretary of State, President of the Parliament of Paris, formerly Master of
Requests, and Intendant of Justice, has acquired the Political and Geographical
knowledge of all the States of the World; that of Ancient and Modern History,
and of all the Interests of the Princes and Potentates of Christendom, in his
Ordinary and Extraordinary Embassies at Rome, in England, Spain, at Aix la
Chapel, and in quality of Ambassador and Plenipotentiary at Nimigen for the
general Peace of Europe, and at Bavaria for the Marriage of Monseigneur le
Dauphin with the Electoral Princess, and in other important Negotiations.
Holland showed him the joy they received after the Peace concluded, to see him
in their Country; and he manifested his by his profuse liberality of his Gold
and Silver to the People in some Towns. This Minister having seen so many
Countries and Nations, and all Courts, it may be said of him what Homer said of
Ulysses in the beginning of his Odysses, according to the translation from the
Greek into Latin, Multorum autem hominum vidit urbes, and mores novit.
Champagne, and Brie, Provence, Britany, Berry, Limosin, Angoumois, Xaintonge,
Bearn, Bigorre, the three Bishoprics of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, the
Principality of Sedan, and the Foreign Countries which are also in his
division, have all a veneration for his Conduct and Generosity. He succeeded to
Messire Simon Arnaud, Chevalier, Lord of Pomponne, in his Charge of Secretary
and Minister of State, which he demised in the Month of December, An. 1679.

The Councels.
THe Councels are composed of the Chancellor Keeper of the Seals of France, of
the Marshal Duke de Villeroy Chief of the Royal Council for the Kings Revenue,
of Twelve ordinary Councillors of State, Three Counselors of the Church, and
Three of the Sword, Twelve attending every six Months. The King regulating the
Council, An. 1673. added the Controuler General of his Revenues, and the two
Intendants of them, to have place in the Councels des Parties, as they have in
those of the Revenue.

The Councillors of State are chosen by his Majesty, being such as have past
the greatest part of all the Offices of the Robe, having been Intendants of
Justice, or Ambassadors, or first Presidents of the Parliaments; these are at
present the best and most sought-for Offices of the Kingdom, and which come
nearest the King, who gives such persons daily the best employs, and
Commissions of greatest importance for the service of himself and the State. To
these Councels the Masters of Request have access, which are to the number of
Eighty, whereof Twenty serve each Quarter: after having been honored with many
Commissions and Intendancies, they are preferred by his Majesty to Employs of
the highest nature where he designs them.

The two Intendants of the Revenue are Messire Vicount Hotman, and Messire
Nicholas des Marests Colbert.

The first has been Councellor in the grand Council, Master of Requests, and
Intendant of Justice in Guyen, and in Tourain, Proctor-General of the Chamber
of Justice, and afterward honored by the King with a place in his Councels,
and with the Commission of Intendant of the Kings Revenue, and of Justice in
the generality of Paris: all these great Employs are marks of his singular
Merit, which he has signalized in all occurrences. Messire Nicolas des Marests
has been Counselor to the Parliament of Paris, and is at present Master of
Requests, and Intendant of the Kings Revenues. There is no man but knows that
he has always done things with skill and integrity: his Ability, his Candor,
and the care that he takes, appear in his Conduct as three great lights, which
make him known to those that will be enlightened.

When the waves are troubled, the Vessel has most need of skilful Pilots: the
perfect knowledge that these two Intendants have of the Interests of the
Provinces, has served them as a Watchtower to keep them from erring; and the
zeal they have for the advantage of his Majesty's Revenue, is another means for
them to behave themselves well betwixt the Sovereign and his Subjects: in a
word, to the end that the King may receive as much aid as his people comfort.

The Illustrious Controller General of the Kings Revenues, of whom I have
spoken before, may rely on the fidelity of these two Intendants.

The Four Secretaries of the Kings Revenues are the Sieur Bechameil, Berrier,
Ranchin, and Coquille.

The Four Clerks of the Council des Parties are the Sieurs Aguillaumie, Pecot,
le Fouyn, and Brunet.

The Keeper of the Royal Treasury in waiting, enters into the Council of the
Kings Revenues; and also the Treasurer of the casual Revenues in waiting, when
they are upon the Rolls of the casual Revenues, this person stands behind the
Chancellours Chair.

Besides the Council of the Finances, and the Council des Parties, the King has
also a Council of Dispatches, a Council of War, and others according to
different affairs: the Council of Dispatches is held in the Kings Chamber,
where attend the Duke of Orleans, the Chancellor, the Marshal de Villeroy, the
Four Secretaries of State, and those that are received for that Office upon
Survivorship. His Majesty presides in the Council of War: the Princes, the
Marshals of France, and other Lords skilful in the Military Art, are ordinarily
called to it.

France the Mountain of the Muses.
IF France be the field of Mars, it is also the Mountain of the Muses, and the
refuge of Arts. Philosophy has left Egypt and Greece, to make its residence in
this Kingdom. The Spaniards confess this truth by this Proverb used in the
University of Salamanca; Dat Lutetia Aristotelum, Salamanca Deum. It Is at Paris
particularly where we find new Plato's and Aristotle's in subtilty and
solidness, Consummated Divines, Orators like Cicero and Quintilian; Cujas's and
Bartholus's for the Canon and Civil Laws; second Galen's, Hippocrates's, and
Esculapius's in Physic. Astrology gives us in the House of the Observatory,
its Ptolomy's, its Alphonsus's, and its Tico-Brahe's; the Mathematics
Cluverius's; Poesy, its Virgil's, its Ovids, its Martials, and its Homers.
Painting its Apelles, and Carvers its Phidias. It Is in France where Foreigners
come and suck the Ambrosia, and drink large draughts of the Nectar of the Gods.

The ordinary places of Residence of their most Christian Majesty's.
PAris, Saint Germains in Lay, Versailles, Vincennes, Fontainbleau, Chambort,
Blois, Compeinne.

These dwelling-places are truly Royal: the Louvre, the Chasteau des
Tuilleries; that of Fontainbleau and Versailles are a Miracle of Nature, and a
Prodigy of Art in all things; and in a word, the Center of the Rarities and
beautiful things of the world.

The Louvre.
PHILLIP August ended the Building of the Louvre, An. 1214. This Palace being
the first of the Kingdom, and as a Masterpiece, some Authors think that this
Monarch called it le Louvre, as though he would say, l'Oeuvre, (the Work) by
Excellency: others think it so called, from a street called Lupura, or Lupara,
in which it is thought to be built. Louis the Fourteenth putting the last hand
to it, has so enlarged it, that it is capable of receiving three Kings. A
Learned and excellent Wit of our time, has made this Inscription for the
Louvre, which comprehends and expresses the greatness of the Building, the
greatness of the person, and of the Name of King Louis le Grand, and the
explication of his Devise or Motto, Nec pluribus Impar, in these terms.

Haec licet ampla domus, long tamen amplior hospes,
Ludovico magno nec totus sufficit orbis
Sufficeret solus multis, nec pluribus Impar.
The same Inscription in English.

This House though great, the Person whose Command
It owns, is greater much, Louis le Grand
Does find the world too scant, for he alone
Would serve for many, fit for more than One.
It Is in the Louvre where Learning has been stripped of the gross Bark of the
School; it is there where the Muses are habited a-la-mode, and where they are
given the fine turn of Politeness, by the means of the French Academy
instituted by Cardinal Richlieu, An. 1635. for the pureness and perfection of
the French Tongue. Of late, some Towns of this Kingdom have erected Academies
for this purpose; as Arles, Suissons, and others. We shall here observe, that
in France, in the time of the said Cardinal, the Gazette, which according to
the term de Gaza, signifies a heap of diverse things, began An. 1631. and that
the first Gazettier, called Theophrast Renaudot, Physician of the faculty of
Montpellier, dedicated it to Louis the Thirteenth. I saw it in the Library of
College Mazarin; it succeeded the French Mercury; its dates and Chronologies
were in the Margin.

The Tuilleries.
THe Tuilleries are called by this name, because in this place formerly there
was a Tuillerie, or place to make Tiles. Queen Catherine de Medices caused this
building to be began in the Month of May of the year 1564. Louis the Fourteenth
has completed it, and rendered it August: this Prince has planted in the Garden
Sycomers and Indian Maroniers, and other beautiful Trees; he has made Knots and
Beds, with all sorts of Flowers, large Allies little Wildernesses, great
Cesterns, with their Jet d'Eaux and Terrasses, and has placed excellent Statues
in it: that of Time, which devours its Children, is very remarkable. We see
Diana of Ephesus in one of the four Chambers of the ancient Pieces of the
Louvre.

Fontainbleau.
THe number of excellent Fountains, and great streams of water, have given to
this place the name it bears. The Inhabitants think that the name Fontainbleau
comes from a Fountain of fair water that is to be seen there at this day. In
the Palace we find four of them, and as many Gardens: its Chambers are very
rich, and its Galeries very beautiful: in one of them are represented in
excellent Painting, the Fights and Victories of some Kings of France. We see in
another the Antiquities, the Garden-Knots, the Grotto's, the Water-falls, the
fine Walks, the great Mail, the Meadows and the Groves that render this place
famous: we see the Hermitage of St. Louis on a little knap in the midst of the
way of the Forest, which is very large, and very full of all kind of Deer.
Jouin de Rochefort has excellently particularized this Royal House.

Versailles.
THere is nothing more agreeable, nothing more sumptuous nor magnificent than
the Palace of Versailles. Silk, Gold, Silver, Pearls and Precious Stones,
Paintings and Tapestry enrich it, and yet infinitely more the presence of the
Master. Its Gardens are vast and charming, and the water falls the finest that
may be seen. How admirable is the great Park, with the great Channel, which is
thirty two fathoms wide, and nine hundred in length! the two Horses that stand
at its entrance in a fierce posture, as those of Montecavallo in Rome, draw on
them the fixed eyes of the Passengers. The Vivarium contains all sorts of wild
Animals. By the rule convenient rebus nomina saepe suis, Versailles deserves to
be called by this name, because his Majesty pours there ordinarily his Favors
and Blessings in a profuse manner on those who have the honor to be known to
him. This place is another Terrestrial Paradise for delights. I think I give it
its Elogy in saying, It Is the work of Louis the Fourteenth, worthy of its
Author; so I say all. The famous Painter Apelles being to represent the
greatness of a Giant, and considering that he could not include so great a Body
in so small a space; he be thought himself to represent only the Thumb, with
this Inscription at the bottom of the Picture, Ex ungue Leonem, The Lion is
known by his Claw: that is to say, from the proportion of this Thumb, the
greatness of the rest of the Body might be known. A Greek Orator thought he had
made a full Panegyric on Philip King of Macedon, by saying that he was Father
of Alexander: Cum te patrem Alexandri dixi, totum dixi. I judge also that the
Elogy of Versailles is complete, after having said, that it is the Work of our
present King, because this word in expression drains and consummates all its
praises. Non datur ultra. The Ambassadors of Foreign Princes admiring this
House of Pleasure, say that it belongs but to a King of France to make the
like. I do not particularize it, because we see on this subject a large Book,
which gives the entire description of it.

Paris.
ALL the Towns of the Kingdom govern themselves according to the motion of that
of Paris, which they look on as the Primum Mobile, and as the Capital. It is
Royal, Sacerdotal, and the seat of the Prophets, and one of the greatest and
most famous of all Christendom. They count in this famous City, a Million and a
half of persons: the pleasant River Sein passes through the midst of it, and
wrests itself in and out at parting from it, as though it were unwilling to
leave it: and to render it yet more agreeable, the River Ourques is brought to
it, to supply the Trenches on the side of Montmartre, by the cares of Sieur de
Manse. Treasurer-General of the Royal Hunting and Hawking. Saint Denis
Consecrated there the Churches of St. Steven of the Greeks, that of Nostre Dame
des Champs, and that of St. Bennet of the University, which was called before
of the Trinity: those of St. Denis, of Charters, and of St. Symphorien, are
very ancient.

Phillip the Second, called August, made an end of Building the great and
stately Temple of Nostre Dame, about the year 1200. Its Structure is admirable;
this Cathedral Church contains sixty six fathom in length, twenty four in
breadth, and seventeen in height; one hundred and twenty Pillars, forty five
Chapels, a great many doors; over the three chief there are twenty eight
Statues of Kings of France, and of the holy Mysteries of our Religion, which
excites the Piety of the faithful. There are three hundred eighty nine steps to
the place where the Bells are; the Towers are thirty four fathom in height
above the Earth. This place is looked upon as the lowest of Paris: the Office is
there celebrated after a Divine manner; Miracles are there wrought; Matins are
sung at Midnight: six of its Canons have been Popes; to wit, Gregory the Ninth,
Adrian the Fifth, Boniface the Eighth, Innocent the Sixth, Gregory the
Eleventh, and Clement the Seventh: fifteen or sixteen Canons of the same
Church have been Cardinals. Abbot Parfait, the ancientest Canon of this Church,
has composed a fine Book, containing the number of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops,
and Archbishops that this Metropolis has afforded, and other singularities
since St. Denis, to Messire Francis de Harlay de Chanvalon. The late Dean,
Messire John de Contes, Counselor of State in ordinary, consummated in the
practice of the Church, has often governed this Diocese to the satisfaction of
all men. He dyed full of years, the fourth of July, 1679. His most worthy
Nephew, Abbot Money, who walks in his steps, succeeded him as Heir to his
Virtues: his Actions are accompanied with sweetness, prudence, gravity, and
modesty. His Brother Abbot Bongueret, Canon in the same Church, is very learned
in the Science of the Canon Law. This Chapter is a Nursery of Bishops.

This City contains Eleven Chapters, a great number of very fair Parishes,
whereof some are equal to good Bishoprics; above sixty Colleges: it was once
proposed to have them reduced to six, because many of them are one-ey'd, so
called, because there is nothing done in them, as in many other Kingdoms.

This Town contains also an infinite number of Religious Houses, excellent
Fountains, Aqueducts, many Bridges, amongst which Pont-neuf, which is all of
stone, surpasses all the rest. We see in the midst of it a Monarch, who was in
three ranged Battles which he gained, in thirty three Rencounters, in an
hundred and forty fights, and in three hundred Sieges of several places; it is
Henry the 4th, excellently represented on a Horse of cast Copper, and at the
end of it the Clock of the fair Fountain of the Samaritan; and Louis the
Thirteenth, on another Horse of cast Copper, with excellent Devises on the
Pedestal, in the midst of the Place Royal, which is one of its ornaments, with
the Queens Tour. The Place Royal was begun to be built, Anno 1604. It Is there
where Coaches go the Tour, where they run the Ring, and use other public
Divertisements. The new Hotel Royal of disabled men, called otherwise the Hotel
of Mars, as large as a Town, built for the place of residence and entertainment
of Soldiers that are lamed and dismembered in the Army, for the service of the
State, is a Monument of the acknowledgment and gratitude of Lewis the
Fourteenth, and a subject of the great care that the Marquess de Louvois has
taken for the perfection of this Work. The Fort of the Observatory for
Astronomers is worthy consideration.

Before that part of St. Germains, formerly called le Fauxbourg St. Germain des
Prez, and others were taken into the Town, there were counted twenty four
doors: that of Saint Anthony is Royal, the figure of the King on Horseback is
over the Triumphal Arch. The late Abbot de Bourzaix thought that the Devises of
this great Monument raised in the honor of Louis le Grand, should have been
Latin; alleging, that the Latin Tongue is the Tongue of Religion, the
Tongue of the Altar, and of the Holy Ghost, and many other reasons. The Sieur
Charpentier of the French Academy taking another way, maintains that they ought
to be in our Tongue, in his Book entitled, Defense de la Langue Francoise pour
l'inscription de l'arc de Triumph.

The same Town of Paris is honored with the first Parliament of the Kingdom:
it is the Court of the Peers where our Kings have their Throne of Justice.

It has also a very ancient University, known throughout the Earth for being
very Learned, and for making others so; Charlemain founded it, An. 791.

We take always the Rector of the Faculty of Arts according to his ancient
standing. The Faculty of Divinity is composed of two public Schools; of that
of Sorbone, and that of Navarre: the Sieurs Martin Grandin, Guillaume de
l'Estocque, Gui Boust, Jacques de Perrier, Edme Pirot, and Michael Antoine
Vincent, teach in the College of Sorbonne. Master Martin Grandin has dictated
Divinity for these forty years. It may be said of him, Scivit and in mundo,
Scibile quicquid erat. The Sieurs Pierre Guischard, Jean de Saussoy, Claude de
Febure, and Briand Marion, are Professors in the College Royal of Navarre.
These two Houses have furnished at all times great Men. The Religious Men and
the Monks have their particular Professors in their Houses, which have also
brought forth great persons. The Seculars and Regulars are compared to two
Beams, which uphold the Edifice of the House of God. The Abbot Coquelin, Doctor
of the House and Society of Sorbone, Canon of the Church of Paris, formerly
Curat of St. Mederic, and Prior of Sorbone, was made Chancellor of the
University in the Month of May of the year 1679. We promise our selves great
things from him, by reason of his eminent Learning and rare Eloquence, whereof
he has given, and daily gives manifest proofs, in the first Chairs of Paris. To
raise the dignity of his Charge of Chancellor, and the merit of his Person,
there is naught wanting to him but that he occupy for some time the Chair of
the Louvre. Besides his being a great Orator (which is a particular Talent) and
a great Schoolman, he is also a great Historian, and skilful in the Oriental
Tongues. He has outdone all his other knowledges by the Voyages he has made,
after the example of another Dedalus, Melampius, Pythagoras, Homer, and others.

Peerless Paris is particularly embellisht with the Palace des Tuilleries, the
Louvre, the Palace of Luxembourg, the Palace Royal, (these two last have
changed their names) with the Hostel de Conde, de Conti, de Soissons, with the
Hostel de Guise, with that of the Grand Prior of France in the Temple, with
that of Angouleme, of Vandome, of Palace Mazarin, and of the Houses adjacent,
with a good Arsenal, and the Bastille, the Hotel de Ville, the Palace where
Justice is administered: the Hotel of St. Paul, recommendable for its Antiquity,
and for having been the place of Residence of some of the first Kings of
France; with the Hotels of Lorrain, of Turenne, of Sully, of Mayenne, of
Lesdiguiere, of Elboeuf, of Matignon, of the Houses of la Baziniere, and of
Guenegaud; of that of the Master of Requests, Amelot Biseul, in the Marsh of
the Temple, and with an infinite number of others; with two high and great
Towers of the Church of Nostre-Dame, the Steeple of the holy Chapel of the
Palace, that of St. Jacques de la Boucherie, the Towers and Steeples of St.
Genevieve, of St. Germain des Pres, and of St. Victor; with many Coupula's,
with the Dome of the Church of Sorbone, the Dome of Val de Grace, the Dome of
the Jesuits of St. Louis, the Dome of the Religious Women, of the Assumption,
and with that of the College of the Four Nations, founded by Cardinal Julius
Mazarin. We must observe, that during this last War, they have not forborne to
enlarge their streets.

College Mazarin, its Institution, Library, and Academy.
THis College was Instituted for the maintenance of Sixty Scholars, Sons of
Gentlemen, who are there to be Lodged, Dieted, and Taught gratis; whereof
fifteen, according as it is expressed in the Foundation, must be of Pignerol, and
of the Territories and Valleys adjacent, and of the Ecclesiastical State;
fifteen of the Country of Alsatia, and other contiguous Countries of Germany;
twenty of the Country of Flanders, Artois, Hainault, and Luxembourg; and ten of
the Country of Roussillon, Conflant, and Sardaigne. In default of Gentlemen,
the Children of the chief Bourgers of the said Towns and Countries are to be
received. Fifteen persons must be drawn from the College for the Academy,
without any distinction of the Countries mentioned.

The College must be governed by the Doctors of the House of Sorbone; amongst
which there are to be four Inspectors, one Grand-Master, Twelve of the
Ancientest Doctors, who are to be under the Inspectors and grand Master. All
Classes are to be gone through there, except that of Divinity: the Scholars of
each are to be Governed by the Principals and Sub-principals established for
their Nation.

There will be in the Academy a Gentleman, a Dancing Master, a Fencing-Master,
a Vaulting-Master, a Master of the Mathematics, and necessary servants.

The Abbey of St. Michel in l'Herm, seated in Poitou, is assigned for the
maintenance of the College and Academy; with many great Houses for the
reception of Coaches, lying in the street Mazarin, and others.

The Library was judged very curious by the Kings of England and Denmark: these
two Princes saw it in the Palace Mazarin, whence it was transported into the
College. His Majesty of Denmark caused his to be built after the model of
that: it is long, wide, and very high; and admits a great deal of light, and
has the prospect of the Louvre, and the Seine: it will be open twice a week to
all persons of Learning, on such days as shall be thought fit; as that of the
Abbey of St. Victor, which is public on Mundays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays,
and which is famous. The Library Mazarin contains 30000 Volumes: there are in
it the chief Books of the Protestants.

Cardinal Mazarin made this pious and grand Foundation for many reasons;
amongst others, for rendering the Inhabitants of the Conquered Countries
beforementioned, as well French in their Heart as by Nation.

Divine Providence having prescribed limits to the life of all men, the Founder
of this College dyed at Vincennes the ninth of March, 1661, in the fifty one
year of his age. His Heart reposes in the Church of the Theatins; his Body will
be transferred from the Church of Vincennes, into the Church of the said
College, when Mass comes to be celebrated in it; and it will be placed in a
magnificent Mausoloeum, there to wait the general Resurrection.

In the Month of May of the year 1677, on the Porch of the Church of College
Mazarin were placed on the Pedestals of the Body of it, advanced from the front
over square Pillars and Pilasters, the four Evangelists; St. Matthew, St. Mark,
St. Luke, and St. John, with their Attributes. On the right hand backward, on
the like Pedestals, the four Doctors of the Greek Church, according to their
place; St. Basil, St. Athanasius, St. John Chrysostom, and St. Gregory of
Nazianze: and on the left hand, the four Doctors of the Latin Church; St.
Gregory the Great, St. Ambrose, St. Austin, and St. Hierome. According to the
Order of time in which they lived, we range the Greeks thus: St. Athanasius,
St. Basil, St. Gregory of Nazianze, and St. John Chrysostom: in the Latin
Church, St. Ambrose, St. Hierome, St. Austin, and St. Gregory. In placing the
figures, they have gone according to dignity.

They say that the Effigies of Louis the Great will be placed before this
College, in a great Place which will be called Dukal.

This College is incorporated to the University, with all its rights and
privileges.

The Sieurs Foucaut, le Fouyn, and Marriage, have taken much pains for
perfecting this College.

Some persons of Quality having assured me of the satisfaction they received in
the relation I made them of the House of President Perrot near the College, I
shall set down the particularities that I observed in it, An. 1677.

The House of President Perrot.
THis House, which faces the Louvre, has five Balconies on the Seine: besides
its Situation, uniformity, neatness, and convenience, it is esteemed curious
for its Ancient Pieces, and for large Pictures made by Apelles's. They are
exposed in the great room of Paintings, which has windows on both sides. We see
there Anthony de Bourbon King of Navarre, Henry the Fourth, Louis the
Thirteenth vested with the Royal Mantle, and with the great Collar of the
Order; and Louis the Fourteenth clad like a Roman; and M. the Dolphin betwixt
the late King and the present in a round or oval over the door of the entrance;
and Philip of France, Duke of Orleans standing by, Louis de Bourbon Prince of
Conde with his Father and his Grandfather, and the Duke d'Enguien with his
Children: the Queens and Princesses are by the sides of their Spouses.

In the midst of this Gallery is placed a large sheet of Velam in Miniature,
set in a frame, which contains the Genealogy of the Bourbons, from St. Louis to
the year 1679; and on the back part of the Velam are represented the Combats,
Rencounters, Sieges, Battles, and Victories gained by the Prince of Conde Louis
de Bourbon.

Amongst some Pictures that adorn the Chapel, that which is against the Altar
is accomplished; and to express the thing better, it is a consummated piece of
work, or a Masterpiece representing the seven Sacraments of the Church: the
Archduke Leopold admiring this Piece, would have given a thousand Pistols for
it if the Master would have sold it him. It was permitted his Highness to cause
a Copy to be taken of it. Near the Chappel-door we see the present Prince of
Conde mounted on a Warhorse, represented to the life. In some Chambers we find
many other Pictures; that of the Nativity of the Son of God; that of Lot having
drank to excess before his two Daughters, to which nothing can be added.

The rolling Desk, composed of diverse Tables, which is in the Library, is of a
very rare structure, and convenient for those that compose some laborious
Piece: all the edges of it are gilded, and the Boards or Planks hold a great
many Books in folio. When you are near it, without changing place, with one of
your fingers you make the Desk turn, and bring before your eyes the Books that
lead to your design; but you must first place them.

Atabalipa one of the Incas of Peru, would not have esteemed it much for his
use: for he threw on the ground a very excellent Book presented to him,
alleging for a reason, that it spoke not a word to him; though they made him
believe it would teach him a great many things, he could not make it speak. I
believe he would have soon imitated a King of Congo, to whom Emanuel King of
Portugal having once sent Lawyers with good Law Books, he sent back the
Doctors, and caused the Books to be burnt, thinking they would serve but to
introduce Cavilling, and put Confusion in the Understandings of his Subjects;
whereas, he said, they had need but of Reason and a good common Sense: which is
related in a History of Portugal. This Prince added, that he should still
continue a Friend to him that had sent them him, taking the good will for the
deed.

In the Garden of the same House I saw a trial made of a great Burning-glass,
in the presence of M. the Prince, which burnt a great Block set opposite to the
Sun; and which wonderfully magnifies and multiplies Objects. The two Gladiators
and other Figures of massy cast Copper, which are Ornaments of the Garden, are
Pieces artificially made: Each Gladiator holds his Buckler with one hand, and
his Sword with the other; whose postures are much esteemed. The Venus is highly
prized; as also another Figure drawing a Thorn out of its foot. The great Iron
Arbor is very beautiful, and very high raised; under which persons breath the
cool Air and fragrant Smells during the Summer-heats: On the side of it are the
Grotto's and Waters. The Dido striking a Dagger into her breast, is represented
to the life; the Vrns are considerable.

The Master of this House considering that good ought to be communicative, has
for some years past made his Garden common to the Public for walking; and has
sometime given to some great Lords and others the satisfaction of seeing the
Cormorant-fishing, which is a Royal Divertisement. I think it not strange that
the Emperor and other crowned heads divert themselves with it.

In this Capital City of the Kingdom there are many Houses whereof Wonders may
be said; which I pass by, because to run them over it would take up a Volume.

I shall only add, that persons curious in wonderful and transcendent things,
should see the Rooms of Anticks of the Louvre and the Tuilleries, the King and
Queens Closets, their Apartments and Furniture, the Kings Library, which
contains above 40000 Volumes, an infinite number of Manuscripts in Hebrew,
Arabic, Greek, Latin, and many of History and Policy; the remarkable Medals,
the curious Shells, a famous Burning-glass known throughout all the Earth, many
Books of Migniature, and other Curiosities; the two Galleries of Palace
Mazarin; that of the Palace of Luxembourg, containing in great and various
Pictures the Adventures of Queen Mary de Medicis; we see there her Birth, her
Life, and her Death. The Palace Royal belonging to Monsieur, merits to be
visited, as also the Royol Academy of Paintings and Carvings, the Galeries of
M. le Prince and others.

Houses of Pleasure about Paris.
THe fair and delightful houses, next the King's, are these: Saint Cloud and
Villiers Cotteret, which belong to Monsieur; Chantilly to M. le Prince: there
is seen even at this day in his Menagery a Pelican 150 years old, having a bill
of Ivory. The Isle Adam belongs to M. the Prince of Conti, Reinci to the
Princess Palatine, Annet to the Duke of Vandome, the Palace of Ecouan to the
Duchess of Angouleme, Gros-bois to the Marquess of Pienee, Ruel to the Duke de
Richlieu, Verneuil to the Duke of this name, Liancour to the Prince of
Marcillac, Villeroy to the Duke of this name, Chaville to M. the Chancellor le
Tellier, Sceaux to M. Colbert, la Cheurette to M. de la Vrilliere, Berni to the
Marquess de Lionne, Chilly to the Marquess d'Effiat, Conflans Les-Charenton to
M. de Harlay Archbishop of Paris. Maisons, Vaux, Saint Mande, Meudon, are also
places very agreeable. Chassan is another House of Pleasure joining to
Harcueil; it belongs to the Abbot of S. Germain des Prez: Cardinal Francis de
Tournon, first Commendatory Abbot of the Abbey of the said S. Germain, caused
it to be put in order; we see there his Arms, which are Seem of Flower-deluces.
Mademoiselle de Montpensier increases the number of delightful Houses, by that
which she purchased of late years at Choisy: This Princess causes a beautiful
Palace to be there built.

The House of the Dean of Pontoise, seven leagues from Paris, has one of the
fairest Prospects and Terrasses of the Country; the Terras is entirely on
Rocks. Messire Steven de Burtio de la Tour Doctor of the House and Society of
Sorbone, and formerly Priour and Professor of the said House, Knight of the
Order of the King under the Title and List of Saint Michael, Count of the holy
Apostolical Palace, and Preacher, is Dean. When the general Assembly of the
Clergy is held at Pontoise, the President lodges at his house. We see at the
entry of this Town, as we come from Paris, a famous Abbey of Religious Ladies,
called de Maubuisson.

I omit to name many other Ornaments, because it would be too tedious to number
them.

Houses and Places of Devotion near Paris.
THe pious places about Paris that are most frequented, are Mount-Valerian, the
Church of the Abbey of St. Denis, Nostre Dame des Anges, otherwise des Bois,
against the Hermitage of Coubron; Nanterre in memory of St. Genevieve, Nostre
Dame des Virtues, S. Prix, Nostre Dame in the Forest and Hermitage of Senar:
Saint Roch is very famous at Pont-carre; they come thither the day of its
Festival from all parts: Saint Spire is visited for the Falling Sickness.

We must say something here of Mount-Vale. rian.

If Mount-Valerian, vulgarly called le Tertre, be not rich, it is nevertheless
frequented: We see there represented to the life the whole History of the Death
and Passion of Jesus Christ. Round about the top of the Mountain there are
seven Chapels or Oratories representing the seven Stations; and on the top
Calvary, on which Jesus Christ is beheld crucified on a tall Cross betwixt two
Thieves, that the representation of the Order of the Crucifixion should be more
lively and plain: and also that after the faithful have plunged themselves by
all these exterior and sensible Objects in the meditation of the Death of
Jesus Christ, they may die to the World, and then rise again with him in a
newness of a spiritual life. They preach there every Sunday and Festival day,
and every first Friday of each month, there being a great concourse of people
that comes from all parts. On the day and Feast of the place, which is that of
the Exaltation of the holy Cross, the 14th of September, there have been
sometimes 30 or 40000 persons, either on the Mountain, or in the Way: The
fraternity of the Penitents of Paris goes thither in a Procession yearly, some
days of the year. On Good Friday three different Preachers preach there the
Passion successively. The Queen, who is a Pattern of Piety and Devotion, visits
this holy place from time to time.

The Church is served by Priests who live in a Society. Messire Michel de
Bougi, Abbot of St. Vrbain, a person of Birth and Merit, is Purveyor; and the
Abbot Hardy, Doctor of Sorbone, is Superior. The Office of Purveyor is for
perpetuity, and that of Superior triennial. Under Anne of Austria Queen of
France, there was a great Lawsuit for the possession of this place, betwixt
the Secular Priests and the Dominicans. This business gave much trouble to the
Abbot de Bougi, and to Master Lafont, in his lifetime Principal of the
College of Narbone.

The Congregation of the Priests of Calvary on Mount-Valerian was established
An. 1633. by Letters Patent of Louis the Thirteenth, who sent for a Priest
expressly for this effect, a man of a holy life, called Charpenter, who had
already instituted it on the Mountain of Betharan in Bearn, which resembles
Mount-Valerian.

The Hermites have been in possession of Mount-Valerian for these 800 years,
according to an humble Remonstrance made An. 1622. to Cardinal des Retz by the
Priests of Calvary: There was seen there for some time a recluded Hermit. The
Treasure which is in the Church of the Abbey of St. Denis, and the Tombs of the
Kings of France, deserve that we should say something of them.

The Treasury of St. Denis.
THe Church of the Abbey of St. Denis is extremely visited, both by reason of
its Patron, and for its Treasure, and for being the Burial-place of the Kings
of France.

King Dagobert the First of the name, caused it to be built, and to be covered
with silver: This Prince, Founder of the Abbey, died the 19th of Jan. of the
year 648.

There is seen in the Treasury a Missal written by the hand above 800 years
since, and a Manuscript above eleven hundred years old, which contains the four
Gospels written in Characters of gold and silver on Velam of a purple color. A
Book of Velam covered with silver, containing the Works of St. Denis the
Areopagite: Another Book written by hand, which contains the Epistles and
Gospels of the great Feasts; Gold, precious Stones, and great Pearls cover it.
Moreover, another Book concerning the Ceremonies and Prayers of the Kings
Coronation.

In a rich Cross-case, a foot and a halfs length of the true Cross.

One of the Nails with which the Son of God was fastened to the Cross; a Thorn
of the Crown, and some of the Sponge with which they presented him Gall.

Some of the Myrrh which the Magicians presented him; one of the Pitchers in
which he changed Wine into Water at the Wedding of Cana in Galilee; and a great
many Shrines wherein Relics are kept.

A great Cross of massy Gold, covered with precious Stones, and set round with
oriental Pearls.

A little Crucifix made of the wood of the true Cross.

The Heads of St. Denis, St. Hilary, and St. Bennet, are extremely rich. The
Miter of the first is of Gold, and all covered with precious Stones and
oriental Pearls; those of the others are also of a great price.

The Head of St. Louis King of France is at Paris in the holy Chapel of the
Palace. Jean d'Eureux Queen of France took it from the Treasury of St. Denis,
and put in its place parcels of all the Relics that are in the said holy
Chapel.

There is seen in the same Treasury of St. Denis a Cup of Tamarisk-wood, in
which St. Louis drank to keep himself from the Spleen.

A Vessel of an oriental Agate, esteemed one of the most precious pieces of the
Treasury, for its largeness, antiquity, and work. It Is believed that Ptolomy
Philadelphus caused it to be made, and that it was working with the point of a
Diamond for thirty years.

Another Vessel of Gold in the form of a Salver, adorned with Granats,
Jacinths, and with a great white Sapphire in the midst, on which is seen the
Effigies of King Solomon seated in his Throne. It is judged that it appertained
to this Monarch, as also a great Vessel of Rock-Christal, by reason of some
Inscriptions in Samaritan Characters.

A Gamahaea in an Agat-stone, expressing the Image of the Queen of Saba.

Many Crowns of Gold and Silver; that of Charlemain, St. Louis, Henry the
Fourth, Louis the Thirteenth, and Louis the Fourteenth. Each of these Kings has
given to the Treasury two Crowns, one of Gold, the other of Silver gilt. That
of Charlemain, which is carried to Rheims to serve at the Coronation of our
Kings, with the other Royal Ornaments, is all of Gold, adorned with great
Rubies, Saphirs, and Emeralds. The Crown of St. Louis is likewise of massy
Gold, adorned with very beautiful precious Stones, amongst others with a Ruby
valued at a hundred thousand crowns: in which is inchast, by the Kings order, a
Thorn of the Crown of the Son of God.

There is seen the Image of the same St. Louis engraved on a Ring, with these two
letters S and L; that is to say, Sigillum Ludovici: because he made use of it
to seal his Letters.

All the Kings have shown themselves liberal to this Treasury; some Abbots of
the Order have also given to it, particularly Abbot Sugar: His two little Pots
are not common, the one is of Rock-Christal, the other of Beril, cut with the
point of a Diamond: His Chalice is made of a very fair oriental Agate.

In this Treasury are kept a great many Swords; that of Charlemain, that which
St. Louis brought with him at his first Voyage from the Holy Land, that of the
Pucelle of Orleans Joanne d'Arc, and also the Sword of Turpin, who having been
made Archbishop of Rheims, afterward bore Arms against the Infidels: There are
seen there many other Pieces of Antiquity. So much for a Sample of this
Treasury. He that desires to see more, may go to St. Denis: where a Religious
man shows it every day at two of the clock in the afternoon. Those that cannot
come to see it, may read a little Book in 12o entitled Inventaire du Tresor de
S. Denis, where all the Pieces are briefly described according to the Order of
the eight Presses where they are shown. This little Book is printed at Paris by
Pierre de Bost Rue S. Jacques, at the sign of St. Francis, near St. Severin.

The Tombs of the Kings of France.
DAgobert the First, eleventh King of France, and St. Louis the forty fourth,
have their Tombs in the Quire of the Church; and many other Kings and Queens.
In the common Vault of Rites repose Henry the Fourth, Mary de Medicis his Wife,
Louis the Thirteenth, Anne of Austria his Spouse: The Duke of Orleans the Kings
Uncle, Madam de Montpensier his first Wife, Henriette-Marie Queen of England,
Henriette-Anne her Daughter the first Wife of Monsieur the Kings Brother, and
others. The Monument of Francis the First is out of the Quire, on the side of
the Cloister in a raised Monument. They count five Kings out of the Quire on
the Gospel-side. Marshal de Turenne is in a Chapel near the high Altar. Louis
the 14th has caused a Monument to be raised in his memory, and in
acknowledgment of the great Services he did to France. After his death many
Services and Funeral Prayers were said for him in the principal Churches of
Paris. Bertrand du Quesclin Sancerre, a Gentleman of Britany, Constable of
France, has his Tomb, for his Fidelity and Valor, amongst those of the Kings,
by the order of Charles the Fifth, called the Wife. Clouis the first of the
name, the fifth King of France, and Clotilde his Spouse, have their Mausolea at
Paris, in the Abbey of St. Genevieve, in the Quire.

Other famous places of Devotion and Pilgrimages greatly frequented in the
Kingdom, and favored with the kindest Aspect of Heaven.
THe Church of Nostre-Dame at Paris in the Isle of France; that of the Abbey of
St. Genevieve, and the Chapel of the Hospital of the Holy Ghost.

Nostre-dame de Grace near Gallion in the Diocese of Rouen.

Nostre-Dame de Chartres in Beausse.

Nostre-Dame de L'Epine near Chalons in Champagne.

Nostre-Dame de Liesse in Picardy.

Nostre-Dame de Bologne on the Sea.

Nostre-Dame de la Deliverance, and Mount S. Michel in Normandy.

Sainte-Reine in Burgundy.

Nostre-Dame d'Alizor near Lions.

Nostre-Dame de Loisiere and la Chartreuse of Grenoble in Daulphine.

St. Maximin, Saint Baume, and St. Martha in Provence.

Nostre Dame de Rochefort in Languedoc les Avignon.

Nostre-Dame de Grau, called la Grenouillade, at half a league from Agde.

Nostre-Dame de Consolation, half a league from Beziers, and Nostre-Dame de
Gignac in the same Diocese.

Nostre-Dame de Liviniere in the Diocese of S. Pons of Tomiers.

Nostre-Dame de Lorme, and Nostre-Dame d'Alen in the Diocese of Montauban.

Nostre-Dame de Ladreiche, a league from Alby.

The Hermitage of Nostre-Dame de Moinier in the Territory of Pompignan, on the
top of a high Mountain in the Diocese of Nismes.

St. Sernin at Tolose, where are the entire Relics of many of the Apostles:
Nostre-Dame d*Alet, and Nostre-Dame de Roqueville, three leagues off.

Nostre-Dame de Garaizon in the Diocese of Ausche.

Nostre-Dame de Verdelez at Cadiliac near Bourdeaux.

Nostre-Dame de Nazareth in Britany, three leagues from Dinan; and Nostre-Dame
de bonnes Nouvelles at Rennes.

Nostre-Dame d'Ardilliers in the Diocese of Angers in Anjou.

Nostre-Dame de Mibonnet, a league from Moulins; in the Diocese of Authun in
Bourbonnois.

Nostre-Dame de Clery near Orleans on the Loire.

Nostre-Dame du Puy, Nostre-Dame de Fridieire, and Nostre-Dame de Pity in
Auvergne. This is without the Town of Chaude-Agues on a sharp Rock: Abbot
Cholmerl is the Founder.

Nostre-Dame de Banelle, and Nostre-Dame de Sabar are in the County of Foix in
the Diocese of Comminges.

Nostre Dame de Quezac in Givodan, near St. Maur the Abbey of St. Bennet in the
Diocese of Mande.

Nostre-Dame de Roquemadou, and Nostre-Dame de Liaurou in Quercy in the Diocese
of Cahors.

Nostre-Dame de Cignac in the Diocese of Rhodes. The House of Arpajou has given
it great Marks of its Devotion.

Nostre-Dame d*Orient in the Diocese of Vabres. These two places of Devotion
are in Rouergne.

Nostre-Dame du Calvaire of Betharan in Bearn, in the Diocese of Lascar:
Messire Pierre de Marca has said wonderful things of it, in a Book entitled
Traite des Merveilles Operees en la Chappelle Nostre-Dame du Calvaire en
Betharan. It was printed An. 1646. and An. 1648. the word Betharan signifies,
according to the Language of the Country, a fine Branch; and according to the
Hebrew Tongue, the House of the Sovereign and of the most High, or the House of
Greatness and Eminency.

In the Territory of the Tribe of Gad there was a Valley of this name; which
appears by the Book of Joshua.

The Mountain Betharan has the figure of that of the true Calvary of Jerusalem:
Many Miracles have been there wrought.

If Miracles were wrought in the Temples of the Protestants, as in these holy
places, they would make them serve as Seals to their Doctrine, and would make
them sound forth with a high voice that the Savior of the World gives the
power to them, as a most powerful and pressing means to cause the truth of
their Faith to be embraced; and because they have no Miracles, they laugh at
them. To which I oppose, that the Jews and Pagans rejected those of Jesus
Christ, and of the Apostles; and with St. Austin, that Miracles have been the
motives of innumerable conversions to Christianity; that Miracles are the
Chains that hold us in the Catholic Church. Our strayed Brethren choose rather
to suffer themselves to be bound by their own Imagination, and by the
consequences they draw from the Scripture, according to their private spirits,
and without having either of our most dear Chains, neither the antiquity, nor
the number, nor the succession of Chairs, nor the Miracles, etc. which have
continued in the Roman Church from Age to Age since the time of the Apostles.
Let us return to our subject.

The Church of Nostre-Dame of Ardilliers, which is one of the chief suburbs of
the Town of Saumur, is served by the Oratorian Fathers.

Saint Maximin and Saint Baume by the Dominicans, as also Nostre-Dame de Bonnes
Nouvelles at Rennes.

Nostre-Dame de Rochefort by the Religious Benedictines.

Saint Reine, by the Cordeliers.

Nostre-Dame d'Orient, by the Capucins.

Nostre-Dame de Consolation de Bezieres, by the Religious of St. Francis of
Paul, vulgarly called les Bons hommes.

The others by Canons and Secular Priests.

The twelve ancient General Governments of the Provinces were called together
at Paris under Louis the Thirteenth, according to their rank and place in the
States General, 1614.
THe Isle of France, Burgundy, Normandy, Guienne, Britany, Champagne,
Languedoc, Picardy, Daulphine, Provence, Lyonnois, and Orleanois.

Of these twelve great Governments many others are made. Lyonnois comprehended
formerly higher and lower Auvergne, and also la March, the higher and lower
Bourbounois, Beaujolois, and the Country of Forests. Orleanois contained
Poitou, Aniou, Touraine, Loudunois, the Town and Government of Rochelle
Angoumois, le Maine, Berry, Pais Chartrain, le Perch, Nivernois, and
Vandosmois. Xaintonge was of the Government of Guienne.

The Governors of the Provinces An. 1679. are these.
THe Town, Provostship, and Vicounty of Paris has for Governor the Duke of
Crequy, Peer of France, Commander of the Kings Orders, and first Gentleman of
the Chamber to his Majesty. He was made choice of by the King to go to Bavaria
to carry the Marriage-Presents to Madam the Dolphiness, Anno 1680.

The Duke d'Estrees, Peer of France, is Governor of the Isle of France,
Soissonnois, Laonnois, Beauvoisis, etc.

The Prince of Conde, Lord Steward of the Kings Household, has the government of
Burgundy and of la Bresse; the Duke d'Enguien has the survivourship of his
Father.

The Duke de Montauzier, Peer of France and Commander of the Kings Orders, has
Normandy: he was Governor of Monseigneur the Dolphin.

The Duke de Roquelaure, Guienne.

The Duke de Chaune, Britany.

Marshal Duke de Vivonne of Montmart, Champagne and Brie.

The Duke of Verneuil, Languedoc: he succeeds Arnand de Bourbon Prince of
Conti, whose Piety is crowned in the Celestial Court: he died at Pezenas An.
1666. the 21 day of February, and his body was carried into the house of the
Carthusians of Villeneufe in Avignon. This Prince composed two Books, one is
entitled Devoirs des Grands, and the other, Memoires du Prince de Conti; the
former contains very excellent Instructions.

The Duke d'Elbeuf is Governor of Picardy.

The Duke les Diguieres of Dauphine.

The Duke de Vandome of Provence. Marshal de Grignan is sole Lieutenant General
of this Province: he has also been Lieutenant General of Languedoc.

The Duke de Villeroy, Son of the Marshall of this name, is Governor of
Lyonnois, Forests, and Beaujolois.

The Marquess d' Alluye of Orleannois, Blesois, Dunois, and the Country of
Sologne, Chartrain, and Vandomois.

Auvergne has for Governor the Duke de Bouillon high Chamberlain.

Higher and lower la March, the Marquess de S. Germain Beaupre.

Limosin, the Count d' Auvergne.

Bourbonnois, the Marquess de la Valiere.

Berry, the Prince of Marsillac. Francois de la Rochefoucaud Duke of
Rocheguion, Groom of the Stole, and Chief Master of the Game of France, Son of
the Prince of Marsillac, and Grandchild of the Duke of Rochefoucaut, married
An. 1679. in the Church of S. Roch of Paris, Madeleine la Tellier Daughter of
the Marquess de Lionnois, Minister and Secretary of State, and Grandchild of
Messire Michel le Tellier Chancellor of France.

Anjou has for Governor Count d' Armagnac, the Kings Master of the Horse.

Touraine, the Marquess de Dangeau.

Le Maine, Laval, and le Perch, the Marquess de Fervaques.

Poitou the upper and lower, the Duke of Vieville.

Xaintonge and Angoumois, the Duke de Crussol.

The Country of Aunis and Brouage, the Duke de Navailles.

Nivernois, the Duke of Nevers.

The Country of Foix, the Marquess de Mirepoix.

Navarre and Bearn, Duke Anthony-Charles de Grammont, Sovereign of Bidache: his
Father, Duke and Earl, Marshal of France, Knight of the Kings Orders, died at
Bayonne the 83 year of his age, the 12th of July 1678.

Conquered Countries.
THe upper and lower Alsatia have for Governors the Duke de Mazarin, Duke of
Mielleraye and Mayenne, Peer of France, and particular Governor of the Towns,
Citadels, and Castles of Brisac, la Fere, Vitre, Vincennes, Port-Louis, and
other places.

Lorrain, the Marshal de Crequy.

The Town and Citadel of Metz and Vic, the Marshal Duke de la Ferte-Seneterre.

Toul, the Count de Pas de Feuquieres.

The Duke de Noailles Peer of France, Captain of the first Company of the Life
guard, is Governor of Roussillon, and Lieutenant General in upper Auvergne.

The Duke and Marshal de Duras, Knight of the Order of the Holy Ghost, has the
Government of Franche Comte.

Marshal d Humicres is Governor and Lieutenant General of Flanders, and
particular Governor of Lille.

Count de Montbron, Governor of Arras, and Lieutenant General in the Country
of Artois.

These Provinces have Lieutenant-Generals, some more, some sewer. The
particular Governors of Towns, Citadels, and other places, are in a very great
number.

The Fertility of France.
ITs Provinces are worth Kingdoms: it is in France where we see the level Fields
fertile in all sorts of Grain, the Hills covered with Vines, pleasant Meadows,
beautiful Forests, fair Olive Trees and Orange Trees, and all sorts of Fruits.
It may be said, that this is the Land whereof the Scripture speaks, which flows
with Milk and Honey; which includes within it all that is necessary for life,
without having recourse to strangers, who stand in need of its Corn and famous
Wines. Salt and Iron are there common. Mines of Gold and Silver might be
discovered there, if men would go to the charge. If Egypt glories in its
Fertility and Fruits, Italy in its beautiful Gardens, England in its fair
Parks, Poland in its vast Meadows; France possesses all these advantages in an
eminent degree. Its Seacoasts have secure Harbors, and Ports full of all
sorts of Merchandise; and its Rivers are navigable. If it does not bring forth
Cloves, Nutmegs, and Cinnamon as the Molucca Islands, Ginger and Pepper as
Calecut, Perfumes as Arabia, Diamonds as the Isle of Ceilan, Emeralds as China,
Rubies as Peru, Topases and Pearls as India; it has men able to conquer all
this, and do not fail to do it. An Historiographer of Brandenburg relates in
his Researches, that on consideration of the power of this Monarch, an Emperor
of the West called Maximilian, said once by way of discourse, that if it were
possible and just to wish it, he would that he had three Children, whereof the
eldest should be God, the second King of France, and the third Emperor.

The Channel of Languedoc.
THere has been made of late years in this Province a great Channel for the
communication of the Mediterranean Sea with the Ocean, by joining the River
Aude, which enters into the Mediterranean Sea, to the River Garone which
discharges it self into the Ocean by the means of many Rivers whose waters are
kept with Sluices in this great Channel, capable of conveying Barks for
transporting Merchandise and other things from the Town of Narbonne to that of
Tolose, and thence to Bourdeaux.

The design of this great Work was projected by Henry the Fourth, examined and
approved by Louis the 13th and put in execution by Louis the Fourteenth, to
whom we must give the glory. This incomparable Monarch for this effect made use
of the conduct of Sieur Paul de Riquet, Native of Beziers, and Baron of
Bonerepos.

This Channel is about thirty five leagues in length from Cape Set, which is
four leagues from Moutpellier, to Tolose.

The Rigole which contains the Waters of the Mountain Moire to the point where
the Waters part called Naurouse, contains five leagues. The place where the
Waters part, or the Reserver, is as large as the Place Royal at Paris. The
Waters are kept by two strong and thick Walls, in which are great Cocks that
are opened with wickets to give a passage to the great Cestern made of an
octangular figure.

Pursuant to this Enterprise there are made ten Bridges, thirty five Mills, and
a hundred and fourteen Sluices.

The new Port made under Cape Set, is situate in the Diocese of Agde; two
Moles will incompass it, which issue from the firm Land, viz. the Isthmus which
separates the Pond Tau from the Mediterranean Sea.

Though the performance of this Masterpiece has seemed impossible to many
persons, it will be perfected in much less time than the new Discovery of the
North-East-passage to China and Japan by the Hollanders, who have been about it
above eight hundred years. This passage is betwixt Spistzberg and Nova Zem^^a

Julius Caesar, Caligula, and Nero undertook (...) the (...) of Corinth, and to
make (...), by the (...) and Ionian Seas: Their (...) nothing.

(...) Commerce of the Ocean, Mediterranean and Caspian Seas, it was formerly
proposed at the Court of the Great Duke of Muscovy to join these great Rivers
together, the Volge, the Duinus, and the Dom, for the communication of the
chief Seas of our Continent. This design also failed of success; but this here
will not prove abortive: and though nine or ten years have been employed
already to do what is done, we must make use of the Proverb, Sat cito, si sat
been; Things are soon enough done, that are well done. The Mother of Hercules
was a whole night in bringing him forth.

They go of late conveniently from Castelnaudary so far as Tolose, which are
two Towns distant from each other ten leagues of Province, which equal twenty
of the Isle of France. When we go by land, at Bastide we begin to find the
great Channel of the communication of the two Seas. This Work has not been
carried on without interruption. This joining of the two Seas will serve
moreover for the convenience of conveying the Merchandise of the Levant, and of
all the Mediterranean into the Ocean, not to run a risk with them by the
Strait, nor expose them to the pyracies of those of Algiers and other Towns of
Barbary.

The Sieur de Riquet, who drew the design of the Channel for the two Seas, and
who has always had the direction of it, died the first of October 1680. in his
house of Frescati at Tolose. He has rendered himself famous by his Enterprise,
which no man before him had the courage to undertake, nor the genius to carry
on: He so far advanced it, that we may say he died in accomplishing it, and
that the little he has left to do, is but to leave to his two Sons (whereof the
one is Master of Requests, the other Captain of the Guards) the honor to
consummate it. It is not doubted but the Channel will be navigable and in its
entire perfection before the end of the year 1681.

The chief Towns after Paris, are
ROuen, Tolose, Narbonne, Orleans, Bourdeaux, Arles, Aix, Marseilles, Toulon,
Rochelle, Poitiers, Xantes, Limoges, Amiens, Abbeville, Rheims, Sedan, Troyes,
Caen, Chartres, Tours, Montpellier, Nismes, Beziers, Montauban, Carcassonne,
Bourges, Angers, Rennes, Nantes, Cahors, Tulles, Auches, Castres, Dijon,
Grenoble, Vienne, Valens, Man's, Perigueux, Bergerac, Again, Moulins in
Bourbonnois, Clermont in Auvergne, and le Puy in Velay, and many others. There
is no Town in the whole Kingdom more subject to Thunder than that of Puy.

The most considerable Maritime Towns are
MArseilles, Toulon, Rochelle, St. Malo, Breast, Havre de Grace, Dieppe, Calais,
Bayonne, St. Valery, Dunkerke, Gravelin; the Borough of Rochefort became a
Town by reason of its Port: it will be made one day the place of embarking for
the East Indies; it is a great Arsenel for the Sea. The Galleys are at
Marseilles: Brouage, Honfleur, Cherbourg, and Grandville, are likewise Maritime
Towns.

A Traveller speaking of Towns, said, that he observed three things in France,
a World, a Town, and a Village; Paris is the World, Orleans the Town for its
situation and uniformity, Poitiers the Village by reason of the great number
of Gardens, Fields, Meadows, and Vineyards that are within its precincts.
Abbeville seems one of the greatest of the Kingdom, by reason of the great
Ponds and large Gardens that are within it.

Chastelleraud, Thouars, Niort, Fontenay-le-Comte, Saint Maixant, Lusignan,
Partenay, la Roche-sur-You, Champigny, la Ganache, and others, are Towns of
Poictou. Poitiers is the Capital, as Xantes is of Xaintonge.

Alez, Anduze, Ganges, Sumene, and Vigan, are those of Sevenes.

Sauve, Saint Hippolite de la Planquette, S. Jean de Gardonenque, la Salle de
St. Pierre, Varelaugue, and Saint Etienne de Valfrancesque in Sevenes, are as
good as little Towns.

Those of Givodan are Mande, Marvege, Canourgue, Florac, Quiesac, St. Chely,
and Chanac, which is the ordinary place of residence of the Bishops of Mande.
Messire Sylvestre de Marsillac caused the Castle to be fortified. I saw there
in his time Arms for five hundred men. This Prelate contributed to the
reducement of Rochelle. Meyrvueich and Bar are two Towns in the Neighborhood.

The Capuchins have in that Country three houses established for the Mission;
one is at Sauve, the other at Vigan, and the third at Florac: We cannot say of
their Churches or Chapels that they are too beautiful, which a Father, General
of their Order, said in the course of his Visitation of that of Riom in
Auvergne, when complaining of the Guardian, who had made it stately by what he
built, he spoke in these terms: Iste Pater concavit Regulam sancti Francisci
Patris nostri.

Viviers, Vans, Aubenas, Tournon, Annonai, Privas, Villeneufve-le-Berg,
Pradeles, and le Pouzin, are of Vivarais.

Le Puy, Saint Paulian, Mounistrol, Crapone, are in Velay.

In the conquered Countries these are considerable.

In Flanders, Dunkerke, Gravelin, Hesdin, Bapaume, Arras, Tournay, Courtray,
Lisle, Douay, Conde, Bouchain, Air, Valenciennes, Cambray, S. Omer, Gand,
Ypres, and many others. These three last places were conquered in the beginning
of the year 1677. Maestrich was surrendered to the Hollanders by the Treaty of
Peace concluded at Nimeguen the tenth of Aug. 1679.

Dunkerke was taken by the Prince of Conde, then Duke d'Enguien, An. 1646. and
by Marshal Turenne, An. 1658. It was for some time in the possession of the
English, because they provided a Naval Army, and much contributed to the taking
of it and of some other places; and therefore five millions were given to his
Britanick Majesty for resigning this Town to the Dominion of the French.

Before Arras was in the possession of France, there was seen in imbost work
over one of its gates, a Cat pursuing Rats, with this Inscription:

Les Francois prendront Arras,
Lors que ce Chat prendra ces Rats.
The French will take Arras
When this Cat takes these Rats.
At present there is only the letter p of the verb prendront taken away, the
word rendront remaining, which signifies Restore. There is seen in the
Cathedral Church a fair and ancient Library.

In Alsatia the chief conquered Towns are Brisac, Colmar, Haguenau, Schelestad:
Philipsbourg was retaken by the Imperialists the 17th of September 1676. with
an honorable Capitulation. Our Frenchmen took in its place Fribourg in
Brisgaw. Philipsbourg has been under the dominion of France thirty two years.

In Lorrain the most remarkable are Nancy, Metz, Toul, and Verdun.

In Franche-Comte, Bezancon, Dole, Grez, and Salins.

In Roussillon, Perpignan, Colioures, Salses, Canet; the Episcopal See was at
Elne. Du Chesne, Father Boussingaut, and A. Jovin de Rochefort, have given a
particular description almost of all the Towns: There has been printed lately
in Holland a Book entitled Theatrum Vrbium.

Rivers.
FRance, as another terrestrial Paradise, has four beautiful Rivers, viz. the
Rhone, the Loire, the Seine, and the Garonne. An Author calls them the four
Royal Rivers.

The Rhone takes its rise at the foot of the Mountain St. Godart; it comes from
the Alps of upper Valois, and is not far from the Rhine and Danubius. The
Germans call it Rhoden, from an ancient Town called Rhodays. Some count it as
one of the three greatest Rivers of Europe. It runs through the Lake of Geneva,
passes at Lions, Vienne, Tournon, Valence, at St. Esprit, Avignon, Tarascon,
Beaucaire, and Arles. The Saone, the Doux, the Lizaire, the Gardan, the
Durance, and other Rivers, enter into it.

The Loire takes its origin at the foot of Mount Gerbier of Jou in the Parish
of S. Martial of the Diocese of Viviers; it is called by this name from a
Country House near its source called Loire, which is in the Parish of St.
Eulalie of the same Diocese, five leagues from the Town of Pardeles in Vivarez,
and six from that of du Puy in Velay. It casts forth water at its rise as big
as a man's thigh. Mount Gerbier is so called because it has the figure of a
Gerbier, that is, a stack of Corn. Those are in an error who affirm the
origin of the Loire to be in Sevenes, because Sevenes is not Vivarez, though
contiguous to it; neither is Vivarez, Sevenes, or Velay. These three Regions
are entirely distinct, and are as it were little Provinces that are
incorporated in that of Languedoc. The Loire passes at Roanne, Nevers, la
Charity, Gien, Gergeau, Orleans, Blois, Amboise, Tours, Saumur, Nantes, and at
the Bridge of Ce. This River is the longest of the Kingdom; it carries Vessels
about a hundred and sixty leagues from Roanne, as far as Nantes, or to Brevian.
If it be not very deep, it is large and very full of Sand, wherefore Vessels
often run a ground there. It passes through the midst of the Kingdom, and
divides it almost into two equal parts. The source of this and of Alliers are
near each other. Alliers, le Cher, Auron, Lindre, the Saudre, the Huine, the
Loire, the Sarthe, the Mayenne, the Vienne, the Clein, and other Rivers,
discharge themselves into this River, which has its beginning and end in France.

The Seine comes from the Mountain Vogesus in the Duchy of Burgundy. S. Seine
gave it its name, it being the nearest place of note to its source. This River
passes at Chatillon, Nogent, Montereau, Melun, Corbeil, Paris, Mantes, Vernon,
Rouen, and at Pont de Larche. Its Rivers are the Marne, Yonne, the Oyse, the
Ayne, the Eure, and others. The Ayne enters into the Oyse; the River called the
Loire passes at Montargis, and receives the Channel of Briare, for the
communication of the Loin and the Seine for Paris. This Channel was made under
Henry the Fourth.

The Garonne issues from the Pyrenean Mountains near a place called Gadeloup:
Its source is affirmed to be in the little Valley of Aran. It passes at Tolose,
at Moissac, Again, Marmande, Cadillac, and at Bourdeaux. Its Rivers are the
Taru, the Lot, and the Pordogne.

The Epithetes of these four Rivers are
RHodanus rapidus, Ligoris latus, Sequanus profundus, Garumna obliquus: Rhone
the rapid, Loire the large, Seine the profound, Garonne the oblique, because it
wrests in and out. The Poets call the Rhone, by reason of its rapidity, the
hasty, the swift, the precipitate.

The principal small Rivers are
THe Charente, the Sum, the Saonne, Alliers, the Tarn, the Lot, the Dordogne.

The Sum is famous in Picardy; it begins by a Saint and ends by another,
which are S. Quentin and S. Valery. Hau, Peronne, Amiens, and Abbeville are
watered with it.

The Charente passes through Angoumois and Xaintonge; waters the Towns of
Angoulesm and and Xaintes.

The Saone coasts along Burgundy, passes at Chalon and Mascon, and goes to
Lions. Its source is near Lorrain: Its Waters are stagnating and dull. The
Poets have called it the Tardy, the Slow, the Sluggish.

Bouche, Larroux, and others, are of Burgondy.

Allier waters Bourbonnois, and goes to Moulins.

The Tar crosses Rovergne and Albigeois, passes at Millain, Albi, and at
Montaubon.

The Aveiron renders its Waters at Rhodes, the Agout at Castres, Puilaurens,
and Lavoir; the Lot at Cahors divides Quercy and Agenois.

The Dordogne waters Limosin and Perigord; its source is at the foot of Mount
Or in Auvergne; it passes at Bretenoux, Sarlac, Bergerac, Saint Foy, and at
Libourne: It Is the fullest of Fish of any in the Kingdom, and particularly
fertile in Salmons.

The Gave and the Gave water Bearn.

The Vilaine and others, Britany Aremorick.

Vien and Tarion, Limosin.

The Dour in Gascogne passes at Tarbes, Air, Dax, and at Bayonne: the Bidouze
enters into the Dour.

The Vienne, the Chein, and the Vouzelle, are in Poictou.

The Auron, the Cher, and the Indre, in Berry.

The Orb, the Brille, and Drome, in Normandy.

The Sarthe, the Huine, and others, in le Maine.

The Loir, the Dive, and others, in Anjou.

The Eure, in Beausse.

The Doux, which was once bitter, in Franche Comte.

The Marne and the Vesle, in Champagne.

The Isaire and the Drac, in Daulphine. The Izaire rises in Savoy, passes at
Grenoble, enters with the Drac into the Rhone near Valence, and not at Vienne,
as an Author has written. If he never was at Valence, he ought to have had a
good Geographical Map, which would have kept him from committing this
oversight. To the Izaire has been given the name of Serpent, because it torns
and wrests very much. It Is by way of allusion that it is said, Draco and Serpens
evertunt Gratianopolin: Those are two scurvy Rivers very rapid. Some years
since the Serpent overthrew the Stone Bridge of Grenoble, which has since been
rebuilt.

The Durance and the Varthe are in Provence; the first waters Sisteron and
Cavaillon: it is very rapid and apt to do mischief, being of the nature of
certain persons, full of gall and bitterness. Fish cannot live in it. The
Varthe is pronounced the Val. The Ardeche and the Cetze water Vivarez.

The Aude and the Eraut are in Languedock; the first passes at Aleth and at
Carassome: An arm of this River waters Narbonne by a great Channel which
divides it into two parts. The Eraut breeds a great number of Trouts, descends
from Sevenes, joins it self to the River Are, passes at Ganges, at la Roque, at
S. Basil, and goes to Agde.

One of the Barons de la Roque has preserved the Catholic Religion in his
place of residency, which is very strongly seated, and which has been the
Sanctuary of the Catholics of the Country in the times of the Wars of
Religion. It is known by tradition that Beza being come thither from Ganges to
preach his new Doctrine, he was expelled by that Lord. The Lady of the place
was seduced before, and the Inhabitants passionately desired to hear him
preach, because it had been represented to them that he preached naught but the
pure Word of God, and the Reformation of the Age, and that he was an
extraordinary Preacher. Beza was already got into the Church de la Madelein,
when the Baron came from his Castle accompanied with his Domestics, and with
Partisans and Halberds.

This River Eraut, before it reaches Ganges, coasts along by the Baronny of
Sumene. The present Baron, formerly one of the Kings Counselors in his Court
of Accounts, Tributes and Finances of Montpellier, has a very fair Castle at
Roger by le Causse against the Mountain Esperou, where there are Simples of a
very great virtue: The Physicians of Montpellier go ordinarily there every year
a simpling; a man is perfumed when he passes through its Meadows all decked with
Flowers. There has been found there sometime an Herb which pulls off Horses
shoes, and which creates hunger in persons that tread on it. The ancient Castle
of Roger, during the Wars of Religion, was a place of Refuge for the Catholics
thereabout: The Pretenders to Religion laid a heavy hand on it by demolishing
a part of it two several times.

If we named in Bearn the Gave, and the Gave, it is because there are two of
them; we may also say the Gandon and the Gandon in Sevenes and in Languedoc,
composed of many Streams and Rivers: One passes at St. Jean de Gardonenque, at
Mialet, and at Auduze. The Marquisate of this Town is in the ancient House of
Aire-Baudouze, and has given the Church three or four Bishops; the Town has
also given some: they are found all named in the Book entitled Gallia
Christiana. The present Marquess commands a Regiment bearing his name. The
Barony of Ganges, which is not far from Auduze, is made a Marquisate of late
years in the House of Tude: Its Marquesses have had Regiments, and some
particular Governments. The Chevalier de Ganges was chosen to command the
Regiment which the Estates of Languedoc granted the King An. 1677.

The other Gandon passes at Alez, a pleasant Town for its fair and vast
Meadow-ground: We see there yet some Relics of the most beautiful Garden
which the Constable Montmorency caused to be made there. This Gandon passes
before the ancient Castle of S. Martin de la Fare. The Family of this Marquess
is originally of lower Languedoc, the Frontier of Sevenes, near Alez. It Is an
Illustrious and ancient House, of which the late high and mighty Lord Messire
Jacques de la Fare, Marquess de la Fare, Vicount de Montclar, Baron de la
Salle, Lord of Bastide, S. Martin, Soudorgne, Paupidor, and other places, has
had many Children.

He married the Daughter of Comte de Lussan, from which Marriage are issued
nine Sons and four Daughters. Of the males there are eight who long time served
his Majesty in his Armies, and have had considerable Employs.

Let us make an of end our Gardons: they descend from Serenes, and meet under
the Village Ners, three or four leagues from Nismes, and pass under the famous
Pont du Guard to go find the impetuous Rhone.

Pont du Guard.
FRance is obliged to the Romans for having built for it on two Mountains this
famous Bridge, which contains three the one on the other. The building is of
Freestone, of a surprising breadth and length: the stones are without
Lime-mortar, or ought else to bind them. The highest Bridge was built to uphold
an Aqueduct for conveying waters to Nismes for its embellishment, and for a
perpetual memory. Some persons think that it was in order to make some
Sea Fights, alleging that Nismes did not want water for its ordinary use.

The first Bridge contains six Arches, the second eleven, the third thirty six:
The first is a hundred and fifty paces in length, the second two hundred
seventy five, and the third three hundred.

They say that that person has not seen Pont du Guard, who has not seen the
Hare, because the figure of it is seen there in Relief on the second Bridge
against the top of the Pillar of the third Arch.

Louis the Thirteenth, and Louis the Fourteenth, Kings of France, went to see
this curious Piece of Roman Antiquity, when they were in Languedoc.

This Bridge was called Pont du Guard because it is situated on the River
Gardon, and retains its name even to this present time.

The Marquess of S. Private, Baron of Fournez, and Lord of other places, has a
Castle by the side of the Bridge, and resides there ordinarily when he is in
his dominions. Cardinal de Richelieu and Cardinal Mazarin have lodged there.
This ancient House has always been well allied, and with the chief of Daulphine.

These great Springs of Water that boil forth, the Fountain of Vigan and of
Sauve in Sevenes, and that of Nan in Rouergue, which equal Rivers, deserve to
be mentioned with that of Nismes at the foot of Tournemagne, adorned with a
great Cestern, and which drives six or seven Mills. The Fountain of Vaucleuse
is likewise famous.

If that of Nismes be considerable for the opening of a Rock whence issues a
great Spring of very clear water, the bottom of which is not to be perceived;
Its Amphitheater there is remarkable for its great and large Stones. A modern
Author has committed on this subject a great Anacronism, or a supposition of a
time far distant from another, when he said that these Stones clove asunder at
the death of Jesus Christ, not considering that the Amphitheater was not then
in being, and that it was not built till a long time afterward. It is thought
that it was begun under the Emperor Adrian, and ended under Antonius Pius
Native of Nismes, a long time after the Ascension of the Son of God. The same
Author did not also observe that the Goths, Enemies of the Works of the Romans,
put fire to this Amphitheater, which has caused the cleaving and blackness. You
may see what is writ thereon by the ancient Counselor Guiran of Nismes, he is
the last who has spoken of it.

The square House which served for the Proetorium, or the place where Justice
was administered, and the Temple of Diana, are moreover ancient Monuments of
this Town, formerly a Colony of the Romans.

Arles and Xaintes have also Amphitheaters, where many sports were celebrated,
and where men were made to fight with wild Beasts.

If the Fountains, of which I spoke even now, are publicly known, those of
Main and Monfrin in bas Languedoc, of Vic in Auvergne at the foot of a
Mountain, of Vals in Vivarez, and at Fonsanche half a league above Sauve, are
extremely frequented for their Medicinal and Purgative virtue: they are as good
as those of the Spaw and of Ems in Germany.

The goodness of the Fountain of Vic was discovered by a Cow, which being the
leanest of the Herd, became the fairest and fattest, because she alone drank of
that water. Amongst the Medicinal Fountains of Vals, we see four that issue
from the same Rock, and pass through diverse Minerals, producing different
effects. That of Fonsanche ebbs and flows; men drink at one place there, and
bathe at another: the Mud of this Fountain is good against sore Eyes. The
Waters of Camarez in Rouergne are also esteemed. A value also is set on the
Waters of Saint Reine in Burgundy, and on those of Forges. The Baths of
Baleruc four leagues from Mont pellier, those of Bagnols in Givodan, those of
Moulins Alchambaut in Bourbonnois, and of Barege at the Pyreneans, are
singular, they strengthen, comfort, and cure many infirm persons. There is seen
in the season a great concourse of people.

In the year of the World 2218. Ana the Son of Sebeon Prince of Seir, found
first of all Springs of hot Water: he is the Inventor of Hot Baths, according
as Torniel and the greatest part of the Interpreters of Scripture, affirm.

A Catalogue of the Archbishopricks of France, and the Suffragan Bishoprics:
containing the number and the name of the first and last Bishop of each
Diocese, to the year 1680.
The Archbishopric of Rheims.
RHeims has had ninety four Bishops and Archbishops, from S. Sixtus to Messire
Charles-Maurice le Tellier, first Ecclesiastical Duke and Peer of France, Legate
of course to the Holy See, and Primate of the Belgic Gauls, Doctor of the
House and Society of Sorbon, and Great Master of the Kings Chapel of Music.

He succeeds Cardinal Antony Barbarin, whose Epitaph, which denotes a profound
Humility, is coucht in these terms, by the order of his late Eminency; Hic
jacet pulvis, cinis and nihil.

The Archbishop of Rheims, at the Royal Consecration and Coronation, Anoints
and Crowns the King.

Its Suffragans are eight, Amiens, Beauvais, Boulogne, Chalons on Marne, Laon,
Noyon, Senlis, and Soissons. Cambray and Tournay belonged formerly to the
Archbishopric of Rheims; wherefore the Archbishops of Rheims signified their
Protestation against the erection of the Archbishopric of Cambray. Messire
Charles le Tellier caused his to be signified to Messire Christopher de Brias.
An. 1679. in the month of June, the King gave in his Council to the Archbishop,
Duke of Rheims, a place of Counselor of State in Ordinary, who seats himself
as first Duke and Peer above the Dean of the Council, immediately after the
Chancellor of France.

Amiens has had seventy six Bishops from St. Firmin to Messire Francois Faure:
he was Preacher in Ordinary to the late Queen Mother Ann of Austria.

Beauvais eighty nine from St. Lucien to Messire Toussaint Fourbin de Janson,
Count and Peer of France, and Vidame of Gerbroi. This Prelate carries the
Mantle Royal at the Kings Consecration and Coronation. He was Bishop of Dignes,
and afterward of Marseilles, and a long time Ambassador in Poland: I speak of
it in the Tract of the Sarmathians; he was proposed by the Pope in his
Consistory for the Bishopric of Beauvais, though he had not been precogniz'd,
because a Precognization is not necessary when his Holiness proposes a Subject.
The Cardinals with a common voice gave him gratis a half of the Bulls. The 27th
of November 1679. he was received in the Grand Chamber of the Parliament with
the usual Ceremonies, and took there his place betwixt the Bishop, Duke of
Langres, and the Bishop Count de Noyon, in the presence of the Duke d*Enguien,
of the Prince of Conti, of the Prince de la Rochesur-You, and of seventeen
Dukes and Peers, whereof three were Ecclesiastics. He gave afterward a Dinner
to the Princes of the Blood, and to the Dukes and Peers.

Boulogne has had sixty six Bishops, comprizing those of Terouanne to Messire
Nicolas Lavocat Billard sixth Bishop of Boulogne, formerly Canon of the Church
of Paris. The first Prelate of Terouanne was called Antimondus or Aumondus; the
first of Boulogne, Antoine de Crequy. Three Bish^^ricks have been made of that
of Terouanne; that of Boulogne, that of St. Omer, and that of Ypres.

Chalons eighty nine from St. Mamet to Messire Louis-Antoine de Noailles Count
and Peer of France: He carries the Ring at the Consecration and Coronation of
his Majesty.

Laon seventy seven from St. Genebaud or Genebal to Cardinal Caesar d'Estrees
Duke and Peer of France; he carries the holy Vial at the Kings Consecration and
Coronation. This Eminency holds his Hat from the Crown of Portugal, whereof he
is Protector. His most Christian Majesty gave him An. 1679. the Abbey of St.
Claude in Franche-Comte, vacant by the death of Dom John of Austria.

Noyon ninty two from Hilary to Messire Francois de Clairmont de Tonnere, Count
and Peer of France: He carries the Wast-belt at the Kings Coronation.

Senlis eighty nine from St. Regulus to Messire Denis Sanguin.

Soissons eighty one from St. Sixtus to Messire Charles Bourlon.

The Archbishopric of Narbonne.
NArbonne seventy one both Bishops and Archbishops, from St. Paul the Proconsul
to Cardinal Pierre de Bonzi the Queens Grand Almoner, formerly Ambassador of
France at Venice, in Poland, and Spain. He was Bishop of Beziers, sometime
afterward Archbishop of Tolose, and for some great good is made Archbishop of
Norbanne; which of course constitutes him President of the Estates of
Languedoc, who look upon him as their Protector, and the King considers him at
the same time as a faithful Support of his Authority. His promotion to the
Cardinalship happened the 22d. of February 1672. and his late great Uncle Jean
de Bonzi who was grand Almoner of Queen Marie de Medicis, was made Cardinal at
the nomination of France, and this by that of Poland. His Embassies have gained
him very great lights.

The Suffragans of Narbonne are Agde, Aleth, Beziers, Carcassonne, Lodeve,
Montpellier, Nismes, S. Pons de Tomires, and Vzez.

Agde sixty five Bishops from Beticus to Messire Louis Foucquet, Lord and Count
of the Town of Agde. Heaven makes known to this Prelate by experience, that the
Felicities of the Earth are mixed with bitterness.

Aleth twenty one from St. Bartholmew to Messire Louis Alphonse de Valbelle. He
succeeds Nicholas Pavilion, who wished that Superiors were infallible in their
Sentiments, impeccable in their Conduct, and far from all surprise.

Beziers seventy two from St. Afrodisius to Messire Armand Jean de Rotondis de
Biscara. This Prelate passed from the Bishopric of Dignes to that of Lodeve,
and from Lodeve to Beziers. He is arrived from degree to degree to one of the
most considerable of Languedoc by his merit, and by the services which himself
and his have rendered the State. The Organs of his Cathedral-Church have the
reputation of being the fairest of France.

Carassonne seventy three from St. Guimera to Messire Louis de Bourlemon
Auditor of the Rota.

Lodeve a hundred and seven from St. Florus vulgarly St. Flour, to Messire
Claude Antoine de Chambonas.

Montpellier sixty three to Messire Charles de Pradel, comprizing those of
Maguelone, which was transferred to Montpellier under Pope Paul the Third, An.
1536. The first Bishop of Maguelone was called Either or Ethere, and the first
fixed at Montpellier was Pellicie the Seventh of the name. Messire Charles de
Pardel was nominated Anno 1675. Coadjutor of his Uncle, whose great services
rendered to the Church and State, even to the exposal of his life once while he
was Intendant of Justice, helped to recompense the science and desert of him who
occupies the Sea at present.

Nismes ninty six from Crocus to Messire Jaques Seguier, formerly Bishop of
Lombez, before Canon, and Theologal of the Church of Paris. The King
considering that Heresy had laid very deep roots for a long time in the
Diocese of Nismes, and that it was a thing of importance to establish there a
Pastor of an extraordinary Zeal, nominated him to this Bishopric an. 1671.
where this Prelate incessantly pursues the wild Beast which has spoiled in
diverse places the Vineyard of the Lord.

St. Tomieres nineteen from Raymond to Messire Pierre-Jean-Francois de
Montgaillard.

Vzez sixty from Constance to Messire Michel Poncet de la Riviere Doctor of the
House and Society of Sorbonne, Bishop and Count of Vzez. As soon as he entered
into this Diocese infected with Heresy, he began with the reformation of his
Clergy, and afterward cast the Apostolical Net and drew up into the Vessel of
the Church many Fish; I mean, men according to the promise which the Son of God
made to his Apostles, that they should be fishers of men instead of fish,
Faciam vos fieri piscatores hominum. The Town of St. Ambrose whereof he is
Pryor and Lord, knows it by experience; where, after having put the last hand
to a very fair Church, and having consecrated it an. 1679. he gave in one day
the Absolution of Heresy to forty seven persons.

The Archbishopric of Bourges.
BOurges a hundred and two Prelates from St. Vrsin to Messire Phelipeaux de la
Vrilliere. St. Rodulphe, forty fourth Bishop of Bourges, was declared
Archbishop, Primate, and Patriarch.

The ordinary Suffragans were eleven, Albi, Cahors, Castres, Clermont in
Auvergne, Limoges, Mande, le Puy, Rhodez, St. Flour, Tulles, and Vabres. Since
that Albi has been raised to an Archbishopric Bourges counts but five
Suffragans, which are Clermont, Limoges, le Puy, S. Flour, and Tulles. In this
counting of the Suffragans given to Albi, there has been assigned to the
Archbishop of Bourges, and to his Successors, 15000 Livres yearly of the
Revenue of the Archbishopric of Albi.

Clermont has had eighty eight Bishops from Austremon to Messire Gilbert de
Veni d' Arbouse.

Limoges eighty five from St. Martial to Messire Louis Lascaris d*Vrfe.

Le Puy eighty eight from St. Georges to Messire Armand de Bethune Count of
Velai.

St. Flour twenty seven from Raymond Vehens or Vehennes, to Messire Jerome de
la Motthe Houdancourt: He succeeds to Jacques de Mont Rouge.

Tulles thirty two from Arnal de S. Astier to Messire N. Ancelin Almoner to the
Queen.

The Archbishopric of Vienne.
VIenne a hundred and three from St. Crescent to Messire Henry de Villars
Archbishop, Count of Vienne, and Primate. He succeeds his Uncle, who having
considered that the Nephew possessed all the Qualities which make a great
Prelate, discharged himself of the Archbishopric as of a heavy burden, on him
who could bear it with all the force necessary for so high a dignity.

The Suffragans are Valence, Geneva, Grenoble, S. Jean de Morienne, and Viviers.

Valence joined with Die has had fifty three Bishops from St. Martius to
Messire Daniel de Cosnac.

Geneva a hundred from Diogenes to Messire Jean d'Arenson d'Alaix, who succeeds
Charles-Auguste de Sales. The Episcopal See was fixed at Anneci after that the
Protestant Ministers had driven from the Town the Bishop and the Catholics.
The Duke of Savoy nominates to this Bishopric. Cardinal Robert Bishop of
Geneva, was Pope under the name of Clement the Seventh.

Grenoble sixty two from Domninus to Messire Etienne le Camus Bishop and
Prince, President of course of the Estates of Daulphine, formerly Almoner of
his Majesty. He might say with the Evangelical Prophet, Quid debui ultrafacere
vineae meae and non feci? I wish him the same fate with S. Gregory of
Neocesarea called Thaumaturgus, who having asked, as he lay on his Deathbed,
how many Infidels remained in the City of Neocesarea, after that it was
answered him only seventeen, he said in rendering thanks to God, that the day
he took the Government of the Diocese he found full as many Catholics.

S. Jean de Morienne is at the nomination of the Duke of Savoy.

Viviers ninety five from S. Janvier to Messire Louis-Francois de la Chaume of
Susa, Count of Vivarez and Prince of Donzere.

The Archbishopric of Tolose.
TOlose has had forty eight Bishops, the first S. Saturnin vulgarly S. Cernin,
and twenty nine Archbishops from Raymond de Comminges Cardinal, to Messire
Joseph de Montpezat of Carbon, formerly Bishop of S. Papaoul, who deserved in
the Prelateship the same elevation as his Illustrious Brother the Archbishop of
Sens.

The Suffragans are seven; Pamiers, Lombez, Mirepoix, Montauban, Rieux, S.
Papaoul, Lavaur.

Pamiers twenty nine Bishops from Louis de Sicile surnamed de Marseille, to
Messire Francois Etienne de Caulet.

Lombez twenty nine from Arnoldus Rogier de Comminges to Messire Cosme Roger,
before General of the Order des Feuillans, and Preacher in Ordinary to their
Majesty's. He was nominated to the Bishopric of Pamiers An. 1680.

Mirepoix thirty two from Raymond Athon to Messire Gabriel de la Broue Preacher
in Ordinary to the King.

Montauban twenty eight from Bertrand du Pui to Messire Jean Baptiste Colbert
de S. Pouages.

Rieux twenty three from Cardinal Pilefort de Rabastein to Messire Antoine
Francois Bertier.

S. Papaoul thirty from Bernard de la Tour to Messire Barthelemi de Grammont.

Lavaur thirty one from Rogier d'Armagnac to Messire Charles le Goulx de la
Berchere, formerly the Kings Almoner.

The Archbishopric of Rouen.
ROuen eighty nine from S. Nicaise to Messire Francois Rouxel de Medavi de
Grancei Counselor of State in Ordinary, Primate of Normandy. Messire Jacques
Colbert is his Coadjutor. He was created Titular Archbishop of Carthage the 4th
of Aug. 1680.

The Suffragans of Rouen are six; Avranche, Bayeux, Coutance, Evreux, Lisieux,
and Sees.

Avranche fifty six from Nepos or Nepus to Messire Gabriel Philippes de Froule
de Tesse.

Bayeux sixty eight from S. Exupere to Messire Francois de Nesmond.

Coutance eighty eight from S. Ereptiol to Messire Charles-Francois de Lomenie
de Brienne.

Evreux sixty seven from S. Taurin to Messire Louis-Joseph de Grignan, formerly
Agent-General of the Clergy of France. He succeeds Henry de Maupas of Tours,
sometime Bishop of Pui, who was deputed to Rome for the Beatification and
Canonization of S. Francois de Sales, and has given the public the Life of
Priest Vincent, General of the Congregation of the Mission of S. Lazarus. The
same Prelate has composed some other Works.

Lisieux forty nine from S. Theobaud to Messire Eleoner de Matignon. If his
high Birth fills him with Honor, his excellent Actions accumulate him with
Glory.

Sees sixty eight from S. Latuin to Messire Jean Forcoal, before Almoner to the
King.

The Archbishopric of Sens.
SEns a hundred and sixteen Prelates from S. Savinien to Messire Jean de
Montpezat de Carbon Primate of the Gauls and of Germany. He was Bishop of S.
Papaoul, and then Archbishop of Bourges, and afterward nominated to the
Archbishopric of Tolose, which he did not occupy.

The Suffragans are Auxere, Nevers, and Troyes. Before that Paris was made an
Archbishopric, they were six in number.

Auxere an hundred and three from S. Peregrin to Messire Andre Colbert Doctor
of the House and Society of Sorbonne.

Nevers ninety two from Tauritius or Astremonius to Messire Edouart Vallot.

Troyes eighty three from S. Amant to Messire N. de Chavigni, formerly the
Kings Almoner.

Bishops of Bethleem.
BEthleem which was but a Village in Palestina belonging to the Tribe of Juda,
was honored with the Title of Bishopric an. 1110. by Pope Pascal the Second,
in the honor of the birth of the Son of God. The Episcopal See was transferred
into France in the Diocese of Auxere in the faux-bourg of the Town of Clameci
against Nivernois. Guillaume the fourth of the name, Count of Nevers, being in
the Holy Land for reconquering of it, and considering that the Bishop of
Bethleem could not subsist there, founded him 500 Livres of yearly Rent for his
subsistence in the faux-bourg before-nam'd. Charles the Fourth King of France
confirmed this Donation. The present Bishop is called Francois Batailler; he
depends immediately on the Holy See, and is very much employed in Ordinations
and Missions. His ancient Predecessors were Suffragans of the Patriark of
Jerusalem. Messire Francois Batailler was proposed to go and serve Portugal at
the time that this Crown was found reduced to one only Bishop, by reason of
the Refusal which the Court of Rome then made to give it any on the account of
Spain, whose Ambassador at Rome made great instances on this subject.

Auchs, joined with the Country of Eusan, ninety six Prelates from Ceratius to
Messire Henry de la Motthe Houdancourt, Commander of the Kings Orders, and
Purveyor of Navarre, formerly Bishop of Rennes, and Almoner of the deceased
Queen Mother. He is esteemed one of the most learned Prelates in Antiquity, and
in the Science of the Canon Law, absolutely necessary for the government of the
Church: It Is what is required at Rome.

The Suffragans are ten; Air, Acqs or Dax, Bayonne, Couserans, Comminges,
Leitoure, Lescar, Oleron, Tarbes, Bazas.

Air fifty one from Marcel to Messire Jean-Louis de Fromentieres, Preacher in
Ordinary to the King.

Acqs fifty seven from S. Vincent Martyr to Messire Philippes de Chaumont.

Bayonne twenty nine from Leon to Messire Henry de Garsias; the Prelate that
occupies it at present is called Messire Jean Dolce.

Couserans sixty three from S. Valere to Messire Gabriel de S. Etienne,
vulgarly Esteve.

Comminges forty seven from Suavis to Messire Louis de Rechignevoisin de Guron.

Leitoure forty five from Heutherius to Messire Hugues de Bar.

Lescar forty five from S. Julien to Messire Jean de Haut de Sallies, President
of the Estates of Bearn, first Counselor to the Parliament of Pau, and first
Baron of Province.

Oleron forty four from Gratus to Messire Arnaud-Francois Maitie.

Tarbes forty nine from Antomerius to Messire Francois de Poudens.

Bazas fifty from Sextilius to Messire Guillaume de la Boissonade of Ortie,
formerly Chanter of the Church of Again; he succeeds Samuel Martineau.

Elne, joined with Perpignan, a hundred and five from Apel who was nominated
Successor of N. Marguerit. This Diocese has been Suffragan sometimes of
Tarragone, sometimes of Narbonne. Elne is three leagues from Perpignan.

The Archbishopric of Lions.
Lions a hundred twenty two Bishops or Archbishops from Potin to Messire
Camille de Neufville de Villeroy Archbishop and Count of Lions, Primate of the
Gauls, and Commander of the Kings Orders, and Lieutenant General for his
Majesty of Lyonnois, Forez, and Beaujolois.

The Suffragans are Authun, Chalons or Saone, Langres, and Mascon.

Authun a hundred eighty four from S. Amant to Messire Gabriel de Roquette,
Successor of Louis d' Attichi. He is President of course of the Estates of
Burgundy, Administrator Spiritual and Temporal of the Archbishopric of Lions
during the vacancy of the Sea. Pope Innocent the Eleventh granted this Prelate
the Pallium. the third of October in the year 1678. Though the Church of Authun
enjoyed this privilege from the Pontificate of St. Gregory the Great, its
Bishops have not been able to obtain it for many Ages, whatever instances they
have made. Messire Gabriel de Roquette received it from the hands of the
Archbishop of Lions Messire Camille de Neufville of Villeroy, with the ordinary
Ceremonies, in the Church of the Carmelites of the faux-bourg S. Jacques of
Paris, the 21 of May 1679. It is to be observed, that it is said to the Pope the
day of the Ceremony of his Consecration when he puts on the Pallium, Accipe
Pallium sanctum, plenitudinem Pontisicalis Officii.

Chalons seventy six from Donatien to Messire Henry-Felix de Tassis, Dean of
the holy Chapel of Vincennes.

Langres ninety three from Senator to Messire Louis de Simianes de Gordes. Duke
and Peer of France, Count of S. Jean de Lion, and first Almoner of the Queen.
The Bishop of Langres carries the Scepter at the Ceremony of the Consecration
and Coronation of the King. The Duke of Burgundy bears the Crown, and puts the
Sword by the Kings side. The Peers appear with a Circle of Gold on their heads
in the form of a Crown. There are Princes and Lords chosen to represent the
Peers whose Peerages have been reunited to the Crown.

Mascon seventy seven from S. Placide to Messire Michel de Tilladet.

The Archbishopric of Bourdeaux.
BOurdeaux seventy two Prelates from S. Gilbert to Messire Louis de Bourlemont,
Auditor of the Rota.

The Suffragans are Again, Condom, Angoulesme, Lusson, Rochelle, Perigeux,
Poitiers, Xaintes, Sarlat.

Again sixty one Bishops from S. Caprasi to Messire Jules Mascaron, Preacher in
Ordinary to the King. He was Bishop of Tulles. The Pope proposed him in his
Consistory for the Church of Again.

Condom twenty three from Raymond Goulard to Messire Jacques de Mattignon, who
succeeds Messire Jacques Benign Bousset, Tutor to M. le Dauphin, and at
present first Almoner of Madam the Dauphiness, and Author of a Book entitled
The Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church on matters of
Controversy.

Angoulesme sixty seven from S. Auson to Messire Francois de Pericard.

Lusson thirty from Pierre de la Voirie to Messire Henry de Barillion.

Rochelle joined with Maillezais twenty four. The Episcopal See was removed
from Maillezais to Rochelle An. 1648, by a Bull of Pope Innocent the Tenth, and
with Letters Patents of Louis the Fourteenth. The first Bishop of Maillezais
was called Gaufrid Pauvrelle, and the two first of Rochelle were Jacques Raoul,
and Messire Henry de la Valle de Boisdauphin de Sable.

Perigueux seventy from S. Fronto to Messire Claude le Boux, Preacher in
Ordinary to his Majesty.

Poitiers a hundred and five from Liberius to Messire Hardouin Fortin de la
Hoguette, formerly Bishop of S. Brieux. He was Agent-General of the Clergy of
France.

Xaintes sixty six from S. Eutrope to Messire Guillaume de la Brunetiere du
Plessis Get, formerly Archdeacon and Canon of the Church of Paris, and grand
Vicar of the two last Archbishops. This Prelate at his coming to the
Pontificate having found in the Field of his Church the Darnel, whereof it is
spoken in the Gospel that the man enemy had sown there during the darkness of
the night, tore it up without unrooting the good seed, by his skill and
dexterity.

Sarlat thirty one from Raymond de Roquecor to Messire Louis de Salagnac.

The Archbishopric of Arles.
ARles eighty seven Prelates from S. Trophime to Messire Francois-Adheimar de
Monteil de Grignan, Primate Prince of Salon and of Montdragon, Commander of the
Kings Orders. Messire Jean Baptiste Adheimar de Monteil de Grignan was
nominated his Coadjutor an. 1666. and consecrated at Vzes an. 1677. He preached
in Advents before their Majesty's, and has made fine Speeches to the King as
deputed by the general Assemblies of the Clergy. The first Archbishop of Arles
was called S. Cezaire. The Town glories in having given birth to eleven of its
Bishops and Archbishops, which are St. Honorat, S. Aurelien, Pierre Ainard,
Imbert de Guieres, Michel de Morieres, Hugues Bouardi, Bertrand de S.
Maleferrat, Bertrand Almaric, and Gaspart du Laurens. I remit those who would
have an ample relation on this subject to a Book newly composed by the Abbot de
Port Native of Arles, which contains excellent Remarks: he has entitled it,
The Ecclesiastical and Secular History of Arles; it is the third Book wherewith
he has gratified the Public. The first is a fine Book of Prayer, the second a
fine Rhetoric.

The Suffragans of Arles are Orange, Marseilles, Toulon, and S. Paul Trois
Chateaux.

Orange eighty eight Bishops from Constance to Messire Jean Jacques d'Obeille.

Marseille seventy one from S. Lazarus Brother of Mary Magdaleine and of
Martha, to Messire N. d'Estampes.

Toulon fifty from S. Honorat to Messire Vint-Mille du Luc, before Bishop of
Dignes.

S. Paul sixty eight from S. Sulpicius to Messire Louis-Aube de la Roquemartine.

The Archbishopric of Ambrun.
AMbrun seventy nine from S. Marcelin to Messire Brulart de Genlis.

The Suffragans are Digne, Glandeve, Grass, Nice, Senez, Vence.

Digne has had fifty two Bishops from S. Domninus to Messire Francois de
Tellier, who was nominated to this Bishopric an. 1677. He was before the
Queens Almoner, Curate and Archpriest of the Church of St. Severin of Paris.

Glandeve thirty one from Fraternus to Messire Leon Bacoue, formerly Cordelier.
He succeeds Jean-Dominique Ithier. Those are deceived who have written that the Sea of Glandeve has been at Antibe; they would say true, if they said that the
Episcopal See was transferred to Grass, because at Antibe they abused the
Bishop of the place.

Grass sixty three from Armenterius to Messire Louis-Aube de la Roquemartine
Dean of the Church of Arles.

Nice is in the nomination of Savoy.

Senez thirty three from Vrsus to Messire Louis-Anne-Aubert de Villeserin,
Commander of the Kings Orders. Some Authors have said falsely, that Senez has
been honored with a Council, because having found cited in some Books
Concilium Sinense, they thought that it was a Council held at Senez, not
observing that it was at Sienna in Italy 1423. besides that the Town of Senez
was then destroyed, and reduced to a pitiful Village. There is an expectation
from Rome of Bulls for the translation of the Episcopal See and Chapter of
Senez to Castellane. For these two hundred years and more its Bishops have
labored for this Work to no purpose; Messire Louis de Villeserin has resumed
so just a design, and has transferred his Officialty, his service and his
ordinary Residency to the Town of Castellane. This Diocese is one of the most
considerable and most ancient of Provence. This Prelate has set up a
Confraternity of St. Francis of Sales in the Chapel of the Religious Women of
the Visitation of St. Mary of Castellane: he has also established in the same
Town a Society des Dames de la Charity, and has made other excellent
Institutions which take from Usurers all sorts of occasions of maintaining
their wicked Commerce, and comfort the Poor.

Vence fifty two from St. Vsebius to Messire Louis de Thomassin Lord and Baron
of Vence, where he has upheld the Rites of the Church with an extreme vigor,
in which and on other occasions he has shown himself a most zealous Defender of
the Episcopacy, and of the Ecclesiastical Discipline; which appeared by a
famous Decree of the Council of State which he obtained An. 1679.

The Archbishopric of Tours.
TOurs an hundred and thirteen Bishops and Archbishops from S. Gassien to
Messire Michel Amelot, formerly Bishop of Lavaur. Some Authors call the first
Bishop of Tours, Gratianus; the Archives and Registers say, Sanctus Grassianus;
and all the Canons of this Church pronounce it thus, saying even in their
Litanies, S. Grassiane, or a pronobis.

The Suffragans are in great number; Angers, S. Brieux, le Man's, Quimper or
Cornouaille, Dol, S. Paul de Leon, S. Malo, Nantes, Rennes, Triguier, Vannes.

Angers has had seventy two Bishops from S. Defenseur to Messire Henry Arnaud.

S. Brieux sixty one from Bishop Adam to Messire N. de Coetlogon.

Le Man's seventy four from S. Julien to Messire Louis de Lavergne Montenard de
Tressan, first Almoner of Monsieur Philippes of France, only Brother to the
King. He succeeds Philippes Emmanuel de Beaumanoir de Lavardin, after having
been first Bishop of Vabres.

Quimper sixty two from Corenthin to Messire Francois de Coetlogon.

Dol sixty seven from S. Samson to Messire Matthieu de Thoreau, formerly
Agent-General of the Clergy of France. Dol has had formerly the Title of
Archbishopric, wherefore the Bishops bear in their Arms the Archiepiscopal
Cross.

S. Paul forty eight from S. Paul de Leon to Messire Pierre de Nebout de la
Brousse.

S. Malo seventy one from S. Maclou to Messire Sebastien de Guemadeuc,
President of course of the Estates of Bretany, formerly Agent-General of the
Clergy: he was nominated to the Bishopric of Beziers, which he did not occupy
through a motion of love for his Country.

Nantes ninety four from S. Clair to Messire Gilles de Beauveau de Riveau. He
succeeds Messire Gilles de la Baume de la Valiere.

Rennes seventy four from S. Clair Moderan to Messire Jean Baptiste de
Beaumanoir de Lavardin.

Triguier sixty one from S. Tudgual to Messire Ignace de Saillant. He was
formerly Captain in the Kings Armies; and there were few there like him, who
joined Valor with Understanding, and who on all occasions could show equally a
strength of mind and that of the arm. He was since Superior of the House of
the Priests of the Oratory of S. Honorius at Paris, and Assistant of the Father
General.

Vannes eighty nine from S. Pattern to Messire Louis Caset de Vautorte, formerly
Bishop of Leitoure.

The Archbishopric of Aix.
AIx seventy Bishops and Archbishops from S. Maximin to the most Eminent
Cardinal Jerome Grimaldi. This Eminency draws his Origin from the Princes of
Monaco. He was Vice-Legat of the Patrimony of S. Peter, Nuncio Extraordinary at
the Court of the Emperor, and Nuncio in France, where he received from the
Kings hand the Cardinals Cap.

The Suffragans are Apt, Sisteron, Prejus, Riez, and Gap.

Apt has had sixty six Bishops from S. Auspice to Messire Jean de Gaillard
Bishop and Prince of Apt, formerly Theologal of the Church of Coutance.

Sisteron sixty one from Valere to Messire Jacques Potier de Novion.

Freius seventy one from Acceptus to Messire Lucid Aquin, formerly Bishop of S.
Paul de Trois Chateaux.

Riez seventy seven from S. Prosper to Messire Nicolas de Vallavoire.

Gap forty four or forty five from S. Demetrius to Messire Nicolas de Meliand.
Guillaume de Mescatin formerly Canon, Great Keeper and Count of Lions, who died
An. 1679. preceded him as the last Bishop save one.

The Archbishopric of Paris.
PAris has had eighty seven Bishops, and five Archbishops; S. Denis was its
first Bishop. Pope Gregory the Fifteenth made this Town, being the Capital of
the Kingdom, an Archbishopric, at the request of Louis the Thirteenth, An.
1622.

The first Archbishop was Messire Jean Francois de Gondi, Commander of the
Kings Orders.

The second, Cardinal de Retz Jean-Francois-Paul de Gondi. He was made
Coadjutor of the Church of Paris An. 1643. and resigned his Archbishopric An.
1661. into the Kings hands, who gave him the Abbey of S. Denis. He would have
laid down his Cardinals Hat An. 1675. to retire himself from the World: the
Pope and his Consistory did not think it convenient, finding him necessary in
the Conclaves; and it mist but little in one but he had been raised to the
Sovereign Pontificate. He died the third Cardinal of his House; his Hat was of
the nomination of France.

The third, Messire Pierre de Marca: he was Councellor, and afterward President
of the Parhament of Pau, Intendant of Justice, and Visitor-General in Catalonia
and Roussillon, Bishop of Couserans, Archbishop of Tolose, and then afterward
Minister of State, and Archbishop of Paris. He received the Bulls some days
before his death, and did not occupy the Sea. This Great Person is buried under
the Archiepiscopal Chair. His Book in folio De Concordia Sacredotii and Imperii
has been read by the Learned, and examined at Rome.

The fourth, Messire Hardouin de Beaumont of Peresixe, a great defender of the
Privileges of his Church, formerly Tutor to Louis the Great, and Bishop of
Rhodez. He writ the History of Henry the Fourth, and has been very liberal in
giving Alms: he gave at one time ten thousand Livres toward a Building for the
Priests of the Congregation and Mission of St. Lazarus at Paris, and during his
Archiepiscopacy assisted poor Gentlemen and others with his Revenue. This
Prelate reunited the jurisdiction of all the faux-bourg S. Germain des Prez
and other places, to the Archbishopric of Paris, with an extraordinary vigor,
by solemn Decrees.

The fifth, Messire Francois de Harlai de Chanvalon, Commander of the Kings
Orders, Duke and Peer of France, and Purveyor of Sorbonne. He was honored with
the Archbishopric of Paris An. 1671. and created Duke and Peer of France An.
1674. It Is the first of this See who has born the Title of Duke and Peer, which
will pass from him to his Successors. He was before Archbishop of Rouen, and
President in ordinary of the Assemblies of the Clergy of France. He never
permits any Priest to speak to him with his Hat off, but himself is likewise
uncovered, though he be a great Lord.

The Suffragans of Paris are Chartres, Orleans, Meaux.

Chartres has had a hundred and five Bishops from S. Avent or Aventin (some say
Potentien) to Messire Ferdinand de Neufville de Villeroy, Counselor of State
in Ordinary, formerly Bishop of S. Malo. He was born at Rome under the Embassy
of his deceased Father, who caused the Statua of Henry the Great to be erected
there. This great Prelate is descended from great Ministers, who have been
cherisht by our Kings, and who have governed the State with so much wisdom and
prudence. He has always had near him persons of eminent Learning.

Orleans a hundred and seventeen from S. Altin to Messire Pierre Cambout de
Coaslin the Kings first Almoner.

Meaux a hundred and four from S. Sanctin to Messire Dominique de Ligni,
Successor of his Uncle Dominique Seguier.

The Archbishopric of Albi.
ALbi has had sixty eight Bishops from St. Clair to Gaspard de Daillon du Lude.
This Bishopric, very famous for its Revenue, was made an Archbishopric under
Pope Innocent the Eleventh, at the request of Louis the Fourteenth, in favor
of Messire Hyacynthe de Serroni, some time Bishop of Orange, and afterward Lord
Bishop of Mande, Count of Givodan, and first Almoner of the late Queen Mother
Anne of Austria, whose Funeral-Oration he made at Paris in the head of the
Clergy of France, and of all that is most Illustrious in the Kingdom, with the
applause and admiration of all his Auditors. His rare Piety, his profound
Learning, the long and important Services which he has rendered the Church and
State, have raised him to this high Dignity. His devise is Sidus flos and
lapis. There has been counted to the year 1680. sixty eight Bishops of Albi:
the Abbot de Came, who daily penetrates Antiquity, has discovered eight or ten
more by reading the Councels and the Register and Documents of the Metropolitan
Church of Albi, whereof he has composed the History. His merit obliged the
first Archbishop of this See, a lover of Learning and learned Persons, to make
him his great Vicar, and to send him on his behalf to assist in the Estates of
Languedoc of the year 1680.

The Suffragans of Albi are the nearest to it; Vabres, Rhodes, Castres, Cahors,
and Mande.

Vabres has had twenty two Bishops from Pierre d'Olargue to Messire Louis de
Barrada. The two first Bishops of this Diocese were of the ancient House of
Olargue.

Rhodes fifty three from St. Amant to Messire Gabriel de Voyer de Paulmi.

Castres twenty nine from Deodat to Messire Michel Tuboeuf.

Cahors sixty four from Genulphe to Messire N. le Jay.

Mande sixty two from S. Severian to Messire Francois Placide de Baudri de
Piencour. He confirms those that are in the good way, and recalls those that
are astray. Five Bishops of this Diocese enlarge the Catalogue of Saints.

The Archbishopric of Cambray.
CAmbray has had nine or ten Archbishops from Maximilian de Berghes to Messire
Christophle de Brias; he succeeds Gaspar Nemius. Many Bishops preceded them;
for some time those of Cambray were Bishops of Arras, they were afterward
separated. The Archbishop of Cambray styles himself Archbishop and Duke of
Cambray, Count du Cambresis, and Prince of the Empire. This Archbishopric
before the Wars was worth a hundred thousand Livres of Rent. The Archiepiscopal
Church has a very fair Body adorned with a high Steeple; some persons think
that its Bell called Mary-Fontenoise resembles in greatness to George d'
Amboise of Rouen, or to Cardaillac of Tolose, or to that of Mande when it was
in being, whereof the Clapper is yet to be seen. Charies the Fifth caused the
famous Citadel to be built, which is very strong by Situation and by Art,
though the King of France took it in a little time, and received the Oath of
Fidelity from the Archbishop An. 1677. The Governor of this place being asked
at Brussels by the Duke de Villa-Hermosa, why he had yielded it so soon,
answered him in these very terms, The King of France was before it in person;
and I believe if he besieged Hell, he would fetch all the Devils out, in case
Hell could be besieged and taken by Mortals.

The Suffragans of this Archbishopric are Arras, Tornai, Saint Omer.

Arras has had fifty three Bishops from Lambert to Messire Guidon de Seve de
Roche Chouard.

Tornai forty eight from S. Plato to Messire Philiberg de Choiseul du Plessis
Pralin, formerly Bishop of Comminges. He preached the Funeral Sermon on the late
Prince of Conti. The Canons of his Cathedral-Church are clothed in violet. The
Town of Gand depended formerly for the spiritual on the Bishops of Tornay, as
we shall see elsewhere.

Saint Omer ten from Gerard de Hamericourt to Messire Annes Tristan de la Baume
Suse. His Majesty chose him for a Diocese and a People newly conquered, by
reason of his particular merit, and of his extreme sweetness, accompanied with
a like Address for governing them. He was created before Bishop of Tarbes. He
expected his Bulls for S. Omer An. 1679. A Historiographer of France says that
he has been assured that the custom of defending Theses in Greek passed from S.
Omer to Paris, in a Book entitled Les Entretiens de Luxembourg, p. 193.

The Archbishopric of Bezancon.
BEzancon ninety four Prelates and Archbishops from S. Lin to Messire Antoine
de Gramont. The Canons of his Cathedral bear in their Arms a Camail of Silk
Azure doubled with Taffety Gules, with a Crosier and a Mitre.

The Suffragans are Bellai, Bale, Lausane. These two last are in Switzerland.

Bellai has had eighty six Bishops from Audax to Messire Pierre du Laurens.
There was given to this Prelate for devise in a These dedicated to him, Crescit
suo sydere laurus, by allusion to his Arms.

Bale sixty from Justinian to blessed Ramestein, who died An. 1651. After that
Bale was entirely Protestant, the Episcopal See was placed at Potentru.

Lauzane sixty three from S. Beat to Messire Jean de Vateville, who died An.
1649. The Sea is at Fribourg in Brisgou: Buntruc is the ordinary Seat of the
Bishop.

Metz, Toul, and Verdun, are Suffragans of Treves, which has been taken and
retaken.

Metz has had eighty nine Bishops from St. Clement to Messire George d'
Aubusson de la Fueillade, Commander of the Kings Orders, Prince of the Empire,
formerly Archbishop of Ambrun, and Ambassador at Venice. Henry de Eourbon Duke
of Verneuil, Jule Mazarin, and Prince Guillaume de Fustemberg, though in the
Catalogue of the Bishops of Metz, not occupy the Episcopal See.

Toul eighty six from Mansuet to Messire Jacques de Fieux, Prince of the Empire.

Verdun ninety four or ninety five from St. Sanctin to Messire N. de Bethune
Bishop and Count of Verdun, and Prince of the Empire. He succeeds Messire
Armand de Monchi d' Hoquincourt.

The Rank and Seats of the Prelates.
THe Archbishops and Bishops have Rank and Seat in the General Assemblies of
the Clergy, according to the antiquity of their Consecration.

The Prelates which are Dukes and Peers of France, have the precedence above
the others at the Ceremony of the Consecration of the Kings, and in the Seats
of Parliament, and enter with their Coaches into the Court of the Louvre.

Agents General of the Clergy of France.
THe Clergy has two Agents General at Court to mind Eccesiastical affairs; the
Archbishops and Suffragan Bishops name them alternatively. They hold their
Charge five years, because at each General Assembly of the Clergy two are
created, who are deputed each by the Province which names at his turn.
Messieurs the Abbots of Maretz Colbert and of Bezons, Doctors of Sorbonne, were
created Agents An. 1680. having been nominated the one by the Archbishop of
Rheims, and the other by him of Narbonne. Bourges and Vienne gave Agents An.
1675. It is observed that there is no Prelate who has been Agent-General of the
Clergy, but that he understands affairs; for as men do business, so business
makes men.

The Clergy has also its Treasurer, called otherwise Receiver-General.

Those that would know the continuation and succession of all the Archbishops
and Bishops of France, must read a Book of a great labor in four Volumes in
Folio, composed by the Sieurs de Sainte-Marthe, entitled Gallia Christiana;
there are seen there a great number of Popes Bulls, the day of the creation of
the Prelates, their Qualities, their Arms, the names and the number of Abbeys.
This Work was printed An. 1656. and is worth a thousand other Impressions.
There is to be seen also another Book on this subject, which has for Title
Series Episcoporum. Pierre Frison has given the public Gallia Purpurata.

Since some time the King seldom gives Archbishopricks to Ecclesiastical
persons, if they are not actually Bishops.

These Archbishopricks contain many Suffragans under them; our Conquests
increase the number.

The sole Province of Languedoc has had to this time twenty two Bishops, and as
many Barons, entering yearly into the Estates.

The Duke of Verneuil is Governor of this Province, the Marquess de Cauvisson,
the Comte de Roure, and the Marquess de Montanegue, are Lieutenants General for
the King; and Messire Henry d'Aguessau, Master of Requests, and President of
the Grand Council, is there Intendant of Justice, Polity, and Finances. He
succeeds Messire Claude de Bezons Counselor of State in Ordinary, who lived
there a long time, and who managed well the Kings affairs.

We shall remark, in favor of this Province, that the Law of Aubeine or
Escheatage has no place here by privilege and exemption of the King, nor in
the Vicounty of Turenne. Laurence Bouchet Advocate in the Court of Parliament
of Paris is formal in the point, in his Book entitled La Bibliotheque ou
Tresor du droit des Francois; in which are treated civil, criminal, and
beneficial matters, governed as well by the Ordinances and Customs of France,
as decided by Decrees of Sovereign Courts, summarily extracted from the most
famous French Lawyers and Practitioners, and compared in many places with the
Laws and Customs of Foreign Nations: This book was printed at Paris, An. 1629.
There may be seen also thereon the book of the Province which contains its
Privileges.

The ordinary List of the Parliaments of France, and the time of their erection.
PAris, Tolose, Grenoble, Bordeaux, Dijon, Rouen, Aix, Rennes, Pau, and Metz.

There are added Tornai and Dole; its Parliament was placed at Bezancon, An.
1674.

Perpignan has a sovereign Council which judges without appeal; as also
Pignerol, Brisac, and other places. That which the French call Parliament, that
is to say conference and debate concerning things belonging to Justice, the
Spaniards name Sovereign Council, and the Savoyards the Senate.

The Parliament of Paris was made of constant Session on the place by Philippes
le Bell, An. 1302. and according to Chorier, An. 1288. It was before liable to
be removed from place to place.

The 19th of May 1678. Louis the Fourteenth nominated Messire Nicolas Potier
Chevalier Lord of Novion and of Vilbon, President of the Cap, to the place of
first President of this Parliament. This place has been long due to his Merit,
to his Integrity, to his great Lights, and to that long experience of the
Parliament House which he has acquired with an indefatigable and wholly
wonderful Assiduity. He has rendered himself considerable on all occasions, and
particularly on those great days, which he held at Clermont in Auvergne 1665.

Tolose was instituted by the same Philippe le Bell, and in the same year as
Paris, An. 1302. and made fixed An. 1443. and according to Chorier, An. 1320.
Its first President is at this day Messire Gaspart de Fieubet.

Grenoble by the Dolphin Louis Son and Successor of Charles le Bell, who
confirmed, Anno 1453. by his Letters Patent, that which the Dolphin had done.
Its first President at this day is called Denis le Goux de la Berchere.

Bourdeaux by Louis the Eleventh, An. 1462. Bourdeaux and Grenoble sit by
turns. That of Bourdeaux was transferred some years since to Condom, and
afterward to Marmande, from Marmande to la Reole. This Parliament has at
present for its first President N. d*Olide, by the voluntary demission of
Messire Arnaud de Pontac.

Dijon by the same King Louis the Eleventh, An. 1476.

Messire Louis Laisne Chevalier Lord de la Margrie, after having been many
years Counselor to the Grand Council, Master of Requests, and having exercised
diverse Intendances of Justice, Polity, and Finances, in Guienne, Normandy,
Burgundy, and had many important Commissions in Languedoc for the Kings
service, and in his Armies, was created for his merit first President of the
Parliament of Dijon, An. 1653. and has kept the place with all the Splendor,
Honesty, Honor, and Understanding imaginable, so far that his Majesty judged
him necessary in his Council, where he has been one of the most employed in the
Affairs of State, and of the Finances. Messire Nicolas Brulard has been some
years first President of this Parliament.

Rouen was established by Louis the Twelfth, An. 1499.

The Author of the book entitled L'Etat de la France, sets this Parliament
after that of Tolose; he speaks in these terms: The Sovereign Court of
Normandy, regulated under the name of Echiquier by Philippe le Bell, An. 1302.
was made perpetual by Louis the Twelfth, An. 1499. though it did not bear the
name of Parliament but under Francis the First, An. 1515. Messire Claude Pellot
is here President since his Intendances of Justice.

Aix An. 1501. by Louis the Twelfth.

Late Messire Geofrey Camus Lord of Pontcarre, Counselor to the Parliament of
Paris, and Master of Requests, was nominated after his Intendancies of Justice
in Guienne, Languedoc, and Provence, first President of the Parliament of Aix
by Letters Patent of King Henry the Fourth, and called shortly after to the
Council of his Majesty, where he died Sub-dean, and honourary Counselor to the
Parliament of Paris.

Late Messire Elie Laisne Chevalier Lord of Marguerie, Father of Messire Louis
Laisne Lord of Marguerie, Counselor of State in Ordinary, was also first
President of the Parliament of Aix: He has given the public a Commentary on
the Prophet Esaias in folio, which a great Pope honored with his esteem, having
said that it belonged to a Counselor of State to explain another Counselor of
State. He has left a posthumous Work on Job.

Late Messire Jean de Mesgrigni Counselor of State, was the first President of
this same Parliament. Messire Arnoul Marin Lord of Chateneraye, occupies at
present this Tribunal.

Rennes by Henry the Second, An. 1553. This Parliament was transferred to
Vannes, An. 1675. Messire Louis Phelipeaux de Pont Chartran is at present its
first President; he succeeds Messire Francois d'Argouges now Counselor of
State.

Pau and Metz are the work of Louis the Thirteenth. Pau was created An. 1620.
and Metz An. 1633. Messire Bernard de la Vie is in the head of the Parliament
of Pau, and Messire Thomas de Bragelone at that of Metz.

Tornai by Louis the Fourteenth, An. 1675.

The Order of the Session of Parliaments was regulated An. 1557. at the Estates
General held at Paris under Henry the Second.

The first President of each Parliament wears on his Cap two Galloons of Gold,
and three Borders of Gold likewise on his Mantle, lined with Hermines on the
backside to distinguish him from other Presidents of the Cap, who have but one
on their Cap. The Presidents, the Counselors, and their Atturneys and
Sollicitors-general, wear red with trimmings of black Velvet, on the days of
Ceremonies; the Hoods are lined with Hermines. The chief Register, and the
first Doorkeeper, wear also a red Robe; this wears a Cap of Gold.

There are in France ten Courts or Chambers of Accounts: The Towns where they
are established are Paris, Rouen, Dijon, Nantes, Montpellier, Grenoble, Aix,
Pau, Blois, and Lille in Flanders. That of Paris is very ancient; its
Presidents, as also those of the Grand Council, wear on the days of Ceremony a
Robe of black Velvet. A book entitled L'Etat de la France marks the
Jurisdiction of all the Superior Courts, and after what manner the Officers
are clothed on solemn days.

There are counted in the Kingdom twenty three Generalities, about an hundred
sixty four Elections: There were counted three Chambers of Edict; that of
Grenoble, that of Castelnaudari which was before at Castres, and that of St.
Machairus formerly at Bordeaux; they were incorporated in their Parliaments An.
1679.

These Chambers were instituted in favor of persons of the pretended reformed
Religion, pursuant to the Edicts of Pacification made in the years 1576, 1577,
and 1578. This last is called the Edict of Nantes or of January. These Courts
or Chambers of Edict were called Miparties, because they were composed of an
equal number of Magistrates Catholic, and of the pretended Religion.

The 22th of April 1666. the King set forth a Declaration which removed the
affairs of persons converted to the Catholic Religion, from the Chamber of
Edict of Castres to that of Grenoble, because many particular persons converted
to the Roman Catholic Religion complained that they could not hope for any
Justice in the Chamber of Edict of Castres. The Archbishops and Bishops, and
other Ecclesiastics deputed in the General Assembly of the Clergy, carried
their Complaints to his Majesty the 8th of September 1679. The Chambers of
Edict of Paris and of Rouen, were suppressed An. 1669.

The Presidential Seats are in a very great number: these are of a Jurisdiction
of a vast extent; the Castelet at Paris, that of Tolose, that of Lions, that of
Poitiers, that of Nismes, and that of Rion in Auvergne. The Sevenes, Givodan,
and Vivarez, plead at the Presidency of Nismes, whereof the Marquess of Monfrin
is Seneschal. The Inhabitants of Velai have their Presidential Seat in the Town
of Puy.

The Countries of State are BVrgundy, Dolphine, Provence, Languedoc, and
Britany.

Remarkable things of these times happening from the year 1672. to the
beginning of 1680.
ANno 1672. the 7th of April, there was published at Paris the Kings
Proclamation, by which his Majesty declared War against the States General of
the United Provinces, both by Sea and Land. His Majesty conquered in a little
time on them above fifty or sixty places, as well Towns as Forts, and took a
great number of Prisoners, without speaking of the reducement of three
Provinces. By reason of these great Conquests it was deliberated in the
Guildhall of Amsterdam for carrying the Keys of their Town to the King; of
thirty six voices there were twenty seven. An ancient Burgomaster, assisted
with eight persons of the contrary opinion, reverst the Deliberation, and
caused the Sluices to be drawn up. After that they were drawn up they would have
sent this ancient Burgomaster into Spain with the Character of Ambassador; he
excused himself on the account of the weakness of his age. M. le Prince drew
very near Amsterdam, and many persons think that he had entered it, had it not
been for the hurt he received in his hand at Tolhus, a place where the Rhine
divides it self, and where is built the famous Fort of Schenk.

The 23 of the same month and of the same year, the King put in possession of
the Seals Messire Etienne Deligre, and raised him the month of January, An.
1674. to the place and dignity of Chancellor of the Kingdom, for his merit and
long services rendered to the State. He was Son of a Master, his Father having
been Chancellor and Keeper of the Seals.

Anno 1673. the War was declared betwixt France and Spain.

At the beginning of the year 1675. the King chose for his Confessor Father de
la Chaize, who has been Professor of Divinity in his Society, Rector and
Provincial of the Province of Lions. He is consummated in all sorts of
Knowledge, and particularly in the Moral, Positive, and Scholastic learning;
in the Mathematics, and in Medals, whereof he has written a Book. It Is a Chair
of Truth and Piety, whence issue Oracles to instruct, and Examples to edify;
it is wherefore Louis the Great by the high Lights which Heaven has communicated
to him, knowing his merit, and the solidity of his Understanding, committed to
him his Conscience and his Soul entirely. He possesses in an eminent degree the
excellent and great Qualities of those that have preceded him in the Office of
Counselor Confessor of our Kings; the first was Aymon Auger, the following
Coton, Arnoux, Siguerand, Suffren, Malliand, Gourdon a Scot, Caussin, Sirmond,
Dinet, Paulin, Annat, and Ferrier. Henry the Third was the first King of France
who had a Jesuit for his Confessor; the other Kings, Successors of this Prince,
make use of them since, and the greatest part of other Monarchs and Potentates.

The 28th of April 1675. the Senators and Sheriffs of the famous Town of
Messina, specially empowered in the name of all the Inhabitants, took on their
knees the Oath of Fidelity to the Invincible Louis the Fourteenth King of
France and of Navarre, from the hands of Louis Victor de Roche-Chouard, Prince
of Tonnai-Charente, Duke of Vivone, and Lieutenant General for his Majesty in
the Town here mentioned, and in the other places of the Isle of Sicily, since
Marshall of France. At this Ceremony and other important actions, assisted
Francois-Auguste de Valavoir Marquess of Vaux, Melchior de Thomai Lord of
Chateauneuf and others. The French soon got possession of lands by the taking
of Scaleta, Augusta, Taormina, Merilli, and other places.

In the same year 1675. the 19th day of the month of July, the Shrine of Saint
Genevieve was carried processionally about the Town of Paris for fair weather,
which was obtained as soon as recourse was made to her Prayers: before, the
obstinate Rains laid waste the Country and the Corn for above two months; the
hopes of the Labourer and Vineyard-keeper were fallen. It was twenty three
years that the Relics of this Saint had not been carried.

An. 1676. the 22th of April happened the great Naval-fight in Sicily as far as
Augusta and Messina, betwixt the French Fleet and those of Holland and Spain.
The French gained a great Victory; Michel-Adrien Ruiter was so dangerously
wounded, that he died some days after. The Sieur du Quesne signalized himself
there, and showed the braveness of the French, who since some years are become
firm Seamen.

The King of France declared War against the King of Denmark the 28th of August
of the same year, because contrary to the Treaty of Peace at Copenhagen, An.
1660. betwixt Sweden and Denmark, for the performance of which his most
Christian Majesty gave his Guarentie, his Danish Majesty did not cease from
making War on the King of Sweden, who had not contraven'd to this Treaty of
Peace.

An. 1677. on Ash Wednesday there was a defeat of a Squadron of fourteen Dutch
Vessels in the Port of Tobago, by the Comte d'Estrees Vice. Admiral of France.
This Island Tobago, which is one of the Isles Antilles in America, gave the
name to Tobacco, or has taken that. This simple was formerly called the Herb
Nicotian, because the Physician Nicot brought it into Europe. Some call it the
Herb of the Queen, for having been first presented to the Queen of Spain. It is
extremely in use in moist Countries, because it dries, and sometimes too much.
After Meals, Pipes and Tobacco are set upon the Table; the men and women think
they are not able to live without it, because the Tobacco evacuates, as they
say, the evil humors of the brain. Jouin de Rochefort relates, that in the
Town of Worcester he was asked whether in France the Scholars when they go to
School carry Tobacco as those of England. He tell us, that when the Children go
to School they carry in their little Bag, with their Food, a Pipe filled with
Tobacco; and that at the hour of taking it every one lays down his Book to
kindle his Pipe, and that the Master takes with them, and teaches them to hold
their Pipe and to smoke. All sorts of persons are seen to smoke in Flanders,
even to the religious men and women.

The Bull of Jubilee of the holy year, which is celebrated from twenty five to
twenty five years, was published at Paris at the beginning of the month of March
in the year 1677. At the same time also was published the Jubilee of the
Exaltation of cu^ holy Father Innocent the Eleventh. The first Jubilee lasted
two months, the other a fortnight; whereof we have spoken in the Tract of Italy.

At the beginning of April, Cambray and St. Omer were reduced to the Obedience
of his most Christian Majesty. St. Omer the second Town of the County of Artois
is seated on the River Aa.

The 11th of April, Philip of France got the Battle of Cassel.

The 14th of July the King received a Courier from the Marshal de Navaille who
commanded the Army in Catalonia, bringing news of a great advantage gained by
the Kings Army over the Spanish Troops commanded by Comte de Monteri Viceroy
in Catalonia.

In the same year the Town of Arles, which was once the Capital of the Kingdom
of Arles and of Burgundy, raised for the glory of the King in the middle of the
Place a stately Obelisque, which was found buried in the Gardens of Madam de
l'Hote, situate in the Trenches of the Town. The Sieur Roubin Member of the
French Academy of this Town, presented the Draught to his Majesty. The
Obelisque is fifty two foot high, without comprizing the Pedestal, which is
seven foot diameter all of a piece.

The 25th of October of the same year 1677. Messire Etienne Daligre Chancellor
and Keeper of the Seals of France, died at Versailles in the house of Chancery,
aged eighty five years and a half.

The 27th the King created Chancellor and Keeper of the Seals of France,
Messire Michel le Tellier, who took the Oath presented him by his Majesty the
29th following.

The indefatigable Marshal de Crequi, who has gloried in exposing himself for a
long time in the dangers of War, whereof he carries many honorable marks on
his body, for the service of our Monarch, has performed according to his wont,
Military actions worthy of his Courage and Valor, and particularly in the
Campaign of 1677. against the Imperialists. The taking of the Town and Citadel
of Fribourg in Brisgaw by this Marshal, deserves to be particularized. This
important place opens the Hereditary Countries, takes from the Emperor a part
of his Dominion. Fribourg has belonged to the Dukes of Zeuringuen, and
afterward to Comte Egon of Fustemberg for having married Agnes their Heiress;
his Descendants were Masters of it to the year 1386. The Inhabitants of the
Town gave up themselves to the Duke of Austria. Marshal Horn and the Duke of
Weimar besieged and took this place three times for the Swedes, An. 1632, 1634,
1638.

Marshal d'Humieres reduced to the Kings Obedience the Town of Saint Guillain,
by his Valor and Forecast, the tenth of December of the same year 1677. This
place is about two leagues from Mons; its Abbot is Lord Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Abbey is the chief of Hainalt.

The 12th the Count d'Estrees having taken the Forts which the Hollanders held
in the Isle of Gorea at Cape-Vert, made himself Master, after a long
Navigation, of the Isle of Tobago, and of many Duch Men of War.

An. 1678. the first day of March, the Town of Gand, Capital of the Country of
Flanders, was invested by the Marshal d'Humieres, and taken by his most
Christian Majesty on composition the ninth of the same month, and the Citadel
the twelfth. Julius Caesar caused this great Town to be built whilst he was at
Terouanne, and the Emperor Charles the Fifth was born and baptized there An.
1500. his Cradle is yet shown there. His Statue is seen in a Marketplace on a
Pedestal. The Episcopal Church is called S. Bavon; the Bishopric is worth
30000 Crowns, and the Prebendries 2 or 3000 Livres. Father Boussingout relates
that the Organ of the Church of Saint Michael has three thousand Pipes, in a
Book entitled The Guide of the Low Countries. The most Christian King gave the
Government of this place to Comte de Montbron. It was restored to his Catholic
Majesty by the Treaty of Peace concluded at Nimegen betwixt France and Spain.
In this Town a Cathedral-Church was built and detacht from Tornai, An. 1559. by
Pope Paul the Fourth, at the request of Philip the Second King of Spain.

The 16th of March 1678. the King judged it convenient for the good of his
affairs, to withdraw his Troops from Messina, which he had a long time kept
there for the service of those of Messina, who had implored his assistance. The
Duke de la Fueillade who succeeded the Duke of Vivonne, permitted above four
thousand Inhabitants of the Town to embarque themselves, they being desirous to
come into France to avoid the rigorous consequences of the Spanish Policy.

The third of May the Town of Ypres surrendered it self to the King; it has the
title of a Vicounty. His Majesty gave the Government to the Marquess de la
Trousse, Lieutenant General of his Armies, Captain-Lieutenant of the Company of
M. le Dauphin.

The third of May the Town and Fort of Lewe in Brabant were taken from the
Spaniards by the Valor and Dexterity of the Sieurs Calvo and de la Breteche;
this person executed the Enterprise. This place is encompassed with a Marsh, a
great Trench, and a Fore-trench full of water twelve foot deep. The fifty
Swimmers under the conduct of the Sieur de Cremeau, Captain in the Regiment of
Piemont, did a bold action in passing courageously the waters with their Swords
betwixt their teeth, being assisted by two hundred Musketeers, who openly
advancing themselves, fired continually on the Enemies to favourize the passage.

The 31th of the same month the Marshal Duke de Navaille took Puicerda, Capital
of Cerdaigne. The King lessened six millions of Livres of the Tailles of the
year 1678. and reduced them from forty millions to thirty four, to be
distributed or divided in all the Generalities and Countries Taillables. His
most Christian Majesty lessened them yet more by two millions, An. 1679. The
Tailles began under St. Louis to maintain the charge of War against the
Infidels in the twelfth age; and the Gabelle or Impost on the Salt under Philip
called the Long, in the thirteenth age of the Incarnation. Ancus Martius
introduced it a long time before at Rome; he has been blamed by some, and
approved by others, particularly the Emperor Justinian, who assured that
without the Gabelle it was impossible to make the Republic subsist, because
the Quiet of the People is preserved by Arms, Arms by Pay, Pay by Imposts,
Tributes, and Tolls. The Emperor Nero would have abolished the Gabelle, but
the Senate opposs'd it, alleging that to diminish the public Revenue was to
ruin the Empire.

In the month of July of the same year 1678. an ill Accident happened in
America to the French Squadron commanded by the Count d'Estrees, six or seven
Men of War and five Flyboats were lost near the Isle of Birds about ten leagues
from Curassow, being cast by the rapidness of the Currents on Rocks, which are
there high. Many persons in them were drowned. Seven Vessels were saved, viz.
the Duke, the Thunder, the Star, the Lion, the Vigilant, the Merillon, the
Tempest; three Fireships and two Flutes.

Of the Peace betwixt France, Holland, Spain, the Emperor, the Elector of
Brandenburg, and Denmark.
THe Treaty of Peace betwixt France and Holland was signed at Nimegen at the
house of the Marshal d'Estrades, An. 1678. the tenth of August, about midnight.
The French and the Dutch embraced each other with tenderness, and showed a
great Joy to see their ancient Friendship perfectly reestablisht. The Marshal
d'Estrades, Son of the Marshal of this name, arrived the 15th of the same month
from Nimegen at Saint Germains in Lay, where he presented his most Christian
Majesty the Treaty of Peace betwixt France and the States General of the United
Provinces. The Ratifications were exchanged the 20th of September, and the 29th
following the Peace was published at Paris with the accustomed Ceremonies. The
5th of October the Marshal d*Estrades Ambassador of the most Christian King,
and the Sieur Beverning Ambassador of the Estates General, caused public
Rejoycings to be made at Nimegen for the Peace betwixt France and Holland.

In the same year, the 17th of September, the Treaty of Peace betwixt France
and Spain was signed at Nimegen about eleven of the clock at night, in the
house of the Holland-Embassadours. The Ratification followed some time after,
as also the publication.

An. 1679. the 5th of Febrnary, the Treaty of Peace betwixt France and the
Emperor was signed in the Chamber of Sir Leoline Jenkins Ambassador of
England, by the Marshal d'Estrades, and the Sieur Colbert Marquess of Croissi,
Ambassadors Plenipotentiaries for the most Christian King, and by the Bishop
and Prince de Gurk, Count Kinski, and the Sieur Stracman, Ambassadors
Plenipotentiaries for the Emperor. Signor Bevilaqua the Popes Nuncio, has the
reputation of having much contributed to this Peace. The Treaty of Peace
betwixt the Emperor and the King of Sweden was signed the same day by the
Plenipotentiaries of the Emperor, and by Count Oxenstern and Sieur Oliwenkans
Ambassadors Plenipotentiaries of Sweden. The 19th of April the Ratification of
the Emperor was exchanged with that of the most Christian King. The 26th this
Peace was published at Paris with the ordinary Ceremonies.

The 29th of June the Sieur Pomponne Minister and Secretary of State, and the
Sieur Minders Envoy Extraordinary of the Elector of Brandenburg, signed the
Treaty of Peace betwixt his most Christian Majesty and the Elector of
Brandenburg. Some time after the Peace was likewise signed betwixt France,
Sweden, Denmark, and the Duke of Holstein Gottorp.

The Marriage of the Princess Mary-Louise of Orleans with the King of Spain.
ANno 1679. the second of July, after the suit which the Marquess de los
Balbazez made of Mademoiselle in the name for the King of Spain, the Chancellor
of France, the Marshal Duke de Villeroy, the Sieurs Colbert and de Pomponne,
Ministers and Secretaries of State, were nominated by the King for drawing the
Articles of the Contract of Marriage; which was signed the ninth by the
Commissaries nominated, and the Marquess de los Balbazez Ambassador
Extraordinary of Spain.

The 26th of August the Contract of Marriage of the King of Spain was signed in
the King of France's Closet by all the Royal House, and by the Marquess de los
Balbazez, and afterward the Affiances were made by Cardinal Bouillon great
Almoner of France. The Ceremony of the Marriage was performed in the Chapel of
the House of Fontainebleau.

The 20th of September the Queen of Spain parted from Fontainebleau for Spain;
she went into a Coach with the King, the Queen, M. le Dauphin, Monsieur and
Madame; they went together two leagues on the way, and parted from each other
after having bid an Adieu very tenderly. Her Catholic Majesty, accompanied
with Monsieur and Madam, went on her way; the Marquess and Marchioness de los
Balbazez went the Journey with her.

The 30th of December of the year beforementioned 1679. was signed at Munic
the Contract of Marriage of M. le Dauphin with the Electoral Princess of
Bavaria, Mary An-Christian Victoir.

A Continuation of Affairs of this time.
THe King re-establisht by an Edict of 1679. the study of the Civil Law, which
had not been taught since the Ordinance of Blois of the year 1579. Messieurs
Boucherat and de Bezons, Counselors of State, who were nominated Commissioners
for determining the difficulties which might hinder the execution of the Edict,
were present at the Harang which the Sieur Deloy Professor made the 17th of
December in the Schools of Law, to thank his Majesty for the favor granted.
Some time after, the King, to render more flourishing the study of the Civil
Law of Paris, made a Society of twelve Doctors, who took the Oath tendered them
by the same two Counselors of State, nominated Commissaries for this effect;
the Sieurs Boccager and le Gendre are of the number of the associated Doctors
for their particular merit. His most Christian Majesty appointed 200000 Livres
to be distributed in the Diocesses of Narbonne, Beziers, Agde, and S. Pons, by
reason of the Damages that they had suffered by the drought of the same year.

An. 1680. on the 15th of January, the Contract of Marriage of Louis Armand de
Bourbon, Prince of Conti, with Mademoiselle de Blois, Ann Mary de Bourbon, was
signed in the Kings Chamber; the next day after Cardinal Bouillon performed the
Ceremony of Marriage in the Chapel of the House of S. Germain in Lay.

The King nominated Abbot Hervaux to the Office of Auditor of the Rota,
possessed before by Messire Charles de Bourlemont.

LORAIN.
LOrain, Lotharingia, took its name from Lotharius, Grandchild of the Emperor
Charlemagne.

The Ducal and Sovereign House of Lorain contains many Escotcheons, over all a
Bend Gules, charged with three Alerions Argent, in memory of Godefroy de
Bouillon, who at one sole shoot of an Arrow broacht three little Birds on it.
Its Princes bear also in their Arms the Cross of Jerusalem, by reason of their
pretenses to the two Sicilies, whereof the Kings were also Kings of Jerusalem.
Lorain has for capital City Nancy; two Duchies, that of Lorain, and that of
Bar. They count there three Bailiwicks or Seats of Judicature, to wit, that of
Nancy, that of Germany Lorain, and that of Vauge. These Bailiwicks comprize a
great many Lands and Lordships, as the County of Vaudemont, the Marquisat
Nomeni, the Marquisat Hatonchatel, the Lordships of Epinal on the Moselle,
Marsal, Blamont, Salverdin, Boulai, etc.

Charles the Fourth Duke of Lorain, Uncle of Charles the Fifth, Son of Francis
Count of Vaudemont, was deprived of his Estates for some years, and restored to
them upon the general Peace by special Articles the 3d of March 1661.

The King of France and the King of Spain have been Masters, the one of the
Estates of this Prince, and the other of his Person.

Henry the Second King of France, conquered Metz, Toul, and Verdun; these three
Towns were straightly united to the Crown of France by the Treaty of Munster, and
by that of the Pyreneans.

Louis the Thirteenth conquered the Town Bar le Duc, and all the Country of
Barrois, and also the strong places Moyenvic, Stenai, Dun, Jametz, and the
County of Clermont, which ought to continue incorporated to France, according
to the Treaty of Peace made in the Isle of Faisans 1659.

Louis the Fourteenth on consideration of this Peace restored Prince Charles to
the possession of the Duchy of Lorain, after having caused his Fortifications
of Nancy to be demolished, on condition that the Duke should leave off all
Leagues, Intelligences, Associations, and Practices with any Prince whatsoever;
which having not performed, his Majesty dispossessed him. Since this Treaty of
Peace, Duke Charles has yielded up to the most Christian King the Property and
Sovereignty of his Duchy of Lorain and Bar.

The most learned Genealogists draw the Origin of the House of Lorain from
above 2000 years. It descends from Echinoal Maire of the Palace under Clovis
the Second King of France 648. It Is the same Family with that of Austria at
present. Its Princes repair not to the Diets of the Empire, fearing lest they
should not have that place allowed them which they pretend to conformable to
their Birth.

The Duchy of Bar is a Fief holding of the Crown of France.

The chief Towns of Lorain are
NAncy, Mireout, Luneville, Spinal, Remiremont, Diuze, Valdegrange, Rosieres,
Neufchatel, etc.

Those of the Duchy of Bar,
BAr le Duc, S. Mihiel, Pont-Amousson, Stenay, Estein, Vizelise, Moyenvic,
Commerci. Pont-Amousson has the title of University; its principal Founder was
Prince Charles the Third.

The Country Messin contains a great many Towns, Buroughs, Villages, Hamlets,
Castles, etc.

At Luneville near Rosieres there is a fair House of Pleasure belonging to the
Dukes of Lorain.

Mausoleums of the Dukes of Lorain.
THeir Tombs are in diverse Abbeys, to wit, in that of Clairlieu, Clairfountain,
Beaupre; and since these three hundred years at Nancy, at S. Georges, and at
the Cordeliers.

There are in Lorain four famous Abbeys of Ladies Canonesses, to wit, of
Remiremont, Epinal, Poussai, and Boussiere: these Ladies may marry themselves,
excepting the Abbesses, and others of the chief; they are of Noble extraction.

Lorain is very fertile both in Corn, Wine, and Pasturage; it brings forth good
Horses, and diverse Animals: Venison is almost as common as Beef in a great many
Butchers stalls.

Fish abound there by reason of the River Maes, and other Rivers very full of
them, as the Moselle, the Sare, the Meurte, and the Selle.

This issues from the Pond Indre, of which the Carps alone bring its Master
once in three years 16000 Livres of Rent, as it has been attested to me by some
of the chief Officers of the late Prince Charles the Fourth. The other Ponds
are considerable; there are four or five of this greatness.

If Switzerland has great Lakes, Lorain has Ponds very full of Fish. A Lake is
distinguished from a Pond or Marsh, that the first is a deep water, and has
Springs which never dry; and a Pond is a gathering together of waters more
subject to diminish: Ponds are emptied, but not Lakes.

This Country has Salt-works of a great revenue. Rosieres, Dieuze, Marsal,
Moyenvic, Salone and Chasteau are places of Salt-works: and excellent Baths,
particularly those of a place called Plombieres, whose warm waters are of a
great virtue; it is a work of the Romans. The Salt-work of Dieuse furnishes Salt
to Alsatia; that of Rosieres, to the three Bishoprics. They make no farther
use of Marsal and Salone, because the others supply abundantly. The Switzers
take their Salt in Franche Comte.

The Mountains are filled with Mines of Brass, Lead, Silver, Alabaster, and
particularly of Iron.

The Forests are full of Game. We see there Glass-houses; the Sieur de
Rochefort says, in his Book of Voyages, T. 4. p. 374. That there is sometimes
danger in seeing them alone when they are in a retired place in the Woods,
because the Workmen may throw a man into the Furnace to make their Glass as
clear and beautiful as Crystal: wherefore in regard he would not that they
tried it on him, he contented himself with seeing that of Venice, and went on
his way. The Lorainers will not grant this Article.

The Soil is so disposed to bring forth Trees, that if it were not tilled it
would all run up to a Forest.

All Lorain is forty leagues in length, and thirty in breadth.

An. 1220. one of its Dukes Matthew the Second, caused an evil Justice to be
flayed by reason of the Thefts he had committed, and his Skin to be put on the
Judicial Seat for his Son to sit on, to whom he gave the Office, and the
terror of being used after the like manner. This Prince followed the Example
of Cambyses King of Persia; with this difference, that he caused the Judge
Chunrad to be flayed after his death; but the other caused Sisames to be flayed
alive. The House of Lorain has yielded many Saints.

The Marriage of Prince Charles of Lorain.
PRince Charles the Fifth is married with the Queen Dowager of Poland, the
Sister of the Emperor Leopold; the Bishop Count Kalonitz gave them the Nuptial
Benediction, assisted with two other Bishops, in the presence of their Imperial
Majesty's and of all the Court, in the Church of Loretta of Neustad: The
Marriage was consummated the sixth of February 1678.

The tenth of February the King of Spain honored Prince Charles the Fifth
abovementioned with the Collar of the Order of the Golden Fleece.

GERMANY.
LEopold the First of the name of the House of Austria, Emperor of Germany,
was born the 9th of June 1640. was chosen King of Hungary An. 1655. King of
Bohemia An. 1656. elected King of the Romans An. 1658. and crowned Emperor at
Francfort on the Main An. 1659. where the three Ecclesiastical Electors and the
Elector Palatine repaired; the others sent thither their Ambassadors; as also
the King of France, the King of Spain, and others.

The Emperors of Germany are Catholics.

The Empire bears Or, an Eagle displayed sable, membred, langued, becked, and
adorned with a Diadem Gules.

It has for Device, Vno avulso non desicit alter.

The Livery of the Emperors of the House of Austria is yellow.

The 14th of October 1676. the Emperor Leopold, some time after the death of
the Empress Margaret of Austria, Daughter of Philip the Fourth King of Spain,
and Sister of the Queen of France, declared for his future Spouse the Princess
Mary Magdalen-Therese-Eleonor of Newburg. The Marriage was consummated at
Passau the 14th of December following. The Bishop of that Town blessed it,
assisted with two Prelates; he of Aicstad was of the number.

Their Imperial Majesty's made their solemn Entries at Vienna the 20th of
January 1677. The Canons of the Arsenal were carried on the Ramparts, and all
the Citizens put themselves in Arms by the order of the Magistrate.

Count Montecuculi was declared Prince of Amalfo the 31th of March 1678.

The 26th of July of the same year, on the day of S. Anne, the Empress was
brought to bed of a Prince, who is called the Archduke of Austria. He was given
at the Font of Baptism the names of Joseph, James, John, Ignatius, Antony, and
Eutache. The Duchess of Newburg presented to the Empress her Daugher a Bed and
a Cradle of silver.

Vienna in Austria on the Danubins is the Capital City, and the ordinary place
of residence of the Emperor. His Palace is August, though it appears very
ancient. It has four Pavilions.

The chief Imperial Houses of Pleasure in the Country.
LVxembourg, Favorites, Neustad, Kanisburg, Ebersdorf, and others.

The Church of the Capucins of Vienna is the ordinary bural place of the
Emperors of the House of Austria in a Vault, and many Obsequies are solemnized
for three days in the Church of the little discalceated Augustins. The
Cathedral-Church is dedicated to S. Steven.

The Coronation of the Emperor, with the signification of the three Crowns.
THe Emperor is crowned ordinarily with three sorts of Crowns; the first is of
Iron, the second of Silver, the third of Gold. The Crown of Iron denotes the
Strength which an Emperor ought to have, that of Silver signifies the
Pureness, that of Gold the Charity. The Emperors formerly went to Milan to
receive the Crown of Silver, and to Rome for that of Gold; at present they go
no longer: the Pope confirms the Election and Coronation. Since Charles the
Fifth, no Emperor has been crowned by the hands of his Holiness. At Aix la
Chappelle is kept the Crown of Iron, with one of Silver; and at Nuremberg many
Ornaments which are made use of at the Coronation of the Emperors. There are
to be seen there the Dalmatica of Charlemagne, the Imperial Mantle, the Globe,
the golden Scepter and the Sword; the golden Bull also, enjoining him that is
elected Emperor to receive at Aix la Chappelle the first Crown which is of
Iron; and if he receives it elsewhere, the Imperial Ornaments are carried
thither, and a great Sword after the Persian fashion.

The Emperor, after his Coronation, receives the Oath from the Imperial Towns;
the Town of Strasburg refused it, praying Count de Hanau, who had Orders to
receive it for Leopold, to assure the Emperor that they would continue within
the bounds of Duty and Acknowledgment toward his Imperial Majesty; but that
having not taken an Oath to any of his Predecessors for three hundred years,
they would not swear, and could not innovate any thing. You may see thereon
Louis du May Knight, in his Book of the State of the Empire, T. 1. p. 365. and
T. 2. p. 203.

The Emperor does not command absolutely out of his Hereditary Countries, but
governs by the way of Diets, which are General Assemblies, and as it were
Estates General. He is the Chief of the Empire, and the Electors are the
principal Members. His hereditary Estates are those of Austria and Bohemia;
those of Hungary are Elective.

The Golden Bull.
THe Constitutions of the Empire are contained in the Golden Bull, which is a
little Book; its Original is writ on Parchment, containing twenty four Leaves,
and thirty Chapters; the twenty three first were published at Nuremberg 1356.
the tenth of January, and the other seven at Metz in the same year on
Christmas Day.

This Book treats of the Election of the King of the Romans, of the Ceremonies
that ought to be observed in the Election of the Emperor, and of his
Authority, of the Devoir and Privileges of the Electors and other Officers of
the Empire, and also of the means to preserve Peace.

The Emperor Charles the Fourth of the House of Luxembourg, made this Bulle,
called by his name the Caroline, in the presence and with the consent of the
greatest part of the Princes, Lords, and other Estates of the Empire.

This Edict comprehending the Fundamental Laws of the Empire, was sealed with a
great round Seal, not on Wax, nor on Lead, nor on Silver, but on Gold, to show
that as this Metal is incorruptible, and the noblest of all, so that the Laws
which this Bulle contains, being the principal of the Empire, ought not to be
changed.

The Seal is fastened to red and yellow Strings of Silk; on one side of it
there is the Effigies of the Author seated in his Throne, vested with the
Imperial Mantle, the Crown on his head, the Septer in one hand, and the Globe
of the Empire in the other, with this Inscription, Carolus IV. divina favente
Clementia Romanorum Imperator semper Augustus, and Bohemiae Rex. On the other
side there is a Castle with two Towns and this Devise, Aurea Roma: and in the
circumference, Roma Caput Mundi regit orbis fraena rotundi. There is an
Inscription on both sides, because the Seal is impressed and engraved on both
sides on a great Medal hanging beneath the Bulle.

It is reported of this Prince, that in recompensing the Treason of three
Captains of Philip of Austria, his Enemy, as they deserved, he caused them to
be paid 600000 Crowns which he had promised them; but it was in false Coin: The
Traitors complaining, the Emperor said to them, Go too, false Money is well
enough for those who have falsified their Faith to their Prince.

Prerogatives of the Emperor.
THe chief Prerogatives of the Emperor are to create Kings; to require the
Towns of the Empire by Proclamation to attend him on occasion; to give the
Investiture of Fiefs, the Power of Legitimating, and other Privileges.

Fourteen Emperors of the House of Austria.
THe Empire has been in diverse Houses, according to the pleasure of the
Electors. There are counted fourteen Emperors of the House of Austria, to
Leopold reigning at present.

The first was Rodolphus of Alsatia Earl of Habsbourg. Writers take notice of
him for that before his Election, as he was hunting, a Priest carrying the
Sacrament to a dying Peasant, he alighted off his horse, and made the Priest
get up upon him, and afterward taking the horse by the reins he accompanied the
Sacrament a long, difficult, and troublesome way, till he came to the Hut of
the poor sick person. This extraordinary act of Piety and Religion has been so
well recompensed by God, that since that time this house is aggrandiz'd and
rendered Illustrious throughout the whole Earth. The Castle of Habsbourg, the
original Seat of the Emperors of the House of Austria, is two leagues from
Bale; there are now only the Ruins to be seen, the Switzers not suffering it
to be rebuilt.

The chief Towns of Germany.
VIenna, Prague, Presburg, Aix la Chappelle, Ratisbonne, Erfort, Dresden,
Munic, Strasbourg, Hambourg, Mayence, Cologne, Treves, Munster, Magdeburg,
Lubec, Nuremberg, Ausburg, Heyldeburg, Francfort on the Meine, Passau,
Visbourg, Brunsvic, Inspruch, Bremen, Brandenburg, Berlin, Hanover, Francfort
on the Oder, and others.

The four Wood-land-Towns, Valdshouet, Lauffembourg, Seckinge, and Reinfeld,
are so called because they are built in Woods.

The four Rustic Towns are Cologne, Ratisbonne, Constance, and Saltzbourg.

Vienna is a Bulwark of Christendom against the Turks; the Emperor Ferdinand
the Third, and Leopold Ignatius his Son, fortified it with large and deep
Trenches, growing broader and broader from the bottom to the top, with twelve
great Bastions, and high Ramparts. There are but six Gates to pass into this
Town, and they are always shut before Sunset: those that come late from
walking, enter by a Wicket at the Gate of Italy, which they must open with a
silver Key. Solomon the Second Emperor of the Turks, besieged this Town with
300000 men the 26th of September of the year 1529. and was forced to raise the
Siege the 14th of October following, after having lost there a great part of
his Soldiers, some say fourscore thousand men. A great number of Bassa's and
other Commanders heads were planted on the Walls of this place, which
vigorously held out twenty Assaults. Notwithstanding this firm Resistance,
Solomon would not withdraw himself till they had permitted him to cause the
Crescent to be set up in Vienna: this was accorded him pro bono pacis, and as a
Memorial of this Siege. The Crescent is to be seen on the Pyramidal point of
the Steeple of the Cathedral-Church of S. Steven. The Town was not then
fortified as it is at present, being now the strongest of all Germany. Its
Bishop is Suffragan of the Archbishop of Saltzburg, who has eleven. The
University of Vienna was founded by Albert the Third. There are seen in the
Emperors Library fourscore and seven Paper-writings hung up, where it is
exactly treated of the University of Paris, of its Statutes, and Privileges.
The Plague destroyed An. 1679. a world of people at Vienna, and in all Austria.

Prague is the Capital City of the Kingdom of Bohemia, whereof we shall speak
elsewhere.

Presburg is the Capital of that part of the Kingdom of Hungary which the
Emperor of Germany possesses there, since the loss of Ofen or Buda, occupied
by the Great Turk. Komorre and Javarrin are two Bulwarks of Christendom on that
side. This Kingdom contained formerly Transylvania, Valachia, and Moldavia;
thence it is that the two Emperors of the West and East pretend each that the
Princes of these three Estates receive from them the Investiture. Attila King
of the Huns and Hongarians, is very famous in History for using Fire and Sword
wherever he came. He styled himself Son of Mundizic of the Race of the Great
Nimrod, Native of Engad, and through the divine bounty King of the Huns, Goths,
Medes, and Danes, the Terror of the World, and the Scourge of God. This Enemy
of Mankind marched with an Army of five hundred thousand men; France forced him
to retreat, and killed him a hundred and fifty thousand men at Arms under
Merovius, being seconded by Aetius a Roman Patricius, and with Theodoric King
of the Westergoths, An. 454. In Hongary they call the Horsemen Hussars, and
the Foot-Souldiers Heiduques.

Aix la Chappelle has the first place in the Diets of the Empire. Charlemagne
made it the head of his Empire on this side the Alps: he was there born, and
there died. There are seen without the Town hot and cold Baths, which are famed
as being Medicinal. Its Inhabitants pay no Toll in any place of the Empire.
Marshal de Crequi made himself Master of this place for his most Christian
Majesty, An. 1678. By order of the Magistrate the Physicians there An. 1680.
Anatomized of a Fountain which is in the Town; they examined its nature and
qualities, and found by the taste and by the places where it passes, that it
comes from Iron, and that the use of this Water, which is cold, is a specific
Remedy for curing a Dropsy arising through an inflammation of the Liver, the
obstructions of that part, and those of the Spleen and Reins; as also the
Hypochondriack affects, the Gravel, the Jaundise, the Green Sickness, and other
Distempers.

Ratisbonne is the place prefixed for the Diets, which render it one of the most
famous and pleasant Towns of Germany; a great many Persons of Quality live
there, that they may see the Diets that are there held of the whole Empire; and
for this reason many Palaces and beautiful Edifices are there built. Its Bridge
over the Danubius is admirable in its Architecture, in the greatness of the
stones whereof it is made, and in its length. Its entrace and passage forth are
fenced with two Towers, whose Gates are guarded with a Corpse du Guard.
Strangers are there examined strictly concerning the cause of their coming,
before they enter the City. The Germans call this Town Regensburg; it is
situated in the lower Bavaria.

Erfort is the first of the Landgraviat of Thuringia, which appertains to the
House of Saxony, as also Dresden. There is another Town called Erfort, which
the late Archbishop of Mayence reduced under his obedience some years since,
assisted by the French Forces, and by the Sieur de Pradel Governor of S.
Quentin.

Munic belongs to the Elector of Bavaria: This Town is in the upper Bavaria;
it is very pleasant, and finely fortified with high Ramparts, large Trenches
full of flowing waters, strong Walls, great Bastions, and many Draw-bridges.

Strasbourg a Free and Imperial Town in lower Alsatia, is famous throughout all
Germany; the two Rivers Ill and Brusche water it: it is half a league from the
Rhine, and has the title of University; the Emperor gave it great Privileges,
An. 1622.

There is seen there a pyramidial Tower of stone hollowed open to the day,
which is esteemed by many persons the highest of all Europe: It is 574 foot
high, and some say, has 630 steps by which men ascend inwardly to the top,
where the Inhabitants always keep a man Centry, who sees above four leagues
distance all round the Town.

Its Clock passes for the finest and most admirable of the whole World, in the
esteem of many persons; the great number of its Wheels and Machines gives a
motion to all the Constellations: There are seen the periods of the Planets,
and their middle stations every hour; the Eclipses, the Days of the Month, the
Moveable Feasts; a Child who strikes the first quarter of an hour with one
stroke on a Bell, a Youth the second with two, a Man full grown the third with
three, an old Man the last with four; then Death issues forth and rings the
hour with his little Bell, and the Son of God who passes before the Figures
which represent the four Ages of Life: the little Bells chime there, and the
Cock crows all the hours of the day and night. The Cathedral-Church is adorned
with this high Tower, and this famous Clock.

Persons who go to Strasbourg see out of curiosity a Tree of a prodigious
bigness, on the top of which a Tavern is kept.

Travelers go to see its Bridge on the Rhine, half a league from the Town,
which is said to be above twelve hundred paces in length; it is kept strictly
since three of its Arches were burnt. This caution hindered not Marshal de
Crequi from making himself Master of it. It is of Wood, and covered with the
same matter: it seems to me dangerous, because it has no side-Rail, and that it
cannot be passed over on Horseback without shaking.

This Town is governed as a Republic; it is very strong, and has a good
Arsenal: Its Canons are famed throughout all Germany. It is all Lutheran,
except a Convent of Religious Women, where Catholics may hear Mass. According
to what Seldom reports, L. 1. De Statu Religionis, Carolo V. Imperante,
Strasbourg continued without any Mass one and twenty years; it was
re-establisht An. 1550.

The Episcopal See is transferred to Molsheim four leagues thence, not by a
Bull of some Pope, but through necessity. Its Bishop, who is Prince of the
Empire, resides ordinarily in the Town of Saverne, whereof he is Lord spiritual
and temporal.

The Ceremony observed in the Electioa of the Bishop.
THe Bishop is chosen by its Chapter. The time of Election being come, the
Chapter goes three solemn Processions; the first for the Election, the second
for the Consecration of him that is chosen, the third for the Preservation of
his Person. The Canons appear on these days of Ceremony with splendor, in
splendoribus Sanctorum. Each in an orderly distance has following him, in
emulation of his fellow-Brothers, great number of Persons of Quality, Officers,
Domestics, and Attendants. They have Train-bearers to carry the Train of their
Gowns, which are extraordinary long, being of Crimson-Velvet; and they have a
Cap of the same Stuff.

The number of the Canons.
THe Chapter is composed of twenty four Canons, Princes or Counts of the
Empire: There are moreover Protestant Canons who have their Revenue apart, and
who are not capitulary. These reside at Strasbourg. Four Protestant Princes are
Canons, the Dukes of Brunswick, of Mekelbourg, of Witemberg,, and the Marquess
of Dourlan. They value not their Canonships, but to be Members of the Chapter.

The limited Residence of the Canons.
THe Catholic Canons are not obliged every year but to thirteen weeks
residence at Molsheim to enjoy their Revenue, so they are in the Diocese in any
place whatsoever.

The ancient Entrance of the Bishop at Strasburg.
WHile the Town of Strasburg was Catholic, the Bishop incontinently after his
Consecration made there his public Entrance, where he was received as its
Prince. This Ceremony is no longer practiced, by reason of the pretentions
which the Bishop has on Strasburg, which does not own him but as Prince of the
Empire.

The number of its Prelates.
THis Town has had eighty four Bishops from Justus or Justin to his Highness
Francis Egon, who styles himself Bishop and Prince of Strasburg, Landgrave of
Alsacia and of Furstemberg, Count of Heiligenberg, Wertemberg, and Loigne. He
succeeds Leopold William of Austria. This Bishopric is endowed with two
hundred thousand Livres of revenue. The same Historiographer of Brandenburg,
whom I have cited elsewhere, has observed in his Researches, that the Emperor
Rodolphus the First used Henry Count of Furstemberg as his near Relation; and
to express to him the extraordinary affection wherewith he honored him, he
said, that he was the bone of his bones, and the flesh of his flesh. They are
the terms which God made use of to make known the Bond which ought to be
betwixt persons nearest allied, viz. Man and Wife married together.

Hambourg Capital City of the Duchy of Olsatia, is governed also as a
Republic; it is entirely for Trade, and rich, strong by Sea and Land: The
Danes and Swedes have many times besieged it separately, and it has always
defended it self. There has been completed of late years a Channel for the
joining of the Oder and the Elb for the transportation of their Merchandise
which comes to Hambourg by Sea, both to avoid the Sound at the entrance of the
Baltic Sea, where they were fain to pay a Tribute to the King of Denmark for
their Merchandise, and to shorten a great reach at Sea which they were forced
to make. This Town is Lutheran, and has a public Library which is open twice a
day, in the morning and after dinner. It has also two Synagogues of Jews,
amongst whom Manuel Tessera is esteemed there ichest of Germany; he is judged to
have five or six millions; he is called the rich Jew. France keeps a Resident
in this Town; it is the Sieur Bidal. We shall speak elsewhere of Mayence,
Cologne, Treves, Magdeburg, Lubec, Heildeberg, and some others.

Munster is the Capital City of Westphalia; it is called in Latin Monasterium,
by reason of a Monastery which was made an Episcopal Church. Thence it is that
at present its Inhabitants are called Monasterians. Its Bishop is a Prince of
the Empire; the Emperor Charlemagne gave him the Principality, on condition of
paying Homage to the Empire. Its last Bishop save one, Christopher Bernard de
Galen, kept a good Garrison in the Citadel which he built. This Prelate died
An. 1678. his life was Military; wherefore being in danger of dying, An. 1674.
some person made on him this Epitaph:

Now in his Tomb will rest from strife,
Who never rested in his life.
An. 1678. his Coadjutor the Bishop of Paterborn took the government of this
Bishopric, which is worth above two hundred thousand Crowns of annual rent, as
we are assured. The Townsmen keep the Town of Munster. Many Revolts and
Seditions happened there before the Citadel was built; the Inhabitants shut the
Gates of the Town one day against their Prelate, who entered there with Sword in
hand after nine months siege, An. 1661. Munster is famous as well for the
Treaty of Peace concluded there betwixt the Crowns of Europe, An. 1648. as by
the imaginary Kingdom of the Anabaptists, who made themselves Masters of this
place An. 1534. They created for their King John Buckold a Tailor, vulgarly
called John of Leidon, because he came from thence, or was there born. When he
appeared in public accompanied with his Court, he had two Pages on horseback
by his sides, whereof one carried his Crown and the Bible, and the other his
Sword. He created Judges, to whom he gave imaginary Kingdoms, and sent abroad
in the World twenty eight of his Disciples to preach his Faith, who were all
put to death but one.

This new Tyrant was overcome after a siege of fourteen months standing by the
Bishop of the Town called Francis Count de Valdec, assisted with some Circles
of the Empire, and Buckold was put in a great Iron Cage, to end there his days
miserably.

This Cage is seen on a Tower of the Church of St. Lambert on the outside, with
two others on the two sides of it. I have noted the chief Errors of the
Anabaptists in the Tract of England.

Magdeburg is famous for its Book of Centuries in eight Tomes in Folio,
composed by Matthias, Flacius Illiricus, Johannes Wigandus, Mattheus Judex, and
Basilius Faber. These Centuriators have compiled in this Work the History of
the Church. We shall say somewhat more of this Town in the Article of the
Elector of Savoy.

Nuremberg is a great Town, and of a great Trade; some persons think the
Emperor Nero to be its Founder, and that since it is called Nuremberg. It is
then very ancient.

Ausbourg, Capital of Souabia, is also very ancient, since Caesar Augustus gave
it its name: its Walls are flanckt with many Towers; its Arsenal is very
considerable. The Lutherans presented in this Town to Charles the Fifth their
Confession of Faith, made by Melancthon. Souabia draws its Etymology from
Suevia or Suecia, because the Swedes lived there some time after having first
reduced a part of Germany under their Obedience.

Francfort on the Main is very famous, as well because the Election of the
Emperors is there made, as for its great Fairs and Markets, and also for its
beautiful Palaces.

Francfort on the Oder is the Capital of the new Marcha of Brandeburg.

Passau is divided into three Towns, which are Passau, Instad, and Ilstad,
which compose one very great one. The Bishops Castle is very stately.
Notre-Dame of Passau is famous throughout all Germany for its Miracles; it is
seated in the Church of the Capucins: a man must ascend about three hundred
steps to come to its Altar.

Visbourg is the Capital of Franconia.

Brunswick the chief of a Duchy in lower Saxony: Its Prince who is Sovereign
resides ordinarily at Wolfembutel in a very fair Palace on the River Echer.

Inspruc is the first in dignity of the County of Tirolis, formerly the place
of residence of its Counts, and then of some Archdukes and Princes of Austria.
We see there the August Palace which the Emperor Ferdinand the Second caused
there to be built.

Bremen on the Weser is the Capital of its Duchy; it has the Title of
Archbishopric.

Hanover resembles Nismes in bigness.

Spire in the Country of Austrasia is the Imperial Chamber, which is as the
constant sitting Parliament of the Empire.

The Imperial and Hans-Towns.
THe Free or Franc-Towns, to the number of about eighty four, are Imperial,
because they owe Homage to the Empire, and have in their Arms an Eagle entire
or divided: their Body has two Voices at the Diets of the Empire.

The four Capital Hans-Towns are Lubec, Cologne, Brunswic, and Dantzic. They
are called Hans, because they are divided into four Anses or Corporations, and
that they are particularly associated for Commerce.

The Maritime Towns of Germany, and those which were on the Rivers, trading
with them, made a League to oppose themselves against the Incursions of the
Huns, and other barbarous Nations, for rendering their Commerce free and secure.
The chief Towns from the Gulf of Finland, which is at one end of the Baltic
Sea, to the mouth of the Rhine, entered into this League, and called themselves
Hans, taking their name either from the Theutonick Sea, because they were
situated on this Sea, the word Ansee signifying on the Sea; or from the Oath
made of joining hands for affording each other a mutual assistance, the Germans
calling the hand Han; or else from the Assembly which is held for deliberating
together, called in the old German Tongue Hanza; and in that passage of the
Evangelists where it is said that the Jews held an Assembly against the Son of
God, the German Bible renders the word Assembly by Hanza.

There were received in this Confederation but the Maritime Towns of Germany,
which had right of shutting and opening their Gates, be it that they were
subject to a Prince, or that they were free; some Kings have authorized them.

Sixty six Towns are called Hans, because they are associated and confederated
with the four Capital Hans-Towns. The Archives of the League are at Lubec,
which is the Capital of all the Hans League; it has right of assembling all the
others, with the advice of five confederate Towns that are next it.

Lubec has for its confederate Towns Hambourg, Rostoc, Wismarc, Strasbourg, and
Lunebourg, Stetin, Anclan, Golnous, Gripswal, Colberg, Ptargard, and Stolp:
Cologne, Brunswic, and Dantzic include the others. You may see thereon the
great Atlas, and particularly the Books on this subject of the four Capital
Hans-Towns.

Archbishopricks of Germany.
THe Archbishopricks of Germany are Mayence, Treves, Cologne, Magdeburg,
Saltzbourg, Breme, and Prague.

Chief Bishoprics.
VIsbourg, Bamberg, Strasbourg, Spire, Liege, Munster, Paderborn, Minden,
Hildesheim, Onasbruc, Verden, Halberstat, Brelau; the Cardinal Landgrave of
Hesse occupies this last, which is in Silesia.

The Abbey of Fulde is famous throughout all Europe for its Antiquity, and for
its great Riches; it is certainly affirmed to be worth a million of Livres of
Rent. It is in Buchow, betwixt Hesse, Franconia, and Thuringia. Cardinal de
Bade has possessed it a long time. The three chief Abbeys of the low Countries
are Saint Vaast of Arras, Saint Berlin at St. Omer, and St. Pierre of Mont
Albin at Gand. Cardinal de Bouillon has the first. Germany has few Archbishops,
and few Bishops in comparison of France: some Authors have counted thirty nine,
others thirty six.

Principalities and Lordships of the Empire, and its Division.
THis Empire contains above three hundred Principalities or Lordships.

It is divided into ten Circles; Austria, Bavaria, Souabia, Alsatia or the
upper Rhine, the Electorate of the lower Rhine, Westphalia, upper Saxony, lower
Saxony, Franconia, and Burgundy, compose the ten Circles. Alsatia and Burgundy
belong to France.

These Circles compose the General Diets of the Empire, where all Affairs are
transacted.

The first Body is that of the Electors.

The second the other Princes, be they Lay or Ecclesiastic.

The third is that of the Free or Franc, otherwise Imperial Towns.

The most usual division of Germany is into Upper and Lower; in the Upper are
put the Switzers, Alsatia, Souabia, the Duchy of Witemberg, Bavaria,
Franconia, the Palatinate of the Rhine, Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, Austria,
Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola, and Tirol.

In the Lower, the seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries; Liege, Lorain,
Cleves, Juliers, the three Electoral Archbishopricks, Westphalia, Hesse,
Saxony, Thuringia, Misnia, Lusacia, Silesia, the Marquisate of Brandenburg,
Pomerania, Mekelbourg, Holsacia or the Country of Holstein.

The chief Rivers.
DAnubius, the Rhine, the Elbe, the Oder, and the Veser.

Danubius arises in Souabia: a great Map very exact of Samson Geographer in
Ordinary to the King, shows us its rise in the Principality and County of
Furstemberg. This River contains above sixty Rivers, some say a hundred,
whereof there are about thirty capable of bearing Vessels. It has this
particular with the Po, that it runs from West to East even to its mouth. It is
the greatest and longest of all Europe, excepting the Volga, according to a
Geographer, which flows in Muscovy. Men give Danubius above seven hundred
leagues in its course; it waters above fifty great Towns, without counting an
infinite number of Castles and Buroughs; passes through the Eastern Empire
which the Great Turk possesses in Europe, and that of the West which belongs to
the Emperor of Germany. After having flowed a long while, it discharges it
self into the Euxine Sea, which is called the Black Sea, or Mar Magiore. This
River and the Rhine are not far the one from the other at Constance and
Schashuysen.

The Rhine comes from the Alps of the Grisons; it has two sources which make
each a stream, the one is near a Village called Fort-Rhen, and the other is not
far from Mount S. Gothard. These two Sources, after having flowed separately
some leagues, (some say ten) unite themselves together. This River passes at
Croire and other places before it enters the Lake of Constance; here losing it
self for a while, it issues forth again with violence, and receives the River
Aar, which much enlarges it, because it contains the Waters of great Lakes and
Rivers in Switzerland. The Nekar, the Mosele, the Main, the Lip, and a great
many others, give a great addition to it. An Author says, that sixty two Rivers
enter this. It waters Bale, Brisac, Philipsbourg, Spire, Worms, Mayence,
Cologne, and other Towns. It parts it self into two Channels at Tholus, where
is the famous Fort Schenk. The left Channel is called the Wahal, and joins it
self with the Meuse near its mouth. The Rhine disgorges it self in Holland into
the Ocean; its course is above two hundred and fifty leagues.

They say that the Rhine was placed as a bound betwixt France and Germany; but
Monarchs do not tie themselves to Rules of Geographers, and their Sword does
not always agree with the Compass.

The Elb begins in Bohemia in the Mountains near Schimidberg, passes at
Cogingretz, Toschen, Dresde, Meissen or Mesen, Torgan, Witemberg, Dessau or
Dessan, Magdeburg, Hizaker, Lavembourg, Harbor, Hambourg, and at Glucstad.

Stade is near the Elbe. Elster, Cadburgz, Moldave, Sale, join with this River.

The Oder takes its Origin in Moravia near Dolmutz, which is the Capital of
it, flows at Ratibor, Oppelen, Breslau, Crossen, Francfort, and at Stetin.
Ratibor, Oppelen, and Breslau, are Towns of Silesia. Crossen is the Capital of
the Duchy whose name it bears. Varthe, Noisse, Boler, and other Rivers, join
themselves to the Oder.

The Weser takes its Origin in Saxony of Naumbourg near the Duchy of Saxony
of Altenbourg, passes at Hamelen, Minden, Breme, and other places. Leina, Aler,
Ecker, Inerst, and other Rivers enter into the Weser. Leina waters Hanover,
Aller Zel and Ferden, Ecker Brunswic, Inerst Hildeshein. Some years since the
Duke of Lunebourg took the Town of Brunswick in despite of all the Efforts of
the Duke of this name.

The Electors of the Empire, An. 1679.
THere are counted many Sovereign Princes in Germany, though feudatory to the
Empire. The chief are the Electors, who have power of choosing by their
Suffrages the Emperors of Germany.

The Archbishop and Elector of Mayence.
ANselm Francis Frederic of Inghelheim, Archbishop of Mayence, Prince and
Elector of the Empire, Great Chancellor of Germany, Legate of course of the
holy Apostolic See. Catholic.

He was elected the 7th of November, 1679. being forty years of age. Before his
Election he was Archpriest of Mayence, and Governor of Erfort.

A Wheel Or in a Field Gules and over it an Electoral Cap, compose the Arms of
this Elector.

The first Elector of this Church was called Villigise, Son of a Cartwright:
for evidence of it, he kept, through Humility, a Wheel in his Chamber, to put
him in mind of his Extraction; wherefore his Successors have kept it in
remembrance of him in their Arms.

The Archbishops of Mayence, as Chancellours of the Empire, keep the Archives
of the Empire, and the original Register-books where are registered the names of
all the Princes and Estates who have a Voice in the Diets. When the Emperor is
dead, they give notice to the other Electors, and signify to them a day to set
upon a new Election.

Mayence, Aschaffembourg, are the ordinary places of Residence of this Prelate,
who has thirteen Suffragans; Strasbourg is one.

Of late years there has been united to this Archbishopric the Bishopric and
Principality of Worms.

Mayence has had seventeen Archbishops from S. Boniface to Anselm Francis
Frederick. Forty Bishops preceded them; the first was S. Crescens, and the last
Gervilio.

This Archbishopric yields ordinarily to its Archbishop six or seven hundred
thousand Crowns of Annual Rent; its Dominions contain twenty five Bailiwicks,
and a great many Tolls on the Rhine and on the Main.

This Elector is Dean of the Electoral College, he crowns the Emperor on his
Lands. The Election is made ordinarily at Francfort on the Main, though not by
an indispensable necessity, because the Emperors have formerly received the
Crown at Aix la Chappelle, and of late years at Francfort and elsewhere. The
Elector of Saxony contested the Election with Ferdinand the First, because he
was elected at Cologne.

Mayence, which was formerly an Imperial Town, lost its Privileges by the
Assassinate of Arnold de Zellenoue its Archbishop.

The Chapter is composed of twenty four Capitulary Canons, that is to say, who
have a deliberate Voice; they are all Gentlemen.

I will not pass with silence a thing which passed in this Town An. 745. Its
Prelate Boniface not believing that there were Antipodes, accused of Heresy
before Pope Zachary, of whom he was Legate, Vigilis Bishop of Saltzbourg,
because he had maintained the contrary both in his Pulpit, and in a Book which
he composed; whereat some Churchmen being scandalized, accused him to
Boniface, who caused him to be condemned as an Heretic, alleging that St.
John Chrysostom, S. Austin, and other Fathers of the Church, had not believed a
new World, and that to set up a new, was to introduce a new Jesus Christ.
Zachary writ on this subject two Letters to Boniface, which are inserted in
the general Sum of the Councils. We can no longer doubt of a new World, since
the discovery of Christopher Columbus. It has been said since of this
Archbishop Boniface, that he was as ill a Geometer, as he was a good man.

There is seen in this Diocese an ancient Tower famous in History, called
Meusthur, that is to say, the Tower of Rats, in a Lake, where Hatton the Second
of this name was devoured by these Animals, An. 914. through a divine
punishment. Some Authors relate that they gnawed away even his name wheresoever
they found it.

The Jews were expelled from Mayence, Anno 1433.

The Invention of Printing.
SOme attribute to John Guttemberg Gentleman, Native of Mayence (some say of
Strasbourg) the Invention of Printing, about the year 1440. under Pope Eugenius
the Fourth. Chasteauniere de Grenaille says, that it was in the Town of
Haerlem, sometime an Episcopal Town, where it was invented; that it was
Laurence Coster who first invented this Art, and that after having begun to
work upon it, and having profited and advanced in it, one of his treacherous
Servants called John Faustus pocketed up and carried away to Mayence all the
Letters and other Instruments serving for Printing, in a word, the whole Trade,
in a Christmas-night, whilst his Master and all the Family were at the
Midnight-Mass. Boxhornius, in his Book entitled the Theater of Holland, has
written in favor of Haerlem; as also Petrus Scriverius: Naude has declared
himself for Mayence,

There are seen on the house of the said Laurence Coster, Citizen, Keeper of
the Royal Palace of Haerlem, these words:

MEMORIAE SACRVM.

Typographia Ars Artium omnium Conservatrix, hic Primum Inventa circa annum
1430.

And moreover the Statue of Coster, with this Inscription:

VIRO CONSVLARI. Laurentio Costero Harlemensi, Alteri Cadmo, and Artis
Typographicoe circa annum Domini 1430. Inventori primo, been de literis ac toto
orbi merito, hanc Q. L. Q. C. Statuam, quia oeream non habuit, pro Monumento
posuit gratissimus.
M. Joli, Chanter of the Church of Paris, has very well remarkt, that we must
not think strange of the difference of these two dates 1440. and 1430. which
are in these Inscriptions, because Boxhornius makes the Invention of Printing
more ancient by ten years, telling us that Coster laid the first Foundations,
An. 1420.

The late Dean of Munster, called Malinchrot, maintains that the Invention of
Printing belongs to Mayence: He has composed a Book in Quarto, which has for
title de Ortu and Progressu Artis Typographicoe, which was printed at Cologne,
An. 1639.

Parival says, in his Book entitled Les Delices de la Holland, p. 86. that the
Chinese a long time since invented Printing; that it was polisht at Mayence,
and thence conveyed all over Europe; but that the Honor belongs to Laurence
Coster, and the immortal Glory to Haerlem.

Adrian Junius says, that the first Characters for Printing were of Beech-wood
whereof Coster bethought him, afterward of Lead, then of Tin. Others say, with
more likelihood, that they began to print at Haerlem with Tables of Box, or of
Brass, engraven after the Chinese manner.

The Book entitled Speculum nostroe Salutis, printed at Haerlem and at
Mayence, is very ancient; as also the Catholicum Januense: it is a Latin
Dictionary called Prosodia. It was composed by a Religious man of the Order of
St. Dominick, and printed at Mayence, An. 1460. That of the Dominicans de la
rue S. Honor, is of the year 1629.

The first Bible was printed at Mayence by John Faustus and Peter Schoeffer his
Son-in-Law, An. 1462. and the year following S. Austin de Civitate Dei, in the
same Town.

Martin and Michel Vlriques were the first who exercised in Paris the Art of
Printing, An. 1470.

The Latin Bible was printed at Paris Anno 1512. Those of Robert Stevens came
forth at Paris An. 1528, and 1532.

The first Huguenot Bible was translated from Hebrew into French by Peter
Olivetan, vulgarly Oliveteau, and printed at Neuchastel in Switzerland, An.
1535. by Pirot Picard.

The Bible of Vatablus was printed by the same Robert Stevens, An. 1557. in
three Volumes in Folio.

The Sieur Joli abovementioned, says in his Book entitled Voyage fait a
Munster and autres lieux voisins, An. 1646 and 1647. a remarkable thing, which
is, that to adjust the difference betwixt Haerlem and Mayence concerning the
Invention of Printing, it may be concluded from a Book of Bertius, that Coster
at Haerlem lighted on the Invention of Printing after the manner of the
Chinese, and that Guttemberg and Faustus invented afterward at Mayence the
moveable and changeable Characters for composing syllables and words; because
Scriverius showed Bertius this Speculum Salutis, whereof each Page was made on
a Frame or Table engraved or cut as it were, and not with separated Characters,
composing apart the syllables, words, and lines. The Parthians wrought their
Letters on Linnen-cloath, after the manner of Embrodery.

The Invention of Powder and Cannon is more ancient; it was invented An. 1354.
We shall speak of it elsewhere.

The Archbishop and Elector of Treves.
JOhn Hugo de Dorsbec, Archbishop of Treves and Bishop of Spire, Prince and
Elector of the Empire, Governor of Prumb, and President of Weisembourg:
Catholic. He styles himself Grand Chancellor of the Gauls, and of the Kingdom
of Arles.

He resides at Wilich. He succeeds Charles Gasper Van Derleyen.

Coblens and Hermenstein are very strong places, by reason of their situation
on the joining of the Rhine and the Moselle; they belong to his Electroal
Highness.

It is said that the Revenue of this Archbishopric may go yearly at eleven or
twelve hundred thousand Livres. The Archbishopric comprehends twenty four
Bailiwicks.

The Chapter is composed of sixteen Capitulary Canons; none but Gentlemen are
received; Princes and Earls are received with difficulty.

This Elector and that of Cologne take their Seats alternatively when the
Emperor is not present; this alternation is made from week to week
successively.

The three Ecclesiastical Electors are no longer deemed Chancellors, only
titular to the Kingdoms of France, Arles, Austrasia, and Italy. The 30th of
August 1670. Christopher de la Fosse a Fleming of the Town of Mons, having
styled the Elector of Treves, amongst his Titles, Archchancellor of France and
the Kingdom of Arles, in a Thesis which he was to defend at Paris for his
Doctorship, he was hindered from defending the said Thesis. Another good Writer
has observed, that when this Elector is called Grand Chancellor of the Gauls,
this is understood of the Country which the Roman Emperors possessed within
the bounds of the ancient Gaul on this side the Rhine, which was called
formerly the Kingdom of Arles.

Treves, called in Latin Augusta Trevirorum, was built, as Aeneas Sylvius
relates, in the time of the Patriarck Abraham, 2000 years before the
Incarnation, by Trebeta Son of Ninus King of the Assyrians, who being driven
from the Kingdom by his Stepmother Semiramis, came and built this Town on the
Moselle. Alstedius says its founder was Trevir Son of Man King of Germany.

This place has been a Theater of War, having been taken and retaken in our
time. It has had 101 Bishops and Archbishops from S. Eucher to John Hugo de
Dorsbec. Popo was its first Archbishop.

The blessed Rhenanus assures us, L. 3. de rebus Germanicis, that the Church of
Mayence and that of Cologne were formerly under that of Treves. Its University
is the most ancient of Germany.

The Archbishop and Elector of Cologne.
MAximilian Henry of Bavaria, Archbishop of Cologne, Bishop and Prince of
Liege, and Bishop also of Hildesheim, Prince and Elector of the Empire, Grand
Chancellor of Italy, and Legate ex officio of the Apostolic See, has many
other Titles. Catholic.

His Arms are those of the House of Bavaria, hereafter mentioned.

This Prince came into the World, An. 1622. the 8th of October; he succeeds his
Uncle by the Father side Ferdinand of Bavaria, of whom he was made Coadjutor,
An. 1643. and consecrated Archbishop by Fabius Chigi, Nuncio to Pope Innocent
the Tenth, for the Peace of Munster; who has since been Pope under the name of
Alexander the Seventh.

The Archbishopric has in its Arms, a Cross Sable in a Field Argent.

Bona on the Rhine is the ordinary place of Residence of the Archbishop: his
Revenue from the Archbishopric arises to six or seven hundred thousand Crowns.

The Chapter of the Cathedral Church is composed of twenty four Canons, who are
all Princes, or at least Earls; bare Gentlemen are not admitted there.

The day that the Archbishop takes possession of the Archbishopric, the Town,
though it be Imperial, does him Homage in these terms:

We, free Citizens of Cologne, promise this day, for this day and the days to
come, to N. our Archbishop of Cologne, to be faithful and friendly to him as
long as he shall preserve us according in our Rights, Honor, and ancient
Privileges; we, our Wives, our Children, and our Town of Cologne. So help us
God and his Saints.

The Archbishop obliges himself reciprocally in these terms:

We by the grace of God, Archibishop of the holy Church of Cologne, Elector and
Archcancellor of the Empire in Italy, to the end that there may be an amicable
Consideration, an entire Confidence, and a sincere and inviolable Peace betwixt
us and our dear Citizens and Town of Cologne, do declare by these present
Letters, that we have promised and assured, and do promise and assure in good
Faith, and without Fraud, that we confirm all the Rights and Franchises written
or not written, old or new, within and without the Town of Cologne, which have
been granted it by Popes, Emperors, Kings, or the Archbishops of Cologne;
which we will never countervene. In testimony of which, we have set the Seal of
our Arms to these Presents the, etc.

The Archbishop was obliged to come every year to Cologne on Twelf-day, and the
Town gave him four hundred Florins of Gold, with a hundred measures of Oats;
which he lost if he came not. There has been a composition since for this Rent
by a new agreement. When he comes there, he cannot stay there above three days
together, unless he has permission from the Burgomasters; and the number of
persons which he brings there with him, is limited. He keeps in the Town a
Magistrate who judges criminal Processes, assisted with two Sheriffs.

The People of the Country call this Town Collen. The Empress Agrippina Julia,
Wife of the Emperor Claudius, having been born there and peopled it with
Romans, gave it its name; since that time it is called Colonia Agrippina.
Trajan was chosen Emperor there. It is said amongst the Germans, that he who
has not seen Cologne, has not seen Germany: Qui non vidit Coloniam, non vidit
Germaniam. This Proverb supposes it to be very famous. Ammianus Marcellinus
calls it Vrbem ampli nominis, munitissimam, amplam and copiosam. The Rhine
gives it the figure of a Bow or of a Crescent, because it bends it self there
by reason of some Banks which are carefully kept. The French took it under
Childeric the First, and it continued in their hands to the Emperor Otho the
First, who restored it again to the Empire amongst the Free and Hans-Towns. It
has for Devise, Colonia sidelis Romanae Ecclesiae filia; and for Arms, three
Crowns Or. It has a great number of Churches and other beautiful Edifices. Good
Walls and double Trenches environ it: Its ordinary Guard is of three hundred
Waloons or Germans.

In the Metropolitan Church, which is consecrated under the name of S. Peter
and the three Kings, called vulgarly the Dome, are shown the three Heads or
Sculls, being very black, of the three Kings or Magi, who adored the Son of God
in the Manger; and it is believed that they are there entire.

The Church of St. Vrsula is famous by reason of the eleven thousand Virgins
cast by a Tempest on the coasts of Germany. There are seen an infinite number
of bones all round the walls of the Quire in high Cupboards* and many Tombs in
the body of the Church, and on an Altar many heads of silver, where is that of
St. Vrsula. The College of Sorbonne a Member of the faculty of Divinity of
Paris, has for Patronesses this holy Daughter of a King, and her Companions.
Cardinal Baronius says in his Annotations on the Roman Martyrologie, that the
true History of these Virgins is lost; thence it comes that we find many
uncertain things of it. Mr. Joli, Canon of the Church of Paris, has said
remarkable things of it in his Book entitled, A Voyage made to Munster in
Westphalia, and many other neighboring places, An. 1646, and 1647. Printed by
Francis Clauzier.

Father Boussingault in his Guide of the Low Countries, p. 101. and 219. says,
that the Church St. Mary of the Capitol has two Bodies and two Quires, in the
one of which the Canons say their Office, and in the other the Canonesses;
where the one being on one side, and the others on the other, they sing the
Praises of God. There is a like thing practiced at Nivelle in Brabant, the
Canons come on certain days of the year into the Church of the Canonesses to
sing with them. The Abbess, as Lady spiritual and temporal of the Town of
Nivelle, it being of her Jurisdiction, presides in the Chapter; the Canons and
Canonesses jointly confer the Benefices which are vacant by the death or by the
marryage of the Canonesses. The Ladies wear in the Church a Rochet with a black
Mantle over it which trains on the ground, a starcht Linnen-cloath on their arm
instead of the Aumusse or the furred Ornament worn by Canons, and a Couvre-chef
on their head.

St. Bruno Founder of the Charthusians, was born at Cologne, and Mary de
Medicis dyed there the third of July 1643. In the same year dyed Louis the
Thirteenth, and Cardinal Richelieu:

Cologne has had eighty Bishops and Archbishops from Matternus to Maximilian
Henry of Bavaria: seventeen Bishops preceded there the Metropolitans. St.
Agilulfe was its first Archbishop. Pope Zachary declared this Church
Metropolitan, An. 744. The Suffragans are Munster, Minden, and Osnaburg.

An Observation on the three Ecclesiastical Electors.
YOu must observe that the three Ecclesiastical Electors have no Passive Voice
in the Assemblies of Election, that is to say, they cannot nominate themselves
Emperors; they may nominate and give their Suffrages for others, but not for
themselves; it having not been judged proper that one and the same head should
wear the Miter and the Imperial Crown, and one and the same hand carry the
Cross and the Sword; and to the end that since they cannot arrive at the Crown,
they may keep the other Electors within the bounds of their devoir.

Another Observation on the Lay Electors.
THe Secular Electors may nominate themselves. Sigismond of Luxembourg, King of
Bohemia, nominated himself after the death of Robert of Bavaria; and the other
Electors acknowledging his merit, gave him unanimously their Voices and
Suffrages.

The Ecclesiastical Electors are elected by their Chapters, who may exercise
the Archiepiscopal Functions during the vacancy of the Sea, but not the
Electoral.

The Electoral Habit.
THe Electoral Habit comes near that of the Presidents of Sovereign Courts.
That of the Ecclesiastical Electors is of Scarlet Cloth, and that of the Lay
Electors is of Crimson Velvet. They are all lined with Hermines, as likewise
their Cap. There are some of them to be seen drawn at large with their
ceremonial Habits, in one of the fairest and richest Galleries of Duke Mazarin,
formerly belonging to the Cardinal of this name. The King of Bohemia, instead
of the Electoral Cap, wears a Royal Crown on his head.

You must observe, that An. 1673. the Town of Cologne was chosen to treat there
of a Peace betwixt the Kings of France and of Great Britain and the Hollanders,
and the Assembly was held at the Convent of the Carmelites, a place very
convenient. His most Christian Majesty sent thither for his Plenipotentiaries
the Duke of Chaulne, and the Sieurs Courtin and de Barillon, who arrived there
the first; the King showing that he would not retard the work of Peace, where
so many Princes concerned themselves, though loaded with Victories. They were
followed by three Ambassadors of Sweden, who had a deference of Honor from
all the rest, they being then in quality of Mediators. Two Plenipotentiaries
came afterward from England, and they expected for third the Earl of Sunderland
chief of the Embassy. During his absence Sir Joseph Williamson performed for
him. Those of Holland came to the number of four, and afterward the
Plenipotentiaries of Spain, who had no other quality but of Envoys. The Elector
of Cologne had one Ambassador, Prince William of Fustemberg; the Elector of
Brandenburg sent thither the Baron of Zminzin, who had a Colleague. The
Emperor deputed the Baron d'Isola and others, and the Bishop of Munster sent
two there. He was one of the Parties concerned. This Illustrious Assembly had
no success, because the seizing and carrying away by force the person of Prince
William of Furstemberg by the Imperialists, though vested with the character of
Plenipotentiary, in a place which ought to be a Sanctuary, obliged his most
Christian Majesty, considering the Laws of Nations violated, to recall his.

Nimegen was since made choice on for renewing the Conferences of the general
Peace. The Duke de Vitry, the Sieur Colbert Marquess of Croissi, and the Sieur
de Mesmes Count of Avaux, were appointed Plenipotentiaries of France Anno 1675.
Marshal d' Estrade succeeded the Duke de Vitry.

The 11th of August 1677. the Bishop and Prince of Gurc chief of the Embassy
of Germany for the Conferences of the Peace, arrived at Nimegen accompanied
with Count Kinski, and with Sieur Straman his Colleagues, who went before him.
All the other Plenipotentiaries repaired thither. The Estates of the United
Provinces of the Low Countries appointed for their Plenipotentiaries the Sieur
Hieromy Beverning Lord of Teylingen Curator of the University of Leiden, the
Sieur William of Nassau Lord of Odik Cortegene, etc. and the Sieur William
Haren Grietman du Bildt.

The Treaties of Peace and of Commerce, Navigation and Maritime affairs betwixt
France and the States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries,
were concluded at Nimegen the 10th of August 1678.

In the same year the Treaty of Peace betwixt France and Spain was signed, and
the year following, 1679. that of France and of the Emperor, whereof we have
spoken elsewhere.

The Elector and King of Bohemia.
THe King of Bohemia, one of the seven Electors, formerly the Emperors great
Cup Bearer, is at present the Emperor himself. Cath.

His Arms are, a Lion Argent armed and crowned Or, with a double tail noued and
passed in Saltier in a Field Gules.

Prague is the capital City; its Dukes, the Kings and Emperors have kept there
a long time their Court: it is divided into three, the Small, the Ancient, and
the New; Praga ad Moldaviam fluvium, the Molde waters it.

Its Inhabitants were governed by Dukes till Vratislaus was created the first
King, who was followed by many others, till the Royal Line being extinct, the
House of Austria put themselves in possession of this Kingdom, which has been
made hereditary in the House of Austria by the Treaty of Peace of Munster.

The Ancients called Bohemia Bojemia or Bojohemia, that is to say in the German
Tongue, the House or Residency of the Boys, a People of the Gauls who retired
thither.

Some have said that this Elector was the last before that he was King. His
Chair at the Elections is of Satin purfled with Gold, and that of his
Colleagues of Crimson Velvet only* Some would seem to say that he has only a
casting Voice and Suffrage, when the other Electors do not accord for the
Election of the Emperor: but it is certain that he is effectively an Elector
as the others, and that his Royal quality gives him the first Seat amongst the
Lay Electors.

Bohemia, with the Provinces of Moravia and Silesia, may be worth yearly twelve
or thirteen Millions to its Prince. The Emperor Frederic surnamed Barberossa,
made it a Kingdom: it is he who said to Pope Alexander the Third, Non tibi, sed
Petro.

The Bohemians in the Ceremonies of the Mass, sing the Epistle and Gospel in
their Tongue, and communicate under both kinds: it has been permitted them as a
thing which does not alter the essence of Faith.

The Town of Egra, otherwise Eger, belongs to this Crown; the Gazettes often
mention it.

There are precious Stones found in the Mountains of Pinch; whence is come the
Proverb, that men throw sometimes a Stone at a Cow, which is worth more than
the Cow.

The Inhabitants of Bohemia are called Bohemians, with an Aspiration, and the
vagabond Egyptian Fortunetellers Boemians; they appeared in Europe An. 1417.
They came from Hungary, and Valachia, Frontiers of Turkey.

The Clocks of Bohemia are after the Italian fashion: they tell the hours there
from one Sunsetting to the next, twenty four hours consecutively.

Olmus is the capital Town of Moravia, and Breslau of Silesia.

The Emperor Leopold declared Count Staremberg Chancellor of the Empire, and
Counselor of his Privy Council, the 24th of January 1678.

The Elector of Bavaria.
MAximilian Marie, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Prince and
Elector of the Empire, Great Steward of the Imperial House, came into the World
An. 1662. is Cath.

His Arms are, three Shields together, the first Sable, a Lion crowned Or,
which belongs to the Palatinate; the second is fusile in bend of 21 pieces
Argent and Azure, which belongs to Bavaria; the third Gules an Imperial Globe
Or, which belongs to the Electorate.

Saltzburg has formerly been the Capital of this Country, at present it is
Munic, a very strong place; some call it in Latin Monachum, others Monachium.
The Germans, Munchen, on the River Iser.

This Elector resides at Munic; his Palace is one of the stateliest of Germany.
The great Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden having taken the Town and the Dukes
Palace, which he did not demolish by reason of its beauty, possessed himself of
the Dukes fine Library, where were rare Manuscripts, which he carried into
Sweden. Queen Christian his Daughter gave liberally of them to some learned
persons; amongst others, to the Sieur Vossius Canon of Windsor in England, to
the Sieur des Carts, and others.

The Castle of Schelesheim two leagues from Munic, is a Country House of
Pleasure where his Electoral Highness goes ordinarily to take the diversion of
Hunting.

His Buccentaurus passes, amongst the curious, for a Wonder of this Age. It is
on the Lake of Staremberg, which is a league over, and six leagues in length.
It is held to be as beautiful and as large as that of Venice, whereof I speak
in its place.

This Elector raises eighteen or twenty thousand men, and sometimes more; his
Revenue is considerable.

His Dukedom, which is in upper Germany, is divided into upper and lower
Bavaria.

Munic, Ingolstat, and Freisingen, are in the upper. Freisingen has the title
of Bishopric, and Ingolstat of University. Ratisbone in the German Tongue
Regensburg, Passau, Landshut, Straubingen; and many others, are of the lower
Bavaria.

The great Church of Munic is the Burial-place of us Dukes.

The Electorate, the upper Palatinate, and the County of Chamb, were granted to
the House of Bavaria, and its Successors, as long as the Maleline should hold,
according to the tenth Article of the Treaty of Munster.

In the last War between France and Germany the Elector Ferdinand Marie stood
Neuter. He dyed suddenly at Schelesheim at forty three years of Age. Pope
Innocent the Eleventh celebrated Mass for the Soul of this deceased person, and
the Emperor caused the Funeral-Obsequies to be solemnized at Vienna in the
Church of the discalceated Augustins.

The Empire has been diverse times in the House of Bavaria. Its Princes have
married eight Daughters of Emperors, and eleven Daughters of Kings; and among
the Daughters of this House, six have married Emperors, three have been
married to Kings, and two to Dolphins of France. Three Electors are of the same
Family; that of the Palatinate of the Rhine, that of Bavaria, and that of
Cologne, which has been for about an Age in this House.

The Elector of Saxony.
JOhn Georges the Third of the name, Duke of Saxony, Landtgrave of Thuringia,
Marquess of Misnia, Great Marshal or Great Gentleman of the Horse of the
Empire, Prince and Elector. Luth.

Quarterly, 1. upper Saxony, 2. Thuringia, 3. Misnia, 4. lower Saxony. Over all
the Electorate, which is barrely Or and Sable, upon that a Crown Verte placed
Bendways.

Dresde on the River Elbe, is at present the ordinary place of Residence of
this Elector.

His Revenue both ordinary and extraordinary, may amount to about eight
millions of Livres.

Magdebourg is the greatest Town of all the Country. The Elector of Brandenburg
possesses it by virtue of the Treaty of Munster, according to which the Empire
has consented that he hold in Sovereignty the Archbishopric of Magdebourg, and
the two Bishoprics of Albestad and Minden, to indemnifie him for Pomerania
Vlterior, possessed by the Swedes. Besides that his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburg keeps a great Garrison at Magdebourg, he spares nothing in
fortifying it.

The present Archbishop, who is Lutheran, is also Bishop of All. He enjoys a
great Revenue. This Prelate or Governor is of the House of Saxony. He is
married, and has Children well grown in years. Amongst his Titles he takes that
of Primate of Germany; the Electoral Archbishops contest this Primacy with him.

The House of Saxony is esteemed one of the most ancient of Europe. Wittemberg
was formerly the Seat of the Duke. This Town is known throughout the Earth for
having first followed the Heresiarch Luther, Native of Islebe in the County of
Mansfel, who having lived some time in the Order of the Friars Hermites of S.
Austin, left them An. 1517. The publication of a Plenary Indulgence throughout
all Christendom in favor of a Croisade against the Turks, served him as a
Stumbling Block, because Cardinal Albert of Brandenbourg, Archbishop of
Mayence, and Commissary of the holy See, permitted Father John Tetzellius a
Dominican, to publish this great Indulgence. Martin Luther, who at that time
was a Religious man and Professor in Divinity, took so great a pique at it,
through a motive of Jealousy, and fell into such a fury, being assisted by
John Stuaupire Vicargeneral of his Order, that he began to preach against the
Pope, and against his Indulgences, maintaining that they were diabolical
Inventions; that the Roman Church must be left, and a Sect made apart; that
there needs no Fasting; that Ecclesiastics, Religious men and women, ought to
marry; and an infinite store of the like Errors. The sensuality of his
Doctrine, joined with the Revenues of the Church, being employed in Pomps, in
Vanities, and other worse things, drew to him a great many Followers, and even
persons of power. John Frederick Elector of Saxony, and Sichingi a great German
Captain, upheld Luther. He changed the name of Ludder, which signifies a Mocker
and Thief, into that of Luther, which signifies Pure; and dyed An. 1646. sixty
three years and some months old. He made his own Epitaph, in these words:
Pestis eram vivus, moriens ero mors tua Papa. This Butterflye threatened an
Elephant; the Plague is ceast, and the Popes live without interruption in
glory. Melancthon speaks of this Epitaph in his Funeral-Oration.

Upper Saxony belongs to the Elector, the lower to the House of Brunswick for
the greatest part of it, and to that of Saxony Lavenburg on the Elbe, which is
the Head of the Illustrious House of Anhalt, comprizing the Towns of Hambourg,
Breme, and the County of Oldenburg.

The Town of Brunswick in the middle of Saxony, is very much enlarged; it is at
present under the government of the Duke of Wolfembuttel, Head of his Family.
These three Brothers, the Duke of Zell, of Hanover, and the Bishop of Osnaburg,
are of the same House.

The Elector of Brandenburg.
FRederick William Marquess of Brandenburg, Great Chamberlain of the Empire,
and Elector, Duke of Prussia, Magdeburg, Juliers, Cleves, Monts, Stetin,
Pomerania, Cassubia, Windalia or Wenden, of Crossen, and of Jagendorff,
Bourgrave of Nuremberg, Prince of Alberstad and of Mind, Earl of la Mark and
Ravenspurg, Lord of Ruvestein, and other places.

These are the Titles which I saw in a Brief which his Electoral Highness gave
to a person of my acquaintance.

This Prince was born the sixth of Feb. 1620. he does not enjoy Crossen and
Jagendorff, but the Emperor.

This Elector Frederick William married in his first marriage Louise Henrietta
Princess of Orange, An. 1646. who dyed the eighth of June 1667. and in his
second marriage Dorothy Daughter of Philip of Holstein Gluxbourg, Dowager of
Christian Louis Duke of Brunswick, the 14th of June 1668. He has many Children
by both. He is a Calvinist.

He bears diverse Quarterings, containing several Alliances and Principalities,
over all Azure a Scepter in pale Or, which belongs to the Electorate; a triple
Helm and triple Crest.

The Livery of this Elector is of a blue color.

Brandenburg is the capital City of the Marquisate to which it gives the name;
it is seated on the River Havel. It is seen at a great distance by reason of
its two great Towers. This Town has the title of Bishopric: Luther received
there the Order of Priesthood.

Berlin, Spandau, and Posdam, are the ordinary places of Residence of his
Electoral Highness.

Berlin is the greatest Town of the Marquisate here named; the River Suevus
waters it. Its Soil is the most fertile and pleasant of the Marcha of
Brandenburg. Berlin is as big as Montpellier or Beziers. They count there three
Towns, to wit, Coln otherwise Cologne on Suevus where is the Palace of the
Elector, the ancient Town of Berlin, and the new which is called Fridericverde.

This Elector, next the Emperor, has more Land and Soldiery than any of the
other Princes of Germany. He has ordinarily twenty five or thirty thousand men
on foot, and good Soldiers. His Revenue ordinary and extraordinary is eleven
or twelve Millions, some say fourteen.

His Court is Royal, and is the best of the Empire, next that of his Imperial
Majesty.

He has three Provinces which go by the name of la Marcha, to wit, the Old, the
New, and the Mean. Three Bishoprics, Brandenburg, le Buz, and Havelsberg.

Frederick Burgrave of Nuremburg bought, An. 1417. the March of Brandenburg of
the Emperor Sigismond, for four hundred thousand Florins, after having first
sold his Burgraviate for two hundred and forty thousand Florins.

The Estates of this Elector contain in length above two hundred German
leagues; from Hussen near Arnhen to Memel in Prussia, they are not large. This
Prince goes on his Lands from the Low Countries as far as Poland and Curland.

The Oder, the Elbe, and the Havel, water these Estates.

This Prince is descended from the House of the Earls of Zolleren in Suabia in
the Diocese of Constance, whereof the Head of the Family is Catholic.

This Elector has done memorable things of late years; amongst others, he has
settled in his House the Ducal Sovereignty of Prussia.

Moreover, he has made a Communication of the Baltic Sea with the Ocean,
through the ministry of a Frenchman of Provence, called Pierre des Chaises,
who undertook it, and brought it to effect by the means of Channels and Rivers.
He fortified Berlin when it was believed to be lost. This Prince came with his
Forces before Ferbellin in the month of July of the year 1675. where he
defeated the Swedes commanded by General Wrangel, and notwithstanding the
bloody Fight on both sides, his Electoral Highness cut in pieces about three
thousand Swedes, took a great number of Prisoners, and took from the Swedish
Army twenty two Standards and Ensigns, eight pieces of Canon, and the Baggage.

This Elector has got by conquest since of the King of Sweden, Wolgast, Wollin,
and Demmin.

The 29th of August, An. 1679. he took from his Majesty of Sweden, Anclan; and
the 30th he made there his Entrance with Madam the Electoress, and the
Electoral Prince. His Highness passing in the Town, alighted before the great
Church, where he heard the Sermon, and assisted at the Te Deum which was there
sung. Thence his Highness went to the Guild Hall, where he received the Oath of
Fidelity from the Mayor in the Council Chamger, and afterward of all the
Burgesses before the Guild hall, and assured them that he would maintain them
in all the Ecclesiastical and Politic Rights and Privileges which they had
enjoyed under the Reigns of his Predecessors the ancient Dukes of Pomerania.
The whole was concluded by a magnificent Entertainment, where all the Burgesses
that came were admitted.

The 19th of December 1677. this Elector gave a public Audience in his Camp
before Stetin to the Envoy of the Cham of Tartary Precopites. His Electoral
Highness sat in a Seat of Crimson-Velvet trimmed with Gold, on a Scaffold
raised two steps, covered with a rich Turkey Carpet. This Envoy had three
Letters, one from the Cham, one from the Sultan Galga his eldest Son, for his
Electoral Highness; and one for the Electoress, consisting of Complements and
offerings of Service.

The 26th of December of the same year, the Town of Stetin, Capital of
Pomerania, surrendered it self to his Electoral Highness, after a vigorous
resistance of six months siege.

The 24th of the same month the Capitulation was concluded and signed on both
sides. The 26th in the morning, the Composition being made, his Electoral
Highness commanded two thousand men to possess themselves of the Gate of the
Bastion, etc.

His Electoral Highness granted the Town ten years Exemption, and the liberty
of Fishing, that the Inhabitants might employ the public Revenues in the
reparation of the Ruins of the Churches; and his Highness took on himself the
reparation of the Cathedral.

The Elector gave to Baron Orflin, Camp-Marshal of his Army, the government of
Pomerania, as Count Wrangel enjoyed it in his lifetime; and made Major General
Suering Governor of Stetin, and Col. Barstel Commander under him. The Siege of
this place cost his Electoral Highness four hundred thousand Crowns in Powder,
Bullets, and Shot, according as some relate.

This Elector made his solemn Entry into the Town of Stetin the sixth of
January 1678. on Twelf-day; and after having heard the Sermon, and received the
Oath of Fidelity from the Magistrates and the People, the Medals which his
Highness had caused to be made, were distributed to the People. In the Evening
he retired into his Camp, whence he parted the eighth to return to Berlin,
where they gave him an August Reception.

This Elector was not satisfied with giving Orders for repairing Stetin with
all possible diligence, but moreover he would add there new labors for
rendering this place of Importance more strong than it was before.

The 22th of October. 1678. the Town of Stralzond surrendered it self by
composition to his Electoral Highness, who made there his public Entrance the
30th of the same month. The Elector granted the Inhabitants an Exemption for
ten years from all the Impositions that they were wont to pay, to capacitate
them to reestablish themselves, because, of two thousand houses that there were
in the Town before the Siege, there remained not fifty which were not consumed
with the fire.

The 17th of November of the same year, Gripswal incurred the same fate; the
Elector received the Oath of Fidelity of the Inhabitants the twentieth of the
same month. This Town has the title of University; it is half a league om the
Sea.

The Swedes entered Germany forty or fifty years since, assisted with the
Protestants against the Catholics.

At the beginning of the year 1679. all the Estates of the Elector of
Brandenburg resolved to erect for this Prince a Statue of cast Copper in the
Town of Berlin, in memory of his great Victories.

This Prince has restored to the King of Sweden the places that he had taken
from him. Stetin is of the number, which is the only place that his Electoral
Highness insisted on keeping, because it had cost him so much, and that it was
the Seat of the ancient Dukes of Pomerania his Predecessors.

There is seen at his Court a Fugitive, to whom the Father General of the
Capuchins spoke on a day, in these words, with Tears in his Eyes: Religion has
given you Honey, and you return it back Gall.

An. 1680. Vrslan Aga Envoy of the Cham of the Crim-Tarters, presented the
Electoress from the Cham's Wife a Shift of Egyptian-Cloath, and a sort of
Buskins embroidered with Gold, such as are worn by the Sultans.

The third of Jan. 1681. Prince Louis of Brandenburg, fourth Son of the Elector
of this name, married the Princess Louise, only Daughter of the late Prince
Bogeslaus Radzevil, she being 14 years of age, a very rich Heiress. This
Princess possesses above 40 leagues of Land in Lithuania on the frontire of
Livonia, where she has two places well fortified.

The Elector Palatine.
CHarles Count Palatine of the Rhine, Prince and Elector of the Empire, Great
Treasurer of the Imperial House, was born 1651. Calvinist.

He bears quarterly in the first and fourth Sable, a Lion Or, crowned of the
same, armed and langued Gules; in the second and third Lozenge Argent and Azure
of twenty one pieces, and then a Mond Or in a Field Gules, which belongs to the
Electorate.

Heidelberg is his capital Town in the lower Palatinate on the Necar. It was
taken An. 1621. by the General of the Emperor Ferdinand the Second. The Tower
where the Clock is, is very high, and of a very excellent Architecture. Manhein
is the Fence of the whole Country; there is a very fair Palace there, where the
Prince ordinarily resides.

Charles Louis, Father to the present Elector, was admirably skilled in the
Civil Law; he has been heard to dispute against public Theses dedicated to his
Electoral Highness with such a strength of Spirit, that he has put to a stand
both Defender and Master. Books are no less worthy of a Prince, than the
Military Art; Minerva and Mars are both Children of Jupiter. Alexander the
Great read Homer's Iliads and Odysses. Julius Caesar has left us his
Commentaries. Alexander Severus read Plato's Republic, Tulliee Offices, and
Horace. The great Captain Scipio studied the Institution of Cyrus; Tiberius and
Adrian the Works of Ovid. Charlemagne King of France and Emperor, read the
Scripture, the Fathers, and particularly the Works of St. Austin; made Rules
for the Reformation of the Church, entitled Capitula Caroli Magni. Charles the
Fifth King of France, named the Wise, caused the Latin Bible to be translated
into French, and caused other Versions to be made. S. Louis, Francis the First,
and other Kings of France, have loved Learning and learned persons. Alphonsus
the Tenth, King of Castile, composed Books ^^ the Civil Law, fine Astronomical
Tables, and even the General History of Spain: it has been observed that he
read the Bible fourteen times.

St. Bruno in his Book entitled the present state of the Affairs of Germany,
with the Interests and Genealogies of the Princes of the Empire, reduces the
Estates of the Prince Palatine to ten Bailiwicks, and notes his Revenue; he has
inherited five hundred thousand Livres of Rent since the death of the Palatine
of Simmeren Uncle of Charles Louis, and formerly his Tutor.

The Elector Palatine, and he of Bavaria, are of the same Family. The House
Palatine is the eldest. Frederick the Fifth, Count Palatine, elected King of
Bohemia, had the Electoral Dignity taken from him An. 1623. at the Diet of Rat
is bone, which gave it to Maximilian Duke of Bavaria. The Elector Palatine of
the Rhine was restored to the possession of the lower Palatinate, and invested
with an eighth Electorate, which was erected at the Treaty of Peace of
Westphalia, at the instance of the most Christian King.

When the Emperor is not in Germany, or that the Empire is vacant, the
Electors Palatines and of Saxony, are Vicegerents or Regents: Bavaria contests
it at present with one of them. The King of the Romans is perpetual Vicegerent
of the Emperor.

The House Palatine has given Emperors to Germany, one King to Denmark, and
two or three to Sweden; and of late years a very worthy Spouse, the Princess
Elizabeth Charlotte, to Philip of France Duke of Orleans, only Brother of the
King of France and Navarre. This Marriage was concluded and the Articles signed
the sixth of November 1671. The Marriage was made at Metz the 26th of the same
month, and of the same year.

Philip Count Palatine of the Rhine, and his Brother Frederick the Second,
signalized themselves at the Siege of Vienna against Solomon: they commanded in
the Town, and so vigorously repelled the Turks in their Assaults, that they
killed 40000. These two Princes, besides the danger of their Life, engaged all
their Estates for the support of this War. The Emperor Charles the Fifth was
about Vienna, keeping the Field.

The Palatinate of the Rhine furnishes all things necessary for humane life, a
great deal of Corn, and good Wines. In the great Tower of Heidelberg is seen a
remarkable Vessel which contains forty Pipes of Wine; it deserves Iron Hoops.

There was seen at Heidelberg before the year 1623. the curious Palatine
Library, which was transported to the Vatican at Rome.

The River Necar is very full of Fish, and serves as well for bringing Wood
from the Otthonick Forest, as for the transportation of Merchandise.

Near this Forest appeared, An. 1476. a Shepherd called Nicolas Hausen, who
quitting the charge of his Flock, forged a Religion, and turned Preacher. He
preached first against the life of Churchmen, and said, that they ought not to
have Titles given them. He attacht also the Secular powers, maintaining that
there must be no paying of Tolls nor Tributes, nor any Imposition or Subsidy,
that all was common; and said in his Sermons, that he had a Revelation from the
holy Virgin. The People, who are lovers of Novelties, flockt to he^r him from
all parts.

He had as great a concourse of People as the Mason that preached at Paris in
the Fauxbourg S. Germain, An. 1672, or 1673. At length Nicolas Hausen was
indicted, and condemned to be burnt as an Heretic. The Mason who preached but
moral things was interdicted preaching, having neither Order nor Mission.

A Relation tells us, that his Electoral Highness Charles Louis made an end of
building, An. 1680. at Frederickbourg near Manshein, one of the fairest
Churches of Germany, and that he dedicated it to holy Concord or Union, which
now he makes it bear, and caused it to be mentioned in a Sermon preached there
the first day for its dedication. The Ceremony began with a fine Concert of
Music, which was followed with an inaugural Oration very learned, and a
learned Sermon of Doctor Fabritius his first Minister: in the afternoon he
caused to preach there a Lutheran Doctor, and in the evening a Catholic Priest
of the Church of Mayence; and all three freely heard each other on the laudable
design of his Electoral Highness. You must not admire at this diversity of
Preachers, because in some places of Germany the same Church is common to
Catholics and Lutherans.

Of the number of the Electors, and other Circumstances.
THe Electors were formerly seven in number; three belonging to the Church, and
four Laymen. They are at present eight, since the Peace of Germany concluded
at Munster, An. 1648.

The Lay-Electors, who are Minors, in the Election of an Emperor, may be
present there accompanied with their Guardians, who are their nearest
Relations. They have no need of them if they have attained the age of eighteen
years complete, because then they come out of Guardianship.

The Princes Electors have the power of choosing the Emperor, to the end that
none attributes to himself the Imperial Dignity as hereditary.

Though the Electors pretend to be equal with Kings, their Ambassadors have
not their Seats but after those of Crowned heads. The youngest Sons of the
Electoral Houses take place in Germany of other Princes.

The Confusion which arose formerly from the great number of Electors, was the
reason that they were reduced to so few. The Emperor Charles the Fourth
confirmed them in the possession of this Right mentioned in the Golden Bull.
The Great Turk calls them the Kings of Germany. Before we leave Germany, we
will observe that Powder and Cannon were there invented.

The Invention of Powder and Cannon.
POwder was invented by chance, An. 1354. by Berthold Schuartz a German
Cordelier. This great Naturalist making an Experiment of Rarefaction, showing
that there was no Vacuum in Nature, made use of a Pot well covered, wherein he
had put Sulphur and the powder of Saltpeter, and laid fire to it, whereof he
saw the effect. Some hold him to be the Inventer both of Powder and Cannon.
Others say that it was Bartholomew le Noir, a Monk of Cologne, a great
Alchymist, who found out the Secret of making Cannon, according to Nauclerus,
in the same year 1354. and according to Baronius, An. 1360. Bartholomew le Noir
was at Venice to cast Cannon, to the end that the Venetians should make use of
them to recover from the Genoeses Fossa Claudia, about the year 1378. according
to Sabellicus, Blondus, and others. The use was received in France, Anno 1425.
at the time that an English Earl, called Thomas of Montigni, besieged the Town
of Man's.

Petrarch falsely believed that the famous Archimedes of the Town of Syracuse
was the Inventer of Cannon, because he conveyed great Rocks by Mathematical
Springs into the near Vessels of the Enemies, and burnt them with
Burning-glasses.

The Chinese boast that a Demon showed the Invention to their first King above
a thousand years before the Nativity of the Son of God.

SPAIN.
CHarles the Second, of the House of Austria, King of Spain, was born the sixth
of November, An. 1661.

He is Catholic, and even so called. It Is a Title given by Pope Alexander the
Sixth to Ferdinand the Fifth, and in his person to his Successors, for having
destroyed in Spain the Moors and Sarasins.

He bears quarterly the Arms of Castille, which are Gules a Castle triple
tower'd Or; and those of Leon, which are Argent a Lion Gules, and within an
Escotcheon the Arms of his principal Realms, which we should call in France
Provinces. The Kings Livery is of a yellow color. The ordinary Devise of some
Kings of Spain is this: Omnes contra me, and ego contra omnes.

Since Philip the Second, the Town of Madrid, situated in new Castille, is the
ordinary place of Residency of this Court. There is a great Bridge, and a
little River under it, called Manzanarez; on the occasion of which, an
Ambassador said to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, Less Bridge, or more Water.

The Kings Palace is called Pallasso del Rey, otherwise Palasso Real. The
eldest Sons of the King of Spain are called Princes of Austria; as in France,
Dolphins; in England, Princes of Wales; in Portugal, Princes of Algarves; and
in Savoy, Princes of Piedmont.

A relation whereof I could quote the Author, tells us that a man must be clad
in black to speak to his Catholic Majesty: I know the contrary by Spaniards
who have had the honor to speak to him in gray Clothes. I may believe that a
man must appear before him in black Clothes when he is in Mourning, and be in a
decent habit.

The Coach-men sit on one of the horses which go at the Draught-tree, since the
time that the Coachman of Count Alvarez, who sat before the Coach, revealed a
Secret of his Master, which he had overheard. The same thing is practiced in
Germany.

The chief Houses of Pleasure belonging to the King, and out of Madrid, are
IL Campo, il Retiro, Aranjues, le Pardo, the Escurial, and Jarzuela.

The Spaniards make of this last save one the eighth Wonder of the World.
Philip the Second laid o^r twenty Millions in building it: he caused the
Escurial to be built both in memory of the Victory which he gained over the
French, An. 1557. at S. Quentin in Picardy on the Sum, the tenth of August,
being S. Laurence's day, and for having caused the Church of S. Laurence of S.
Quentin to be beaten down; whereupon he made a Promise to God to cause a finer
to be built in Spain, in the honor of the same Saint, and a Monastery where
the Monks of S. Hierome are magnificently seated. The King has a Seat in the
Refectuary, and a great Palace without the Convent. After the Library of the
Vatican, which is the first of the World, that of these Monks has been greatly
valued.

There is seen at il Campo a great Park for the divertisement of Hunting; great
Ponds and Gardens.

At il Retiro, otherwise called Buen Retiro, there is seen Philip the Fourth on
a Horse of cast Copper. The King passes there the greatest heats of the Summer,
by reason of its Waters and fine Grotto's of different kinds. The fine Walks
are there as green in the Summer as in the Springtime. There is a strange
Figure there standing in the midst of a great Cistern, casting forth water from
all the parts of its body, which is made use of for watering in a moment a
Garden of the Palace full of all sorts of Flowers. There is also seen there
Gardens full of Fruit Trees.

At il Pardo are the Pictures of all the Kings of Spain.

The ancient Palace of one of the Kings of the Moors, called Halambra, is
remarkable for being flankt with thirty Towers; it is on one of the little
Hills of the Town of Grenada.

The chief places of Devotion.
IN Madrid the Church of our Lady Almudena, and that of Athoca, are very
famous. Our Lady of Athoca, called according to the Language of the Country,
Nostra Senora d'Athoca, is at Madrid, as the Church of our Lady at Paris, for
Piety and the concourse of People. It Is there where the Te Deum is sung.

Saint James of Compostella in Galicia is a very famous place of Pilgrimage;
the French Pilgrims that go thither pass over the Trembling Bridge. It is
thought that this Bridge is so called by reason of the flowing of the Sea,
which coming to press against it, makes it tremble. It Is a roguish Bridge of
wood, a little River passes under it.

The Apostle S. James the Greater is the Patron of all Spain. His Relics are
under the great Altar of the Metropolitan Church of Compostella: his Figure
representing half his body, is over it: his Pilgrims Staff is on the side of
the Quire; and his Head at Toulouse in the Church of S. Sernin. It Is there
where the Pilgrims begin their Pilgrimage.

S. James has been seen to fight for the Spaniards against the Sarasins,
holding in his hand a white Standart with a red Cross in it, in the time of
King Ramires; who being assisted with his Apostle, charged so briskly the
Enemies, that he cut in pieces 60000 on the place.

Charlemagne King of France was at Compostella to honor St. James, and caused
his Church to be built. Since the Kings of Spain have been Catholics, they
have always honored him.

I have read a Relation of diverse Voyages, in which the Author says, that St.
James suffered Martyrdom at Compostella. It Is a roguish Memoire which has been
given him; I remit him to the Books of the Acts of the Apostles, to the
Ecclesiastical History, and to the holy Martyrology, and he will find that it
was at Jerusalem that Herod caused him to be beheaded. This Apostle having
continued some time in Spain, returned to Judoea; his Disciples after his death
carried him from the Port of Joppe presently to Fa, where they embarkt for
Spain; and after having sailed all along the Mediterranean Sea, and passed the
Straight of Gibralter, they took on the Ocean the course of Galicia, where they
landed and disembarkt the body of the Saint in the Town of Irisflavia, where he
continued hidden and unknown, till it was miraculously discovered by a Star
which appeared there. This place has been called since Compostella, that is to
say, Campus stelloe. S. James the Lesser suffered also Martyrdom in Jerusalem,
whereof he was Bishop; he was thrown headlong from the top of the Temple to the
bottom, and cudgelled to death.

After S. James of Compostella, Mount Sarra is another place of Piety and of
Pilgrimage, very much frequented: It Is a Mountain in the middle of Catalonia,
on which there is an Abbey of the Order of S. Bennet, and where thirteen
Hermites have each their little Cell and little Garden.

The Angelical Chapel, called otherwise our Lady of the Pillar, is very famous
at Saragossa. Buterius says that S. James being in Prayer about this Town with
his little Flock, and being very uneasy that he could not convert in Spain
above nine persons, whereof there were eight Jews, and one only Spaniard; the
holy Virgin, brought by Angels from Judaea into this Country, appeared to him
near the River Eber on a Pillar of Marble, some say of Jasper; who comforting
him, foretold to him the Conversion of this People by the Ministry of his
Disciples; and that St. James raised her since this Chapel, where this Pillar
is seen, and on it the Figure of the Virgin holding her Son in her arms. This
Church is esteemed the most Ancient of Christendom, amongst those that are
dedicated to the holy Virgin.

The Division of the Spanish Monarchy.
ITs Kingdoms, or to say better, its Provinces, were formerly to the number of
fourteen, by counting thus: Castille, Leon, Arragon, Catalonia, Valencia,
Andalusia, Grenada, Murcia, Galicia, Portugal, Algarve, the Asturies, Biscay,
Navarre.

Catalonia is a County and not a Kingdom: when the King of Spain makes his
first Entrance into Barcelona, which is the capital City, he enters there in
quality of Earl; wherefore when he is before the Gate, which he finds shut,
after having knocked, they ask from within the Town the name of him that will
enter: his Catholic Majesty answers twice, The King of Spain; and they do not
open the Gates to him till he says it is the Earl of Barcelona King of Spain,
who will come in. At these words the Gates are incontinently opened, and they
give his Majesty a Reception becoming him.

Portugal and Algarve have their King. Biscay is a Lordship; Navarre belongs to
France: a part of Biscay is possessed by the French, and the other by the
Spaniards.

Spain may have two hundred and sixty French leagues in length, and two hundred
in breadth, without comprizing what it has in Italy, in Flanders, and in
America, and along the coasts of Barbary on the Mediterranean Sea.

The chief Towns are
MAdrid, Toledo, Sevil, Grenada, Sarragossa, Valencia, Compostella, Salamanca,
Barcelona, Cadiz.

Madrid is increast since that the Kings of Spain have kept there their Court;
it has no Suburbs. It has been said that this Town was walled round with Fire,
by reason of its ancient Walls built in many places with great Stones that
strike fire. Its Fountain is very famous, after that of Palermo in Sicily, and
of Navona at Rome, which are esteemed the finest of Europe. The Fountain
Arethusa is celebrated in History; it has been the ground of many Roman Fables.

Toledo is adorned with two fair Palaces, with that which Charles the Fifth
caused to be built there, and with that of the Archbishop. The Metropolitan
Church has a Clock resembling that of Strasburg in Alsatia in its height and
Architecture: the Doors of this Church are of cast Copper; the Streets of the
Town are very narrow; the Moors built the Walls.

Sevil is the Capital of Andalusia; the Spaniards say thus: Que no ha vista
Sevilla, no ha vista la Maravilla: He that has not seen Sevil, has not seen a
Wonder. The Duke of Medina Coeli has a fine Palace there. It is held that this
Town called Hispal, or Hispalis, gave the name of Spain to all the Kingdom.

Grenada is larger in compass than any Town of Spain: the Moors built it. The
Streets are narrow, and the Houses ranged after such a manner, that they
resemble the kernel of a Pomegranat. The Kingdom has a great number of
Mountains.

Sarragossa is the Capital of the Kingdom of Arragon; it has an Archbishopric,
Parliament, Inquisition, and University.

Valencia, called the Beautiful and the Great, is the Capital of the Kingdom
whose name it bears; it is honored with an Archbishopric, Parliament, and
University.

Compostella Capital of Galicia, is famous for the Relics of the Apostle St.
James the Greater, Brother of St. John the Evangelist. The Spaniards call
Compostella, San Jago di Compostella.

Salamanca is recommendable for its largeness and University, which is the most
famous of all Spain. It has a great House adorned with a Court, where are the
Schools and the Halls where the Acts are made, and where Persons are admitted
to Degrees; Metaphysick is there in its Throne. The Preachers there are very
full of Gestures to express naturally their Thoughts and Motions; they make use
of all the parts of their Body, of the Head, Hands, Feet, and Eyes: Though they
said nothing, a man might guess very near what they would say. Francis Relux, a
Dominican, Doctor of the Faculty of Divinity of Salamanca, formerly Confessor
of Charles the Second King of Spain, and at present Bishop of Placenza, has for
Successor in his place of Confessor, Father Bayono, Professor of the University
of Alcala.

Cordona, capital City of the Dukedom whereof it bears the name, has a Mountain
of Salt.

Barcelona, called by the Spaniards Barcino, is an important place; the French
possessed it under the Reign of Louis the Thirteenth: The Palace of the Duke of
Cardona there is August; there are seen there some Figures of the Earls of
Barcelona. This Town, which is at present double, has a Bishop, a Parliament,
an University, Inquisition, and a Port where many Ships have often been cast
away in the Road.

Cadiz is famous by reason of the advantageous situation of its Port; it is
there where the Galleys arrive that come from Peru laden with Gold and Silver.
This Town is very strong and well peopled: in those late Wars its Bishop coming
from Italy, was stopped at Montpellier, and sent afterward from Tholose into his
Diocese in exchange for some Prisoner.

Rivers of ancient Spain.
TAgus, the Ober, the Guadian, Guadalguivir, the Douro, and the Minhio, the
Guadalaiar, the Seger, the Liuga, and others.

The Tagus, famous for its Golden Sand, passes at Toledo, Villa Franchia, and
at Lisbon.

The Iber, Iberus, at Sarragossa and Tortoza: this River gives the name of
Iberia to all Spain.

The Latins call the Guadian, Anas; and the Guadalaiar, Bertis; the Douro,
Durius; the Seger, Sicoris.

The Spaniards boast of having a Bridge on which above ten thousand horned
Beasts may feed together. This proceeds from the River Anas, which hiding it
self for six leagues, passes under a great Meadow-ground. According to a Map
made in Spain, which the Sieurs Samsons, Geographers in Ordinary to the King,
have shown me, and which they find good, this River loses it self and rises
again. It is metaphorically called Anas, because of its entrance and coming
forth of the Earth as a Duck does in water. Its waters supply Baiados and other
places.

Some Rivers in France lose themselves in like manner, and appear again; as the
River Sumene at the foot of the Sevenes, the Rize near Masdazille in the
Country of Foix, the Vouzeille in Poictou four leagues from Poictiers on the
West Side, the Bandiat near Angouleme, the Rile in Normandy near Beaumont le
Roy, the River Drome near Bayeux the Venelle which passes at Selongay in
Burgundy, seven or eight leagues from Dijon on the North-side.

The Guadalguivir waters Corduba and Sevil.

The Douro, Valladolid and Zamora.

The Seger descends from the Pyrrheneans into Catalonia, passes at Vrgel and
Lerida.

Caesar and Lucan speak of the River Cinga, which is by the Pyrrheneans, and
which has retained its name even to this day.

The Archbishopricks.
TOledo, Sevil, Sarragossa, Burgos, Grenada, Valencia, Compostella, and
Taragonia.

Cardinal Porto Carero is Archbishop of Toledo, and Primate of Spain: He
succeeds Dom Pascal Cardinal of Aragon, Archbishop of Toledo, who died at
Madrid the 28th of September 1677. After having given all he had to the Poor,
he gave his Nephew only a Picture of Devotion. Cardinal de Porto Carero gave,
An. 1679. to Dom Francisco Canon of the Church of Toledo, the Archdeaconship of
Toledo, which is worth forty thousand Ducats of Rent.

Toledo has eight Suffragans, Sevil three, Sarragossa six, Burgos three,
Grenada two, Valencia three, Compostella fifteen, Taragon seven.

Toledo has two hundred thousand Piasters yearly, Sevil eighty, Sarragossa
fifty thousand, Burgos thirty thousand, Grenada thirty thousand, Valencia
thirty thousand, Compostella twenty four thousand, Taragon sixteen thousand.

The Bishopric of Ciguenca brings fifty thousand Piasters, and Cadiz twelve
thousand.

The Archbishopricks and Bishoprics have a great Revenue in Spain. If the
number of Archbishopricks be there small, it is very great in the Estates of
Naples, which are possessed by his Catholic Majesty; it is true that these
here are very much limited in the extent of Country, and in their Rents, as in
the rest of Italy, excepting the Archbishopric of Milan, Naples, and Messina.
They count in the Kingdom of Naples twenty Archbishopricks, and a hundred
twenty seven Bishoprics.

Pope Adrian the Fourth granted to the Kings of Spain, in the person of Charles
the Fifth, of whom he had been Tutor, the Right of Nomination to Bishoprics
and other Consistorial Benefices; they have the Nomination but of some in the
Kingdom of Naples. The same Pope Adrian, a Spaniard, gave the Conquest of the
New World to the Kings of Spain, wherein other Nations do not agree. Atabalipa,
one of the Kings of Peru, called the Incas, being told that this Pope had given
the King of Spain his Country, said with a laughter, Who is that man who gives
that which belongs to another? This Incas being taken Prisoner by the
Spaniards, offered for his liberty a Chamber full of Gold and precious Stones;
which could not save his life. Before he died, he appealed to the Justice of
the God of Christians, Protector of the afflicted and innocent. Pizarre has
been blamed every where for having caused him to be strangled; he feared that
if he let him live, he would be taken by force from him.

Philip the Second boasted that he comprehended the course of the Sun within
his Dominions, by reason of America, because the Sun shines there always when
it is set in Europe. A Grandee of Spain having said on a day to this Prince,
that a year before the Emperor Charles the Fifth had left to him his Crowns;
he replied, that it was a year since also that he repented of it. The said
Philip died of the Lousy Disease, after having lost the Kingdom of Tunis and
Holland. Pope Clement the Seventh ended his life also by the same Disease,
caused through a great corruption.

Philip the Fourth fell much from his vast Dominion by the loss of Portugal,
with all its dependancies in the East and West, and after the seizure of
Jamaica by the English.

Spain was extremely dispeopled by the Expulsion of the Moors and Jews; it was
farther emptied to stock the Indies: and these Dominions being dispersed in many
places, cannot easily be relieved. Its Mountains are barren, and its Women not
very fertile.

The Spaniards are grave in their walk and discourse. This makes me think of a
pleasant passage related by a modern Author; he says, that a Buffoon with his
ridiculous Gestures and Expressions having on a day made the Queen laugh
extremely at Table, it was said to her, that a Queen of Spain ought to be
serious. This Princess who was in her Orient, newly come from Germany,
answered, that they should then take away that Fellow from before her eyes, if
they would not have her laugh.

The Spanish Nation has the repute of making Rodomontadoes; the following is
not mean, made by an Officers, a Prisoner of War in France: Louis the
Thirteenth having asked him wherefore the King of Spain went not to the Wars as
the Kings of France, he answered with an Exclamation, Ho, it is not necessary;
if the King my Master went to the Army, he would make the whole Earth to
tremble.

The Spaniards are fit for holding a long Siege, because being sober, they
endure hunger and thirst a long time. They fear much the English; wherefore
they have said, La Guerra con toto il Mundo, y la pace con los Inglesos: War
against the whole World, and Peace with the English, because they are better
Soldiers than them on the Sea. All men are not fit for the Sea.

There grows not much Corn in Spain, because the Lands are ill cultivated;
France and Sicily are its its Granaries, and of the Low Countries. Its Mines of
Andalusia, Estramadura, Grenada, Murcia, and of some other places, are very
famous.

They embark at Malaga the Wine of Grenada which is brought to Paris, at
Alicant that of Murcia, and at Cadiz that of Andalusia. The White Wind is there
better than the Claret. Arragon and Castille produce not much Wine; that of
Portugal is almost of a Crimson color.

Their Oils of Olives, their Woolls, their Silks, their Horses, and their
Mines, are very considerable.

The Castilian Language is the finest of all Spain. Charles the Fifth said,
that if he were to speak to God, he would speak in the Spanish Tongue, by
reason of its Gravity; to Men, in French; to Ladies, in Italian; to Horses, in
the German. Some Castilians have dared to say, either through a gayness of
Spirit, or as a Rodomontado, that God spoke Castilian to Moses on Mount Sinai.
They speak grossly in Galicia.

Agrippa describing the Humor of four chief Nations of Christendom, says among
other things, that in their singing,

The Spaniards Groan,
The Italians Bleat,
The Germans howl,
The French Quaver.
The 27th of December. 1676. the King of Spain writ a Letter to Don Juan, by which
his Catholic Majesty signified to him, that he judged it convenient to have
him near him to assist him with his Counsel: It is coucht in these terms,
according to an Extract taken from the London-Gazette of the fifth of Feb. 1677.

The Copy of the Letter of the King of Spain writ to Don John of Austria.
DOn Juan of Austria, my Brother, of the Council of State, Governor and
Captain General of the Spanish Low, Countries, and Commander General of all our
Sea-Forces; the Affairs of this Monarchy being at present in such a condition
that I find my self obliged to seek all sorts of ways for settling them as they
ought to be; and having considered that you are therein so very much
interessed, and that I must impart to you the greatest part of my Resolutions,
I proposed to my self to require you to repair hither without any delay, to
assist me in a juncture so important; it is what I promise my self from the zeal
which I have always found in you for the good of the State. God keep you in his
protection as I wish.

From Madrid, the 24th of December. 1676. EGO REX. By the Command of our Lord the
King, D. Hierom de Eguia.

The Copy of the Letter of the Queen Mother to Don John.
THe King my Son has resolved, as you may understand by the Letter which he has
written to you, that you repair hither as soon as may be to assist him in the
administration of the Affairs of the Monarchy; and I may tell you, that there
is nothing which can please me more than to see you embrace the direction with
all the diligence which the juncture of affairs requires: In which I shall rely
on your zeal and good intentions; assuring you, that for as much as shall be in
my power, I shall always use my endeavors for procuring you all satisfaction.

From Madrid the 27th of December. 1676.
The Answer of Don Juan to the Queens Letter.
Not doubting but your Majesty sees the Answer which I have made to the Letter
of the King my Brother, whom God preserve, it would be to no purpose for me to
repeat it to you; assuring your Majesty that you never may have had, nor never
will have any person who wishes and wishes again to your Majesty with a more
sincere intention, that which I take God to witness to be most beneficial and
advantageous for the service of your Majesty: At whose feet I cast my self,
praying God to maintain your Majesty a long uninterrupted course of years in
Posterity.

From Sarragossa, the first of Jan. 1671.

In the same year the Marquess de Villa Seria lost the Kings Favor.

His Catholic Majesty arrived at Sarragossa, accompanied with Prince Don Juan,
the Duke Medina Coeli Great Chamberlain, the Constable of Castille Great
Steward of the Kings Household, the Count de Talaras, the Duke de Montery, and
with Count d'Arcot.

The Queen was in her Government of Toledo. Some time afterward the new
Corrigidor of Madrid, or the chief Governor of the Polity for remedying the
inconveniences which ordinarily happen in the night, ordained the seventh of
October, conformably to what has been practiced of late years at Paris, and at
Amsterdam, for the public good, that for the future there should be exposed
throughout the whole Town of Madrid Lights in the Streets by the means of
Lanterns, and ordered that from five to five houses there should be a Light,
for which the five houses should contribute proportionally. This Sentence has
been put in execution.

At the beginning of the year 1678. the Council gave sentence in the case of
Don Ferdinand of Valenzuela Marquess of Villa Seria, who was condemned to a
perpetual banishment, and sent to the Philippine Islands. Intelligence was
given, An. 1680. that the King of Spain called him back from banishment from
the Islands where Don Juan had caused him to be banished.

The 17th of September, Don Juan of Austria, natural Son of the late King
Philip the Fourth, died, being fifty years of age. His Body was carried to the
Escurial. This Prince died at the same hour, the same day, and the same month
as the late King his Father, 1666. He was a great Captain, fearless in War, a
man of great Reservation, a great Minister of State, penetrating all things,
and neglecting nothing.

The Kings Marriage.
CHarles the Second, King of Spain, being given to understand that the King of
France had granted him the Princess Mary Louise of Orleans for Spouse, made
extraordinary Rejoycings at Madrid, all the Town appeared in fire for many
days; the People cried with a loud voice, That France had always given them
good Queens. At their Arrival the Patriarch of the Judges gave their Catholic
Majesty's the second Benediction. The 13th of January 1680. the Queen of Spain
made her public and solemn Entrance at Madrid.

FINIS.

