Passive Obedience, Stated and Asserted.

IN A SERMON PREACHED At Ampthill in Bedfordshire, Upon Sunday, September. 9.
1683.

Being the Day of THANKSGIVING FOR THE Discovering and Defeating The Late
Treasonable CONSPIRACY AGAINST His Sacred Majesty's Person and Government.

BY THO. POMFRET, A. M. Rector of Ampthill, and Chaplain to the Right
Honorable ROBERT Ear. of Ailesbury.

LONDON: Printed for Joanna Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Ailesbury, One of the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
COuld I have taken the Confidence to have disputed your Commands, this
Discourse would not have needed that Protection, and Favor, which now it
humbly begs. Not but that I am well assured, the Doctrines in it are truly
Christian, but it is sent forth into an ill natured, and Plotting Age, that
will not give tolerable entertainment to any Principles but such as invite to
Apostasy, and Rebellion. It is not therefore without extreme Necessity, that I
press to Your Lordship, in this Dedication; the very asserting Primitive
Religion, and Christian Loyalty, will need such a Patron. And though it is no
Secret to the World, yet I cannot forbear declaring that I cannot have such a
Defender as Your Self, who does so generously practice both those Virtues. I
have seen in Your Lordship such Concernment for the Crown, and the Established
Religion, that I might presume of Patronage; But I must beseech Your Pardon
too, that I present this, (of which I have so mean an Opinion my self) to a
Person for whom of all men, I have the greatest Honor, and from whom I have
received the greatest Obligations. But You loved the Subject, and therefore
liked the Sermon, no Man ever having better joined the Christian and the
Statesman. And truly (my Lord) I have been entertained with the greatest
Delight as well as Advantage, in Your own Discourses of Loyalty, that it self
in You being founded upon Principles truly Noble and Brave; not living upon
future Expectances, but serving Your Prince, as You do Your God, by the
Engagements of pure Love, and undesigning Virtue: And therefore in all Changes
You was always Your Self, no Change of State making You change Your Party. This
is removed as far from Untruth, as it is from Flattery, that You can no more
forsake Your King nor Your Religion, that You can Your Self, being one that
values not Your Fortune, nor Your Greatness, above Your Virtues. And as to
this, all men that know You will allow the Character, so it is my happiness, as
well as interest, that I can testify it by a daily Experience, having the
honor of being

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and obedient Chaplain, Tho. Pomfret.

A SERMON ON I S. PET. ii. 20, 21. But if when ye do well, and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye
called.
IT is not unknown to any man who has heard the Sermons, or read the Books, or
remembers the Practices of all sorts of Dissenters from the Church of England,
but that they have been a People not only the most ungovernable, but also the
most destructive to the Peace, and Dignity, and Lives of Princes. It cannot
therefore be any thing strange, to hear by the King's Declararation, of a
Conspiracy complotted against His own Life and Government, since it is by such,
whose very Principles do so naturally tend to Sedition, and Blood. And though
indeed by God's wonderful Providence, His Majesty has been hitherto delivered
from the Malicious, Unchristian, and cruel Designs of these men; yet I cannot
see, without a continuation of Miracles, how it is possible for our Government
and Religion, to be rendered in any degree safe, unless such Positions be
rooted out, and renounced, which plainly lead to disturb and ruin Kingdoms. For
since the Supreme Power, is both by Gods express Order, and the consent of all
Nations, absolute and unaccountable; if you once take the Sword out of the
Magistrate's hand, and put it into the Peoples, that Nation is presently in a
state of War, and every man may thrust his dagger into his Neighbors side, if
he has a stronger Arm, and a more bloody mind. To prevent this; by Gods
Ordinance, and the agreement of all Commonwealths, the Supreme Power only is to
bear the Sword, and that to defend every man's Right, but no man to rise up,
upon any Pretense whatsoever against that. A conclusion this, that is founded
by God and Nature, Reason and Religion, and has been consented to by all good
Christians, and wiser Heathens.

But some hot and troublesome men amongst us, given up to Rage and Ambition,
have torn up the Foundations of Peace and Government, and will endure neither
Kings, nor their Laws; but hate their Power, and would violate their Persons to
bring in their own Devices, and enlarge their Grandeurs. Nay, and that
Christianity it self, which is the greatest obligation in all the World, to
Peace and Obedience, might have no effect toward the preservation of Gods
Vicegerents, they will make the Christian Religion, the pretense to Rebellion,
and for the concernments of God, practice directly opposite to all his
Commandments: and amongst the rest, evidently against this of the Text, where
we are enjoined to suffer, though it be for doing well. Passive Obedience,
which is a patient and mild suffering the hard, and unjust usages of Kings,
being both the Christians duty, and profession; that at once he might possess
his mind in patience, and secure the Public Quiet.

But this meek and Christian Principle, was of late called to an account; and
by Arguments of railery and contempt, endeavored to be hooted out of the
World; and represented to be mean and base, tamely to suffer evil, and far more
honorable to be enrolled amongst the Banditi, and Russians, than in the
Catalogue of Martyrs.

And accordingly to give the more confidence to their horrid plot, the
Chaplain, and the Goliath of the Conspiracy was sent forth to bid defyance, to
God, and the King, and the whole Army of Martyrs; and to tell the World, that
his Masters were men of that mettle, that with his own Julian, they would turn
Apostates to all Religion, and rather than suffer as Christians, confederate in
Treason. Upon this principle their wicked Design proceeded, and therefore it is
but needful that it be considered, and for the future (if possible) prevented:
which I shall endeavor from the Text; where we have a passive Obedience
commended; God's acceptance of it; and our own calling to it. Which I shall
render more plain in these following Propositions.

I. That as Christians, we are bound to do well, though we suffer. II. When we
do well, and suffer for it, we must take it patiently. III. If we do well, and
according to the Christian Rule, we will rather suffer patiently than resist
the power by which we suffer. IV. That as all these are acceptable to God, so
to them all, we are called by our Religion: it is both the duty, and end of our
Christian Vocation.
I. That we must do well, though we suffer for it. And indeed having this
Conscience, that we do well, it will be easy to suffer the utmost that we
fear, or the worst that men threaten: keep the Conscience but clear of guilt,
and the suffering though it bring smart, can do us no mischief. Only here, both
the Prudence and Innocence, of a Christian does require, that we bring not
suffering upon our selves for evil doing. A caution S. Peter, thought
necessary, that the sufferings of his time might be truly Christian. 1 Ep. iv.
15. But let none of you suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an
Evil-doer, or as a Busy-body in other men's matters. All Evils as they have
their proper and legal Remedies, so too there are peculiar, and distinct
Physicians. The maladies of the State, and the corruptions of the Church, must
be purged by the Governors of both: and though private Subjects may condole
the miscarriages in Government, or innovations in Religion, yet they must not
without due Power and legal Authority, turn State-menders and Church-reformers.
Many things may be necessary, and well done if accomplished by due means: so
that we are to consider not only the goodness or necessity of the thing, but
also what we have to do in it. For St. Peter you see ranks the Busy-body, with
very ill Companions, Thieves and Murderers; enough one would think to restrain
all People, from mending what they are not concerned in; and to assure them,
that if they suffer as Busy-bodies, it is so far from dying as Christians, that
it is with shame and disgrace, it being the Cause, not the Death, that gives
both the Martyrdom, and the Honor. Hence St. Paul in his own justification,
when he was Accused of the Jews, told Felix, that they neither found him with
multitudes, nor with tumult, Act. xxiv. 18. and challenges his Accusers at
verse. 20. if they could find any evil-doing in him. He had done nothing against
their Laws nor Government, he heads no Faction, nor is concerned in any
Consults for the destruction of Caesar; and by these things he testifies his
Religion and Innocence. No man ought, to think, that he suffers with honor,
who is so far from suffering for doing well, that he does an Evil to prevent
that which he fears to suffer. The case this, of all Plotters against
Government; they fear, or at least pretend some Evil to their Persons and
Estates, from the unlimited Power of the Prince, and then against the Laws both
of God and Man, conspire his ruin. And can these men be allowed to suffer for
doing well; who dye as Criminals to the Laws both of Heaven and Earth? the Law
of God requiring that no ill Action be done to prevent the greatest Suffering;
and the Laws of Men condemning them as Transgressors, for doing ill. And in the
mean time, Christian meekness is lost too, which commands us; though we do
well, and yet suffer, to take it patiently: which is my Second Proposition.

II. When we do well, and suffer for it, we must take it patiently. Patience it
is, that makes our suffering easy; that fanns us with sweet and pleasant
gales, when the fires are about us; that rocks us asleep in the midst of
torments: our own impatience being the greatest trouble; both aggravating the
other, and afflicting more sharply by it self. It was Christ's command to his
Disciples, and in them to all Christians, speaking to them about the
Persecutions of the last times, S. Luke, xxi. 19. In Patience possess ye your
Souls. He foretold 'em what they should expect, verse. 12. and so onward, to be
persecuted, to be delivered up to the Synagogues, imprisoned, and betrayed by
Kindred, by Parents, by Brethren, to be put to death, and hated of all men for
his sake: yet for all that, in Patience possess ye your Souls.

Now to suffer patiently, is first, to be content with what we suffer: and if
once thus we were, our murmuring would cease, our grudgings were at an end; we
would not revile God's High Priest, nor speak evil of the Ruler of his People:
much less, combine to remove those Princes whom our own Fret and Malice, and
Ambition, only make uneasy. We would not stumble at straws; nor no mountains
cast upon us would unsettle us, would shake our Loyalty; such is the Power, and
virtue of a contented patience.

Yet that is not all. He is content with his Fortune that neither repines nor
murmurs at it; this may be Heathen patience, but it is not Christian. That man
only is Christianly patient, that secondly, is cheerful in it; does not only
quietly and serenely suffer wrong, but rejoices in it. This, the true Martyrs
patience; such as St. Paul speaks of the first Christians, who took joyfully
the spoiling of their goods, knowing that in Heaven they had a more enduring
substance.

This cheerfulness sometimes works to a Resignation, sometimes arises from it;
however a full Resignation of our selves into the hands of God, is always a
companion of, and a necessary ingredient, and must be the third in Christian
Patience. He suffers patiently, that suffers without reluctance, that is so at
the dispose of the Almighty, that he has not so much as a desire, or wish
within him, for any thing concerning his tribulation, or issue of it, but what
it pleases God to make him; who is content to live in torment, or die in pain,
or change his condition as often, and as many ways as it shall seem best to the
wisdom of his Heavenly Father: this is perfect Patience, and this is patiently
to suffer as Christians.

There are who would be counted such; whom yet every thing disturbs, whom every
little suffering discontents, who are always repining at superior Powers, who
upon every petty grievance, speak evil of Authority, whose hasty desires never
wait God's leisure, but seek out speedy, and unlawful Remedies to themselves;
and yet will needs be counted patient men, the only Martyrs. But call we this
Patience to Rage against Government? Nay, and when we are justly sentenced for
our faults, even then to suffer with reviling mouths, and seditious speeches!
neither to trust our Deliverance to God's Providence, nor our safety to the
Laws! not only to prescribe to God, means, and time, to help them; but Conspire
by the most dishonorable, as well as the most wicked ways to free themselves,
from such mischiefs which only their own folly and malice have created to
themselves! Plotting thus against their own Peace, by needless jealousies, and
then make that very jealousy, a sufficient ground to contrive the King's ruin!
Certainly, these men, have other principles than what Christ left them; who
being reviled, reviled not again, who when he suffered, threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously; who yet had full power to
have judged them himself: only that he might leave us an Example, how to behave
our selves when men oppress us, to be content when men oppress us, to be
content with it, cheerful under it, and refer the rest to God. And this will
make way for my third Proposition:

III. If we do well, we will rather suffer patiently, than take revenge upon,
or resist the Power which God has set over us. If the Authority be just,
Obedience is necessary; not always to do what is commanded, for it may be Evil;
and then God must be obeyed, not man: yet to man, so much Obedience, even in
that, is due, as to submit patiently to the penalty is inflicted on us, though
it be unjust.

Indeed naturally, every man has a Right of Resistance, to repel an Injury
from himself: yet this his private power, for peace and quiet sake, is
restrained with bounds by that Superiors power under which he is. So that being
a Member of a Commonwealth, or Kingdom, he has no Resistance lawful,
permitted to him, but what is indulged or commanded to him by the Law under
which he lives; which certainly denies him any resistance of the supreme Power
it it self, be it what it will; else were there no way left to quiet any time
the Seditious, or conserve the public peace, neither could the Majesty of the
supreme Authority be defended, were there left to the Subjects a liberty to
gainsay, or withstand, much less to resist it: whence it comes, that there are
so many cautelous, and even scrupulous Laws, invented by Parliament, to keep
the Person, and Power, and Dignity, of the supreme Governor Sacred and
Inviolable.

Therefore as to that pretense, that by nature we have a freedom to withstand
force, by force, and may deliver our selves by the destruction of that Power
which would inslave us; it is to be considered. That in all established
Governments the People have divested themselves from the rights and practices
of those Liberties, and Defenses, which otherwise they might make, and enjoy.
For because it was soon found out that every single man would be a Prey to any
other that was stronger than himself, therefore all people thought it necessary
to combine themselves into Societies, and unite their Strength by putting it
all into the hand of one man, who should defend all the rest. Now the
Conclusion from hence is; if the power of defending, and revenging of wrongs,
be committed by the People, to one Man, for the ends of Government, then this
Power is given from themselves, and stated in the Supreme, there to remain. The
same natural reason that makes Government necessary, making it as necessary
that the Governor be obeyed: but then he cannot be judged, nor he most not be
resisted; for the Supreme cannot be both above and under the People: but it is
so, if the People can avenge their own wrongs; for that which avenges must also
be supreme; which because in no Monarchy the People are, therefore they must be
quiet, and patient; for how can they right themselves against him whom they
cannot call to judgment?

The very Heathens saw this necessary subjection without any other light than
what Nature gave them. Principi summum imperium Dii dederunt, subditis obsequia
gloria relicta est, says Tacitus. The divine Power has given the supreme
Arbitrament of all things to the Prince, the only glory left to Subjects is
Obedience. Aequum atque iniquum Regis imperium feras. Seneca. The Kings
Command, be it just or unjust, must be suffered. (...), is all the reason
Euripides gave in this case, Governors they are, and therefore must be obeyed.

Nor was Passive Obedience due only to the supreme Magistrate, but to all the
rest proportionably, to inferior Governors, to Fathers, and Masters. It was
Roman Law, Miles qui castigare volenti Centurioni resisterit, si vitem tenuit,
militiam mutat, si ex industria fregit, velmanum Centurioni intulit, capite
punitur. That Soldier which resists his Captain when he comes to beat him for
his faults, if he lay hold upon his Commander's Cudgel, shall be presently
discarded, but if he break it, or lay hold upon him, he shall die for it.
Aristotle though he spoke not Law, spoke the ground of it, when he said, (...);
If a Magistrate strike us, we must not strike again. And Cicero for our Parents
says the same: Non modo reticere homines parentum injurias, sed etiam aequo
animo far oportet, We must bear our Parents injuries with silence and
patience; so natural Piety does enjoin us: Servants were bound to a more strict
obedience to their Masters by the Civil-Laws, which are nothing else but
Conclusions deduced from the Principles of Natural Reason, and are in this,
backed by the Judicial. Thus even Nature taught them, which yet makes all
equal, but however born to be obedient to the state, wherein they are to be.

And all this is but reason, for the inferior having either by voluntary
Choice as Servants, or by Natural descent as Children, or by condition of state
or succession as Subjects, given up their right of all, and the dispose of
themselves to the wisdom and discretion of their Governors, have no reason to
resist their Commands and Injunctions, because in so doing they contradict
themselves: first willing and desiring one thing in their supreme Governor,
(who is vertually each of them) and then the contrary by a new affection of
their own.

It Is requisite therefore that one of these be repealed, the first is not now
in our power to do, it is out of our hand, without a limitation. The second
therefore we must correct, either by submitting to what the other shall think
just, or by suffering for transgressing it, when we cannot do it with a safe
and quiet Conscience.

Yet in all this, with St. Augustine's order, Si aliquid jusserit Curator,
faciendum, non tamen si contra Proconsul jubeat; aut si Consul aliquid jubeat,
and aliud Imperator, non utique contemnis potestatem, sed eligis majori
servire: If an inferior Magistrate command, we must Obey; yet if the superior
enjoin the contrary, we must suffer the inferiour's violence against us; but do
what the superior bids us.

But I leave Nature and Reason, because men have forgot them, and I might upon
the same account omit Scripture also, but it is the Word of Eternal Truth, and
we must not slightly pass over it. And in it how read we? In the Old Testament,
at the first institution of Kings, 1 Samuel 8. 11. when he had told them how
their King should use them, usurp upon their Land and Vineyards, and Wives and
Children, and take of them what he pleased, What then? shall they lift up
themselves, and stir against him? No, ye shall cry out in that day for the King
which ye have chosen you. verse. 18.

There is all the remedy you have in case of his Tyranny and Oppression, to cry
out in that day unto the Lord. And it is strange if any License of Resistance
was ever granted by Almighty God, that in a People so obstinate, so ready to
perverseness, as the Jews, we never read of any Party that rose up against
their Kings, (though wicked and ungodly) to vindicate themselves from their
unjust Grievances; which must needs arise by the Idolatry of such who Ruled
over them; unless such who were peculiarly Authorized from Heaven, or such
whose Actions are Recorded for History, and Testimony of God's Providence in
suffering them, not of his Testimony in approving them.

Nay more; the very Idols of the Heathens, how grievous soever to the devout
and pious Souls, were not demolished by any private hand, they were fain to
suffer it, it being not justly in their power to do otherwise. And you may read
of the indiscreet Zeal of a Christian Bishop who against the Emperors Command
or Toleration, throwing down an Idols Temple, was the occasion of a violent
persecution. God is a God of Order, and would have none go beyond their bounds,
but do their duty, and commit the rest to his wiser disposal.

But however not to resist, for that of all the rest is incompatible with
Suffering, You must therefore needs be subject, Romans xiii. 5. For to say no
more, whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, and they
that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. It is in vain to say more,
being so plain to any man to understand, that seriously thinks of a Day of
Judgment; when all the dawbing of Liberty, and Property, and Religion, shall be
wiped off, and no pretense nor distinction satisfy against the Evidence of
Truth, and so plain expressions.

And if you please to have any more of God's mind, you shall see in Scripture,
that He is so tender of Kings, that not only they shall not be ill used, but
not so much as ill thought, or spoke of, Eccl. x. 10. Curse not the King, no
not in thy thought. Nay, and to prevent all Rebellion from shrouding it self
under the new invented terms of Heats and Stirs, God himself has declared,
Prove. xxx. 31. Where the word of a King is there is power, and who can say unto
him What do thou? Against him there is no rising up.

This perhaps all men will agree to, but when the Prince is evil, and does
wrong, invades Property, and intrenches upon Liberty, or indangers our
Religion. For what then? Why the Rule in Scripture relates to such Princes that
are supposed to be Evil; for no man will Curse him whom he thinks to be good
and gracious; but be he never so Evil, Curse him not, no not in thy Mind, much
less with thy Tongue, and then to be sure to do him no harm with thy Hand, when
thou must not so much as intend, or wish it in thy Thought. Resist not Evil is
our Savior's injunction, Mat. v. 39. we must hurt no man, nay not that man
from whom we receive hurt; for no man must be his own Avenger. If a private
hand does me an Injury, I have no way to defend my self, but by the Magistrate
and by the Law. But then if my Prince does me Evil, how shall I render Evil
back to him? It must be by some Power superior to his, but that is none but
Gods. Here therefore St. Paul's Rule comes in, Romans xii. 37. Not to render Evil
for Evil, but to give place to wrath, that is, to the Divine Vengeance. Evil
Princes are to be referred to that; and to this agree our Laws, declaring, That
the King receives his Power only from Gods hand, and therefore he is
accountable only at His Tribunal.

Well; but then the People are but in an illcondition: for if Kings who are for
our defense shall turn Wolves, and destroy us; instead of being
Nursing-Fathers, shall eat up their Children; if against Law, they shall impose
upon our Liberties and our Consciences, and not allow a legal freedom in our
Estates, and Religion, what then? why! the question still is, whether they be
Kings, or not? For if they be supreme, we cannot control, nor correct what is
above us. Our present remedy is Patience, and we must leave all the rest to
God's Care and Punishment; for we our selves are tied up, and we must not
resist.

And say, there is any Case in which we might; what Case is that? I hope we
shall not admit it in all; but then if you admit but one, that will be as bad,
for seditious People will be sure their Case shall be that. And if in any case
at all, it must be certainly in the Case of Religion; and here indeed all our
Rebels crowd in. Ay, but the Scriptures which teach our Religion, will not
allow it in that Case neither: For even then, when the Emperors persecuted
Christianity, and lived upon Blood, and satisfied both their Malice and their
Pleasure in the death of Christians: Yet still says St. Paul, ye must be
subject, and ye must not resist, for that will be your damnation; and you had
better dye Martyrs than Rebels. Upon this reason the Christians always laid
down their weapons, and lifted up their hands in Prayer, threw away their
Swords and took up the Cross, and fought for no Crowns but those of Martyrdom.

Yet still, we hope we may be concerned for the Public, not that we have any
private quarrels against the King, or particular designs to make our selves
great; but however as Patriots of the People, and Representatives of our
Country, we must prevent mischief, and not suffer the Commonwealth to be
destroyed: and therefore it may be more advisable to cut off a dangerous
Prince, than leave it in his election and power to destroy Liberty, and
Property, and Religion. By this specious pretense it is, that our Protestant
Dissenters cover, and defend their malicious purposes: not remembering the
Christian Rule given by St. Paul, Romans iii. 8. Not to do Evil that Good may
come of it. Those mischiefs which we fear hereafter, if they cannot lawfully be
diverted, must be entertained whenever they shall happen, with patience and
submission: and, as in that, there is more Christianity, so too more Prudence,
and a nobler Courage; for thus we preserve the present Peace, leave future
things to the dispositions of Providence, and our own preservation, to the Laws
and an harmless Innocence. We have a sort of hotheaded Republicans,
reprobating the Rights of the King, and the noblest Subject, by a kind of
absolute and irrespective Decree, against Religion, Common-justice, and the
Laws; not considering in the least, the fatal consequences, and horrid
injustice; so they can but wreck their malice upon the best of Kings, and the
most generous of Brothers! But allowing those things by which they would
blacken them; are we to preserve that which they call Protestant Religion, (a
composition of so many, that in the whole mass it is none at all) against all
the Rules we are to take from our common Christianity, as well as natural
Justice? Not to do Evil that Good may come of it, is the direction of our
Bible; not to put that upon another which we would not endure that others
should put upon us, is the Rule of Equity; and not to set the Nation into a
present flame, for fear heareafter a tempestuous Prince should Govern it, is I
presume, a conclusion from Policy. And though Self-preservation be a very dear
Principle, yet certainly not to be persued by the violation of those Rights
that are establi^h'd by Divine and Humane Laws.

These are the things that we have so long, and so justly complained of in the
Tenets and Practices of our Adversaries of Rome: but whilst we thus fear, and
strive, and cry out against Popery, shall we our selves maintain one of the
saddest points of it; in our Affronting, Opposing, and Conspiring against
Kings? glorying so long in the Word Protestant, till we altogether disclaim the
Christian; and by a pretense of Zeal against one Religion, become a scandal,
and a shame to all! For as to Government you cannot tell me which is worst, the
Romanist or the Dissenter: for if the King be inferior to the Pope, as the
Jesuits, or to the Presbytery and People, as the other do affirm; it is but
charging him with misdemeanors in Government, and then setting up the
Pastoral-Staff of St. Peter, or the Standard of Christ, and you may call him to
an account with Sword and Blunderbuss, and yet be Innocent. Thus the Scepter of
the Prince, be i^ under the Keys of St. Peter, or the Kirk of St. Andrew, shall
be Deposed by every proud Priest or pragmatical Presbyter; and it will be all
one to the Monarchy which prevails, the Pope or the Faction. Nor is it any
great matter what our People call themselves, or of what Church they are; for I
am sure if they be Rebels, they cannot be good Christians. Therefore I was
always of Opinion, that those men who can think it lawful to fight against
their Prince, were the rankest Hypocrites in their pretenses to Religion: for
such whose Consciences are Armor of proof against the plain demonstration of
duty, will stick at no other sin, when their Ambition or Interest, invites them
to it. I have therefore continually wondered how such, as might easily be
observed both to speak and practice ill things against the Government, could
ever be thought to be Sober, and Pious People: remembering that when St. Jude
was giving an account of base and wicked men, as a part of their Character
tells us, they despise Dominion, and speaks evil of Dignities; which as he
makes the mark of a profane and wicked person, so the Apostle aggravates it,
by observing that it is an using the Prince worse than St. Michael would the
Devil, against whom he brought no railing accusation. To which meek and
Christian temper we shall the sooner be persuaded by considering the last
Proposition.

IV. That to do well, and suffer patiently, is incumbent upon us, by the
Religion we profess. To this we are called, to do well, and yet suffer, to do
well though we suffer, to suffer patiently, nay and to choose to suffer, rather
than resist, or rise up.

It is Cowardice, not Christianity to desist from doing well, for fear of
suffering evil; nor are dangers or undoing, or death it self, Pleas sufficient
to excuse us from the performance of what is just and good: for this, says S.
Peter, is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. verse. 15, 16. as free, but not using your liberty as
a cloak of maliciousness but as the Servants of God; that is, as those who are
called to imitate the Patience of a Crucified Lord and Master. Christ gave his
Disciples the exactest Rule of Patience, say the Ancient Fathers, not only, not
to resist, but not to seem to go about it; and from this place in the Text, and
verse. 12. 13, 14, 15, 16. of the Fourth Chapter they gather it, and to Christ's
Example they conform it; whose Example is propounded to us in the following
verses; who exalted also every virtue, and therefore this of Patience and
Obedience, to their just perfection, and so enjoins it to his Disciples. This
made the Christian Church grow up to its height and splendor; for it was not
the Sword of Fighting Men, but the Blood of Patient Christians, that spread the
Name of Christ, and so gloriously defended it; it being the Christians
Principle to Suffer for his Name, not fight for it, but to be sure rather to
Suffer, than Rebel.

And if you ask the first times of Christianity, both their Actions and Words
express as much. The Thebaean Legion consisting of near Seven Thousand
Christians, when the Emperor Maximinian, under pain of death, commanded them
to Sacrifice to Idols, what did they? they stood not upon their guard, though
they could easily have done it, but suffered themselves to be decimated by the
hands of some few Executioners sent on purpose, and after that they threw down
their weapons, and submitted their Necks and unarmed Bodies, to the Sword of
the Tyrant. Hoc solum reminiscentes, (says the Story) se illum confiteri, qui
nec reclamando ad occisionem ductus est, only remembering this, that they
confessed themselves to be his Disciples, who was led like a Lamb dumb before
his shearers, who did not open his mouth. And we read of as great a number
under Valens the Arrian Emperor, who without any resistance, submitted
themselves to his Fury and Violence.

Nor was it as the Author of Julian pretends (though against all the faith of
History) that in these Examples there wanted power of Resistance; and
Tertullian tells the Emperor as much, Externi sumus, and vestra omnia
implevimus, etc. cui bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam copiis
impares; qui tam libenter trucidamur, si non apud istam disciplinam, magis
occidi liciret, quam occidere. What Armies (says he) were we not sufficient to
grapple with, though we were fewer, who are yet so willingly slain, if by our
Religion it were not more lawful to suffer, and be killed, rather than to kill
others, by defending our selves. S. Cyprian says as much: and Lactantius thus
expresses Patience: Ideo cum tam nefanda perpetimur, ne verbo quidem
reluctamur, sed Deo remittimus ultionem. When we suffer such horrible things,
we do not so much as resist them in words, but commit the revenge only to God.
Thus they chose to suffer, and thought themselves called thereunto by their
Religion.

And if we would be truly Christians, this must be our temper, this our
practice. And I hope in what concerns our duty, whether to God, or Man, we
shall take our measures from Christ, and primitive Religion, and not from such
hot and rebellious Zealots, who with God in their mouths will violate all that
is sacred and just, in their actions.

I would only say one thing more. Here is an horrible Plot discovered, against
the Life of the King, and His Royal Highness: and this calls upon us all who
have but an ordinary kindness, and respect to His Majesty and the Government,
for two duties: The First is, to pay unto God, an hearty Acknowledgment for his
tender and particular Providence over the King, and indeed in him, over us all,
since in his Preservation, we enjoy our Lives, and Estates, our Liberties, and
Religion. The other duty is, to set a mark upon those Men, and such Principles,
which would have murdered the best of Kings, and the most Loyal part of the
Nation, under a pretense of defending Liberty, and Protestant-Religion. How far
this wretched Plot it self, is believed, or whether believed to be the Plot of
those Men against whom it is both Charged, and Proved, I cannot say; but this I
will say, that the Practice of what they would have done, is so like, what by
their Preachers they are taught to do, that if we do but consider by whom the
Dissenters are led, it is no wonder at all to find them so ready to do mischief.

And as I was saying at first, that their Principles do so naturally tend to
Rebellion, that they can never be made good Subjects, but by renouncing their
Masters, and their Doctrines; So I now add, that if there be any one of them
that is kind to the Government, it is the goodness more of his Nature than
Persuasion, if they do believe their own Guides. I shall instance but in a few,
but those few, such as were notoriously active in the destruction of the Royal
Martyr, and have been Teachers of the People in Conventicles since the Return
of his present Majesty.

Mr. Calamy, in a Speech at Guild Hall, upon the calling in of the Scots to
assist the Rebellion, to encourage so Pious a Cause, did assure his Auditors,
that had he himself as many Lives as Hairs upon his Head, he would Sacrifice
all in that Quarrel. A blessed President for a factious People! Nay, and as to
that very Principle upon which this wicked Plot was grounded, (viz.) the
pretense of preserving Liberty and Religion, he delivers his Opinion, That for
Peace and Reformation, it is commendable to Fight against the King's Command.
Page 29. Theses. The Pope in his Chair could not have determined more
magisterially, nor to more mischievous purposes: And indeed the Jesuit and the
Presbyterian, proceed by the same measures; for to gain the People to Fight
against their Prince, they will at any time make over to them, the Sovereignty:
And then as Mr. Calamy asserts, all Loyal Subjects (as now it is pretended) are
the betrayers of Religion, and Liberty; and those (says he) that fought under
the King's Banner, did endeavor, by all bloody and traitorous ways, to subvert
Religion and Property. So that here is Treason found in the King, against his
Sovereign Lord the People! Therefore he declares the Rebellion to be so much
God's Cause, that whoever dyed in it, would dye a Martyr. Sermon to the Peers.

Mr. Jenkins, another of the same holy stamp, after the War which he had
Preached up, was ended, and he had leisure to calculate the Thousands, both of
Men and Money, consumed upon that fatal occasion, and had also weighed the
King's Blood, and all his Subjects that had been Murdered, against the
Covenant, he sets down his Opinion at the foot of the Account, that the removal
of the King, and Bishops, was a sufficient payment for all the ^oin and
Treasure that had been spent in those ^^^traction^^^; So that, it is no wonder
at all, that, these men value not the blood of Kings, nor their People;
Reformation and Protestant-Religion, will answer for it all. And for that, you
shall hear Mr. Baxter too, (who has still the guidance of Consciences, and is
Master of a Conventicle) declaring, That where Religion and Liberty, are the
question, it is not to be questioned at all, but that the King, and all that
adhere to him may be murdered. Upon this account perhaps, he declares to the
whole World by way of boast, that he had Preached Thousands into the War, and
that his own being engaged in it, was the greatest outward Service he ever
performed to God. Page 141. H. C. Nay, and lays down that infamous as well as
Treasonable Principle; That if he had taken up Arms against the Parliament, his
Conscience tells him he had been a Traitor. A rare Christian Conscience, for a
Preacher of Christ, and one that had taken the Oath of Allegiance, to declare
it to be Treason to defend his Liege Lord. But this Gentleman was better read
in Scripture than our Laws; and indeed one would think so, that shall see him
urge all those Texts of it, that were intended for lawful Governors, to press
Obedience to the usurped Powers; those he said, could not be ^^ed without
damnation, but the King might* for Loyalty in this Man's Divinity, is the
unpardonable Transgression. For Rebellion against the King, he thinks, needs no
Repentance, or no Mercy, and therefore, (says he) having searched into the
matter of Fact, as to my concernment in the War, I am so far from Repenting,
that I could not forbear doing the same, under the same circumstances. And
truly Custom in this matter is a very fine thing, he that has practiced so well
against one Prince, can tell how the better to deal with another.

And as to Princes in general, the late Dr. Owen, that had so many Disciples at
his feet, has declared, That when Kings command unrighteous things, and their
Subjects do obey them; no doubt but the destruction of them both is just, and
righteous. And it is no doubt if these Casuists could determine it as readily
by the Sword, as with their Pens. And though indeed they have Hypocrisy, and
Impudence, equal to their Wickedness, and would bear the World in hand; that
they are Harmless and Innocent, yet from them it is that the Easy and the
Zealous, are taught to desie Government, and put in practice the worst
Principles of their Masters. I need not instance in any more particulars,
Calvin, and Beza, Knox and Buchanan, have taught the whole Herd of Dissente^^
such horrible things, that as they themselves ha^^ managed them, have in all
Nations proved to the continual disturbance of the Peace, and to the Murder of
a great many Princes, as does appear in History. And indeed the first Man in
Story, that spoke evil of Kings, was a Separatist. St. Ambrose tells us of
Lucifer Caralitanus, who spoke hard things of Constantius the Arrian Emperor;
but the Father observes, that he was one that did Separate from
Church Communion. After that, the Popes of Rome, and with them since have
joined the Presbitery, both the one and the other, having declined from
Primitive Piety, fell off from their Loyalty also, and reckon it no Sin, to
Curse or Rebel against their Prince. But in all the first times of Religion,
for some hundreds of Years, the Christians by their Books, and by their Blood,
gave Testimony that Kings are in no case to be Conspired against or Resisted.
Hence Tertullian tells us for the honor of Christianity, that when there was a
Rebellion made against a Bloody, and a Cruel Emperor, out of pretense for
Religion, and the Publick-Good, the Christians then would not be ensnared into
Evil by the glorious Baits of Liberty and Religion.

And to conclude, Christ never gave any other Rules than what are in the Text,
Obedience and Patience, the one when the Prince commands as he should, and the
other when he commands what he ought not. And thus we either obeying or
suffering like Christians, shall dye like such, and He that calls us to Grace,
will one day bring us to Glory, and Crown both our Doings and our Sufferings,
with Peace and Glory, and Immortality.

FINIS.

