OF Ejaculatory Prayer. THE NECESSITY there is OF it.

THE ADVANTAGES there are FOR it.

AND THE ADVANTAGES there are BY it.

DEMONSTRATED With several Directions for the Practice of it.

By Theophilus Polwheile, M. A.

SVRSVM CORDA.

(...)

London, Printed for Tho. Tailor, at the Hand and Bible on London Bridge, 1674.

To the worthily honored Mr. MATTHEW SKINNER, Merchant in London.
SIR,
THE great kindness that you showed to me immediately after I had the happiness
to be first acquainted with you, has made such an impression upon my Spirit,
that I cannot but exceedingly rejoice to have this oprortunity, of telling to
the World how much you have obliged me. In Testimony of which, I now present
you with this Treatise (such as it is) of Ejaculatory Prayer. Which I Know (it
being of that nature that it may well be numbered amongst those things that are
to be looked upon as helps and furtherance of having your Conversation in
Heaven; which I persuade my self is your main design and endeavor) will be
very acceptable to you. Seeing but few (if any) have made it their principal
design to discourse fully, and particularly of Ejaculatory Prayer (for though
something transiently in prosecution of other Discourses, yet not any peculiar
Treatise that I know of has been published concerning it) although many, as
may well be supposed, even of those who do acknowledge the concernment of
Prayer in the general, do not understand, at least consider as they ought, the
concernment of Ejaculatory Prayer in particular: I have for the Information and
Conviction of such Persons Written this ensuing Treatise. Wherein I have
endeavored to evince the Necessity of it; and to show not only the Alvantages
we have for it, but also the Advantages and benefits we may have by it. I have
shown likewise the evil of neglecting it; and essayed to persuade to the
diligent performance of the Duty, hoth for our selves and others, upon all
occasions: yet upon some more especially, which therefore are mentioned, and
insisted on in particular. And because Men are liable to many a miscarriage in
the discharging of it, for preventing of them, several Cautions are laid down;
and afterward several Directions given, to help in the performing it. This is
the Sum and substance of what this Treatise contains, which I have contracted
in as narrow a Compass as I could: seeing ordinary Persons (for whom this
Treatise is specially designed) are neither willing to be at the price of
buying, nor at the pains of reading much larger Discourses. I have no more to
add, but that my desire and prayer is, and shall be, that the blessing of
heaven may be upon your self, and your worthy Relations and that I am

SIR, Your most affectionate Friend, Theophylus Polwheile.
Tiverton, October 10. 1674.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Text whereupon the ensuing Discourse is grounded, set down, and
explained. All sorts (or kinds) of Prayer therein virtually comprehended; and
consequently Ejaculatory Prayer. The Doctrine of praying with Ejaculatory
Prayer from thence inferred. What Ejaculatory Prayer is. A Description of of
it: wherein it agrees with other Prayer, and wherein it differs from it. The
Doctrine proved, both by Precept and Practice, out of the Scripture.

CHAP. II. ARguments to excite to the Practice of Ejaculatory Prayer. Some
Arguments from the Necessity there is of it. The Necessity of Prayer in the
general. The Necessity of Ejaculatory Prayer in particular. Some Arguments from
the Advantages there are for it. Several Advantages for Ejaculatory Prayer more
than for other Prayer. Some Arguments from the Advantages there are by it.
Advantages by it, In respect of our good. Advantages in respect of Gods glory.
The Application, Some Iuferences for Information and Instruction. CHAP. III.
THE Evil of Neglecting Ejaculatory Prayer. Two sorts guilty of it. Some as not
praying with any Prayer at all. The evil that is in this. Some notwithstanding
their praying with other Prayer. The Evil that is in this. The Evil that comes
by it. A Diswasive from it. CHAP. IV. AN Exhortation to the practice of
Ejaculatory Prayer. Men exhorted to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer for
themselves. The forementioned Arguments from the Necessity there is of it, the
Advantages there are for it, and the Advantages there are by it; to excite to
the practice of Ejaculatory Prayer, by way of Motive applied. Special Occasions
of Men's praying with Ejaculatory Prayer for themselves mentioned. Special
Directions, as to every particlar occasion, for what they should pray, given.
CHAP. V. MEN exhorted to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer for others. it is their
Duty to pray for others as well as for themselves. It is their Duty to pray for
others with Ejaculatory Prayer. When they should pray with Ejaculatory Prayer
for others. For whom they should pray, when they pray with Ejaculatory Prayer
for others. CHAP. VI. CAutions for preventing of mistakes, and miscarriages,
in, and about, the practice of Ejaculatory Prayer. It must not hinder Set
Prayer. Arguments to convince of the Necessity of Set Prayer. It must not be
formal. It must not be hypocritical. It must not be profane. It must not be
passionate. It must not be rested in, nor trusted to. CHAP. VII. DIrections for
the right performance of the Duty of Ejaculatory Prayer.
Books Printed for Tho. Tailor at the Hand and Bible on London Bridge,
Argalus and Parthenia, by Francis Quarls. Hodders Decimal Arithmetic. Heaven
taken by Storm, by Tho. Watson. The Child's delight, or an Essay to the English
Grammar, by Tho* Lie. A Manual for Parents, by Tho. White. A Discourse of the
Excellency of the Heavenly substance, on Heb. 10. 34. by John Hicks. Two
Sermons, one on the fifth of November, the other before the Military Company at
St. Clements Danes, by John Scot Minister of St. Thomas Southwark*
ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 12. for prying* read praying. p. 13. l. 8. blot out s. p. 15. l.
15. after do r. so. p. 60. l. 2. for uncharitable r. unaccountable. p. 85. blot
out the quotation in the Margin, and place it in p. 87. over against these
words in l. 11. p. 104. in the margin for Vnam r. Nam. p. 125. l. 23. for show
it r. showed. p. 133. l. 5. for away r. awry. p. 134. l. 17* blot out it. p.
139. l 20. for real r. natural. l. 25. after but r. he. p. 141. l. 21. for
attractable r. attractive. p. 142. l. 20. for naturable r. natural. p. 143. l.
8. for the r. your. p. 144. l. 12. for tryes a Dart, or shoots, r. tryes to
Dart, or shoot.

OF EJACULATORY PRAYER.
CHAP. I. The Text whereupon the ensuing Discourse is grounded, set down, and
explained* All sorts (or kinds) of Prayer therein virtually comprehended, and
consequently Ejaculatory Prayer. The Doctrine of Praying with Ejaculatory
Prayer from thence inferred. What Ejaculatory Prayer is. A Description of it.
Wherein it agrees with other Prayer, and wherein it differs from it. The
Doctrine proved both by Precept, and Practice out of the Scripture.
THe matter to be discoursed in the Treatise which I now begin, being the Duty
of Ejaculatory Prayer* a great and concerning Duty; I shall lay for a
Foundation of my Discourse, those words of St. Paul in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, Chap. 6. 18. Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication, which
therefore must be a little explained.

The Apostle having in the foregoing verses exhorted the Ephesians, that they
might be the better enabled to fight against their spiritual Adversaries, to
put on their spiritual Armor; in the conclusion here in this verse, he exhorts
them to pray: to show, (that as Men in other War, are wont to seek aid and
help of those that are their Confederates, by Letters; so) Christians in this
spiritual War should seek aid and help of God, who is their Confederate by
Prayer. And

1. He shows it must be Always, Praying always. The meaning whereof is not,
that they should do nothing else but Pray, as those Heretics of old, called
the They were about the days of Constantine: Their Heresy was (as Austin and
others relate) in this; That they decryed all other Religions Exercises, and
employments in men's ordinary Callings, in comparison of Prayer, which they held
to be the whole Duty of Man, and therefore vilifyed Preaching, and the
Administration of the Sacraments, etc. upon this ground, because we are
commanded in Scripture to Pray always.
Euchittes, or Praying Heretics, taught; but that they should Pray upon all
occasions. The Original is (...), in every opportunity. Now these opportunities
are either standing* opportunities (or set-times) of Prayer, Morning and
Evening; or else occasional, and accidental, at any other time of the day. The
Apostle means both, when he says Always, or in every opportunity: As if he had
said* Let no opportunity of Prayer pass, without Praying in it. This is the
first Particular, he shows it must be Always.

2. He shows it must be with All Prayer. Praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication: that is, with all sorts of Prayer, or with all kind, or all
manner of Prayer. As if he had said, Pray with all manner of Prayer, or all
manner of ways. For this Epihheton (...) quod hic adjicitur, videtur omnimodam
precationem innuere, ^ou publicam solum, sed and privatain, ac secretam.
Arrowsm. Tact. Sacr.] Addo non statam solum, sed and Ejaculatoriam, etc.
All here, being Universal, comprehends all sorts of Particulars under it.
There be several sorts, or kinds of Prayer, (I say, several sorts, or kinds,
taking these words not in the special, but in a more general, and large
signification.) all which being herein virtually comprehended, might here be
fitly spoken of. And I might therefore take an occasion from hence you see, to
show it to be the Duty of Christians to Pray all manner of ways, or with all
sorts of Prayer upon all occasions, in every opportunity: But I am to insist
only upon one of them at this time, and that is Ejaculatory Prayer. Seeing the
Apostle exhorts the Ephesians to Pray always with all Prayer; and one sort of
Prayer is, Ejaculatory Prayer, therefore that must needs be meant amongst the
rest; and thence we may fairly infer this Doctrinal conclusion.

That it is the Duty of Christians to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer; or, To be
always in every opportunity praying and seeking to God by Ejaculatory Prayer.

In the handling of which, I will show you,

1. What Ejaculatory Prayer is. 2. That it is a Duty always in every
opportunity to be performed. 3. What Arguments there are to excite to the
performance of it. And then 4. Make Application of it.
For the first of these, What Ejaculatory Prayer is; You must know, That
Ejaculatory Prayer differs from other Prayer, only Quo ad Modum, in respect of
the Manner. All Prayer is a Religious representation of our Will, or Desire
before God, that he may be as itwere affected with it, to grant it to us. It Is
an expression of the desires of the heart unto God. It Is not enough unto
Prayer, that there be desires, but they must be some way or other, either in
heart, or with the voice, in thoughts, or in words, expressed unto God. Now
this is done, either for some continuance of time, as when a man sets himself
purposely to seek unto God for any thing he desires, and spends some
considerable time, (more or less) in the performance of the Duty, as Dan. 9. 3.
This is Set-prayer. Or else it is done for some short moment of time; when,
upon any occasion, in any place, any company, any business, or employment
whatsoever, the heart does suddenly dart up some holy desire unto God, and the
Vbi men's aut non penitus, aut non diu vacat Orationi. Ames. Medul.
mind does either not wholly, or not long attend unto it. When it is thus, then
it is called Ejaculatory Prayer. And therefore it is called Ejaculatory Prayer,
to express this quickness of the desire, and shortness of the duration, and
continuance, together with the forcibleness and efficacy of the Prayer. For
Ejaculation signifies a shooting, or darting forth; which is a sudden quick
motion, whereby the Arrow, or Dart is made to fly swiftly and speedily to the
Mark; and therefore it is a fit Metaphor to express the Manner of such short
Prayers unto God.

Ejaculatory Prayer then may be thus described.

It is a sudden, short transient prying unto God; when, where ever a man be,
whatever he be doing, however it be with him, he takes an occosion to express;
either in his heart, or with his voice, some holy gracious desire unto God,
that may be for the glory of God, and his own, or others good to be granted by
God.

In this Description of Ejaculatory Prayer we have, both wherein it agrees with
other Prayer, and wherein it differs from it.

1. Wherein it agrees with other Prayer; and that is in three Particulars.

1. It agrees with other Prayer in this, that it is an expression of some holy
and gracious desire unto God: for otherwise it were not Prayer.

2. In this, that it is either in the heart, or with the voice, either Mental,
or Vocal. These are examples of both in Scripture, which you shall have by and
by.

3. In this, that it is either for our selves or others.

2. Wherein it differs from other Prayer; and that is in three Particulars also.

1. It differs from other Prayer; in this, that it is sudden; that is to say,
without any deliberation, or premeditation, or preparation, without which,
ordinarily, other Prayer must not be.

2. In this, that it is a short transient Prayer, that is quickly past, and
gone, as an Arrow out of the Bow, or Dart out of the Hand, as consisting of
some single Petition; whereas other Prayer is a continued series or order of
praying, lengthned out for some time, as has been said. Other prayer therefore
is called a pouring out of the Soul, 1 Samuel 1. 15. and a pouring out of Prayer.
Isa. 26. 16. But Ejaculatory Prayer is but as a drop.

3. In this, that it is any place, any employment, any condition, which other
Prayer cannot be. And thus you have the first Particular, what Ejaculatory
Prayer is. Now in the next place I will show you,

2. That it is a Duty always in every opportunity to be performed. For the
proof whereof consider that,

1. It is Implicatively, or Virtually commanded. We are required to Pray with
all Prayer, as in the Text, therefore with this. We are to Pray without
ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17. that is, not only at Set-times, or occasionally with
Set-Prayer, but ever and anon all the day long with Ejaculatory Prayer.

2. There are many commendable Examples of it recorded in Scripture, which
therefore ought to be followed. Abraham Prayed with Ejaculatory Prayer for his
Son Ishmael, O that Ishmael might live before thee! Genesis 17. 18. David Prayed
with Ejaculatory Prayer against the Counsel of Ahithophel, O Lord, I pray thee,
let the Counsel of Ahithophel be turned into foolishness, 2 Samuel 15. 31. This
and the former were Vocal Ejaculatory Prayers. Nehemiah, while he was waiting
on the King, as he sat at the Table, and was questioning with him, Prayed with
Ejaculatory Prayer, Nehem. 2. 4. The King said unto him, For what do thou
make request? But before he told the King for what it was, he says he prayed
to the God of Heaven. By which it is evident that it was with Ejaculatory
Prayer that he Prayed, and it was Mental Ejaculatory Prayer. Christ when he was
upon the Cross Prayed with Ejaculatory Prayer for those that Crucified him,
that they might be forgiven. He said, Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do, Luke 23. 34. So Saint Stephen for those that Stoned him, He
kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge, Acts 7. 60. And at the same time he Prayed with Ejaculatory Prayer for
himself, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. v. 59. St. John telling that Christ
says, Surely I come quickly, presently adds in Ejaculatory Prayer, Amen, even
so come Lord Jesus. And then concludes with another Ejaculatory Prayer, The
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen. Rev. 22. 20. These are
some of the many Examples of the practice of this Duty recorded in Scripture,
by which you may see it is a Duty always in every opportunity to be performed,
which was the second Particular to be shown. Now in the third place see that
Arguments there are to excite to the performance of it, which I shall show in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. II. Arguments to excite to the Practice of Ejaculatory Prayer. Some
Arguments from the Necessity there is of it. The Necessity of Prayer in the
general. The Necessity of Ejaculatory Prayer in particular. Some Arguments from
the Advantages there are for it. Several Advantages for Ejaculatory Prayer more
than for other Prayer. Some Arguments from the Advantages there are by it.
Advantages by it in respect of our good. Advantages in respect of God's Glory.
The Application. Some Inferences for Information, and Instruction.
THere be manifold Arguments to excite to the diligent practice of this Duty of
Ejaculatory Prayer. And they are of three sorts; such as may be drawn from

The Necessity there is of it. The Advantages there are for it. The Advantages
there are by it.
1. From the Necessity there is of it. Prayer is necessary.

1. Necessitate praecepti, by necessity of Precept, as an Act of Obedience to
God's Command. He has Commanded that we should Pray, and Pray continually. And
the Commands of God puts the greatest necessity upon a Duty that may be. There
is nothing more necessary than that God should be obeyed. St. Paul speaking of
his Preaching the Gospel, says, Necessity is laid upon me, and Woe be to me, if
I Preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 16. He means not Necessity of Coaction, that
he was forced to Preach whether he would or not. No, If I do this thing
willingly, says he, I have a reward, but if against my Will, a dispensation of
the Gospel is committed to me. He means, Necessity of Precept. The same may be
said of every other Duty; there is a Necessity laid upon us by Gods Command for
the performance of it, and woe be to us, if we do it not. Some things indeed are
indifferent, we may do them, or not do them: but other things are of absolute,
and indispensable necessity, because they come under the Law, because they are
Commanded. And where God has Commanded, we are not to choose.

2. Necessitate Medij, the necessity of Means, because it is a necessary means
for the attaining of the End, namely God's Glory, and our Good. First God's
Glory. For Prayer is an Act of Religion, or Religious Worship; because of its
own Nature it yields to God that sufficiency, and efficiency of Knowledge,
Power, and goodness, which is proper to him as God; and therefore the glory
that is due to him as God, cannot be given to him without it. Secondly, Our
good. For, though all good works, as flowing from Faith, have some power to
obtain blessings from God, by virtue of those Promises, whereby he appoints a
free reward to them; yet Prayer has the force of a means to obtain a special
manner, not only as it is a chief part of Obedience, and therefore a principal
good work; but also because it has in its Nature this End and Use, as it is a
formal Act of Faith and Hope by which we receive all good things from God, and
therefore without asking in Prayer we cannot expect to receive any thing, you
have not, says the Apostle, because ye ask not; Or if we do, that it should be
sanctified. For every thing is sanctified by the Word, and Prayer. 1 Timothy, 4. 5.

By this then we see there is a necessity of Prayer. But it often comes to pass
when it is necessary to pray, that unless we do with Ejaculatory Prayer, there
can be no praying at all, and therefore there is a necessity of Ejaculatory
Prayer. Sometimes no other Prayer can be made. Sometimes there is an
impossibility of praying with other Prayer, in respect of the suddainness and
frequency of Occasions. Other Prayer cannot be made so suddenly as sometimes,
nor so frequently as most times there is Occasion. And there is an
impossibility of praying with other Prayer, sometimes in respect of unavoidable
hindrances; such as are from some violent disease, forcible restraint, and the
like. Sometimes a man has not strength, sometimes not time to pray with any
other Prayer than Ejaculatory Prayer. Hezekiah had not strength to pray with
any other Prayer when his disease grew strong, as he seems to imitate, Isa. 38.
14. where he says, Like a Crane, or a Swallow, so did I chatter, by which as
it is conceived Sensus loci, vix potui proloqui, and paucis supplicavi. Al.
Preces suas citatas, and breves fuisse signigficat Synops. Critic.
he means, that his Prayers were very brief; uttered with an interrupted voice,
by reason of the greviousness of his evil, and fear of present death. Peter had
not time to pray with any other Prayer when he was sinking. He had only time to
cry, Lord save me, Mat. 14. 31. And Stephen had but time for two or three such
like short prayers when he was stoned, Act. 7. 59, 60. So that sometimes no
other Prayer can be made. Sometimes also no other Prayer ought to be made. As
when there is not a convenience, or fitness, either in respect of the Company,
the Place, or the Employment one is in. When a man is with a Company that is
engaged in some secular business, or in some sport or play: or is in some
public place, as in the streets where People are passing to and fro
continually: or is himself engaged in some other duty which he must necessarily
attend; he ought not then to go his solitary set Prayers, and yet then, as
there is occasion, there ought to be Ejaculatory Prayer. But when other Prayer
may, and also ought to be made, even then Ejaculatory Prayer is necessary. Not
only before it, that the heart may be the better prepared for it, and after it,
that the heart may be the better kept in a frame answerable to it: but
sometimes in it, as for the repelling some evil thought, that either arises in
the heart, or is injected into it, which otherwise perhaps cannot possibly be
done. And when other Prayer is not necessary, Ejaculatory Prayer may be so. A
man is not always bound to go to Set Prayer when he may: though there be a
liberty, there is no necessity. But there may be a necessity then of
Ejaculatory Prayer, and this might be sufficient to manifest the necessity
there is of the practice of this duty of Ejaculatory Prayer. But it may be made
yet further to appear, by what is to be said of the necessity of it in some
other respects. As in respect of our sins, the necessity of it appears in
respect of them. For, First it is necessary that our sins be confessed, and
prayed against particularly. This is true of all our known sins; every known
sin must be repented of in particular. But this cannot be done always in
Set-Prayer, because before the time for Set-Prayer comes, diverse of them (they
being so many) must needs be forgotten. And besides, it is necessary that we
should do what is to be done against sin presently, if there be nothing to
hinder. Blessed is the man that stands not in the way of sinners, but
presently makes haste out of it. Psalm. 1. 1. It Is necessary therefore, that
having sinned, we forthwith ask the pardon of it, and power against it; but not
necessary to go every time to Set-prayer. God will not have us delay till the
Set-time comes; therefore expects it should be done presently, speedily. It
would argue great contempt of the Majesty of God else. As when one accidentally
hurts or wrongs another, and he does not presently cry Mercy, especially if he
be a great Person, every one would wonder, looking upon it to be, as it is, out
of contempt, that he neglects to do it. Therefore in that case, if there be any
ingenuity, you say, Alas Sir, What have I done! I crave Pardon, I cry Mercy,
etc. And much more should you do, whenever you know that you have sinned
against the great God. Ejaculatory Prayer is necessary then in respect of our
Sins. It is necessary also in respect of our Mercies. It is necessary that
Mercies be asked, and Prayed for particularly, as we take notice that we want
them. God requires that in every thing by Prayer and Supplication, our requests
should de made known unto him. Phil. 4. 6. But this cannot be done, but by
Ejaculatory Prayer: because if it be deferred till the time for Set-prayer
comes, many of them will be forgotten, and so we shall not pray for them at
all, but either be content to go without them, or betake our selves to some
other means for the obtainin of them, both which are very great evils, the one
being a despising of the Mercies of God, the other a despising of God himself,
which was Asa's Sin. 2. Chron. 16. 12. There is a necessity therefore of
Ejaculatory Prayer not only in respect of our Sins, but also of our Mercies.
Morever, as for the Sins and Mercies of Others, it is necessary in respect of
them likewise. When any are committing a sin, it is necessary we should pray
that they may repent and be forgiven; when they are laboring in the works of
their calling, that they may succeed and prosper; when they are in danger, that
they may be preserved, and delivered; but it is not necessary that we should
Pray thus always with Set-prayer, neither indeed is it possible. Therefore it
must be with Ejaculatory Prayer. In fine, it is necessary that we pray as much
as we can. Pray always says Christ, without ccasing says the Apostle. But we
shall not do so, unless we Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer, as well as with
Set-prayer. And thus you have the first sort of Arguments to excite to the
Practice of this Duty from the Necessity there is of it. The next are,

II. From the Advantages there are for it. There be many Advantages for
Ejaculatory Prayer, more than for other Prayer. For whereas other Prayer can be
but at certain times, all times serve for Ejaculatory Prayer. This Duty of
Ejaculatory Prayer may be done at all times, (...), in season, and out of
season. There needs no waiting for a fit time to Pray in with Ejaculatory
Prayer, as, when we are to Pray with other Prayer, very often there does. We
have no cause to say, when we should pray with Ejaculatory Prayer, Our time is
not yet come; for it is always ready. If there be need at any time, whatever
the time be, it is a fit time, it is fit to Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer in it.
And whereas other Prayer can be but in certain places, this may be in any place
whatsoever, (...), every where, or in every place, as the expression is, 1 Timothy
2. 8. which is especially true of Ejaculatory Prayer. Other Prayer, as the
Apostle there shows, may be in every place, that is, in every place that is
convenient (for so we are to understand him) but every place is not convenient
for it, as I have shown above. But every place is convenient for Ejaculatory
Prayer, and therefore it may be made any where, in any place, one as well as
another without exception. There needs no entering into the Closet, no shutting
of the door for Ejaculatory Prayer; no withdrawing from Company, no going into
a desert place, as sometimes there must be for Set-Prayer, Mat. 6. 6. and chapter
14. 23. And whereas other Prayer requires some actual preparation ordinarily,
(which may have something of difficulty in it, especially in some cases; and
requires some time, though it be never so little) this requires none, save only
a habitual preparation, upon which it is accepted, though there be no actual
preparation, which indeed by reason of its suddainess, it does not admit of.
Again, Other Prayer is inconsistent with the performance of other Duties at the
same time; but this is consistent with any Duty whatsoever. You must lay aside
all other business when you go to Set-prayer; but you need not lay any business
aside for Ejaculatory Prayer, you need not forbear any other Duty for the
performance of it. Even while you are hearing, reading, buying, selling, or
doing any other Duty, or Business either in your general, or particular
Calling, you may Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer as well as if you had nothing
else to do; it being not inconsistent with other Duty, nor any other Duty with
it. Furthermore, Other Prayer can be but seldom (in comparison) but this may
be frequent: not only many times a day, but many times in an hour. Daniel used
to de at his Set-prayers three times a day, David some days seven times; but
you may be at your Ejaculatory Prayer not only seven times a day, but seventy
seven times, yea many more. Again, Other Prayer is liable to many Distractions,
and Interruptions. Distractions from vain thoughts, and injections of Satan,
which may cause one to forget. Interruptions from the violence of wicked men,
and unexpected continggencies, which may cause one to break off. But this is
not liable to any Distraction, or Interruption whatsoever. Other Prayer may
sometimes bring into danger; one may be called in question for it, as Daniel
was, Dan. 6. 16. But none can question any for this when it is mental (as for
the most part it is) because it comes not under their observation, they cannot
know it. Satan likewise may take advantage against us from other Prayer; he
may by our Vocal confessions to God in Set-prayer come to know some secret sins
we are guilty of, and after lay them to our charge, and terrify us for them.
But he can take no advantage from Mental Ejaculatory Prayer for the same
reason, Cognoscunt Angeli cordium cogitationes in suis effectibus: ut autem in
seipsis sunt, Deo tantum sunt naturaliter cognitae. Thom p. 1. q. 57. Art. 4.
because he cannot know it. Again, to Pray with other Prayer, we are sometimes
to wait for Company, but need wait for none to Pray with this. And other Prayer
requires some length of time more, or less; but Vid Sc^iebler* Metapb. l. 2. c.
4. p* 7.
this may be done in an instant. Other Prayer requires See this at la^ge
discoursed in Dr. Goodwins Child of Light walking in darkness. p 57, 61, 64,
etc.
bodily labor, and so bodily strength, but this requires none. And some other
Prayer requires a special gift, but this none. Though a man be of never so weak
parts and gifts, yet he may be able to Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer. And thus
you have the second sort of Arguments to excite to the practice of this Duty
from the Advantages there are for it. The third are

III. From the Advantages there are by it. As there be many Advantages for
Ejaculatory Prayer, so there be many Advantages by it, and that in respect of

Our Good. God's Glory.
1. In respect of our Good. It is a special means of preventing Guilt; so that
when one is tempted, if he does not consent, but presently cry unto God by
Ejaculatory Prayer* against it; then, though it be his Affliction, it is not
his Sin. When you are troubled with blasphemous thoughts, then Ejaculatory
Prayer (if you use it aright) prevents the guilt. As when the Virgin was
ravished, if she cried out, she was pronounced innocent, Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26, 27.
This is a great Advantage, because it is better to be kept from Sin, than from
Suffering: The Devil caused Job to suffer many ways, but he could not (as he
hoped he should have done) cause him to sin, and that was his Advantage; for so
he was kept from the greatest evil of all; the least evil of sin, being
unspeakably worse than the greatest evil of suffering. And as it is a special
means of preventing guilt, so likewise of removing it. Suppose guilt has been
contracted, yet Ejaculatory Prayer (made in Faith, and with Repentance) does it
away. If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 9. David found it to be
so by experience, Psalm. 32. 5. I confessed (says he) and thou (speaking unto
God) forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Now this God does upon confession made
in Ejaculatory Prayer, as well as in Set-prayer, of which it is like David there
speaks. This also is a great Advantage. For Blessed is the man whose iniquity
is forgiven, whose sin is covered, as David says in the beginning of that
Psalm; which was a truth he had learnt by a dear-bought experience, having been
in so miserable, and so wretched a case so long, by reason of the guilt of sin
grievously afflicting and tormenting his Conscience, until by an act of
pardoning grace upon his confession, it was removed, as he declares in the
verses following. This therefore I say is a great Advantage; and as it is said
of Love, so may it be said of Ejaculatory Prayer in this respect, That it
covers a multitude of sins.

Another Advanatage is the having thereby a speedy return of Prayer, a present
Answer. For by Ejaculatory Prayer many times it is as soon obtained, as needed,
even then when there can be no Praying with Set-prayer for the obtaining of it.
This likewise is a great Advantage, for Delay is not only grievous, but
dangerous. It is also a special way of exercising Grace; for there is no
Ejaculatory Prayer that is right, but there is much Grace exercised in it. As
Faith, Hope, Love, Fear, Humbleness, and the Like. And then by this means they
are frequently exercised many times a day, which is a special Advantage; for
the frequent exercise of Grace increases the habit of Grace. And it is a
special Preservative of ones Peace, it being (as has been said) a special
means both of preventing guilt, and of removing it. And is it not a great
Advantage to have liberty to come unto God when one will? As to have liberty to
speak unto some Great Man as often as there is occasion, more than to be tied
to such and such set-times? Now by Ejaculatory Prayer you may come when you
will. It is also a special means of repelling Tempation, whether from Satan,
or your own hearts. And a special help against evil thoughts of any kind
whatsoever: For it prevails with God to come into ones help, to give Grace to
help in time of need. It will prevent our going forth in our own strength in
any undertaking, and consequently being left to our selves. For then (seeking
God by Ejaculatory Prayer first) we make him our strength, and he is not wont
to leave any to themselves that seek unto him, and depend upon him. It is a
special means of getting, and keeping Acquaintance with God. For as
Acquaintance grows amongst men by intercouse, and speaking one to another, so
it is here; by accustoming to speak to God by Ejaculatory Prayer, we grow
acquainted with him, which, what an Advantage it is, Eliphaz will tell you, Job
22. 21. It is a special means of freedom from carking care, and a special ease
to unburden ones self thus into the bosom of God upon all occasions. It is a
special Preparative to every Duty, and a good Close of it. Duties are never
better performed, than when Ejaculatory Prayer is made the Alpha, and Omega,
the Beginning, and Ending of them. To conclude, there is no such way to attain
our Desires so speedily, and frequently, as to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer.
Without this many of them will be but wandering, and consequently vain, and
fruitless desires; whereas this will send them to their right place and object,
which cannot be without some good success. And thus you see what Advantages
there are by it in respect of our own Good. It is of Advantage also.

2. In respect of Gods Glory. It gives him glory not only as other Prayer does,
but in a special, and peculiar manner as such Prayer. For it shows that he is a
present help in time of trouble, able to Deliver when, and wheresoever we stand
in need of Deliverance. It shows also that he is ready to help, as well as
able, seeing (as appears by this) a word will do it, that is, prevail with him.
And it shows also that he does not apbraid for our often coming to him. For if
we do as we ought, we come often to him by Ejaculatory Prayer (many times it
may be in an hour) and as often as we come (Praying aright) he hears us. Now
these are all glorious things in God, and our Praying with Ejaculatory Prayer
gives him the glory of them. Thus you see what Advantages there are by it in
respect of God's Glory. And thus you have the Arguments there are (some of the
principal of them) to excite to this Duty of Ejaculatory Prayer, which was the
third particular to be shown.

The Fourth is to make Application. And

First, If these things be so, it will hence follow, that Christians should
still be in a Praying-way, (I mean in respect of their conversation and course
of life) that they should endeavor to be always exercised in that which is
good, and take heed, not to be engaged at any time in any sinful practice, that
they know, or think to be sinful. For there is still need almost to be Praying
with Ejaculatory Prayer; and if at any time they be not in a good way, but
doing that which is evil, contrary to knowledge, and convictions; either they
will have no heart to Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer, (for Conscience of sin will
stop the mouth, and make them unable to ( Psalm. 40. 12.) look up unto God) or
it will not be heard. (For if men regard iniquity, ( Psalm. 66. 18.) God will
not regard their Prayers.) And therefore Zophar thus advises Job, If thou
prepare thine heart, and stretch out thy hands toward him; If iniquity be in
thine hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacles:
For then shall thou lift up thy face without spot, yea thou shall be steadfast,
and not fear. Job 11. 13, 14, 15. But because men may be in a good-way, and yet
sometimes not be in a good frame, but very much indisposed, (as to other
Duties, so) to this Duty of Prayer, we may see hence then,

Secondly, What need there is to be still in a Praying-frame. For Ejaculatory
Prayer admits not of any immediate preparation for the bringing of the heart
into a good frame, if it be not in it before, as has been intimated already.
And if it be not in such a frame, either the Duty will be omitted, or not
rightly performed.

Thirdly, See hence what need there is to be in a Praying-state. For otherwise
you cannot be in a Praying-frame, for Ejaculatory, or any other Prayer
whatsoever. An unsanctified person has always an unsanctified frame of heart:
(his mind and conscience is defiled, Titus 1. 15.) and therefore can do no Duty
well, and acceptably.

Fourthly, See hence what a vain and foolish conceit it is, for any to think to
be heard merely for their Long-prayers, as some do, and therefore use vain
Repetitions for the lengthning out of their Prayers, as if they should be the
sooner heard for their much speaking, Mat. 6. 7. But God by his approving, and
hearing of Ejaculatory Prayers shows, that he regards not so much the quantity,
as the quality of a Prayer. And therefore in our Set-prayers we must not affect
to be long: God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth, therefore (says Solomon)
Let thy words be few, Eccles. 5. 2. Not that it is unlawful to make
Long-prayers, especially upon extraordinary occasinns, for we read of Christ
that he continued a whole night in Prayer, Luke 6. 12. But when we do so, it
must be with abundance of See Hildersham on Psalm 51. Lect. 62. p. 287* where
four Cautions are mentioned, that must be observed in it.
Caution; and never upon this ground, that we shall be heard the sooner for our
much-speaking.

Fifthly, See hence that it is no sufficient excuse for not Praying at all,
that any have not a Gift of Prayer. For suppose such cannot make a formal
Set-prayer of themselves, yet they may be able to Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer;
that requiring no such Gift as was shown before.

Lastly, We may see hence, what evil they are guilty of, that neglect
Ejaculatory Prayer. For if it be a Duty, a Duty of such Necessity to be
performed, as we have seen it is* if there be so many Advantages for, and so
many Advantages by the diligent and frequent performance of it, as we have seen
there are; then it must needs be very great evil they are guilty of, that do
either wholly, or for the most part neglect it. And this leads me to another
part of the Application, wherein for the Conviction of those, that, as being
either in the one respect, or in the other guilty, are concerned, I shall a
little enlarge in the Chapter following.

CHAP. III. The Evil of Neglecting Ejaculatory Prayer. Two sorts guilty of it.
Some as not Praying with any Prayer at all. The Evil that is in this. Some
notwitstanding their Praying with other Prayer. The Evil that is in this. The
Evil that comes by it. A Disswasive from it.
BEfore I come to persuade to the Practice of this Duty of Ejaculatory Prayer,
and to give Directions concerning it, I will show here the Evil of Neglecting
it: men never making conscience of practicing any Duty aright, till they be
first sensible of the Evil of the Neglect of it. That Ejaculatory Prayer is
much neglected (though it comes not so much under others Observation, as being
for the most part an Act of the inward man, performed in the mind, will, and
affection without any external sign purposely adjoined) cannot be doubted. And
that the Neglect of it is evil, must needs be acknowledged by all that believe
it to be a Duty: the omission of what is required, being as sinful, as the
Commission of any thing that is forbidden, if not more. But what Evil there is
in it, is not so well understood, or at least considered of, as it should be,
by many that are guilty of it. And therefore for the awakening of such persons,
and making them sensible of the state of their case in this respect, I will
here show both the Evil that is in it, and the Evil that comes by it.

Two sorts of Persons are to be spoken to, as specially concerned in this
matter.

1. Such as do therefore neglect to Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer, because they
do not make Conscience of Praying with any Prayer at all.

2. Such as though they make Conscience of other Prayer, yet do not make
Conscience as they ought, of Ejaculatory Prayer, and therefore do either
wholly, or for the most part, neglect it.

1. Some are so far from Praying with Ejaculatory Prayer, that they do not Pray
at all; that whereas they should Pray with all manner of Prayer, they Pray with
no manner of Prayer at all, and therefore not with Ejaculatory Prayer. Now what
does this argue? but,

First, Abundance of Atheism in the heart, that whatsoever they profess, yet
they have not a real sense and apprehension of the Being of God in their
hearts, or at least of his being such a God as they have heard he is. He that
comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 1. First, That he is. Secondly, What he is. viz.
That he is a Rewarder, etc. or else he will not come unto him; or if he does,
it is as if he did not come, it is but a mock-coming; but ordinarily such do
not come unto him at all. See Psalm. 14. 1. 4. where this is alleged as the
reason of not Praying to God. The foal has said in his heart there is no God,
v. 1. Now see what follows in v. 14. Have all the workers of iniquity no
knowledge, who eat up my people, as they eat bread, and call not upon the Lord?
It argues then you see, abundance of Atheism in the heart.

Secondly, Abundance of Enmity. If it does not argue Atheism, but there are
some convictions of a Deity; yet it argues Enmity, abundance of Enmity in the
heart against God. As what greater sign of Enmity can there be, than for a
person (though he stand in need of such an ones help never so much, yet to
choose, rather to have no help at all, than to seek unto him for it. This made
the Woman of Samaria wonder that Christ being a Jew, would ask of her that was
a Samaritan, because there was such an Enmity betwixt the Jews and the
Samaritans, that they would not be beholden one to another, John 4. 9. And
therefore men will not ask of God, because they hate him, because they look
upon him as an enemy to them (they being enemies to him) and therefore will
rather seek to any, than to him. Ye will not come to me, says Christ, John 5.
40. Cum dicit, non vultis, ostendit ipsos pertinacitur veritati agnitae
resistere. Pareus. Aversar. in Johan.
not because they were ignorant of him, but because they hated him. Thus it
argues abundance of of Enmity against God. And as it argues abundance of Enmity
against God, So

Thirdly, Abundance of Pride, and Stubberness against God. As Psalm. 10. 4. The
wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God. Now this
is the most abominable Pride that is; and therefore when ever such shall seek
unto God (as in time of their distress, when tribulation and anguish comes upon
them, they are apt to do) they are not like to find him* See Prove. 1. 27, 28.
Let all such therefore as wholly neglect Prayer, see hence the evil of their
neglect.

2. Others there are, who though they do not wholly neglect Prayer, but have
their Set-prayers (perhaps morning and evening) yet they do either wholly, or
for the most part neglect Ejaculatory Prayer. Oh how do many persons go from
day to day, all the day long, and yet never dart up one Ejaculatory Prayer unto
God! Though there be never so much occasion, in respect of good things to be
obtained, or continued: in respect of evil things to be prevented, or removed;
their wants are many, their doubts, and fears, and griefs many, their
corruptions strong, their afflictions heavy, their temptations by means of both
very prevailing; yet they seldom or never for all this, dart up one, so much
as one Ejaculatory Prayer unto God. Now what does this argue? hut

First, Gross Stupidity, and insensibleness, that a man feels no Evil for the
present, and therefore is not grieved. Grief is querilous, ever and anon
complaining, and crying out for help. One that feels his Sin, will cry for
pardon, Why do thou not pardon my sin? Job 7. 21. One that is sensible of
Temptation, will cry that it may depart from him. For this I be sought the Lord
thrice, says Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 8, Though it was but a thorn in the flesh, yet
because it was so grievous, therefore he cries again, and again. So that if evil
be upon any, and they do not cry to be delivered, it is a sign they do not feel
it. Thou do not feel thy hardness, else thou would cry, Lord, why have thou
hardened my heart from thy fear? Isa. 63. 17. Art not sensible of thy
frowardness, and perverseness, the stubborness and rebelliousness of thy
spirit, how that when thou should do good, evil is present with thee, how
that a Law in thy members wars against the Law in thy mind, bringing thee into
captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in thy Members; else thou would cry
out, O Wretched Man that I am who shall deliver me? Romans 7. 24. Thou art not
sensible of thy corruptions, temptations, afflictions: Gray hairs are here and
there upon thee, but thou know it not; strangers have devoured thy
Substance; Sin, Satan, the World has devoured, and eaten up thy Graces,
Comforts, Enjoyments, but thou know it not, and therefore do not cry unto
God by Ejaculatory Prayer. Does the wild Ass bray when he has grass? or Loweth
the Ox over his fodder? Job 5. 6. So, does a man cry when he wants nothing?
does he pray when all is well with him? and yet even then perhaps he wants
every thing, Rev. 3. 17. For a man then to go whole days and nights and not cry
unto God, what does it argue, but that he feels nothing amiss, nothing ailing
him, nothing wanting to him? Oh reflect upon thy self, thou that can not tell
the hour, the day, the week, when thou dartedst up one Ejaculatory Prayer to
God. See, See I say, what an evil this is. As spiritual sense is a great
blessing (the great blessing of the Covenant of grace is an heart of flesh, a
soft and sensible heart, that is sensible of the least sin to be humbled for it,
and of the least judgment to be humbled under it) as this is a great blessing;
So insensibleness is a great curse. The greatest plague that ever God inflicted
upon Pharaoh was hardness of heart.

Secondly, It argues Carnal Security, and Presumption; that as a man feels no
evil for the present, and therefore is not grieved; so he fears none for the
future, and therefore is not moved. Where there is fear, there will be a flying
presently to God by Ejaculatory Prayer. When Jehosaphat saw himself in such
danger, being beset by his Enemies, he cried unto the Lord by Ejaculatory
Prayer, 2 Chronicles. 18. 31. So Peter to Christ when he was in danger of drowning,
Mat. 14. 30. Fear makes one presently fly to the Refuge. When therefore men are
in danger, but there is no flying unto God, it is a sign they are secure in their
own thoughts, that as they feel no evil for the present, so they fear none for
the future, And what is this, but Carnal Security? There is a twofold Security,
one Spiritual, and that is, when a man is so secure, that he makes no use of
carnal means, but is confident of safety without them, and therefore never
betakes himself to the use of them: this is spiritual, this is a gracious and
blessed Security. Now on the contrary, Carnal Security is when a man is so
secure, that he makes no use of Spiritual means; as for Example, when though a
man be in danger, yet he does not make use of Ejaculatory Prayer. He is secure,
but it is Carnal Security. And this is a main cause, why not only this, but
Set-prayer is neglected too. Men say, we see that they do as well that are
without Prayer, as those that use it, and therefore they conteut themselves to
be without it too; for they think they shall do well enough, at least they
think they will do well enough without it, and therefore do not Pray. Now what
a sad thing is this! How can thou be secure that art in jeopardy every
moment? in danger of Temptations, Sins, Sufferings continually? Thou art not
afraid of Temptations, and none more likely to be tempted than such. Not
afraid of sin, and none more under the power of temptations than such. Not
afraid of Judgment, and none more like to have Judgments inflicted upon them
than such. This gives Advantage to Satan to tempt, and to Corruption to close
with the Temptation, and to God to give thee into the hand of Satan, it
provokes him to let out his wrath in some most dreadful expressions of it upon
thee. Oh consider, it is certain thou art very frequently in danger all the day
long; thou know not what a day may bring forth, even then when there is no
appearance of danger, there may be very great danger: But how often is there an
Appearance of it, and yet, however it be, thou never cryest out unto God all
the day long. Does not this argue then thou art secure? Oh if it were with a
Spiritual Security, it were a blessed thing; if thou were so secure, as not to
be pressed, or tempted in thy Spirit to the World, to Sin, to Satan; to use
any indirect means, or sinful shifts for thy security, this were a blessed
security. I but to be so secure, as not to be moved, or pressed at all in thy
spirit to fly unto God, (whereas, considering the continual danger and hazard
thou art in, though thou have still need to do it, thou can not be preserved,
and delivered without him) this is Carnal security; and such security is cursed
security, security not to salvation, but to ruin and Destruction.

Thirdly, It argues Independency upon God, and Carnal confidence in the
Creature. Look what a man does most depend upon, look what it is he thinks he
stands in most need of, that he will be sure, presently, and most frequently to
fly unto in any strait, or difficulty; his thoughts will be first, and mostly
upon that, and that he will betake himself unto, as often as there is occasion.
If God be a man's confidence, so that he sees he stands most in need of God,
then he will frequently, yea continually fly unto God in time of danger, What
time I am afraid, I will trust in thee, (says David) that is, as often as I
am afraid. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, therefore the Righteous run
into it, and are secure, Thus it is when God is a man's confidence, when a man
depends upon God. And so it is when a man depends on the Creature. Wealth is
the Rich man's strong Tower, and therefore in any danger, he flies unto that,
therefore he makes Gold his hope, and says unto fine Gold, thou art my
Confidence, Job 31. 24. He seeks unto that, whenever he is in distress. So
another that depends upon some Great Man, some Friend that he conceives is
sufficient and able to help him; he has recourse unto him, and not unto
another, because he thinks him to be sufficient, and he needs none other:
therefore he makes known all his wants, and grievances to him; as often as he
is in any straits, he flies unto him, and not to another. And thus it is when
men ordinarily fly unto any thing, every thing, for the supply of their wants,
and not unto God. It Is a sign they are not sensible of their need of God, that
they do not need him for, Counsel, for Direction, for Preservation, for
Protection, for Deliverance; but that something else is more needful for them.
Asa sought not to the Lord, but to the Physician. Ahaziah sent to the God of
Ekron; what did this argue, but that he depended upon the God of Ekron, and not
upon the God of Israel? Therefore said the Prophet, Is it not because there is
not a God in Israel? And so, when in any of thy wants, thou presently liftest
up thy heart unto the Creature, and not unto God, does it not plainly argue,
thou do trust to the Creature, and not unto God? Does it not manifestly
declare, that thou see more need of the Creature, than of God? the Wisdom,
Power, Strength and Sufficiency of the Creature, more than of God? If thou
did see thy need of God, thou would fly unto God: for that a man has first
in his thoughts, which he thinks he does most need; and therefore when God is
not in thy thoughts, but something besides God (which usually, and most
frequently thou have recourse unto for thy help, and supply) it is a sign thou
do not depend upon God, nor see thy need of him. If thou did see thy need
of God, thou would be continually seeking to him: If thou did see that
nothing can succeed and prosper without God, thine eyes would be upon him, thy
thoughts, thy desires would be ever, and anon, ascending unto him. How is it
then, that God is so seldom in thy thoughts from morning to evening? That thou
art busied about other things, but God is not in all thy thoughts? Thou
speak to one for Counsel, to another for Comfort, to another for Support:
but seldom speak for any thing unto God; Whereas, if thou did depend upon
God, thou would be continually speaking to him, thou would be ever, and
anon speaking to him by Ejaculatory Prayer. When thou find thou lackest
Wisdom, thou would say, Lord give me Wisdom. Let me not miscarry in this
Affair. Bless the Means, etc. When thou lackest Peace, thou would say, O
Lord, speak Peace. Create the fruit of the lips, ( viz. of thy Messenger) to be
Peace. And so, whatever thou lackest, if thou did depend upon God, thou
would be still seeking to him for it. For as much then, as thou seldom, or
never seek unto God, it is an evidence that thou do not depend upon God.
Now what a vile thing is this, that thou should see more need of any thing,
than of God! that thou should depend upon any thing, every thing more, than
upon God! Read that dreadful Curse denounced against such, Jer. 17. 5, 6.

Fourthly, It argues Sinful forgetfulness of God. Suppose it does not argue any
distrustfulness of God, yet when a man shall go all the day long, and never so
much as once, or but seldom, lift up his heart unto God for any thing he
stands in need of, it must needs argue a very great unmindfulness of him:
Though usually they go together, and the one is the cause of the other. As
Psalm. 78. 34, 35. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned,
and enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and
the most high God their Redeemer. Why did they not seek God before? Why, it was
because they did not remember that God was their Rock. So when men are not
frequent in seeking to God by Ejaculatory Prayer, it is a sign they do not
remember that God is their Rock. Now see what a vile thing this is. This
forgetfulness of God is virtually all sin whatsoever. And therefore they are
charged, Deuteronomy 32. 17, 18. to have sacrisiced to Devils, and not to God: but to
Gods that they knew not, to new Gods that came newly up, whom their Fathers
feared not; Because of the Rock that begat them, they were unmindful, and had
forgotten the God that formed them. See then the evil of neglecting Ejaculatory
Prayer in this respect, in that it argues a sinful forgetfulness of God.

Fifthly, It argues that the Spirit is much quenched. For if it were not
quenched, it would be stirring up to Ejaculations: It would enable us to cry
with Sighs and Groans which cannot be uttered. The Spirit in Scripture is
compared to fire: and as the Sparks fly upwards when the fire is blown, so do
Ejaculatory Prayers, when the Graces of the Spirit are stirred up, and blown
into a flame. When therefore there are no Ejaculations no dartings up of
Prayer, and Supplication unto God, (though there be never so much occasion)
it is a sign the fire of the Spirit is very much quenched. And what an Evil that
is, I have shown at large See my Book of Quenching the Spirit.
elsewhere.

Lastly, It argues a Resting in Set-Prayer; that when men have Prayed in the
Morning, they think they have done enough for all the day. As I have read of
one that would constantly Pray every Morning, and then say, Now Devil do thy
worst; and then never mind God all the day after, but as there was (...), the
opportunity of Temptation. Ink^ 8. 13.
opportunity, run to all excess of Riot. Oh if men did not rest in their
Set-prayers, if they did not think them enough; they would follow God with
their Ejaculatory Prayers. As some when they have delivered a Petition to a
Great Man, thinking it not enough, do therefore follow after him, speaking to
him, and soliciting him by reiternated requests to grant it to them. The
neglecting then to follow God with Ejaculatory Prayer, argues a resting in
Set-prayer. And what an Evil thing is this, that the doing of one Duty, should
be the cause of neglecting another! But so it is, when men rest in their Duties.

And thus you see what Evil there is in it.

Consider farther what Evil there comes by it.

As much evil is in it, so much comes by it. As

1. Hereby there grows a strangeness betwixt God and his Soul; whereas you
should maintain an holy Familiarity with him; which is done by often visiting
him, and by often speaking to him, as Acquaintance, and Familiarity amongst men
is, as has been said. The neglect of this therefore loses your Acquaintance
with God. And losing your Acquaintance with him, it loses likewise your Peace
with him. Acquaint now thy self with him (says Eliphaz) and be at Peace. q. d.
Otherwise there will be no Peace, Job 22. 21. And also your boldness in
approaching to him; for when once there grows a strangness, there will be a
loathness to speak.

2. Hereby you expose your selves to manifold Temptations. Therefore says
Christ, Watch and Pray lest ye enter into Temptation: thereby intimaing, that
if Prayer be neglected, ( viz. Ejaculatory, as well as Set-prayer) you will
enter into Temptation presently. And it must needs be so: for besides, that God
may justly let loose Satan upon you in this Case; Corruption will get an
advantage; so that tho Satan should not tempt, yet you will be in danger of
being drawn away of your own Lust, and enticed; and so carried into many sins,
which otherwise might be avoided.

3. Hereby you are unawares surprised not only with Sins, but Sufferings. Hence
it is that you meet with so many cross Accidents in the course of your lives.

4. Hereby you are deprived of many Blessings and Comforts. You have not,
because you ask not with Ejaculatory Prayer.

5. It hinders the prevailing of Other Prayers, loses the benefit of your
Set-prayers. For then we shall know (says the Prophet) if we follow on to know
the Lord, viz. when we have Prayed with Set-prayer, if then we follow on with
Ejaculatory Prayer. Hosea. 6. 3.

And thus you see the Evil that comes by it.

Many other Particulars might be mentioned, but these may suffice to show what
an Evil the Neglect of Ejaculatory Prayer is. Labor therefore to be sensible
of it, and humbled for it, that so you may continue to neglect it no longer.
Consider Sirs, If you could not tell where to find God; If he were a God afar
off, not nigh at hand, it were another matter: Or if you might not come to him
when you find him; if you might not speak to him so often: Or if there were any
thing to hinder you from speaking; so that you could not (though you would)
speak so often to him: you might then have something to say, for not seeking by
Ejaculatory Prayer unto him. But he is always every where present, nigh unto
you, when, and whenever you have any thing to call upon him for: and you may
come when you will; ask what you will that is good for you; he delights in your
often coming, and upbraideth not, Jam. 1. 5. and there is nothng to hinder;
nothing from without; and therefore the Neglect of it is the more inexcusable.
Again, if it were a long, and large Prayer that were required, as sometimes it
is; yet what could be excepted against it? should you not be willing to spend
even whole days, and nights in Prayer for the obtaining of some Mercy, if
thereby it might be obtained? But this is but a short Prayer; only the darting
up of a Desire, the speaking as it were but of a word unto God. And what! not
speak a word unto God? not so much as a word? Oh how many helps, and
assistances, how many Deliverances, and Salvations might thou have had, only
but for speaking a word by Ejaculatory Prayer unto God, and yet thou would
not speak! What a shameful thing is this! and how should it make men blush,
that are guilty of Neglecting Ejaculatory Prayer, it being so unreasonable, and
consequently so uncharitable a thing, for any to live in the Neglect of it! And
therefore let all such be humbled, and beware of Neglecting it any longer.

CHAP. IV. An Exhortation to the Practice of Ejaculatory Prayer. Men exhorted
to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer for themselves. The forementioned Arguments
from the Necessity there is of it, the Advantages there are for it, and the
Advantages there are by it, to excite to the Practice of Ejaculatory Prayer, by
way of Motive applied. Special Occasions of men's Praying with Ejaculatory
Prayer for themselves, mentioned. Special Directions, as to every particular
occasion, for what they should Pray, given.
HAving shown the Evil of neglecting Ejaculatory Prayer, I come now to Persuade
to the Practice of it: And shall therefore speak here by way of Exhortation, to
stir up every one of you, to be much in this Duty; to be ever and anon darting
up Prayers and Requests unto God. And that

I. For Your-selves. 2. For Others.
1. For your selves. Labor to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer for your selves.

To move you hereunto, I need do no more, than apply the Arguments already
mentioned, to excite to the Practice of the Duty, from the Necessity there is
of it, the Advantages you have for it, and the Advantages that come by it.

First, in respect of the Necessity there is of it. It is a needful and
necessary Duty. I have shown you the Necessity of it in diverse particulars. Now
who is there, but would do, what is needful, and necessary to be done? This is
an Argument of weight in other Cases. You say of such a thing, It must of
necessity be done: and that turns the Scales, and weighs down all Arguments,
and Persuasions to the contrary. Why so it should do in this Case. Ejaculatory
Prayer is Necessary Prayer.

There is a Necessity of Prayer: of all Prayer, says the Text, Praying always
with all Prayer; not only Set-prayer, but Ejaculatory Prayer. There is a
Necessity of Set-prayer; but not only of that, but of Ejaculatory Prayer too.
And there is more frequently a Necessity of Ejaculatory Prayer, than there is
of Set-prayer, as I have shown before. How should this then prevail with you!
He is a fool, that in a case of Necessity will deliberate; that when it
appears, such a thing is necessary to be done, will consult with himself,
whether it be best to do it. But to some perhaps it does not appear that
Ejaculatory Prayer is such a thing. Let them weigh well then, what has been
said before, of the Necessity of it, that so they may be convinced how much
there is in it upon that account, to prevail with them to put it in Practice.
Thus in respect of the Necessity there is of it.

Secondly, In respect of the Advantages you have for it. Many things are
needful, that yet are not possible, at least easy to be done. But to Pray with
Ejaculatory Prayer, is not only possible, but easy to be done. There is no
Duty almost that has more Advantages for the doing of it, than this.

I have shown you what Advantages there are for it in diverse particulars* So
that though you cannot Pray with Solemn, or Set-prayer, yet you may with
Ejaculatory Prayer, when, and wheresoever you will, as often as you have
occasion, in any place, at any time, in any Company, any Business, or
Employment whatsoever. Now then, seeing it not only must be done, there being
such a Necessity of it; but it also may be done, there being such a Convenience
for the doing of it; it should be a forcible Argument to move you to it.
Difficulty often proves a Discouragement from Duty. This many times
discourageth from Set-prayer, that there are so many difficulties attending it,
so many difficulties, and inconveniences in respect of time, place, business,
and the like. But this cannot discourage from Ejaculatory Prayer; for there is
nothing more easy, either in respect of the Substance, or Circumstances of the
Duty.

I. In respect of the Substance. For do but consider the Duty it self. What
great matter is it, to dart up a single desire in Prayer unto God? I mean
comparatively. It is nothing so much as Set-prayer. Now if God required some
greater thing, would you not do it? how much more when it is so little, when it
is but Ejaculatory Prayer?

2. In respect of the Circumstances; as time, place, means, etc. All these do
not always concur to Set-prayer; but they do to Ejaculatory Prayer. There is
always a convenience for Ejaculatory Prayer. All Circumstances do jointly
concur, and sweetly conspire together to make up an opportunity, and
convenience for Ejaculatory Prayer upon all occasions; so that if nothing
hinder from within, there is nothing that at any time, in any place, can hinder
from without.

3. In respect of the Advantages that come by it. Many things are easy to be
done, that yet are not of any great Advantage to be done: they are possible,
but not profitable. But this cannot be said of Ejaculatory Prayer; for of what
Advantage it is, you have seen in many particulars.

1. In respect of your Good. Ejaculatory Prayer (as you have heard) is much for
your good, you may gain much by it. Now when you consider the gainfulness of a
thing, it sways much with you: when you consider what Advantages you shall have
by doing such a thing, it is a prevailing Motive to do it. This prevailed with
the Shechemites to submit to Circumcision. Shall not their Cattle (say they)
and their Substance be ours? Genesis 34. 23. Consider then the Advantages you
shall have by Ejaculatory Prayer; and then see if your affections will not be
won to it. Wicked men say indeed, What profit is it that we Pray unto God? so
thy are brought in speaking, Job 21. 15. what is the Almighty that we should
serve him? what profit should we have if we pray unto him? Therefore they do
not Pray. But this implies, that if they did believe they should have profit by
it, then they would do it. Now as for you, ye see what profit you shall have,
if you Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer; and therefore let that move you. Though
wicked men make a question of it, yet you do not, at least should not; and
therefore to quicken your affections to this Duty, be frequently telling your
selves what you shall gain by it. You have heard of the gains of Ejaculatory
Prayer in diverse particulars, Do not forget. As arrows in the hand of the
mighty man, so (says the Psalmist) are children of the youth. Happy is the man
that has his quiver full of them, Psalm. 127. 4, 5. The like may be said of
Ejaculatory Prayers. They are as arrows in the hand of the mighty man, happy is
he that has his quiver full of them. None shoot such shafts as these, none
throw such darts. These fly up to Heaven, hit the mark, win the prize, wound
the Enemy, quench all the fiery darts of Satan: and if they return into a man's
bosom, they return not empty, as it is said of the Bow of Jonathan, and the
Sword of Saul, From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the Bow
of Jonothan turned not back, and the Sword of Saul returned not empty, 2 Samuel
1. 22. Oh therefore be in love with this Duty, be much in this Duty of
Ejaculatory Prayer. Thus in respect of your good.

2. In respect of God's Glory. Ejaculatory Prayer is much for the Glory of God.
He has a special income, and revenue of Glory by it, as you have heard in
several particulars. Now though respect to your own good should prevail much
with you, yet respect to the glory of God should prevail much more. The glory
of God is your supreme end, your good is but the subordinate. Think then with
your selves, how much hereby God shall be glorified. Indeed, as you cannot
sufficiently act for your own good, so neither for the glory of God without it.

Thus you see how much there is to move you to the practice of this Duty of
Ejaculatory Prayer. Labor therefore to be much in the practice of it. Upon all
occasions, in every opportunity, see that ye remember to be praying with
Ejaculatory Prayer. It is necessary upon all occasions, but upon some more
especially; Some of which therefore, I shall in this place mention to you.
Neither I, nor any other can possibly number all, they be so many; there being
no case, no state or condition, that possibly you can be in, wherein there is
not an occasion in some respect or other, for the performance of this Duty. I
shall therefore mention only some Special Occasions, whereupon it will be
needful to be much in the practice of it. As

I. When you go into Special Occasions of men's Praying with Ejaculatory Prayer
for themselves.
Company. When you go into Company, you should consider how many things there
may be to irritate and provoke your Corruptions, damp and quench your Graces,
discompose and distemper your Spirits; so that you may neither Speak, nor Act,
as becomes you to do, but shamefully miscarry, to the dishonor of God, the
grieving of his Spirit, and the Spirits of good men, or the hardening and
prejudicing of the wicked, according as the Company is, into which you come.
And therefore at such a time, (having a call from God to go) be much in
Ejaculatory Prayer.

1. That God would be with you, say, Lord go along with me into this Company. I
would not be there without thee, O Lord, and therefore would not go thither
without thee.

2. That he would set a watch before the door of your lips: that you may speak
nothing, that you would wish unspoken afterward; that no idle word, nor
corrupt communication may proceed out of your mouth.

3. That he would open your lips, that so you may speak to Edification, so as
to administer grace to the hearers. You will find that as your mouths are apt
to be open to what is evil, unless God shuts them; so they are apt to be shut
to what is good, unless God open them. Therefore Pray to him that shuts, and
no man opens, and opens and no man shuts, (Rev. 3. 7.) that as he would
shut the door of your lips when you are forward to speak any thing that is
evil, so he would open it, when you are backward to speak any thing that is
good. Pray with David, O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth
thy praise, Psalm. 51. 15.

4. That he would keep down Pride and Passion, and remove Prejudice, and all
that may any way disorder your Spirits.

5. That you may profit by what you hear, and see, and make a right use of it
to your spiritual advantage: and therefore if any good de spoken, or done, beg
of God that your hearts may close with it.

6. If any thing be said or done, that begins to be a temptation, then
presently send up an Ejaculatory Prayer for the preventing of it. As if there
be any foolish talking, or jesting which is not convenient ( Ephesians. 5. 4.)
then, that you may have no fellowship with it, but that your spirit may be in a
serious frame: or if there be any stories told of any thing that is to the
dishonor of God, which possibly may provoke laughter; then, that your hearts
and countenances may be composed, so as not to discover any liking thereof, but
the contrary, remember to fly presently to God by Ejaculatory Prayer.

7. If any good thing be spoken or done, which may possibly provoke to Envying,
or Judging, and Censuring, or Contradicting; then fly to God by Ejaculatory
Prayer. Say, Lord, what a vile heart have I, that I should be thus offended at
that which is good. Oh help against this Pride, this Envy, this Selfconceit,
etc. Thus when you go into Company.

II. In the Beginning of any Special Work or Service for God, either in your
general, or particular Calling. Indeed in the beginning of every Work and Duty,
you should endeavor (as much as possibly you can) to remember to lift up your
hearts unto God by Ejacuculatory Prayer; for the more frequently, and
ordinarily you do so, the better it is. But the more concerning the Work, or
Business is, the more especially careful you should be of beginning it in this
manner. When therefore you are entering upon any special Employment, engaging
in any special Business, you should consider your wants, and weakness, and
wickedness of your hearts, by reason whereof you are liable to many failings,
and miscarriages in the doing of it; so that either God will not succeed it, or
if he does, he will not accept of it. And therefore then lift up your hearts in
Ejaculatory Prayer.

1. For Wisdom and Discretion to direct you, that so you may not lean to your
own understandings. Say, Lord, thou have said, that if any man lack Wisdom, he
should ask it of thee; and so do I: therefore I come unto thee, Be thou Wisdom
to me. It Is not in man to direct his steps, therefore teach me the way that I
should go. Order my steps in thy Word. Suffer me not to lean to my own
understanding, My Wisdom is but Folly, and will misguide me, etc. Thus Pray
for Wisdom to direct you.

2. For Plyableness, and Tractableness of Spirit to incline you, that so you
may not lean to your own wills, but follow the Dictates of Wisdom, and not
fulfill the desires, or (...). Ephesians. 2. 3.
wills of the Flesh, and of the mind. You shall find such an unruliness of
Spirit oft-times, if not most times, that tho your Convictions tell you, you
should do so and so, according to the rule of the Word; yet you cannot bring
your minds to it, but will do it your own way, according to a rule of your own,
quite contrary to your Convictions. Oh then, for the preventing of this, fly
unto God by Ejaculatory Prayer. Say, Lord, not my will, but thine be done.
Deliver me from the unruliness, the frowardness, and perverseness of my spirit,
that I may not affect to do what is good in mine own eyes, so as to please my
self; but what is good and acceptable in thine eyes, so as to please thee.
Lord, show me what thy good and acceptable will is, and give me an heart to do
it: Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not unto Coveteousness, not unto
Pride, not unto Vainglory, etc. Psalm. 119. 36.

3. For Power and Strength to effect, and bring to pass. I will cry unto God
most high, (says the Psalmist) unto God that performs all things for me,
Psalm. 57. 2. And so do you. Say, Lord I have no power to do any thing of my
self, therefore I seek to thee. He that Planteth is nothing, and he that
Waters is nothing; it is God that gives the the increase. Except the Lord
build the House, Man labors but in vain: So, unless thou blessest me; Lord,
I shall act but in vain. Lord, thou art he that gives power to get wealth;
therefore do thou succeed me, do thou prosper me. Prosper thou the work of thy
hands. Thus in the works of your particular Calling. And so likewise in the
works of your general Callings, when you are entering upon a Duty of Worship,
Say, Lord, I have not sufficiency for the least good thought; Let me have Grace
to help, Let me have Grace whereby I may serve thee acceptably, with Reverence,
and Godly Fear, Let thy Grace de sufficient for me, etc. Thus in the beginning
of a Work.

III. In the Progress of any work or Business. While you are working, or acting
in any Duty, or Employment, you should be much in Ejaculatory Prayer. For first
then you are apt to forget; Your hearts are like broken Bows, starting aside
continually. Though you have begun with God, and that upon most serious
consideration, in the entrance upon the Duty; yet you will find it difficult
to hold on with God in the progress of it. Your hearts will be stealing away,
turning aside, going back. Therefore that you may continue to be with God in
the Duty from the beginning to the end of it; be ever and anon seeking to God
by Ejaculatory Prayer. Again, Secondly, Corruptions will be stirring: so that
instead of filling up the work with the actings of Grace, there will be danger
of filling it up with the Actings of Corruption. Oh how little Grace is acted
in most Duties! Thirdly, Satan will be tempting; he will be laboring to join
his Temptations with your Corruptions: And both will have a powerful influence:
Either, First, to make you weary: Or, Secondly, to hold you too long at it: Or,
Thirdly, to make you do amiss in it; either by way of Omission, or Commission;
either by not doing what should be done, or by doing what should not be done;
in the doing of it: Therefore be frequently seeking to God by Ejaculatory
Prayer. And that

1. For Mindfulness. Say, Lord, when I am ready to turn aside, then let me hear
a voice saying, This is the way, walk in it. Lord let me not forget what I am
now about. Let not my heart start aside, let it not steal away, etc.

2. For Renewed Strength. Lord, thou have said, They that wait upon thee shall
run, and not be weary; walk, and not faint. Answer me therefore, and strengthen
me with strength in my Soul. Let me not be weary, and faint in my mind.

3. For Self-denial. Lord, enable me to withstand these evil workings of my
corrupt heart. Oh that I may not please my self, so as to displease thee in the
doing of this work. Teach me to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, etc.
Let me not please my self in doing this work, so as to displease thee in not
doing the other, to which thou do now call me.

IV. In the Close of any Duty.

Then you will be apt to overlook God's Assistance, and to be attributing to your
selves, or to means. To your selves, as Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 30. The King
spoke, and said, Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the House of
the Kingome by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? Hence
that Caution, Deuteronomy. 8. 17. -- and thou say in thy heart, My power, and the
might of my hand has gotten me this wealth. Oh how apt are men to reflect upon
themselves when they have done any thing, and to ascribe to themselves? So
likewise to the Means. As they, Habak. 1. 16. That Sacrificed to their own
Nets, and burnt Incense to their own Draggs. Secondly, You will be apt to
neglect Gods Acceptance; only considering whether it be acceptable to your
selves, or to others; either as Self-pleasers, or Man-pleasers. If you find it
satisfies your own Consciences, so that there is no clamouring there; it is
enough: Or that Men like of it, and applaud it; though it be no way pleasing,
or acceptable to God, it matters not. Therefore in the Close of every Duty,
lift up your hearts by Ejaculatory Prayer.

1. Acknowledging Gods Assistance. Say, Not unto us, not unto us, O Lord, but
to thy Name be the Glory. Thou shall remember the Lord thy God (says Moses)
for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Say therefore,
Lord I have nothing but what I have received, and received from thee. Lord, of
thy own have I given thee. I have labored yet not I, but thy Grace, O God,
that was with me.

2. Begging God's Acceptance. O that what I have now done, might be accepted of
thee! Lord, though men like it, and applaud it never so much, yet unless thou
likest it, it is nothing. Oh that I might but find now that God accepts my
Work! See Psalm. 19. 14.

3. If any good has been done, Beg that God would enable you to do so still,
and to do so more. See 1 These. 4. 10.

4. If any good has been gotten, Beg that it may not be lost. Say, Lord, keep
these thoughts, these affections, etc. in the heart of thy Servants for ever. 1 Chronicles. 29. 18.

Thus of this fourth Particular.

V. When you come unto any of the Ordinances. As,

I. When you come to the Hearing of the Word Preached, Oh then is a special
Season for Ejaculatory Prayer. And that,

1. For your Ministers, that a door of Utterance may be given, that a suitable
word may be spoken. Say, Lord, now be with thy Servant, that he may speak as he
ought to speak. Let his tongue be touched with a coal from the Altar. Let him
have a double portion of the spirit, a fresh anointing, that he may speak a
word in due season, a suitable, and seasonable word, etc.

2. For your selves, that a door of Entrance may be given, Say, Lord, not only
open his mouth, but mine ear. Let mine ear now be boared, Let my ear be opened,
that I may not only hear, but hearken; not only understand, but obey.

And for this end seek unto God by Ejaculatory Prayer, both against that that
may let, and hinder you; and for that that may help and further you in the
sanctifying of God's Name in Hearing.

1. Against that that may let and hinder you. As,

1. Vain thoughts; thinking upon impertinent things. Say, Lord, let not vain
thoughts now lodge within me. Deliver me from those sinful outgoings, and
wanderings of heart, which I am wont to be subject to in hearing thy word.

2 High and lofty thoughts. Let the Word be mighty through thee O God, to the
casting down of imaginations, and of every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.

3. The Suggestions of Satan. Let Satan now be chained up. Lord, rebuke
Satan. Let him not steal away my heart from the word, or the word from my
heart.

2. For that that may help and further you. As,

1. Real Apprehensions of the presence and Majesty of God, whose word it is.
Say, Lord, Reason tells me that thou art every where present; but thy word
tells me that thou art in an especial manner present in the Preaching of thy
Word; oh help me to believe this. Strengthen my Faith now, that I may not only
set my self to hear the voice of Man, but of God; that I may hear what the
Spirit has to say to the Churches, Rev. 2. 7.

2. Composedness of spirit, that your hearts may be composed into an awful
frame and temper suitable to the holiness and awfulness of the Presence of God,
before whom you stand. You will find you have vain and distracted minds: they
ought to be composed; therefore lift up your hearts to God by Ejaculatory
Prayer, pray that he would fix them, that so you may attend unto him, and upon
him without distraction.

3. Quickness of Apprehension. You are dull of hearing ( Heb. 5. 11.) Beg of
God that he would make you of quick understanding (Isa. 11. 3.) that he would
destroy the face of the covering cast over you, and the vail that is spread
upon you. Isa. 25. 7.

4. Livelyness of Affection, that you may not sit like stocks and stones before
your Ministers, but that you may be easy to be moved, and stirred up by the
Reproofs, and Counsels they dispense unto you.

And then for all these be earnest with God for the workings and influences of
the Spirit.

3. As you are hearing all along, be lifting up your hearts by Ejaculatory
Prayer unto God, suitable to the nature of the Matter Preached; that as the
Minister is Preaching, you may be Praying.

Therefore,

1. When any thing is difficult, then pray, Lord give me to Understand this.

2. When any thing is reproved, Lord, affect my heart, to loath this, and to
leave it.

3. When any thing is enjoined, and pressed as a Duty, Lord incline my heart
that I may practice it.

Thus when you come to the Preaching of the Word.

II. When you come to the Administration of the Ordinance of Baptism. See
Ford's two Treatises of the Practical use of Infant Baptism.
Then likewise is a special season for Ejaculatory Prayer. Then Pray that your
faith may be strengthened, to believe the warrantableness of Administering the
Ordinance, not only to Believers, but to their Seed also, their Infant Seed.
Say, Lord, have thou not taken them into Covenant with thy self? Thou have
declared that thou have. And will thou then deny them the Seal of it? I believe
that thou will not. Have thou not said, That to Believers and to their Children
the Promise is? Act. 2. 39. And is not the Seal of it to them also? Lord, may
not Saints be Baptized? And, have thou not said, (1 Cor. 7. 14.) that the
Children of a Believer are Saints? Lord, have thou not made known (1 Cor. 10.
2.) they were Baptized under the Old Testament? And why should any think then,
that it should be otherwise under the New Testament? Were not the Children of
Unbelieving Jews broken off by the unbelief of their Parents? and may I not
thence infer, that the Children of Believing Gentiles are by the faith of their
Parents graffed in in their stead to partake of the fatness of the Olive in
this Ordinance of Baptism? Lord, I believe, help my unbelief. Thus pray that
your Faith may be strengthened to believe the warrantableness of Administering
Baptism to the Children of Believers. Then for the Child that is to be
Baptized, Pray that the Ordinance may be made effectual to him. Say, Lord, this
Child ( Ezekiel. 16. 20.) that was born unto thee, is now brought unto thee: Oh
take away all iniquity, and receive him graciously. Lay thy hand upon him, and
bless him. Join the inward Baptism of the Spirit to this outward Baptism of
Water, that it may be indeed a Baptism of Regeneration to him. Let his Soul be
washed in the blood of Christ, as his flesh shall be washed with this water,
the sign of it. Let him be buried by Baptism in the likeness of his death, that
he may be also raised with him in the likeness of his Resurrection. Lastly, for
your selves, Pray that you may be humbled, for that you have no more improved
your Baptism for time past: And that you may be quickened, and stirred up to
make ( Romans 11. 19, 20.) a better improvement of it for time to come. And beg
earnestly that it may be more and more effectual to you. Say, Lord, have I all
the Grace that was sealed to me by Baptism? is there no more forthcoming to me?
Lord, is the efficacy of the Ordinance tied only to the present Administration?
Thou have declared that it is not, Therefore let it be more and more effectual
to me.

Thus be much in Ejaculatory Prayer when you come to the Administration of the
Ordinance of Baptism.

III. When you come to the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. Then also labor to
be much in this Duty of Ejaculatory Prayer. Before you come, you should be much
in Solemn Prayer: you should examine your selves, and be much in Solemn Prayer
to God, that so your hearts may be rightly prepared. The Preparations of the
heart in man are from the Lord. Prove. 16. 1. Take heed therefore that you put
not off all to Ejaculatory Prayer then. But when you come, you must be much in
Ejaculatory Prayer. Then pray that God would perfect what is lacking in your
preparation. Be sensible that all you have done in order to the preparing of
your hearts is but little in comparison of what ought to be. And therefore pray
that something may be done for the further perfecting of it. That so your
hearts may be, and continue to be in a right frame suitable to the Ordinance,
that you may carry your selves so, as is suitable unto the awful Presence that
is there; so as you may manifest thereby, that you discern the Lords Body. It
was the great sin of the Corinthians, that they had no more of the aw of God
upon their hearts, when they came to the Lord's Supper. Lift up your hearts
therefore by Ejaculatory Prayer unto God, and pray earnestly, that he would put
his fear into your hearts. It Is evil to feed without fear at our own Tables,
Jude 12. much more to feed so at the Lords Table: For because of this, men eat
and drink damnation to themselves, not (...)? not discerning the Lords Body;
that is, not Sanctifying it, or using it as becomes so holy a thing. Mede. Book
I. Disc. II. Not discerning] viz. bearing no greater respect to the Sacrament
of the Communion of the Body of Christ, than to any other corporal, and common
kind of food. Diodat. in loc.
discerning the Lords Body: or not differencing it: as if it were but a common
thing. Therefore the awfulness of his Presence, (for the King sits at his
Table) the holiness of the Mysteries, the danger of profaning them, should
make us come with greatest Fear and Reverence, else we eat and drink
unworthily, not discerning the Lord's Body. Be earnest with God therefore by
Ejaculatory Prayer to put his fear into your hearts, and to keep it in your
hearts while you shall be then before him. Say, Lord thou have said, thou will
put thy fear into the hearts of thy people; oh put it into mine now. Let me
have grace whereby I may carry my self acceptably in this Ordinance, with
Reverence and Godly Fear. You should come likewise with greatest humbleness,
and self-abasement when you come unto this Ordinance. For what are we, that we
should be admitted to the Lord's Table? Verily we are altogether unworthy, we
deserve not so great a privilege: And not only so, but we deserve the quite
contrary, viz. to be rejected, and kept off from it. And therefore reflecting
upon the greatness of the Privilege, your own littleness, and nothingness, nay
the vileness and wretchedness, say (considering what God has done for you in
bringing you to his Table notwithstanding) as Mephibosheth did to David when he
invited him to his Table, Lord, what is thy Servant, that thou should look
upon such a dead Dog as I am! Oh how is it that thou have brought me hitherto!
That I who deserve not to be set with the Dogs of the Flock, should thus have
the Childrens bread provided for me! Is this after the manner of man, Lord!
There must be also (when you come to this Ordinance) Brokenness, and
Contriteness of heart: For therein you see Christ dying for sin, and for your
sins; and what an unworthy thing is it for any one to pretend to benefit by the
death of Christ (which was death for sin) and yet live all the while in that
sin, for which he professes to believe that Christ dyed! Therefore sin must be
grievous to you, that you may repent of it. Therefore cry by Ejaculatory Prayer
unto God, to affect your hearts for you. Say, Lord, take away the heart of
stone that is in me, and give me an heart of flesh, a soft and sensible heart,
Lord; that while I look upon Him (in this Ordinance) whom I have pierced by my
sins, I may mourn, and be in bitterness of spirit: That I may mourn that ever I
should do so much as I have done against such an one that has showed such
love, as to die for me: That I should sin so much, notwithstanding the death of
Christ, and so much against the death of Christ: That sin should be so sweet to
me, that was so bitter to Christ. Oh that while I see the Body of Christ broken
in this Ordinance, my heart may break within me at the sight of it! Oh that I
may not look upon a broken Christ, without a broken heart! Let my heart now be
broken for sin, and be broken from sin, etc. Again, when you come to this
Ordinance, there must be sincerity and uprightness of heart. You come to eat
and to drink at the Lords Table. You must not eat for your selves, nor drink
for your selves; that is, for your own ends, as they, Zech. 7. 5, 6. but in
singleness (or simplicity) of heart, as they, Acts 2. 46. Not in treachery, as
Judas, of whom Christ says, that after he had eaten bread with him, he lifted
up his heel against him. Oh this is vile: therefore let us draw near with a
true heart. Heb. 10. 22. To play the Hypocrite here, is worse than any where
else. Pray therefore that you may be sincere. Say, Lord, deliver me from the
falseness, and deceitfulness of my heart. Let my heart be sound in thy
Statutes. I am come to renew my Covenant with thee; Oh that I may be fully
resolved to keep close unto God! To give goodly words, or to make vain shows
will not satisfy. Thou can not endure false and loose Christians. Oh help me
to be sincere. May I now be more fully resolved for God, and my heart be more
firmly engaged to God than ever. May I entirely give up my self unto thee, O
Lord my God, even with my whole heart, and my whole soul; that so from my heart
I may say, Truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, etc. Thus Pray when you be
at this Ordinance for sincerity, and uprightness of heart. You must pray also
for the strengthening of your Faith. Faith has a manifold office in this
Ordinance. As, To apprehend, and discern what is exhibited and represented: To
receive and apply what is offered, and tendered: To go out unto Christ to
receive virtue from him: To open the heart to let it in, etc. Those acts of
Faith whereby you received Christ at first, must now be renewed in receiving
him again. Therefore say, Lord strengthen my Faith. Let not my Faith now fail
me. Here thou offerest the Body and Blood of thy Son: Thou say, Take ye, eat
ye, drink ye. Oh now that there may be an inward act answering to this outward,
whereby I may receive Christ thus visibly exhibited and tendered to me! Oh that
I may have Faith as a taking hand to go forth to the offering hand of God! That
my taking, and eating, and drinking may be really significative of my Faith
appropriating, and applying Christ. Thus for the strengthening of your Faith.
Pray in like manner for the strengthening of your Love. You should exercise Love
exceedingly, abundantly, when you come to the Lord's Supper. First to Christ;
considering how lovely he is. First in himself: If there be any thing lovely in
any, it is all in him. Secondly in his Love to you. He loved you, and gave
himself to dye for you: made his soul an offering for sin, endured buffeting,
spitting, Crucifying, is gone to prepare a place for you in Heaven, appears
there for you, etc. Thirdly in his Love to you manifested in this Ordinance.
Herein he makes a representation of his Death to you. Gives you it as a Pledge
to assure you. Instituted it that very night he was betrayed. Considering all
this, how should you stir up your selves to love him! Pray therefore for grace
whereby you may be enabled to let out your affection abundantly to him. Say,
Lord, let my eye affect my heart; Let the sight of the Love of Christ to me in
this Ordinance, beget in me answerable Love to Christ. Behold how he loved me!
even so, as to give himself to dye for me. And shall I not love him then? Oh
help me, help me, blessed God. Let me Love him dearly, even with all my heart,
with all my soul, with all my might. Thus Pray that you may express your Love
unto Christ. You must express it Secondly one to another, and to all Saints
whatsoever. You are all one in Christ Jesus: all one in this Ordinance (all eat
of the same bread, and all drink of the same Cup) And therefore Pray that you
may be all one in Affection. Say, Lord, let our Communion in this Ordinance
unite our hearts together more than ever before. Herein is Love; not that we
Loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins, 1 John 4. 10, 11. O Lord, if thou so lovedst us, we ought also to
love one another. Oh fill me with Love therefore to all these, and to all
others that are thy Servants. Let me bear no malice in my heart now. If any
have injured me, Lord, I forgive them, and desire from my heart that thou
would forgive them too. Forgive me my trespasses, as I forgive them that
trespass against me. And, Lord, help me to forgive them, as I desire thou
would forgive me. Thus pray for the strengthening of your Love. Pray
earnestly likewise for Desire, and a Spiritual Appetite; that God would make
you sensible of your infinite need of Christ, that so the desires of your Souls
may be to him, and you may hunger and thirst after him. And that he would give
you good hope of a gracious satisfaction to your desires, that so you may be
confident, and be able confidently to say, as Psalm. 65. 4. Blessed is the man
whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy
Courts: I shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy House. And that he would
seal up some Evidence of his special Love and Favor in Christ unto you, that
might fill you with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory; that so you may be able
to say, My Spirit rejoices in God my Savior. If ever we rejoice, it should be
when we come to the Lord's Supper. The Superstitious deceive themselves, who
believe that the Commemoration of His Death consists only in mourning. For in
the Eucharist, Jesus Christ is not simply propounded unto us as dead, but as
dead for us. To the end, that as his death is our life, so it should be also
our joy.
Nothing is more poper to the Commemoration we make of the Death of Christ
therein, which is our life. Say therefore, Lord rejoice the soul of thy
Servant. Fill me with all joy and peace in believing. Lastly, Pray that you may
be in a Thankful frame, that Deshagne. Of the Eating of the Body of Christ.
Sect. 4. c. 5.
so you may be able in Truth and Sincerity to say, as Psalm. 103. 1, 2. Bless
the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Bless the
Lord O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits.

Thus you have the fifth Particular, viz. how you should Pray with Ejaculatory
Prayer when you come to the Ordinances.

Another special Season for Ejaculatory Prayer is,

VI. When you are upon your Sickbeds. Then you cannot go to your Solemn
Prayers, as at other times; therefore then is a fit season for Ejaculatory
Prayer. Pray then, That God would show you wherefore he contends with you. That
he would open your ear to Discipline, and seal Instruction upon your Spirit.
That the fruit may be the taking away of sin. That (if it be his good pleasure)
you may live and keep his word. That (however) you may be willing to die. That
you may Sanctify the Name of God in your sickness, by a meek, quiet, humble,
and submissive behavior before others. That you may be strengthened against the
assaults of Satan. That you may have such to come to you, as may speak sutably
to your condition; and, that you may profit by it. That you may have assurance
(if the Lord shall see it good for you) that so, an abundant entrance may be
ministered to you (whenever you go hence) into his Heavenly Kingdom.

VII. In the hour of Temptation. Then dart up Prayers* as fast as possibly you
can. Then Pray for Wisdom to discern the evil, and danger of the Temptation.
For Courage, and Resolution to resists it. For Strength to overcome it. And
that Satan may be called off.

VIII. When you come into Untrodden Paths. then Pray, that God would guide you
by his Counsels.

IX. When you are going a Journey. Then Pray that God would be with you, and
bring you back again (if you are to return.) That he would give his ( Psalm. 91.
11, 12.) Angels Charge over you, to keep you in all your ways. That he would
succeed and ( Genesis 24. 12.) Prosper you.

X. In time of the Motions of the Spirit. See Psalm. 27. 8. When thou said
Seek my Face, my heart said, Thy Face, O Lord, will I seek.

Thus be much in this Duty of Ejaculatory Prayer for your selves.

CHAP. V. Men exhorted to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer for Others. It is their
Duty to Pray for Others, as well as for Themselves. It is their Duty to Pray
for Others with Ejaculatory Prayer. When they should Pray with Ejaculatory
Prayer for Others. For whom they should Pray, when they Pray with Ejaculatory
Prayer for Others.
HAving Exhorted you to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer for your selves, I come
now to Exhort you to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer

2. For Others. Labor to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer for Others.

In Pressing this Exhortation to Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer for Others, I
will insist upon these three Particulars.

1. To show you why you should Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer for Others. 2. When
you should Pray with Ejocutory Prayer for Others. 3. For whom you should Pray,
when you Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer for Others.
I. W^^ you should Pray with Ejaculator^ Prayer for Others.

For the clearing of this, I will show y^^,

1. that it is your Duty to Pray for Others as well as for Your selves. And
then, 2. That it is your Duty to Pray for Others with Ejaculatory Prayer.
1. It is your Duty, not only to Pray for Your selves, but also to make
Conscience of Praying for Others. This is expressly commanded, Jam. 5. 16.
Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another. And this Reason
is given, The effectual fervent Prayer of a Righteous man avails much with
God: that is, not only for himself (the Apostle does not speak of that in this
place) but for others also. q. d. his Prayers avail much for Others, and
therefore you should Pray for them; by this you should be encouraged to do it.
This you are exhorted unto, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore, that first all
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all
men. Mark it, for all men: And he exhorts to this first of all, before he
descends Hoc primum, inquit, prascribo, ^nam praescribet* deinceps and alia.
to any other Particulars, thereby intimating, that it is a special Duty, Grot.
in loc.
that every one ought to make Conscience of, to Pray for Others as well as for
Themselves. It is taught you also in the Lords Prayer. For there it is not, My
Father which art in Heaven, nor, Give me my daily Bread, nor, Forgive me my
Trespasses, etc. But, Our Father, Give us, and Forgive us, etc. Christ thereby
teaching you, that it is your Duty to Pray for others, as well as for your
selves. You are commanded likewise to get Others to Pray for you, Jam. 5. 14.
Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them
Pray over him. And not only Elders are to be desired, but (as there is
occasion) Others also, as is employed, v. 16. Confess your faults one to
another, and Pray one for another. Now as you are commanded to get others to
pray for you, so others are by the same command required to get you to pray for
them; and so it is your Duty to pray for Others, and not Your selves only.
Again, God has promised to hear his people, not only for themselves, but for
others also. As Isa. 45. 11. Jam. 5. 14, 15, 16. 1 John 5. 16. Now when ever
God makes a Promise to the doing of a Duty, it is, as to encourage, so likewise
to engage to the doing of it. Furthermore, The Examples of the Godly in all
ages, praying for others, as well as for themselves, bind you to this Duty:
Abraham prayed for Sodom, Lot for Zoar, Moses for the Israelites, David for the
whole Church, Paul for particular Churches; as for the Romans, Romans 1. 9. for
the Colossions, Col. 1. 9. and not only for* particular Churches, but for
particular Persons; as for Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 3. for Philemon, Philem. v. 4.
These Examples ought to be imitated. They have been earnest likewise with
others for their Prayers; as Hezekiah for Isaiah's prayers, 2 King. 19. 4. Paul
for the Romaus prayers. See how passionatly earnest, and importunate he was (
Now I beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and for the
love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your prayers to God for
me.) Romans 15. 30. Which he would not have been, but that he knew, that to pray
for others was not only* a Duty, but a very prevailing Duty (if performed
aright) for those on whose behalf it should be performed. And therefore he was
in great hopes, and did exceedingly comfort himself upon the prayers that were
made for him; as upon the Corinthians prayers, 2 Cor. 1. 11. and upon the
Philippians prayers, Phil. 1. 19. We may add unto all this, that the Precept of
Christian Charity requires no less of you, (easpecially when your prayers are
desired by any on their behalf.) For therein you are commanded to love your
neighbor as your selves; and if to love him as your selves, then certainly to
pray for him as well as for your selves. To Pray for your selves, necessity
requires; to Pray for others, Charity. Charity begins at home, but does not
stay at home. The Law also of your Communion with Christ requires it. You have
Communion with him in his Priestly Office, and by virtue of that are made
Priests unto God, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and therefore as such, are bound to make
intercession for others. Lastly, Hereby you shall imitate the example of
Christ, who Prayed not only for himself, but for others, which you are
especially bound to do. For he has given us an example that we should follow
his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

Thus you see it is your Duty to Pray for Others, as well as for your Selves.

Now this being premised, I will show you,

2. That it is your Duty to Pray for Others as well as for your Selves with
Ejaculatory Prayer.

For the proof of this consider,

First, You are expressly commanded to Pray with all Prayer for all Saints. So
in the Text, Praying always with all Prayer for all Saints, etc. and therefore
with this. So that you are to Pray not only for your Selves with Ejaculatory
Prayer, but for Others also.

Secondly, You have many Examples of Ejaculatory Prayer for Others recorded in
the Scripture. Abraham Prayed with Ejaculatory Prayer for Ishmael. And Abraham
said, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee, Genesis 17. 18. Eli Prayed with
Ejaculatory Prayer for Hannah. Go in peace, and the God of Israel grant thee
thy Petition that thou have asked of him, 1 Samuel 1. 17. Elishah Prayed with
Ejaculatory Prayer for his Servant. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray
thee, open his eyes that he may see, 2 King. 6. 17. Stephen Prayed with
Ejaculatory Prayer for those that stoned him. And he kneeled down, and cried
with a loud voice; Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, Act. 7. 60. Christ
Prayed with Ejaculatory Prayer for those that Crucified him. Then said Jesus,
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34. These, and
diverse other Examples there are of Ejaculatory Prayer for Others in Scripture,
which you are bound to follow.

Thirdly, God has heard Ejaculatory Prayer for Others. He heard Abraham's
Ejaculatory Prayer for Ishmael. As for Ishmael, I have heard thee, Behold I
have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, etc. So Eli's Ejaculatory Prayer
for Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 26. in granting her Petition, he granted his which he
made on her behalf. So the Lord heard Elisha's Ejaculatory Prayer for his
Servant. The Lord opened the eyes of the Young man, and he saw, 2 King. 6. 17.
So Stephen's and Christ's. Now as the Command and the Examples lay an
obligation upon you, so this Experience of God's hearing it, is, and should be
an encouragement to you, to be much in it. As David, Psalm. 32. 5. telling of
God's hearing him, etc. Says, For this shall every one that is Godly pray unto
thee in a time when thou may be found.

Fourthly. You cannot Pray for so many in particular in your Set-prayers as you
may in your Ejaculatory Prayers. It is your Duty, not only to Pray for others
in the general, but in particular also. The Apostle tells that when he Prayed
for others, he mentioned them particularly by name in his Prayers. So Romans 1.
9. I make mention of you in my Prayers. And so he tells the Ephesians, Ephesians.
1. 16. So the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1. 2. So Philemon, Philem. v. 4. He made
mention of particular Churches by name, and of particular Persons by name. So
Abraham made mention of his Son Ishmael by name; and Job, when he Prayed for
his Children, did not only Pray for them all in the general, but for every one
in particular. He offered a Sacrifice ('it is said) according to the number of
them all.

Fifthly, You cannot Pray so suddenly and speedily for them in your
Set-prayers, as you may in your Ejaculatory Prayers. Many times their necessity
is so urgent, that there must be Prayer for them presently, without any delay.
But that cannot be always in Set-prayer, because that requires a certain time,
which is not always coincident with others occasions.

Sixthly, You cannot Pray so much with them in Set-prayer, as you may in
Ejaculatory Prayer. It Is but seldom (in comparison) that you can be with them
in Set-prayer, so as to Pray for them in their presence; and yet that is your
Duty: But you may, when ever you be with them, Pray for them in Ejaculatory
Prayer. To Pray for them, and with them, that is, in their presence, in their
hearing, will the more convince them of your love to them, direct and quicken
them to their Duty, and provoke them to Pray for you with Ejaculatory Prayer
too, and so there will be a mutual exchange of Ejaculatory Prayers with each
other. As Ruth 2. 4.

For these Reasons you ought to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer for Others: and
so you have the first Particular; Why you should Pray with Ejaculatory Prayers
for Others. The Second is,

11. When you should Pray with Ejaculatory Prayer for Others, or what are the
special seasons of performing this Duty of Ejaculatory Prayer for Others.

1. When you go to Visit them, or do occasionally meet with them, Genesis 47. 7.
And Joseph brought in Jacob his Father, and set him before Pharaoh, and Jacob
blessed Pharaoh: that is, Prayed by Ejaculatory Prayer for a Blessing upon him.

2. When they are going from you. So when Jacob went from Isaac, Isaac Prayed
for him with Ejaculatory Prayer. God Almighty bless thee, and make thee
fruitful, and multiply thee, etc. Genesis 28. 3.

3. When you are going from them. So Jacob, when he went out from Pharaoh, Genesis
47. 10.

4. When you do occasionally think of them, when they come to your
reremembrance. So Paul, Phil. 1. 3. I thank God upon every remembrance of you,
always in every Prayer of mine for you all, making request with joy. Then
remembering the condition they be in, or are like to be in, accordingly let your
Prayer be.

5. When sudden danger unawares does surprise them, then dart up some sudden
Ejaculatory Prayer for them. Ejaculatory Prayer is especially useful upon
sudden occasions both for our selves, and others. Herein lies one special
excellency of it. Then pray that the Lord would be a present help in time of
trouble, that he would make speed to help, that he would interpose, etc.

6. When they are undertaking any difficult and hazardous Service. So when
David was going to fight with the Philistine; Saul said, Go, and the Lord be
with thee, 1 Samuel 17. 37.

7. When you receive any special kindness from any. Thus Naomi, when Ruth told
how kind Boaz had been, Ruth 2. 19, 20. When she saw what she had gleaned, she
said, where have thou gleaned to day? Blessed be he that did take knowledge of
thee, v. 19. And when Ruth had told her, she said, Blessed be he of the Lord,
who has not left off his kindness to the living, and to the dead. So Paul,
speaking of Onesiphorus's kindness, takes an occasion to pray for him with
Ejaculatory Prayer, 2 Timothy 1. 16, 18. The Lord give mercy to the house of
Onesyphorus, for he often refreshed me; the Lord grant unto him, that he may find
mercy of the Lord at that day.

8. When they are actually at work in their particular Callings: Then say, The
blessing of the Lord be upon you. Then bid them God speed. Then say, We bless
you in the name of the Lord, or Lord be with thy Servants, Prosper the work of
their hands. Thus Boaz, when he came into the field to the Reapers, Ruth 2. 4.
said, The Lord be with you.

9. When they desire you to pray for them, when they beg your Prayers, then
presently dart up some Ejaculatory Prayer for them. When your Children come and
say, Pray to God to bless me, then say, The Lord bless thee my Child; or, Lord
bless this Child.

10. When they utter any Ejaculatory Prayer for you. So when Boaz prayed for
the Reapers, The Lord be with you; they answered, The Lord bless thee, Ruth 2.
4.

11. When they are entering into a new Relation, or changing their condition.
So when Boaz Married Ruth, all the people that were in the Gate, and the Elders
said, The Lord make the woman that is come into thy house, like Rachel, and
like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel, Ruth 4. 11, 12.

12. When you are giving any good Exhortation, or Counsel, then say, The Lord
bless this to you, The Lord grant you may not forget it, etc.

And thus you have the second Particular, When you should pray with Ejaculatory
Prayer for Others. The Third is.

III. For Whom you should pray, when you pray with ejaculatory Prayer for
Others.

1. The Text says, for all Saints; that is for all Saints living here upon
Earth, For you are not to pray for those that are dead. And therefore David
left off praying for his Child, as soon as he knew that he was dead, 2 Samuel 12.
23. This I note, because it is ordinary for ignorant persons, though not to make
Setprayers (they being out of use since Popery has expired) yet to make
Ejaculatory Prayers for the dead. As when they speak of such an one that is
dead, to say, God be with him, and God have mercy upon his Soul, etc. But there
is neither Quum mihi objiciunt Adversarij, ante mill and ^recentos annos, usu
rceptum fuisse, ut precationes fierunt pro defunctis, eos vicissim interrogo,
Quo Dei Verbo, qua Revelatione, quo Ex^mpl^ factum sit. Calv. Institut. l. 3.
c. 5.
Precept, nor approved Example of this in the Scripture, and therefore you must
not pray for the dead, but for the living; and not only for those that are
living at present, but for those that shall be living for the future, John 17.
20. Vide Reinoldum de Sacr. Scrip. Eccles. These. 5. p. 160.


Again,

2. The Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2. 1. for all forts; not only Saints, but Etiam
pro nondum credentibus.
Sinners. We are there commanded to pray for all men, therefore Grot. in loc.
even for the worst, the vilest of men; for Ejaculatory Prayer may prevail for
the Conversion of such. Yet this you must know, that you are not to pray for
any such, or any else as they are actually engaged in any evil way; you may not
dart up any Ejaculatory Prayer for them, as being in such a way.

1. Not for such as Persecute and Oppress the Church of God, Psalm. 129. 5, 6,
7, 8. -- neither do they that pass by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon
you, etc.

2. Not for such as seduce by false Doctrine. 2 Epist. of John v. 10. Bid him
not God-speed, for those that do so, are partakers of his evil deeds. And this
is true of others, as engaged in any way of sin to the dishonor of God, and
detriment of Religion, we may not pray one Ejaculatory Prayer for them, as
engaged in such a way. And here by the way you may note, what an evil it is to
do that which hinders the Ejaculatory Prayers of others. As it is a great evil
for any to do that that hinders their own Prayers; so likewise to do that that
hinders the Prayers of others, though it be but their Ejaculatory Prayers. Oh
consider, if God cast thee out of their Ejaculatory Prayers, much more does he
cast thee out of their Solemn Prayers. Oh that such would consider.

Thus you see whom you should Pray for by Ejaculatory Prayer, in the general.
In special, you must Pray by Ejaculatory Prayer for your special Relations. As
Parents must Pray by Ejaculatory Prayer for their Children; Children for their
Parents; Masters for their Servants, Servants for their Masters; Ministers for
their People, People for their Ministers; Magistrates for their Subjects,
Subjects for their Magistrates. What Duties soever we owe to others by virtue
of our Relations, we are more especially bound to them by those Relations; and
where we are more especially bound, there it is the greater sin to be guilty of
neglect. Abraham made Conscience of Ejaculatory Prayer for his Child; Elishah
for his Servant; Boaz's Servants for their Master; the Israelites for their
King; 1 King. 1. 39. Let us be careful to do so too. By this means you may
procure much good to them; obtain many a Blessing for them. And by this means
we may prevail that they become greater Blessings to our selves; so as that we
shall have the greater Comfort in them, and by them.

CHAP. VI. Cautions for preventing of Mistakes, and Miscarriages in, and about
the Practice of Ejaculatory Prayer. It must not hinder Set-prayer. Arguments to
convince of the Necessity of Set-prayer. It must not be Formal. It must not be
Hypocrytical. It must not be Profane. It must not be Passionate. It must not
be rested in, nor trusted to.
I Have now done with the Exhortation to Ejaculatory Prayer both for Your
selves, and for Others. That which remains, is only to give you some Cautions
for preventing of Mistakes and Miscarriages in the performance of the Duty; and
then to give you some Directions for the right Performance of it.

First, then for preventing of mistakes and Miscarriages in, and about the
performance of this Duty of Ejaculatory Prayer, these Cautions following are to
be given.

Caut. 1. It must not hinder Set-prayer, either for your Selves, or Others. The
Text says, Praying always with all Prayer, and therefore with Set-prayer, as
well as Ejaculatory Prayer. Set-prayer is a Duty as well as Ejaculatory Prayer,
(nay in some respects much more) and and one Duty must not justle out another.
The performance of one Duty is no excuse for the none-performance of another.
This is Partiality, which is either in the Negative part of the Law, when a man
casts off some sins, and continues the practice of others still: or in the
Affirmative part, when he practiceth some Duties, and neglects others.
Therefore he is a Deceiver, that upon pretense of Praying with Ejaculatory
Prayer, omits Set-prayer. This is a deceiving of God. But cursed be the
Deceiver (says the Prophet) Which has in his Flock a Male, and voweth and
sacrifices to the Lord a Corrupt thing, Mal. 1. 14. So may I say, cursed be
the Deceiver, that having opportunity for Set-prayer, puts God off with
Ejaculatory Prayer. This is a defrauding of God, a cheating him of his due. And
if this be so provoking when it is done to man, how much more when it is done
to God! If God will not suffer man to be defrauded, much less will he suffer
himself to be so dealt with. For this cause therefore the Judgments of God come
upon men, because they neglect Set-prayer. I will go, and return to my place
(says God) till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face: in their
affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5. 15. And so the Prophet observes
they did, Isa. 26. 16. When thy chastening was upon them they poured out a
Prayer: but not till then, and therefore the chastening of God was upon them,
that so thy might by that means be brought to pour out a Prayer. Now that was
more (as has been said) than Ejaculatory Prayer. Set-prayer therefore is
necessary. Ordinarily by Prayer in most of those Precepts and Examples that are
given of Prayer in Scripture, is meant Set-prayer.

That you may be convinced of the Necessity of Set-prayer.

1. Consider the practice of Christ. He was much given to Set-prayer as well as
to Ejaculatory Prayer. He withdrew himself into the Wilderness and Prayed,
which he needed not to have done, if it had been for Ejaculatory Prayer only.
Luke 5. 16. He went out into a Mountain. Luke 6. 12. In the morning. Mark 1.
35. And in the morning rising up a great while before day, he went out into a
solitary place, and there prayed. In the Evening, Mat. 14. 23. And when he had
sent the multitude away, he went into a mountain to pray, and when the Evening
was come, he was there alone. And this was his custom, Luke 22. 39.

2. Consider the practice of the Saints. We read in Scripture of Holy Men that
have set themselves to seek God, and have spent much time in the Duty. As David
three times, seven times a day. Daniel three times a day; and it was his usual
custom, which he continued in the most dangerous times. Hannah poured out her
soul. Peter went up to the house top.

3. That people may be at Set-prayer, God has appointed, yea expressly
commanded them, to go alone, and to enter into their Closets, and shut the
door, which needs not to be done for Ejaculatory Prayer, Mat. 6. 6.

4. Sometimes to go together. As they did, Acts 2. 42. Acts 4. 24.

5. That they might have Set-prayers in time of the Old Testament, he built
them an house chiefly for that end; which therefore had its denomination from
thence, It was called the house of Prayer, Isa. 56. 7.

6. Therefore God will have Set-prayer, that he may be worshipped with Solemnity.

Lastly, We have many things to Pray for, which cannot be expressed (as is
necessary they should be) in Ejaculatory Prayer.

For these reasons Ejaculatory Prayer must not justle out Set-prayer. He that
prays only, or mostly with Ejaculatory Prayer, and not with Set-prayer, offers
to God only the tyth of Mint and Cummin, and neglects the weightier matters of
the Law. This we ought to do, but not to neglect the other. (vid. Preston's
Daily Exercise.) Suppose thou have business, yet there must be a time for
Set-prayer. You will have an eating time, and a drinking time notwithstanding
business; and so you should have a Praying time. People do not look upon Prayer
as necessary, or else they would never neglect it for other matter as they do.
And there is much of Atheism and Infidelity in it, that is the cause of it, as
has been said. And therefore, though I show it you by way of information from
this Doctrine of Ejaculatory Prayer, that you may learn this, Not to expect to
be heard, merely for your long Prayers, because then you could not be heard for
your Ejaculatory Prayers: yet it is not so to be understood, as if long Prayers
were simply to be condemned. ( vid. Hildersham ubi supra.) Our own, and others
Necessities, especially the Churches Necessities, do often make it necessary,
that there be many and long Prayers. And therefore know, that you may make long
Prayers, so that you do not affect to be long, thereby to show your ability in
Prayer, and get applause, which is Pharisaical; nor think to be heard merely
for your much speaking, using vain Repititions for that end; which is Paganish:
but having respect to the Magisty of God; do not multiply expressions
carelessly, but endeavor that there be as much matter and affection, as words,
and then there is no evil in the length of your Prayer, and you shall not
offend thereby.

This then is the first Caution, It must not justle out Set-prayer. Though
Ejaculatory Prayer be necessary, yet it is not enough; it is not only
necessary, there must be Set-prayer too.

Caut. 2. It must not be Formal, that is, having only a vain show, and
appearance, or resemblance and likeness of Ejaculatory Prayer, without any
reality, as being only a customary thing, from Education, Example, or the like.

Now then it is so,

1. When it is without any attention of the mind unto it. As when persons being
used, or accustomed to such expressions, as are materially expressions of
Ejaculatory Prayer, do make use of them upon any occasion, but that so as they
do not consider, or attend to what they say. Thus many upon trivial occasions,
or otherwise, will cry out, O Lord, and O God, and God bless us, God have
mercy, Christ help us, God forbid, God shield, etc. not minding what they say,
so as to have any thoughts of God in such Prayer, or really intending to pray
unto him. Thus God is near in their mouth, but far from their reins, as the
Prophet complains, Jer. 12. 2. It must not be so therefore; when you dart up
any prayer unto God, you must not dart up words only. When you take your leave
of others, you say, God-bu'y. The expression is good, yet it may be you do not
mind what you say many times when you say so, and then it is but a mere
formality, or (as we say) a Complement, a Ceremony, and no more.

2. Then it is Formal, when it is without any concurrance of affection with it,
any out-going of desires either after the thing, or unto God for the thing
prayed for. Thus many pray, not caring whether they have the thing or no that
they pray for, not looking after it when they have prayed. Or if they desire
the thing, though they express a desire, yet it is not to God. They shoot at
random, not aiming at the mark. Now it must not be so, for there must be a
darting up of desire unto God, or else it is not Prayer. Without this, though
you dart up never so many Prayers, you do not pray in any of them, as it is said
of Elias, That he prayed in prayer, Jam. 5. 17.

3. Then it is Formal, when it is without power in it. Then a thing is said to
be in form when it is not in power (2 Timothy 3. 5.) when it is not effectual, so
as to have any powerful influence upon a man, so as to stir him up to effectual
endeavors, either for the avoiding of the evil prayed against, or the
obtaining of the good prayed for. You must take heed of praying with
Ejaculatory Prayer in this manner. You must not dart up prayers, as men when
they shoot at random, not considering why, nor wherefore, nor how, and in what
manner you do it. But it must be so as God may be sanctified in it. Otherwise
it is but a taking his Name in vain, and God will not hold those guiltless that
do so. Therefore when you dart up any prayer to God, consider what you do.
Labor to be serious and real in it. Look that there be desires, and that your
prayer be such in respect of desires, as may put you upon effectual endeavors;
else your darts will fly short, they will not reach up to heaven. God cannot
endure such praying, and therefore let not any one think to obtain any thing by
it. If your Prayers have no power with your selves, they will have no power
with God. They will not be like Jacobs Prayers, that had such power as to
prevail, Hos. 12. 4.

Caut. 3. It must not be Hypocritical. As there is abundance of Hypocrisy many
times in Set-prayer. So likewise there is in Ejaculatory Prayer.

Then it is Hypocritical,

1. When it is done purposely, and in tentionally to be seen of men; and so to
be thought to be more holy, and devout for it. Thus men may be frequently
lifting up their eyes and hands (a sign of mental Ejaculatory Prayer) that it
may be taken notice of, that they pray, and are men that are mindful of God.
Thus the Pharisees did love to appear to men to fast; and so all Hypocrites,
they love to appear to men to perform those Duties that they perform.

2. When it is to cover and hide some wickedness. As some for a pretense make
long prayers, Mat. 23. 14. So others for a pretense make short prayers, viz.
Ejaculatory Prayers. Many, if they be suspected, and questioned for a crime;
that they may be credited, will presently, betake themselves to Ejaculatory
Prayer wherein they make their appeals unto God, and pray that God would judge
them, and discover it, if they speak otherwise than the truth, and so lift up
their eyes and hands, thinking that then men will not suspect them any longer.
But this is Hypocrisy, and a perverting of the Duty.

3. When it is with Dissimulation. As when you pray for others to their faces,
whom you do not wish well to in your hearts, but the contrary. This is
Flattery, and made the note of wicked persons in the Scripture. The wicked
flattereth with his lips. Thus many will shoot up Prayers for others before
their faces, Oh the Lord bless you, God keep you, God grant you a good day, a
good year, etc. and shoot out poisoned arrows against them, even bitter words,
and it may be curses behind their backs.

4. When it is only in time of Distress. As Jer. 2. 27. -- but in time of their
trouble, they will say, Arise and save us. Thus many that seldom or never pray
unto God, either with Set-prayer, or Ejaculatory Prayer in time of their
health; if trouble be upon them, or they be in any great danger, will be much
in Ejaculatory Prayer, O Lord, help me, O Lord forgive me, Oh if thou will but
spare me this once; I will become a new man, will never sin as I have done,
etc. Now though possibly sometimes there may be sincerity in this, as
proceeding from true Repentance, yet usually it is nothing* but Hypocrisy. For
will the Hypocrite pray always? No; as, not with Set-prayer; so not with
Ejaculatory Prayer neither, and therefore he is an Hypocrite. Labor therefore
to be sincere in your Ejaculatory Prayers both for your selves, and others. As
Formality will m^ke (...) (...) so Hypocrisy will make it fly away. This then
is the third Particular, It must not be Hypocritical.

Caut. 4. It must not be Profane. As it is,

1. When it is done in a Profane manner, As sportingly, or as it were in
jest. As when persons are at their sports and games, and they cry out, O God,
or God be thanked, or God send me good luck, etc. or every one for himself, and
God for us all.

2. When it is done in a way of sin. As when men are acting in some unlawful
business, and yet will pray to God to speed them. As now, when any are going to
steal, and yet will pray, God send us good fortune, etc.

3. When men express some wicked resolution they have taken up, and will with
the same breath pray, God forgive me. As, I cannot but do such a one a
mischief, God forgive me. This is a Profaning of Ejaculatory Prayer, and a
polluting of the name of God. This is to make God a Patron of wickedness, and a
party to it. It is also a mocking of God; for what is it else, for a man to do
wickedly against his Conscience, and yet to pray that God would forgive him? If
thou meanest to go on in sin, how can thou expect that God should forgive
thee? this is in effect to pray that God should give thee a Dispensation, a
License, as he said, God be merciful to me when I bow my self in the house of
Rimon. This is a praying for forgiveness not only without it, but contrary to
the condition upon which it is promised; for that is Faith and Repentance. Take
heed therefore that your Ejaculatory Prayer be not Profane.

Caut. 5. It must not be passionate, darted up in wrath. When you pray (says
the Apostle) lift up your hands without wrath and doubting, 1* Tim. 2. 8. But
usually it is otherwise.

1. Many when they are angry with any that will not yield to them, will say,
Well, if you be upon those terms, then God-bu'y, and so fling away from them.
Thou fool, Do consider what thou Prayest? shall God be with him, and wilt not
thou? It Is as if thou should say, Let God be with him if he will, but so
will not I.

2. Many in their mad frantic passion dart out horrid imprecations, 1. Upon
themselves. As, I pray God I may never prosper if this be so; or if I should be
guilty of that you lay to my charge. 2. Upon others. As, God confound him, The
Devil go with him. Men are very apt to bring their sudden passions into
prayer. But this is contrary to the Rule, Bless, and Curse not. Such kind of
prayer is like but to recoyl upon your selves, and come down upon your own
heads.

Object. But may we not use Imprecations? We find that Holy Men in Scripture
have done so.

Answ. Their Imprecations were from special excitations and impulses of the
Spirit of God, and were Prophetical Predictions. We must not pray the prayer of
Elias without the spirit of Elias. The Disciples would have had leave to call
for fire from Heaven, as he did; but Christ said, Ye know not what spirit ye
are of, Luke 9. 55.

Caut. 6. It must not be rested in, nor trusted to. Not rested in, as, when men
think it to be enough, so that they need not make use of Set-prayer at all,
though there be never so great occasion, of which I have spoken somewhat
already. Many when they sit down to Meals will say, God make us thankful, and
that is all the Prayer they make. And when they have committed a sin, they will
say, God forgive us, and never think of seeking any farther for the forgiveness
of it. Not trusted to, as, when men put off* all to a Deathbed Ejaculatory
Prayer. Many will say, If we may but have time to cry God have Mercy, it will
be enough. This is a trusting to Ejaculatory Prayer. But,

1. That Is an uncertainty whether there will be time for so much or not; for
some are suddenly smitten and taken away.

2. Suppose there be, yet it is not enough. Oh what a slight matter do such
make of Forgiveness, and Reconciliation with God! whereas the heart must do the
greatest work that ever was done, before it can be obtained. Take heed
therefore of trusting to your Ejaculations. I will not trust in my bow (says
David, Psalm. 144. 6.) Neither do you in this, for of it self it cannot save you.

Thus I have shown you what things you are to take heed of for the preventing
of Miscarriages in this Duty.

CHAP. VII. Directions for the right performance of the Duty of Ejaculatory
Prayer.
NOW in the last place to give y^^ some Directions for your h^^, to enable you
to perform this Duty aright, and to be much in it.

Direct. 1. Labor for truth of Grace. For else you cannot pray acceptably. God
will not hear the least Ejaculatory Prayer that a wicked man darts up unto him.
The Prayer of the wicked is Abomination. See Prove. 15. 8. and Romans 8. 8.

Direct. 2. Be very watchful. This will be a special help to you. The Watchman
cries upon every occasion; and so the Watchful Christian. The Watchman is
purposely set to descry occasions, and for this end do you watch; watch unto
Prayer, 1 Pet. 4. 7. unto Ejaculatory Prayer. Watch and Pray, Mat. 26. 41. If
you watch, you will pray, else not: that is, not so frequently as you ought. He
that means to throw or shoot a dart, watches diligently for his opportunity.
So must you do, else many an advantag will be lost as not observed. Watch
therefore to see if any danger be toward, any temptation, any sin, any
suffering, that accordingly you may cry unto God, by E^^culatory Prayer.

Direct. 3. Labor for quickness of apprehension, that so you may not watch in
vain, or so much in vain, as you must needs do if you bewithout it. Some can
apprehend quicker than others. Labor therefore for a spiritual Sagacity, a
spirit of discerning, an accute sense, a clear quick-sighted eye. For a blind
man to watch to is no purpose and for one that is poreblind is little better.
Therefore,

1. Get your he arts purged from Lusts, for they blind the eye of the
understanding that it cannot see. And besides this,

2. Give all diligence to be adding to your Faith Virtue, etc. For he that
lacks these things is blind, and cannot see affar off, 2 Pet. 1. 5-9.

3. Let your senses be experienced to discern good and evil, Heb. 5. 14. For as
by frequent exercise real habits are begotten, so thereby spiritual habits are
incresed, and perfected.

Direct. 4. Labor to preserve in your souls a spiritual tenderness, that so
you may not only discover, but affected with what you discover. When the heart
is hardened, then, though a man have never so clear Apprehensions and Convictions,
yet they do not prevail, but he neglects God in them. But when the heart is
soft and tender, it cannot endure to lie under the guilt of the least sin, or
be without a sense of the love of God, etc. but will presently fly unto God by
Ejaculatory Prayer for it.

Direct. 5. Labor to see what danger you be in continually, and then you will
be still looking up, and flying to God continually. Still think with your
selves that you walk among snares, that you are not secure, and this will make
you frequent in Ejaculatory Prayer unto God. Now there is no place, no company,
or condition you can be in, but you need the help of God to assist, to protect
and preserve you in it. You may, nay you ought to assure yourselves, that
(though you do not see it, yet) you are in continual danger, in jeopardy every
moment. For there are hidden snares, and the Devil goes about continually
seeking whom he may devour. Therefore besides the manifest and apparent dangers
that some times there are to be taken notice of: (for the discovery of which,
you are to watch (as has been said) besides these I say, you should believe
that there are hidden dangers, and this will make you be continually darting up
Prayers unto God for protection, and preservation. Lord, I know not what a day,
what an hour may bring forth, therefore be with me, etc. You take most hurt by
these hidden, these unseen danges ( for in vain is the Net spread in the sight
of any bird) therefore labor to get your hearts affected with this
Consideration, and then you shall be thereby very much quickened to be much in
this Duty.

Direct. 6. Set God always before you. For the sight of God is very
attractable, it is the nature of the sight of God to draw the soul after him.
When a man forgets God, and has him not in his thoughts, there is no motion
after him, but when he sees him, he cannot but upon every occasion fly unto
him. When the Child sees the Mother, he cries after her, though before (while
she was out of sight) he was well enough without her.

Direct. 7. Keep grace in continual exercise. Be still stirring up the fire,
and blowing it into a flame. It Is the nature of Grace (as of fire) when stirred
up, and set on work, to be darting upwards.

Direct. 8. Grieve not the Spirit, cause it not to depart. For the Spirit it is
that enables to cry, Abba, Father. It is from the spirit that men are much in
Ejaculatory Prayer.

Direct. 9. Accustom your selves to be much in Ejaculatory Prayer. For the
Soul moves most that way, that it is most used to. This will make it natural as
it were, and very easy. When once we are used to a thing, we can do it upon
all occasions, and we do it freely without difficulty.

Direct. 10. Keep Conscience clear, for else you will not dare, at least will
have but little heart to be darting up any Ejaculatory Prayer to God upon any
occasion. Guilt unbends the bow, weakens the arm, and makes it tremble. For
this end, be sure you keep in a good way, for else there must needs be guilt,
and consequently fear, which will hinder the praying by Ejaculatory Prayer unto
God.

Direct. 11. Be humbled for your neglect of Ejaculatory Prayer. for a man will
not make conscience of a Duty, and be serious and constant in the performance
of it, till he be first sensible of his sin in omitting it, and thoroughly
humbled for it.

Direct. 12. Observe experiences of the evil essects of neglecting Ejaculatory
Prayer, and frequently bring them to remembrance. As, how often you have
miscarried in Company, etc. by reason of your neglecting to lift up your heart
by Ejaculatory Prayer to God to be with you, etc.

Direct. 13. Often consider with your selves, Is there nothing that I should
now be speaking unto God for? there may be some thing, and I do not see it. By
this means you will come to see. Again Consider with your selves, Can I now
lift up my heart unto God being in such a frame? Can I dart up a Prayer unto
God being in such a way? Am I now in such a frame of Spirit, such a place, such
a company, as that I can say, Lord, vouchsafe to be present with me. And if you
cannot, endeavor speedily to get out of it. For if thou can not pray there,
what should thou do there? When a man tryes a dart, or shoots in such a
place, and finds he cannot, he presently leaves that place; and goes to a
better. And so do you, when you find you are not where you should be. Say, If I
stay here, then I cannot pray, etc. By this means you will remove the
impediment. And you should take heed your Prayers be not hinhered. 1 Pet. 3. 7.

Direct. 14. Often call your selves to an account. Say, Have I not forgotten?
Have I sent up any Ejaculatory Prayer to Heaven since morning? Since I have
been here? Since I have been in this place? Since I have been in this company?
And if you find you have not, then cheek your selves for it, and stir up your
selves presently to it.

FINIS.

