A SEASONABLE APOLOGY FOR RELIGION, Being the subject of two SERMONS Lately
delivered in an Auditory in LONDON.

By Matthew Pool, Minister of the Gospel in London.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel; and at the Bible on London Bridge, under the
Gate. MDCLXXIII.

To the Right Honorable and truly Religious Lady Laetitia Countess of Donegal,
etc.
Madam,
WHen I resolved to comply with the desires of some worthy persons in the
publication of this discourse, I was not long in suspense about the Dedication,
but was speedily determined therein, by calling to remembrance a former
obligation to your Honor, under which I had justly put my self; only I feared,
lest, instead of discharging an obligation, I should deserve an imputation of
presumption and w^akness, in thinking to dissolve it by such a trifle. But,
Madam, if I should take the measure of my return, from your merit and my duty,
peradventure I could not have satisfied justice, without a Volume as large as
that, which your Honor and many others know, I am engaged in: Besides, I
considered the nature of true goodness and generosity, which looks not so much
to the nature of the Present, as the sinc^erity of him that tenders it. And,
Madam, though the bulk of the discourse is but small, and my managery of it can
add no greatness to it, which I confess is such as needs the pardon of a
critical Reader, yet I must aver, that the subject of it is truly great,
Religion, which has the great God, and the great Savior the Lord Jesus for
its object, great promises for its encouragement, great salvation for its
reward. And what Galen said of Physic is more true of Religion, non datur
exiguum, there is nothing small and trivial in it. And as Religion is great in
it self, so I dare say it is in your Honors eyes, and therefore I am persuaded
you will not despise this small Apology for it: which the miscarriages of
former times makes necessary, and the degeneration and malignity of the present
makes seasonable But I must remember I am writing an Epistle to a small
Discourse, and I must have a care of making my Gate too wide, lest (as he said)
the City should run out of it. Your Honors time is too precious for me to rob
you of more of it, and my occasions are so urgent that they will scarce allow
me to perform civilities. I only add my own, and beg yours, and other truly
religious persons Prayers, that God would bless my poor endeavors. If your
Honors name and interest engage others to read it to their good, it will
abundantly answer the desires and compensate the pains of,

Madam, Your Honors most obliged, and humble, and faithful Servant, especially
in the concerns of your soul M. P.

A SEASONABLE APOLOGY FOR RELIGION.
Matthew 11.19. The last clause of the Verse. -- But wisdom is justified of her
children.


THE Particle But commands your reflection upon the foregoing words and verses,
wherein our Savior describes the humors and manners of that generation, which
he does two ways, 1. Allegorically, verse. 16, 17. But whereunto shall I liken
this generation? it is like unto children sitting in the Markets, and calling
unto their fellows, and saying, We have piped unto you, and you have not
danced, We have mourned unto you and you have not lamented. 2. Properly, verse.
18, 19. Wherein he represents their perverse and censorious humor. They were
so capricious, that God himself could not please them, though he condescended
so graciously as to use variety of means and different sorts of persons, to
comply even with their humors as far as might be, to become all things to all
men, that he might save some. First he sends John, neither eating nor drinking:
which you are not to understand simply, as if, as they fable of the Cameleon he
did live upon Air, but the meaning is, he did neither eat nor drink
intemperately* He did both restrain himself from unlawful, and moderate himself
in lawful, things. For Quantity what he did eat was little, next to nothing,
for Quality, it was Locusts and wild Honey; His garments also were as
unpleasing to others as his meat to himself: and all this was designed by God
for this end, that the austerity of John's life, joined with the severity of
his doctrine, might awaken that secure generation to repentance, whereby they
might divert Gods judgments, and prevent their own ruin. But all was to no
purpose, and it produced quite contrary effects, even a censure of his person
and doctrine, instead of compliance with them. They say he has a Devil. Man
(they considered) was a sociable creature, and because he much avoided converse
with men, and chose solitude, they said he has a Devil, according to the
ancient observation, That every solitary person is either a God, or an Angel,
or a Devil.

They pretended they could not tell, whether John's doctrine was inspired by
God, or suggested by the Devil, and therefore they rejected the counsel of God,
against themselves, in refusing his Doctrine and Baptism. When this proves
ineffectual, God contrives another way, and sends an Ambassador in another
garb. verse. 19. The son of man came eating and drinking, i. e. freely
conversing with other men, even the meanest and the worst of them, Publicans
and Sinners, accomodating himself to the customs and companies of men as far as
might be, but this also succeeds as ill as the former attempt; they are still
striking upon the same string, and venting their censorious humor. They say,
Behold a man gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners.
His gentleness to Sinners they call approbation of their sins, his conversable
disposition, looseness and luxury; Thus far you have their censure. My Text
contains our Saviors (...) or judgment upon the whole, But wisdom is justified
of her children. In which words three things need explication.

Quest. 1. What is meant by wisdom?

Answ. In Scripture use, as sin is often called folly, so Religion or the fear of
God is called wisdom. Job. 28.28. The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to
depart from evil, that is understanding. Wisdom and goodness in Scripture
language are but two expressions signifying the same thing. Psalm. 36.3. He has
left off to be wise and to do good, where the last words expound the former*
More particularly wisdom in this place is that which the generality of the Jews
rejected, and that was Christ, (who is called Wisdom, Prove. 8. and who is made
unto us of God wisdom, and in whom are all the treasures of wisdom) and the
wise and holy counsel of God concerning man's salvation through Christ. This is
that which they rejected, and the children of wisdom justified.

Quest. 2. Who are the children of Wisdom?

Answ. The true Disciples of Wisdom. It is a phrase of the Hebrew language,
whereby men devoted or addicted to any person or thing, are called his, or its
children. Thus those that addicted themselves to prophetical studies, are
called the sons of the Prophets. 2 Kings 4.38. Thus the friends and associates
of the Bridegroom are called children of the Bride chamber, Mat. 9.15. And the
same phrase we meet with in profane Authors. Students in Physic are called by
Lucian (...), Children of Physicians. And Students in Philosophy are called the
children of the Philosophers. So here, the children o^ Wisdom are the approvers
and lovers of Wisdom or Religion; The sincere worshippers of God, those* that
heartily embrace the ways of God, that are his servants devoted to his fear,
and particularly those that approve of Christ, and embrace his doctrine and
ways.

Quest. 3. What is meant by being justified?

Answ. It is a juridical term. To be justified is to be acquitted and approved;
for you must conside^ that Wisdom or Religion was here brought before the
Tribunal of audacious men, and they past a sentence of condemnation upon it,
unto which the present justification is opposed. So then the sum of the Text,
with respect to the Context is this. First here is Religion condemned by evil
men, though upon very slender grounds and gross mistakes, and perverse
constructions. Secondly here is Religion justified, vindicated and approved of
by good and wise men, But wisdom is justified by her children, and accordingly
there are two doctrines that hence offer themselves to your thoughts; the first
implied, the second expressed.

First, That ungodly men are very apt to speak evil of Religion and religious
persons upon the most trivial pretenses. Doctrine. 1.


Secondly, As it is the duty of all, so it is the practice of those that are
wise and good, Doctrine. 2.
to justify Religion, notwithstanding all the miscarriages of its friends, and
censures of its enemies.

Of these in order.

First, Ungodly men are very apt to speak evil of Religion, and its professors,
upon the weakest and most trivial pretenses.

The rise of the Doctrine you see is evident; the Jews condemned both John and
Christ, and their several methods and doctrines, and that (as you have heard)
upon most frivolous motives. This has always been one of the many ill
qualities that are in wicked men, that they have an aching tooth at Religion,
and religious men, a great pronity to seek and spy faults in them.

When there was a strife between the Herdsmen of Abram's Cattle, and the
Herdsmen of Lot's Cattle, Genesis 13.7. It is mentioned as a memorable
circumstance, that the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelt then in the Land.
Abram well knew what an evil eye those men had upon Religion, and how ready
they would be to censure the actions of those that owned it; and therefore he
condescends to Lot, though his Junior and his Nephew, and offers him his choice
in a writ of partition, verse. 8, 9. And Abram said unto Lot, let there be no
strife I pray thee between me and thee, etc. for we be brethren: is not the
whole Land before thee, separate thy self I pray thee from me, if thou will
take the left hand, I will go to the right, or if thou depart to the right
hand, then I will go to the left.

The Jews were the only people that professed true Religion in the World, and
there was no people more maligned and despised; no Religion more censured than
theirs; no calumnies were thought foul enough to be fastened upon them: They
were said to worship the Clouds, to worship an Asses head, and what not? and
when the Jews degenerated, and their Religion was either corrupted or
antiquated, and Christians came in their stead; they succeeded also into their
hatred, and were (as the Apostle speaks) in vulgar account as the scum and
offscouring of all things. Acts 28.22. As concerning this Sect, we know that
it is every where spoken against.

And thus it has been in all succeeding ages, and therefore it is no wonder if
it be so at this day. I must acknowledge with grief of heart, that pretenders
to Religion have given too great occasion to its enemies to open their mouths
against it, and it is my earnest prayer, that God would forgive the sins of
English professors; the sad effects whereof we feel at this day, and in nothing
more than in this, that for their sakes Religion is dishonored and despised.
But yet I must add, that whatsoever have been the pretended or real
miscarriages of Religious men, Religion is innocent, and has not deserved any
of that contempt or reproach which is cast upon it. And therefore this will not
justify the practice of ungodly men, whereby they are so apt to censure
Religion, and its professors, upon the most vain and trivial pretenses. In the
prosecution of this doctrine, I shall proceed in this method. 1. Give you some
demonstrations of the truth of the point. 2. The Grounds and reasons of it, and
3. apply it to our own use.

First, I shall give you some demonstrations or indications of this malevolent
temper of wicked men, and of their perverse and unreasonable censures of
Religion and those that profess it.

First, They condemn that in Religious men which God commands. For example. God
commands men not only to mind their own salvation, but their Neighbors too. It
is a speech befitting none but a barbarous Cain. Am I my Brothers Keeper? It ^s
our duty as occasion is offered, and need requires, to admonish our brethren of
their sin and danger, to prevent their damnation, and to further their
salvation by all means possible. Scripture is express and peremptory, Leviticus
19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart: thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. And certainly, if I must
help up my Neighbors Ass when he has sunk down under the weight of his
burden, or help him out when he is fallen into a Pit; much more is it my duty
to help my Neighbors Soul, when it is ready to drop into the pit from which
there is no redemption. Nay the very light of Nature teaches men this doctrine.
Remarkable to this purpose is that passage of Socrates, as Plato reports it in
his apology for him, who tells his Judges; that if they would spare his life
upon this condition, that he should forbear instructing, and reproving the
young men of the City, he would not accept his life upon such dishonorable
terms. But now, if a Christian makes conscience, and seriously sets himself to
the practice of this duty, if he does admonish, and warn, and reprove his
Neighbor when he sins against God, and wrongs his own Soul, how severely is he
censured for it; then he is a morose and unconversable person, a busy body, a
troublesome and intolerable Neighbor. Then Religion makes men peevish,
ill-natured, imperious, and all that is hateful.

An eminent instance of this we have Genesis 19. where Lot endeavors to
diswade the Sodomites from executing their intended wickedness, verse. 7, 8. I
pray you brethren do not so wickedly, behold now I have two daughters which
have not known man, let me I pray you bring them out unto you, and do you to
them as is good in your eyes, only unto these men do nothing, for therefore
came they under the shadow of my roof. Where (abating the error of offering
his Daughters to prostitution) ther^ is so great a constellation of virtues as
might command reverence from the most savage Barbarians; so strict an
observance of the Laws of Hospitality, such fortitude and generosity in
exposing himself to the utmost hazards, for the defense of those whom he
supposed to be helpless strangers, such Heroical self denial in being more
willing to receive the injury in a part, and the fruit, of his own body, than
to permit it to strangers, such eminent charity in affording counsel to these
wretched Miscreants, and doing what he could to prevent the death of those that
deserved not to live; and the reproof too, was managed with all sweetness and
mildness, I pray you Brethren, and fortified with great strength of reason and
arguments, do not so wickedly, as if he had said, This action has a turpitude
in it self, and will bring some mischief upon your heads: and yet these
virulent Adders, turn a deaf ear to the counsels of this holy charmer though he
charmeth so wisely. verse. 9. And they said, stand back, and they said again,
this one fellow came in to sojourn and he will needs be a judge. Now will we
deal worse with thee than with them. Thus heartily did they censure and
threaten him for no other crime but this, that he did his duty, and obyed Gods
command, and would have made them as happy as himself. So it is a plain command
of God, that Christians should walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.15. (...) exactly,
warily, precisely, for so the word signifies. That they walk according to rule,
Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be unto them, and
mercy. That they have a respect unto all Gods commands: and hate every false
way* Psalm* 1^9.128. and consequently that they make conscience of every, yea
the least duty, and of avoiding the least sin, that they abstain from all
appearance of evil* 1 These. 5.22. Now if a Christian really be this, which he
ought and pretends to be* and do this which you see he stands obliged to do*
it is incredible what clamours are raised against him. If a man make conscience
of remembering the Sabbath day to keep it holy, and of abstaining from the doing
of his own ways and pleasure, and the speaking of his own words, as is expressly
commanded, Isaiah 58.13. (unless perhaps the Advocates of profaneness will
fetch relief from the Tents of Heresy, and say, that the Old Testament i^
antiquated to Christians) then he is a Praecisian, foppish, superstitious, nay
he is a Jew, and I must acknowledge, it is better be a Jew than such a Pagan
Christian, as to live in the gross violation of the known laws of that God whom
he professes to serve and obey. Thus if a man will not do all that his
neighbors do; if a man make a scruple of those actions and carriages which
others can easily* digest, and and are generally esteemed but puny sins* then
he is nice, singular, fantastical, though it be no more than God requires he
should be.

Secondly, They condemn religious men for those very things which their own
conscience^ approve of: for men's consciences if they be not bribed, are
generally on Gods side. For example* Conscience will justify, that a man
should strive to enter in at the straight gate, and make Religion his work and
end, to which all other things should give place. So as neither worldly
business, nor idle visits, nor recreations should divert a man from it.
Conscience will justify, that a man should be governed by Religion in all his
concernments, that whether he eats or drinks, or whatsoever he does, all should
be done to the glory of God, as we are expressly enjoined. 1 Cor. 10.31. That a
man should prefer the hearing of a Sermon, before an unnecessary worldly
occasion, or the performance of a civility, I had almost said before a dearly
beloved Play. This I say is no more than Conscience will justify: and it is a
case already determined by our Savior, Luke 10.41, 42. But if a man will
resolvedly and diligently set upon the practice of these things, he shall
certainly hear of it. This is but pride, to be thought better than his
neighbors; humor, to do more than other men; hypocrifie, to make great shows
of devotion; design, to cover some evil practices; or at best but an
intemperate and busy zeal.

I knew two persons of Quality that were censuring some of their near
Relations, and condoling* one with another, that they could have no more
comfort in them: They were so frequently in their Closets, or at Sermons, and
Fasts, etc. that they could have no society with them: but at last Conscience
began to work, and one of them said, but the truth is, Sir, they do no more
than you and I ought to do. And believe it, however men may stupifie their
consciences now, there will be a great number of that mind at the last day.

Thirdly, They condemn Religion for the faults of irreligious men, or such as
are vai^ pretenders to Religion: For such the World has ever had, and it is
reasonable to expect it, especially if Religion happen to be in fashion, and
the way to preferment. And a multitude of such persons there were in the late
times, that have since discovered of what complexion their Religion was, being
of forward pretenders to it, grown implacable haters and persecutors of it; and
these were the men that contributed as much to our late sad and sinful
enormities as any; and now Religion must bear the blame. All these men's brats
must be laid at Religions door; and Religion must needs be the cause of
Sedition and Rebellion, and what not? More wise and just was that late Noble
Lord, who though a constant enemy to all, either the real, or supposed,
miscarriages of late times, yet has left this passage upon record in his pious
Letter, That though Religion had been abused to very bad purposes, it was not
to be thought worse of, for it. A great sign of a truly honest mind and heart,
and the contrary speeches of other men do plainly discover a heart full of
malevolence and ^ll-will to Religion. We know the Devil some times transforms
himself into an Angel of Light, now it were as just to charge all the lies and
wicked actions of the Devil acting in such a disguise upon all the holy Angels,
as it is to charge the faults of mere pretenders to Religion, upon the sincere
professors of it.

Fourthly, They condemn Religion for the faults of humane nature. If any person
that professes Religion be morose or passionate, if any of them be churlish
Husbands, perverse Wives, slothful or heedless Servants, Religion must suffer
for it, and you shall hear such language as this, this is Religion, these are
your religious persons. It must be granted that such persons do very wickedly;
to give occasion to the adversaries of Religion to open their mouths against
it. They shall pay dear for exposing Religion in this manner: that should teach
them to conquer themselves, and to subject their own inclinations to the
commands of God, and the credit of the Gospel: yet still, I say, Religion is
not the worse for it. It is an unjust and an ungodly thing to charge the faults
of nature upon grace. What was said of Galba's wit, may frequently be said of
the grace of God planted in the Soul, that it does male habita^e, that it is
lodged in an incommodious and ill tempered body; Religion will not alter the
constitution of the body; it will not expel choler or melancholy, or correct
any of those ill humors that are connatural to it. The Heathen Seneca Epist.
11. might teach these men more candor, while he says, Nulla sapientia
naturalia animi vitia ponuntur: quic^uid infixum and ingenitum est, lenitur
art, non vinci^ur. No wisdom will wholly subdue the natural infir^ities of the
mind: whatsoever is rooted in us, and ^orn with us, it may be qualified by art
and industry, ^ut it can never be conquered or extinguished.

Fifthly, They condemn that highly in religious ^en, which they allow or bear
with in themselves ^r others. Herein appears their gross partiality, they can
see the motes in their eyes, and cannot discern the beams in their own: and
this I commend to your observation upon this sort of men, you will find those
who are most forward to accuse Religion and Religious men upon every small
occasion, most ready to excuse ungodly men for far greater crimes: their
drunkenness is but good nature and sociableness; their horrid murders,
especially if ^shered in with the solemnity of a Duel, are but acts of Valor
and Gallantry; their dismal oaths, able to make the pillars of Hell to tremble,
are but the effects of sudden passion, for which, good men, they are verry
sorry afterward. In a word, All their sins are but infirmities, and all the
sins of Gods people are rebellion and witchcraft; and as some have said in a
particular instance, the very unpardonable sin. Thus if David do but once fall
into the sin of Adultery, the enemies of God will take occasion to blaspheme
him. 2 Samuel 12.14. Ay, This is the man after Gods own heart, This is the man
that keeps himself from his own iniquity, This is he that has respect to all
Gods commandments, and hates every false way. Other Kings of his and the
succeeding times committed the same sin a hundred times, but you hear no noise
of that. In them it was but a venial sin, a humane frailty, or the just
Prerogative of Princes. Hence it comes to pass, that those who are really sorry
for some of the miscarriages of their Brethren in iniquity, do heartily rejoice
and triumph in the slips and falls of religious Men, while a generous and
virtuous soul would on the contrary say, Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in
the streets of A^kelon.

Secondly, I shall make a little enquiry into the cause^ o^ ^his malignity,
whereby wicked men are so prone to speak evil upon Religion and Religious
persons on all occasions. I shall only mention five.

First Ignorance. However many of these men esteem themselves the wits of the
Age; herein they betray great ignorance and folly, or (which i^ worse,)
desperate malice; but in charity we will suppose the best, it is their
ignorance. Therefore they impute all evil effects to Religion, because they
have not wit to understand the true causes or differences of things, nor to
consider, that in good men th^re are diverse and contrary principles, from each
of which those ac^ion^ may proceed. It Is true, Pleb^ non distinguit, The Rabble
make no distinct^on. But if these men had the wisdom wherein they pretend to
excel others, it would teach them to discern between things that differ; to
ascribe every effect to its proper cause; and to distinguish between those
actions which proceed from the frame of the soul, and those that flow from the
temper of the body; between those that arise from Religion, and those which are
the fruits of that imperfection which attends upon Religion in this life. And
because these men can no better distinguish, it is a plain evidence, either
that they have malicious hearts, or else but vulgar heads.

Secondly Hatred of God and Religion. Peradveture some may say, there are no
such Monsters in the world that hate God, and that I do but traduce the nature
of man in making such a supposition. But if I am deceived, God has deceived
me. For amongst the other crimes which the spirit of God has branded the
Romans with, this is one, that they were haters of God, Romans 1.3. And God says
he will repay them that hate him to their face. Deuteronomy. 7.10. And if the
experience of former ages has left this doubtful, I think that of this
generation will put it out of all question. Since men have now arrived to that
height of impudence, ( Caligula like) to proclaim war against God himself.
Hence come those audacious and Atheistical discourses and Books which have
dared to appear in the face of the Sun in this generation, as if they would
beat God out of the Field, and dispute him out of the world. There are some men
whose principal business it is to affront God, and to do as much mischief to
Religion as possibly they can. I have been credibly informed concerning a
Person of some Quality, who perceiving his friend to scruple an action which he
persuaded him to, said to this effect, I suppose you are not willing to do
this, because you think it unlawful, and I therefore would do it. So that I
think by this time it is past doubt, that there are such prodigies in humane
nature, that have a radicated hatred against God and Religion; and no wonder if
such a cause produces such an effect; and hatred of Religion makes them forward
to censure it. For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth will speak.
Men are generally ready to excuse the actions of those that they love, and to
accuse and censure the actions of those whom they hate, and to take all they
say or do in the worst part.

Thirdly, Revenge against Religion and Religious men; they owe them both a
spite. Religion condemns them to unspeakable Torments, to the Worm that never
dies, the Fire that shall never be quenched. It tells them in plain terms, that
the wicked shall be turned into Hell, that there is no peace to the wicked,
that if they live after the flesh they shall dye, and that if they hope to
escape eternal death upon other terms, they do but cheat themselves. Religious
men also condemn them; and as the Saints shall judge the World at the last day,
so do they now. It Is said of Noah, that by t^^t eminent act of Faith, the
building of the Ark, he condemned the unbeleiving world. Heb. 11.7. This was
the matter of Cain's contest with his Brother, and the reason why he slew him,
Because his own deeds were evil and his Brothers righteous. 1 John 3.12. Abel's
example condemned him; and so does the example of good men in all ages condemn
the ungodly of their several generations. Wicked men, especially the ingenious
part of them, have many fine devices to paliate their sins with; it is their
nature or temper, and that is immutable: their temptations are invincible:
Flesh and Blood can never forbear in such circumstances, or endure such
severities. Now when men talk at this extravagant rate, as if the serious
practice of godliness were absolutely impossible, Behold (say God and
Conscience) thy self confuted by these instances. They do spend as much time
and pains in the service of God, as is necessary for thee to do; they subdue
those inclinations which thou pretendest to be invincible; they actually
overcome the temptations, which thou say are irresistible, and why can not
thou do so? Ay this is the ground of the quarrel, therefore these men must be
reproached, and Religion must be traduced, that so Revenge may be satisfied.

Fourthly, Self defense, and the maintenance of their Lusts; they love their
Lusts, and therefore dislike Religion, because it makes oppos^tion against
them. As some fond Parents disgust those persons that tell them of their
Childrens faults. Sinners are passionately desirous, and stiffly resolved to go
on in sin without control or disturbance, which they are most likely to meet
with from Religion, and Religious men. These will be always reproving and
warning them, and that will be forbidding and threatening them. So that in their
own defense, or rather in the defense of their Lusts, they are driven to an
enmity against them both. They must disparage that yoke which they will not put
on, and condemn Religion, that they may justify themselves in their contempt
and rejection of it. They must hate and vilify Religious persons, as the
Malefactor does his Judge. An eminent instance of this we have in Ahab, 1 Kings
22.8. where, being asked by Iehoshaphat, If there was not there a Prophet of
the Lord, He answers, There is one Micaiah, the son of Imlah, by whom we may
enquire of the Lord, (he grants him to be a true Prophet of the Lord Jehovah,
and yet adds) but I hate him, for he does not prophecy good concern-me, but
evil. Micaiah would stop him in his career; he would not have had him go ^o
Ramoth-gilead to the slaughter. He was indeed ^ better friend to Ahab, than
Ahab was to himself, and this was the reason of his hatred against him.

Fifthly, Love to Calum^y. The Athenian Orator being to defend himself from the
accusation of his adversary, premised, that he was to speak to them with great
disadvantage, because men did generally love to hear accusations rather than
apologies, of which many accounts may be given. Envy at the virtues of others;
pride to find others worse than themselves: the patronage they gain thereby to
their own errors, by finding others as guilty as themselves, and so they make
an escape in the crowd. And all these considerations, are more urgent against
Religious men, as those that shine with the greatest luster; and therefore
calumnies against them must needs be most grateful.

Here is ground for an Apology for Religion, Use 1.
notwithstanding all the miscarriages, of pretenders to it, or professors of
it, which it must be confessed, (and I think there are few truly good and
ingenuous persons that will deny it) have been in the late times grievous and
scandalous, and God grant us all, and especially those that have been most
culpable, true repentance for them, that they may remember that tremendous woe
denounced by our Savior against those by whom offenses come. I do not here
plead for any of these things. Blame Persons, and condemn Facts as much as you
please, only for your own sakes take heed of condemning the Righteous with the
Wicked. But as for Religion, what has that done? this I affirm, that Religion
is not responsible for, or chargeable with any of these things; nor is there
any reason, why men should think or speak worse of Religion, or truly Religious
men upon this occasion. It is held unjust, and unreasonable to charge the
faults of any particular person upon all the rest of his profession, to charge
the fraudulent and dilatory practices of one Lawyer upon all the persons of
that Robe; or the errors and follies of every impertinent Q^ack, upon the whole
College of Physicians: and why should Religion have harder measure than other
professions have? Nay on the contrary, there is great reason it should have
better, because of that reverence we all owe to God, because of the sublimity
and dif^iculty of thos^ things wherein Religion is concerne^, in which
th^^^fore mistakes are more easy, and because of (...) g^^at importance of
Religion, w^^re mistakes and misapplications are more dangerous. I do not now
desire your favor, but demand your justice for Religion, and this I do again
aver, that the miscarriages of some, yea many Religious men, do not afford a
solid argument against Religion, and that for three reasons.

First, Because all Religious men are not involved in the guilt of them. There
have been in all ages, and so there were, and are in this, some Religious men,
that did and do, sigh and mourn, for those public abominations which they
cannot, or could not help. Now as you must take heed of justifying the wicked,
so must you also of condemning the righteous. So then all Religious men are not
liable to this charge, and yet if they were, Religion is not concerned in it,
and that because

Secondly, Religious men are subject to mistakes, and corrupt inclinations as
well as other men. It was said of Elias, that he was a man subject to like
passions as other men were, and by reason hereof, a truly good man, may
sometimes turn aside to crooked paths; but this is not to be imputed to
Religion, no more than ill manners are to be charged upon good Laws. Nay,
indeed these are the effects of Irreligion, or of the imperfect state of
Religion in this life. If a Physician prescribes an excellent method of cure,
and the Patient observes some of the directions, and neglect others, and the
cure be incomplete; this is no blemish to the Physician or his Art, but the
blame entirely rests upon the Patients head. Religion gives us excellent rules
for the conduct of our lives unto perfection and happiness; but if men do not
walk according to these rules, we may say with the Apostle, Let God be true,
and every man a Liar. Let every man, whether Religious or Irreligious, bear his
own burden, but why should Religion suffer for men's extravagancies? This is
all that can be said, Religion does not make Men Angels, infallible in their
judgments, immutable in their goodness: and is no Physician to be prized but h^
who cures all diseases?

Thirdly, Religion has washed her hands from all the guilt of men's
miscarriages. In all Courts or Councils, those that enter their protests
against unrighteous sentences are held innocent. Now Religion has entered its
protest against all the disorders of its Disciples; Religion has bound its yoke
upon all of them. What if some Religious men be seditious or rebellious against
Magistrates, Religion has protested against it, Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be
subject to the higher powers, and if men forget their duty, Religion commands
to put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
Magistrates. Tit. 3.1. If persons professing godliness be perverse or stubborn
Servants, Religion has declared against it. Servants be subject to your
Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward. 1 Pet. 2.18. And the like obligation Religion has laid upon every
relation: Husbands must love their Wives, as Christ loved his Church, Ephesians. 5.
25. And Wives must be in subjection to their own Husbands. At their peril be
it, if they will dare to violate these sacred injunctions, but if they do, yet
there is no reason Religion should bear the blame: that has laid its commands
upon all its followers, to carry themselves in every relation and condition
with all care and sweetness. It allows no man's unrighteous, churlish, morose,
un-neighbourly deportment. But whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report: if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, we must think of these things. Philip. 4.8.
It commands that every one that names the name of Christ, should depart from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. and charges Christians, as they tender its honor, to
take heed to their actions. Let as many Servants as are under the yoke of
Christ, count their own Masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and
his Doctrine be not blasphemed. 1 Timothy 6.1. Religion disowns and disclaims those
pretende^s that act contrary to these rules, yea and has commanded us to
disown them too. Now we command you brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
disorderly, 2 These. 3.6. I have written to you, if any man that is called a
brother be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an Idolatour, or a railer, or a
drunkard, with such an one, no not to eat. 1 Cor. 5.11. It forbids all
irregularities, under the highest penalties: Neither fornicatours, nor
Idolaters, nor adulterers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God, nay, it
severely punishes all obliquities. Christ has ordained a strict discipline,
which if it were faithfully executed, would effectually purge out all those
persons, for whose sakes Religion suffers. There are also spiritual, and most
tremendous punishments, which Religion does inflict upon unsound professors, by
giving them up to a reprobate mind, and seared conscience, to damnable heresy
and apostasy from Religion, to Atheism and Popery, of which we have ^requent
instances; Religion thus purging out its ill humors, and abandoning its rotten
members, of whom we may say as St. John does, 1 Ep. John. 2.19. They went out
from us, but they were not of us, for if ^hey had been of us, they would no
doubt h^ve conti^ued with us. In a word, Religion does more to se^ure the world
from all manner of injustice and ^ickedness than any thing else whatsoever. For
both binds the righteous laws of men, upon the Conscience with the authority of
God, and it threatens the violators of them with severer punishments than
Magistrates can inflict: so that if Religion does not restrain men, nothing
will. It Is sufficient that Religion has don its part, and therefore ought in
all reason and justice to be excused. I cannot but observe the gross
unrighteousness of men, that for some few l^te instances of Rebellion or
Sedition amongst professors, take occasion to condemn Religion, whereas if they
look into the Histories of other Nations, or of former ages in this, they shall
find twenty instances to one of the same sins in persons that never made any
show of Religion. Nor has Religion only given excellent rules to oblige
Subjects to obedience to their Rulers, and a patient suffering under them, but
also there have been diverse remarkable instances of Christians practicing this
rule, and quietly submitting to those penalties which probably by force they
might have avoided, and therefore it is a clear evidence of men's malignant
disposition against Religion, that they take occasion to condemn it from the
ill examples of some, rather than to commend it from the good examples of
others, as the laws of Civility and Charity oblige them to do.

Use. 2.
Caution or instruction.
First, To the enemies of Religion. Secondly, To its Friends. Thirdly, To all.
First, To the enemies of Religion. Take heed of this sinful practice of
speaking evil of Religion for any men's pretended or real miscarriages. We live
in times wherein men's mouths are open against Religion; they are not contented
to condemn the actions of Religious men, but from thence both weakly and
wickedly infer that all Religion is but a cheat and imposture, and men are very
apt to drink in such cursed suggestions, and to follow such pernicious
examples. This therefore I caution you against. Whoever thou art that do so,
consider

First, Herein thou art the Devils friend, thou do his work and may expect
his wages, Religion is Gods great Instrument to dissolve the works of the
Devil; and no wonder if he labors to disparage it and make it ineffectual.
Whoever is the engine, you may be sure the hand of Ioab is in this matter, and
it is he that sets men upon this work* hereby he hardens men against God, and
ex^sperates God against men. For be assured of it, God is very tender of the
honor of Religion, and h^ that touches that, touches the apple of his eye.

Secondly, Herein thou art thy own enemy; when thou openest thy mouth against
Rel^gon upon any pretense whatsoever: I may say, as Solomon did concerning
Adoni^h, As the Lord live^ thou spe^kest this against thine own head. Possibly
some professors of Religion have given thee occasion, and thou art glad of it*
as wicked men usually are both at the sins and suffering^ of Gods people,
though none have less cause for it. M^t. 18.7. Woe to the World because of
offen^es: The blame of ^he offense will rest upon the head of him that is the
cause of it, but the mi^chief of it redounds ^o the wicked world, and most of
all to them that take the gre^test pleasure in it. Their laughter ^s but like
that of one in a p^rensie^ an indication of his disease, and a presage of his
death. Consider I beseech you, if ever you come to Heaven, you must love
Religion, and imitate the lives of Religious persons. High and honourabl^
thoughts of Religion are the first entrance into a state of conversion and
salvation, so long as a man has Religion in contempt, he is far from the
Kingdom of God.

Secondly, Caution to the friends and professors of Religion.

First, Abuse not this Doctrine to carelessness. Peradventure some may reason
^hus, Because ungodly men are forward to speak evil of Religion without cause,
therefore it matters not how they carry themselves toward them; whether they
please or offend them. But this is a dangerous mistake, they will take
occasion, but you must not give it, but rather follow the Apostles pattern. 2
Cor. 11. 12* What I do that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them
that desire occasion. Religion commands you not only to please God, but others
as far as you may. Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor, for his
good to edification. Religion does not only forbid to offend God, but men, 1
Cor. 10.32. Give none offense, neither to the Iew^, nor to Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God. It requires your special care and ^ircumspection toward
strangers or enemies, Col. 4.5. Walk in wisdom toward them that are without:
and there is great reason for it, that the name of God and his Doctrine be not
blasphemed. 1 Timothy 6.1. This was the ground of D^vid's pious resolution. Psalm.
39.1. I said I will take heed t^ my ways that I sin not with my tongue: I will
keep my mouth as with a bridle, while the wicked is before me.

Secondly, Learn hence to live above the censures of evil men: be not
discouraged in, or driven from any of the ways of God by all their reproach^s
and ^alumnies: you have seen you must not necessarily give them offense; now
you see you must not be ruled and guided by their offense. In short, you must
neither regard their offense too little, nor too much. The rule is this, In
things indifferent, you must be a Willow, and not a^ Oak, do what lies in your
power to comply with them, to please and win them, but in matters of evident
duty* you must be an Oak* and not a Willow, as Luther ^xpresses it. You must
follow the example of our Blessed Savior, who when he was told that the
Pharisees were offended at his Doctrine, he passes it by with contempt, and
this answer, Every plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
rooted up. Let them alone: they be blind leader^ of the bli^d. And if the blind
lead the blind, they shall both fall into the Ditch. Mat. 15.13, 14. From
whence Divines have drawn this conclusion, that the scandal of proud Pharisees
is to be neglected. If once it comes to this dil^mma, that a man must offend
God or Men, he need not tak^ day to consider, it is easy to tell which to
choose.

Thirdly, Learn hence to maintain the honor of Religion. If wicked men's mouths
be open against it, let not your mouths be shut, but open, for the defense of
it* Take heed of that no less dangerous, than common, sin of being ashamed of
Religion; remembering that severe, but righteous, sentence of our Saviors,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the
glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. Mark 8.38. and Mat. 12.30. He that
is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me, scatters
abroad. It is a part of the Prophets charge against the Jews, that they are not
valiant for the truth upon the earth: Ier. 9.3. Wicked men are not ashamed to
wear the Devils Livery, and why should you be ashamed to wear Gods? I beseech
you content not your selves with owning Religion in your hearts, Christ as he
deserves, so he expects, your mouths and tongues also, Romans 10.9. If thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy heart tho^
shall be saved. Thus David was not satisfied with having the word of God hid in
his heart, but says, I will speak of thy testimonies before Kings, and will
not be ashamed, Psalm. 119.46. and (which makes the argument more for^ible) the
Kings of his time were Pagans, both strangers and open enemies to Religion.

Fourthly, Carry your selves so circumspectly, that you may give no advantage
to the enemies of Religion, that you may stop the mouth of calumny, so the
Apostle counsels us, 1 Pet. 3.16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they
speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse
your good conversation in Christ, and again, 1 P^t. 2.15. For so is the will of
God, that w^^h well doing you put to silence the ignorance of fool^sh men. Take
heed especially of those practices, which open the mouths of ungodly men
against Religion; particularly these.

1. Avoid all affected and unnecessary singularity in words, gestures, habits,
etc. There is one kind of singularity you must always maintain, viz. the
singularity of a holy life, Ephesians. 4.17. This I say therefore, and testify, in
the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk: and Exodus 23.2.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Noah's singularity is mention^d
to his honor, Thee (only) have I seen righteous before me in this Generation:
and Lot's singularity, whereby he differed from the rest of the Sodomite^, is
remembered to his praise in both Testaments. Nay the very Heathen Seneca
justifies this singularity, in his Discourse De Constantia Sapientis, Non
respicit sapiens quid homines turpe judicent au^ miserum; non it qua populus;
sed ut sidera contrarium mundo i^er intendunt, it^ hic adversus opinionem
omnium vadit, that is, A wise or good man does not regard what men judge
dishonorable or miserable; he does not go in the common road, but as the
course of the Stars is contrary to that of the lower world, so he act^ contrary
to the opinion and practice of the generality of men. Worse therefore th^n
Heathens are they who dare open their mouths against this singularity, and call
it preciseness, or peevishness or humor, etc. which indeed, coming from such
mouths, are rather titles of honor, than imputations of disgrace. But the
singularity that I warn you against, is that which lies in little things, in
the ^ffectation of words, phrases, ton^^, gestures, etc. against which the same
Seneca speaks pertinently and excellently, Ep. 5. Intus omnia sint dissimilia,
fron^ nostra populo conveniat, id agamus ut meliorem vitam seq^am^r quam
vulgus, non ut contrariam; alioqui quo^ emendare volumus ^ug^mus. Temperetur
vit^ i^ter bonos mores and publicos, suspiciant omnes vitam nostram, sed and
agnoscant. Let our inside be as unlike the people as may be, and our outside as
like to them; let this be our care, that our course of living be better than
theirs, but not contrary, lest otherwise we drive away those whom we would
reclaim. Let us steer our course b^^^een that conversation which is best, and
that which is most in use. Let our manner of life be such that they may
reverence it, but yet such also that they may understand it. I cannot therefore
approve of any uncooth gestures or tones, or other affected singularities in
any Christian, and least of all in Ministers; yet thus much I must say, there
is no reason why men should despise the Ordinances of God for such
circumstantial and trivial indecencies, or refuse their food, because it is not
served up in a Lordly Dish. Nor should it be thought strange or unreasonable,
if such as have an inward passion for Religion, discover it in their outward
man, by some unusual significations. I must not ^issemble, I cannot but esteem
it another token of men's malevolence against Religion, that they can dispense
with these very things, or more indecent postures, from persons transported
with love or any other passion, which they so severely censure in persons that
are fired with zeal for God and for the good of souls; and because they have no
sense of these things in themselves, they conclude there is none in others
also, and judge all to b^ but hypo^ritical fiction; but alth^ugh such Censurers
are never the better, yet I wish I could prevail with all serious Ministers and
Christians to watch against such things, to strive with their own temper, and
to red^em themselves from such ill habi^^ and ^ustoms, which some peradventure
have contr^cted. I would entreat you to consider, that, 1. Religion does not
oblige you to them; that consists not in meat^ and drinks, and phrase^ and
gestures; but in righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. 2.
Religion obliges you against them, the great command of the Gospel is, Let all
things be done to edif^cation; and we must according to the Apostles practi^e,
1 Cor. 9.^2. become all things to all men, if by any means we may save some.
And let me add, what Christians happily do not sufficiently consider, that they
ought to have a more special care of those whom they are too apt to despise, I
mean of ungodly men, (whom such affectations do fill with prejudice against
Religion) as the Physicians chief care lies toward those that are most
diseased. And forasmuch as the conversion of sinners is a more noble and
necessary work than the edification of Saints, Christians should in this, as in
all other parts and kinds of conversation, so demean themselves, as they may
not prejudice any against, but rather win them to the love and ways of God.

2. Take heed of injustice, fraud, or falseness in your words, trades, and
actions. This is that which opens the mouths of men wide against Religion, and
woe to them that give the occasion, but let such vain pretenders to Religion
know* that godliness is nothing worth which is not a^tended with righteousness,
and the grace of God, wheresoever it is in truth, will teach a man to live
soberly and righteously as well as godlily in the world. All that are truly
good will not only make conscience of serving God, but will also provide things
honest in the sight of men* Romans 12.17* So 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; that is* are you so ignorant
of the principles of the Oracles of God, as not to understand so plain and
importa^t a truth? The Rules of the Gospel are clear* 1 These. 4.6. That no man
go beyond or defraud his Brother in any matter, because the Lord is the avenger
of all such. There is a vulgar reproach, Professors of Religion will not swear,
but they will lie loudly. Will they so? then set a mark upon them. That man
that will lie or cheat, or falsify his word, and allow himself in the usual
practice of these things* let him know, and let others take notice of it, his
Religion is in vain, nor ^s Religion concerned in his miscarriages: In the mean
time you see what necessity there lies upon all that fear God, to avoid such
wicked practices.

3. Take heed of scandalous sins; you must indeed make conscience of avoiding
all sin, it being the character of every truly good man to be the same in
secret, where none but God sees, that he is before the whole world: But in
especial manner you must take heed of notorious si^s; for hereby God is
publicly dishonored, and the souls of others infinitely wounded, and Religion
highly disgraced. He that is not deeply affected with these considerations, I
may say, has not one dram of true Religion in him.

4. Take heed of relative sins, it is a great honor to Religion, when those
that profess it carry themselves well in all their Relations, when religious
persons are the best Husbands, the best Wives, the best Masters, the best
Servants, and let me add, the best Neighbors and Friends. For do not think
Religion does either require you or allow you to be unneighbourly or
unsociable. It Is true there needs caution in this matter, that a man do not
partake of the sins of others, that he does not maintain intimate or
unnecessary familiarity with grossly vicious persons, but, in other cases,
Religion commands courtesy and kindness, be pitiful, be courteous, 1 Pet. ^.8.
Unspeakable is the hurt which that silly Sect among us do in this respect, by
making the world believe, that Religion teaches them ill manners.

5. Take heed of pride and passion. I join them together, because they usually
go together, only by pride comes contention, Prove. 13.10. These sins are
odious in all men, but especially in persons professing godliness, because it
directly contradicts the great command and example of their Lord and Savior,
Learn of me for I am meek and lowly.

6. Take heed of indiscreet zeal, without due respect to persons, or places, or
things; hereby many men have done great mischief to Religion, even when they
have designed the advantage of it; we are commanded to be wise as Serpents, as
well as innocent as Doves; and Christians have great need to pray to God for
wisdom, not only for their own safe conduct to eternal life, but also for the
prevention of these dishonours which they may bring upon Religion by their
follies and imprudences.

3. Caution to all. I beseech you do Religion, and your selves that right, not
to judge of it by the censures and calumnies of evil minded men; remember
though they shall answer for their wickedness, you shall not go free; if by
their false suggestions you be induced to any contempt or dislike of Religion,
you shall assuredly perish, and your blood will be upon your own head. If the
blind lead the blind both shall fall into the Ditch. Consider also you have
been forewarned of this mistake, and your own reason must needs allow this
inference, that if Religion be not to be valued by the lives of good men
(because they come unspeakably short of the Rules and Precepts of it) much less
is it to be measured by the slanders of wicked men. There are three just
exceptions against the testimony of ungodly men against Religion.

1. They are ignorant. How witty or learned soever they be in other matters,
they are deeply ignorant of the concerns of Religion, and therefore speak evil
of that which they understand not. They say there is no such thing in the world
as Religion, that it is nothing but fancy, or passion, or imposture and design;
and they may in part think so* because indeed they know nothing of the reality
of Religion, as one said, whose profession should have ^^ught him better
things, he knew no regeneration, but when a man turned from a Jew or a Heathen
to believe in Christ; Religion is not to be known, but by an inward sense and
taste. Taste and see that the Lord is good, Psalm. 34.8. If so be you have tasted
that the Lord i^ graciou^, 1 Pet. 2.3. It is therefore no wonder, if ungodly
men represent Religion to themselves and others as fantastical, burthensom,
and slavish, because they see only the outside of it, which is the uncomly and
troublesome part of it, but are profoundly ignorant of the inside of it, in
which the beauty and pleasure of it consists. The inward work and actings of
grace in the soul, acquaintance and communion with God in Christ, the
consolations of the Holy Spirit, joy and peace in believing, triumphant hopes
of eternal glory* these things to them are a Terrae incognita, an undiscovered
part of the world; or rather a mere Vtopia or Fiction. Now what prudent man
will venture his salvation upon the report of such unlearned and unexperienced
persons in these matters? by the same reason, by which I am obliged to believe
the best Artists in their several professions, I am also obliged to reject and
slight the testimony of illiterate Novices, such as these are in the affairs of
Religion.

2. They are interessed persons. They are bribed against Religion, not only by
the censures of others, and by the common cry (which easily carries away such
unstable souls) but also by their own lusts. Religion has an enemy in every
man's breast, every sinful desire and inclination which a man has, designs
nothing less than the extirpation of Religion, which is the only thing it
dreads, and therefore hates, according to the known* Maxim. Now what man in his
wits will run so great a hazard, as the loss of an immortal soul and an eternal
life, upon the testimony of interessed persons? Perit judicium cum res transit
in affectum, That man's opinion is little worth, which is biased by his
interest and affections.

3. They are enemies and malicious persons; they owe Religion a spite, and
their hearts are full of malice against it, as I have already proved by diverse
instances. I do not say they hate Religion, for it self, but they hate it upon
other grounds, partly out of envy at that luster which they cannot attain,
partly out of revenge against their Judge, and principally out of love to their
sinful lusts; but whatever is the cause the effect is evident, they hate God
and are enemies to Religion, as any prudent man will easily discern; and
therefore their testimony has no weight nor force in it against Religion.
Religion is not to be evil thought of, either because of the miscarriages of
its friends, or the censures of its enemies, which leads me to the second
Doctrine, viz.

As it is the duty of all, so it is the practice of those that are wise and
good, to justify Religion, notwithstanding all the miscarriages of its
friends, and censures of its enemies.

The subject of this Proposition is the justification of Religion. What that
phrase implies has in part been told before, and will hereafter be more fully
explained: At present this may suffice, as God justif^eth a sinner when he
absolves him from all the guilt of his former sins, and from all the censures
and accusations of the Devil and his own conscience, and holds him for
innocent; so do we justify Religion, when we acquit it from all the censures
and imputations of ungodly and unworthy men against it, when we heartily
approve of it, when we think and speak honorably of it upon all occasions,
when we credit and adorn it by our actions. This justification of Religion,
notwithstanding the miscarriages of its friends, and censures of its enemies,
1. Is the duty of all. No men are more deeply obliged to the practice of this
duty, than they that least perform it, than the maligners and censurers of
Religion: because Religion is the only Physic and cure for a lost soul, which
none need more than such undone and desperate creatures. This is one of the
first steps to salvation; it is most certain, till a man justify Religion, he
will never love it, nor choose it, nor give up himself entirely to it: the
Scribe who did approve of Religion and an holy life, our Savior said of him,
thou art not far from the Kingdom of God, Mark 12.34. And on the contrary,
salvation is far from the wicked, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.155. because
they seek not thy Statutes: and they that do not justify and approve of Gods
Statutes will never seek them.

2. It is the practice of those that are wise and good; and that,

1. Because they are wise; their wisdom enables them to distinguish aright.
It Is the folly of ungodly men, that they can not distinguish; and hence it
comes to pass that they charge the faults of men upon Religion, and impute the
miscarriages of hypocritical Professors to serious Christians. But true wisdom
teaches men to distinguish (1.) between persons and persons, between pretenders
and sincere Christians. I would not countenance that fond conceit of some who
pretend to a spirit of discerning in this sense, that they can distinguish
between hypocrites and sincere persons, as Saint Peter could discern the
false-heartedness of Simon Magus, Acts 8. 23. For I perceive that thou art in
the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. For neither are these men
Peter's successors, nor did Peter (for any thing that appears from the Text)
perceive it any other way, than by observing the effects of a naughty heart,
and judging of the Tree by the Fruit; which we also may do, and those that are
wise can do. They can in some good measure see through the varnish and pretense
of hypocritical Professors, and therefore they seldom or never charge the
misdemeanors of such persons upon those that are truly religiou^.

2. Their wisdom helps them to distinguish between persons and things, betwixt
Religion and the Professors of it; and hence they avoid that Rock which wicked
men generally stumble at, they do not impute the faults of men to Religion.
What is good in men they ascribe to Religion, that has the honor of it, as in
reason it should: what is evil in men they charge upon themselves and their own
corruption, where the shame of it ought wholly to rest.

3. Their wisdom helps them to distinguish between things and things, between
error and error, sin and sin, and so they avoid the vulgar error of the
Enemies of Religion; unto whom every mistake of a Professor of Religion is a
fundamental heresy, every distemper the Plague, and every infirmity is the
unpardonable sin; whereby they do at once betray both deep ignorance and
desperate malice: but wise men distinguish, they allow for the infirmities both
of humane nature, and of the Christian state in this life (as in reason they
ought, and as the great God himself is pleased to do) and therefore they
neither so highly censure the slips of Professors, as others do, nor dare they
charge any of them upon Religion.

2. They justify Religion because they are good, and therefore judge justly
and impartially of it, and that is sufficient. Religion begs no man's vote, it
courts no man's favor, but only demands justice, and requires a fair trial by
equal Judges, which good men are. They are not bribed and biassed by prejudice,
lust, or interest, and therefore can discern the truth of things, and
consequently the beauty of Religion.

In the farther prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to show, 1. Why
we should justify Religion. 2. How we should justify it: and 3. Apply it.


For the first, I shall enforce the practice of this duty by these reasons.

1. We should therefore justify Religion, because God justifies it. It is safe
being on Gods side, and let me be bold to affirm, that supposing a man did find
some difficulties in Religion which he could not resolve and conquer, yet he
ought to submit to Gods wisdom, by an implicit faith to believe what God
says, and by a blind obedience to do what God requires, though he see no
reason for it. For this is a respect which we usually pay to persons eminent
for wisdom and goodness; that we do not easily suspect or condemn their
actions, though seemingly strange, but rather put a favorable construction
upon them, justly concluding, that they see some reason for their actions,
which we do not apprehend. But here we have occasion to renew the old complaint
concerning man's perverseness toward God. Multos erga homines aequos reperies,
erga Deum vero neminem. We shall meet with many persons that pass an equitable
judgment upon the actions of men, that judge harshly and unrighteously
concerning the ways of God. Now God justifies Religion,

1. By his Word. The justification of Religion is the great scope and design of
the Holy Scripture; there is not a line in it but has some plain tendency that
way; and all the miracles which are recorded in Scripture (a great number
whereof are also acknowledged by Heathen Authors) are so many unquestionable
evidences that God does, and that we should, justify Religion.

2. By his works. For although God does not think fit to turn miracles into our
daily bread, nor immediately to punish every impudent Malefactor (whom he
reserves to sorer punishments, and whom he never punishes more dreadfully than
when he does forbear to punish them) yet he has not left himself, nor
Religion, without witness in diverse Ages of the world, nor in our Age neither.
The wrath of God has been revealed from Heaven against the unrighteousness and
ungodliness of men. God has at sundry times and in diverse manners, immediately
and extraordinarily, pleaded the cause of Religion, sometimes by the miraculous
preservations and deliverances of his people in extremity of danger and misery;
sometimes by a stupendous discovery and remarkable punishment of the closest
crimes of ungodly men; as it has been the observation of all Ages concerning
Murders, and many other Villainies, of which innumerable instances might be
given, and confirmed by most considerable and concurrent testimonies, which he
that shall deny, cannot, without great folly and arrogance, expect to be
believed himself in any thing he affirms.

2. Because the greatest Enemies of Religion are and have been, and will be,
forced to justify it: multitudes of Perse^utors in the Primitive times, when
they considered the holy lives, the constant and cheerful sufferings of the
Christians, did cry out, Great is the God of the Christians, and many were
converted upon that occasion. Ungodly men are frequently compelled by the light
of their own consciences, and by the irresistible evidence of things, to
commend those holy and righteous ways of God, in which they will not walk. It
is true, wicked men are generally mad, and therefore it is said of the
Prodigal, when he was converted, that he came to himself, Luke 15.17. implying
that till that time he had been besides himself. Take a wicked man in the heat
of his youth and lus^, and you had as good meet a Bear robbed of her Whelps,
and you may as soon pacify the one as the other. Then he acts more like a
brute than a man, not only against the rules of Religion, but against all the
sentiments of reason, and honor, and interest: He sacrifices all to a base
and sordid lust: and in these circumstances who will value his judgment? but
when the mad fit is over, when he recovers the use of his reason and
conscience, then you shall hear him justify Religion and condemn himself. When
age and experience has made him wise, when sickness and the approach of death
makes him serious and impartial, then he changes his note, and those things
which were gain to him, he now accounts loss, those lusts which he formerly
doted upon, and used to chew under his tongue like a sweet morsel, to think of
with great delight, he now abhors the very remembrance of; those good men whom
he before despised, he now embraces, that Religion which he trampled under his
feet as foolish and contemptible, he now applauds as the only wisdom, and
wishes in vain, that it had been ^^s choice and portion. An instance whereof
we have, Prove. 5.11, 12, 13. And (lest) thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh
and thy body are consumed, and say, how have I hated instruction, and my heart
despised reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined
mine ear to them that instructed me. It has been observed by some of the
Heathens, that the soul, when it is nigh its departure out of the body, is more
wise and apprehensive than it was before. Thus much is certain, that then
prejudice, humor, and deceit vanish, and things appear in their true and
proper shape, then men are in earnest, and they judge impartially, and then it
is that they justify Religion. And this has not only been the practice of
weak and foolish men (as some ignorantly object) but of as great Wits and deep
Statesmen as the world has had, that have then bewailed their contempt of
Religion, and giving the deceitful world precedence before it.

3. You should justify Religion because the Devil opposes it. It is most
apparent from the experience of this, and all former Ages, that Religion is the
object of the Devils rage and malice, his great design is to stop the course of
it, to keep men from the love and practice of it. To this end he raises
calumnies and persecutions, and fills the minds of men with prejudices against
it, and tempts religious men to sin that they may dishonor it. The Devil
carries himself quietly toward ungodly men, complies with their inclinations,
presents convenient objects and occasions to them, gives them all furtherance
in their evil designs; but when any man begin^ seriously to think of Religion,
then the Devil bestirs himself, sometimes roaring like a Lion, sometimes
deceiving like a Serpent; then he stirs up friends to flatter and seduce,
enemies to threaten and rage, others to slander and reproach. And wherefore is
all this? What does this teach us? even that which is said concerning Nero,
that must needs be some excellent thing which so envious and malicious a spirit
so fiercely opposes* In brief thus, man's interest and the Devils are directly
opposite, and therefore you may safely conclude, whatsoever promotes his
interest destroys yours. He heartily grudgeth to man his restoration to that
happiness which himself has irrecoverably lost, and therefore he sets himself
against Religion, which he knows to be the only restorative to lost man; the
only way to deliver him from the Devils power, and from wrath to come, and to
instate him in the possession of true and endless bliss.

4* You will never repent of the justification of Religion, once justify
Religion and you will never condemn it. Ungodly men are changelings in
Religion; their Religion varies with their humor, and with the season; they
have one Religion in the time of youth and jollity, another in the time of old
age and trouble; one Religion when the man rules in them, another when the
beast gets the upper hand; so that the whole employment of the poor sinner is
all his days to do and undo, to build with one hand, and to pull down with
another, to erect in health, and demolish in sickness. How full the world is of
sickbed repentances is commonly observed, how true they are, is another
questions; but it is sufficient for my purpose, that sinners are then clearly
convinced, then they condemn themselves, and their former ways, and caution
their friends and brethren in iniquity. It Is seldom or never seen that they
dare stand to their former bargain at that time: But he that justifies
Religion once, will justify it for ever. The judgment of a good man is steady
and fixed, as his practice is regular and constant; he justifies Religion in
prosperity, and he does no less in adversity, when he suffer^ with it, yea
though he suffer by it. He justifies it in health, and, you may be sure, he
does so in sickness too. I dare challenge the experience of all persons, did
you ever hear a man in his wits upon a dying Bed complain that he had been too
religious, or condemn himself, that he had slighted the concernments of the
present world in comparison of it? I trow not. No* then Religion appears with
the most beautiful face, then a man finds unexpressible sweetness and
satisfaction in it; then a smile of Gods face is more worth than a thousand
worlds; when a man can say with good Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, how I have
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. Esa. 38.21. or with
Saint Paul, I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my my departure is at
hand; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith. Henceforth there is laid up sor me a Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.6,
7, 8. Nay a religious man carries his principles along with him into another
world. He that justifies Religion now, will justify it at the day of
judgment, and for ever; then he will ^ejoice in, and bless God for directing
him to his ^ormer choice; when the miserable sinner shall make ^ formal
recantation of all his hard speeches and bitter reflections upon Religion and
its Professors, and will say (as it is represented in that Apocryphal Book
called the wisdom of Solomon, Ch 5.) This was ^e whom we had sometimes in
derision and a Proverb of ^eproach, we fools accounted his life madness, and
his end to be without honor, how is he numbered among the children of God, and
his lot is among the Saints, we wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and
destruction, yea we have gone through Deserts where there lay no way. But as
for the way of the Lord we have not known it. What has pride profited us? or
what good has riches with our vaunting brought us? etc.

5. Religion is highly justified by the sad effects of irreligion in the world.
This is an argument not consisting of empty words, but deduced from the nature
of things. It Is most true, Carendo magis quam fruendo sentiuntur bona, The
excellency of things is better understood by the want, than by the enjoyment of
them. The darkness and sad effects of the night, commend to us the use and
excellency of the Sun and day light; consider with me, I beseech you, the
doleful estate of this degenerate Age and Nation. How are men (not by Poetical
fiction, but too truly) transformed into Swine, and Goats, and Serpents, and
Tigers; nay, in truth, I wrong the Beasts by the comparison; men are much the
worse bruits of the two, they far outdo them in filthiness, deceit,
perfidiousness, fierceness, and rage. Whence is it that men do so waste their
consciences with hideous crimes, blast their reputations, and render themselves
the scorn of all serious and prudent men, fill their bodies with loathsome
diseases, reduce their estates to a morsel of bread? Is it not for want of
Religion; which, where it is observed, is an effectual fence, to all these?
Whence is that Proverb verified, that One man is a Wolf, a Devil to another,
but for want of Religion to control their unmanly, unchristian, unruly
passions; look into many Families, whence are all the breaches, contentions,
and divisions there? whence is it that Husbands and Wives are so false, so
unnatural and unkind one to another? and that notwithstanding the manifest
command of God to the contrary, and the Oath and sacred Tie which God has
bound upon them, which their own express consent has made indissoluble but by
death, that they do so easily, so unnecessarily, and so frequently separate one
from another? Whence is it that Children are so stubborn and rebellious, that
Servants are so froward, unfaithful, and (...), but because they want Religion
to teach an^ enforce their several dutys? Whence are the disorders in Kingdoms,
that Superiors do not rule well, that inferiors do not obey well, that all do
not live in mutual love and amity? What is the true cause of tumults and
sedition? Not Religion, as is falsely pretended, but irreligion; witness Iam.
4.1. From whence come wars and fightings amongst you? come they not hence, even
of your lusts that war in your members? Which it is the great business of
Religion to mortify. Methinks I hear the cries of thousands whose irreligion
has consumed their Estates, and shortened their days, and hurried them before
their time into another world, crying out, as they say was written upon
Sennacherib's Tomb, (...), Look to me and learn to be godly. Wicked men in
Scripture are compared to the Horse and the Mule that have no understanding,
whose mouths must be held with a Bit or Bridle, Psalm. 32.9. This Bridle is
Religion, and when you see these Horses in humane shape, run furiously away,
breaking through all Hedges of restraints, venturing upon precipices, prancing
in the midst of highest dangers, it is an evidence that the Horse has cast his
Bridle or his Rider. This was Abraham's inference, Genesis 20.11. I thought surely
the fear of God is not in this place, and they will slay me for my Wifes sake.
And as much may be gathered from Nehem. 5.15. But so did not I (that is as
precedent Governors did, oppress and grind the people) because of the fear of
God. Nay the very common form of legal Inditements against notorious Offenders
(...)evince this, being ushered in with this Prefac^, not having the fear of
God before their eyes. I must acknowledge I am very apt to believe, that one
principal reason why God suffers such abominable wickednesses, and mischiefs
consequent upon them, to break for^h is, that it might be a divine deductio ad
absurdum, that by the dismal effects of irreligion, the worst of men might be
forced to see the excellency and necessity of Religion.

6. If you do not justify Religion, the Heathens will condemn you. Who
although they did not understand the doctrinal mysteries of Religion, yet they
have in a great measure justified the practice of it. Yea there are diverse
practices of religious men, which our Christian Heathens censure and deride,
which those more sober Heathens have approved and commended. To give two or
three instances: If any man among us hold fast the truth, and resolutely
persist in virtuous and pious actions, notwithstanding all the reproaches,
losses, and sufferings, which he may meet with. If any man will quit his part
in Paris for that i^ Paradise (as one said) our modern Heathens make such a man
the object of their mirth and scorn. So did not the wise Heathens: In ea (i.e.
honestate) autem persequenda, omnes cruciatus corporis, omnia pericula mortis
atque exilii parvi sunt ducenda, was the speech of Cicero pro Archia Poeta, i.
e. In the prosecution of virtuous actions, a man should lightly esteem all the
tortures of the body, and the utmost perils of death or exile. So Seneca Ep.
66. Ad omne pulchrum vir bonus sine cunctatione procurrit: stet licet carnifex,
stettortor, atque ignis, perseverabit, nec quid passu^us, sed quid facturus
sit, adspiciet, and se houestae rei tanquam bono v^^o credet. A good man will
make haste to the execution of any good purpose, though the executioner be at
hand, with all the instruments of torture, yet he will persevere, and not so
much consider, what he shall suffer, as what he should do, and will trust
himself with a good cause, as with a virtuous and generous friend. Again, if
any Christian make Religion his great business, and command all his other
concerns or occasions to stoop to it, and govern all his worldly affairs by it;
such a one in the new style of the Heathens of the last Edition is but a grave
Fop, he becomes the Song of the Drunkards, the sport of the Wits, (as they tell
us they are) or, more truly, the scorn of Fools. The same Heathen Seneca would
teach these Creatures more wit and Religion, Non cum vacaveris philosophandum
est, omnia alia negligenda ut huic assideamus. You are not only to give up your
selves to the study and practice of virtue, when you have nothing else to do,
but all other things are (comparatively) to be neglected, that you may entirely
devote your selves to this. And elsewhere he gives this invincible reason for
it: Si aeger esses, curam intermisisses rei familiaris, and forensia tibi
negotia excidissent; toto animo id ageres ut a morbo liberareris. Quid ergo?
non and nunc idem facies? omnia impedimenta dimitte, and vaca bonae menti; nemo
ad illam venit occupatus. Exercet Philosophia regnum suum, dat tempus, non
accipit, etc. If you were dangerously sick, you would cast off the care of your
domestic concerns, and public employments, you would make this your whole
business to get your selves rid of your disease. And why then do you not now
set upon the same course; cast away all impediments, and con^^crate your selves
to virtue? No man is fit to entertain so noble a guest, that is not fully at
leisure for her. Virtue wherever it resides will govern, nor does it receive
Laws but give them. It is not content to take that time which is left to it, by
secular affairs, diversions, and recreations, but makes such allowances of time
to these as it judges meet. Arrian tells us, that it was not only the opinion
of the Jews, but also of the wise Egyptians and Romans, (...). That virtue and
piety is to be preferred before all things whatsoever, and that it is in all
times and things to be pursued with our utmost strength. It Is no great matter
if our barbarians be of another opinion. Again, If any Professor of Religion
makes conscience of redeeming his time, and dare not prodigally cast away that
precious jewel (the true worth whereof will never be thoroughly understood,
'till we come into that eternal state of happiness or misery, which is the
result of the good or ill management of it) in vain and impertinent things as
others do, he is presently condemned, as nice, supercilious, and uncivil. The
wise and learned Heathens were of another opinion; it was the complaint of one
of them, Nemo ullam auferat nobis diem, nihil dignum tanto impendio redditurus,
sibi ipsi animus haereat, se colat, nihil alieni agat, i.e. Let no man rob us
of a day, because he cannot give a valuable recompense for so great a loss: let
us employ our time in the cultivation of our minds, and let us not spend it in
frivolous and impertinent things. And elsewhere he complains, Magna vitae pars
elabitur male agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus. A great
part of our lives is spent in doing ill, more in doing nothing, and most of all
in doing things to little or no purpose. I could easily mention many more
particulars, but by these you may judge of the rest; and from hence let me
leave this conclusion in your minds, that the enemies and deriders of serious
godliness, do not only oppose the humors and fancies of some weak Christians
(as they falsely suppose) but do indeed confront all the wisdom of former Ages,
and the concurring votes of the most learned Philosophers.

2. What is it to justify Religion, or how must a man justify it?

Answ. This duty has a reference,

1. To men^ thoughts and opinions; we must justify Religion by maintaining
high and honorable thoughts of it; in particular it implies, that a man should
sincerely esteem Religion to be,

1. The wisest choice and best bargain: So did Job 28.28. Unto man he said the
fear of the Lord that is wisdom, and to depart from evil that is understanding.
So did the wisest among mere mortals, Prove. 3.15. She is more precious than
Rubies and all the things thou can desire, are not to be compared with her;
consequently he will not think it a stoical Paradox, that the good man is the
only wise man, and all others are Fools, especially those that think they are
least such. When a man looks upon serious Christians as Fops and Fools, he does
not justify Religion, but he justifies irreligion, and condemus himself.

2. As the justest Law. It Is very true, some of the Precepts of Religion are
hard in themselves, and seem harder to them that never did accustom themselves
to bear this yoke; when God gives Laws to men's thoughts and inward affections,
restrains their senses, and bridles their tongues, when he commands them to
hate and forsake Father and Mother, Wife and Children, estate and life for his
sake and the Gospels, they think these are hard sayings, and none can bear
them; and upon this account they condemn the Laws of their Lord and Maker, and
quarrel with Religion, and vent their rage against God himself: but good men
are of another and better mind, they justify all the commands of God,
howsoever repugnant to their own wills and appetites, or destructive to all
their worldly interests. So did David, Psalm. 119.128. I esteem all thy Precepts
concerning all things to be right. And so did Saint Paul when he was under the
same temptation as other men, when his corrupt inclination led him one way, and
the Law and Spirit of God pulled him another way, and he was like one torn
asunder by wild Horses, yet he justifies the Law of God, and condemns himself,
Romans 7.7. What shall we say then, is the Law sin? God forbid. Nay I had not
known sin but by the Law. v. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment
is holy and just and good. 14. For we know that the Law is spiritual, but I am
carnal, sold under sin.

3. As the chief felicity. A good man looks not upon Religion as a burden
which he must be forced to endure, but as a privilege which it is his
happiness to enjoy. There is nothing in the world which he more passionately
desires, than that he could live exactly according to the excellent Precepts of
Religion, (so that he desires death it self for this end, that he may live in
perfect and constant exercise of all virtues and graces) there is nothing that
he more heedfully and industriously pursues, nothing the want whereof does more
afflict and torment him; the holy Ordinances and Exercises of Religion (which
to an ungodly man are tedious, dry, unsavory things) to a good man are very
pleasant and satisfactory. A day spent in the Courts and Service of God, he
prefers before a thousand employed in Balls, or Plays, or any other of the toys
and trifles of humane life, Job. 23.12. I have esteemed the words of his mouth
more than my necessary food.

2. This duty of justifying Religion relates to the tongue or discourse, in
these particulars.

1. You must not censure or condemn Religion, upon any pretense whatsoever: It
concerns you to be very cautious and modest in your censures of religious
persons, that you make not harsh conclusions concerning their state, nor
uncharitable constructions of their actions, remembering that with what judgment
you judge you shall be judged, and with what measure you mete it shall be
measured to you again: but above ^ll take heed of speaking ill of Religion,
which is directly contrary to the present duty.

2. You must not partake with others in that vulgar sin of censuring and
scoffing at Religion. You may be very guilty of this sin, though you never
speak a word against it. If you freely and familiarly and unnecessarily
converse with those whose throats are an open Sepulcher, always belching out
impure steams against heaven and against God; if you consent to them, connive
at, or any ways approve of them. For as the Roman Orator says, Quid interest
inter suasorem facti and probatorem, aut quid refert utrum voluerim fieri an
gaudeam factum? What difference is there between him that persuades another to
an evil action before it be done, and him that approves of, or pleases himself
with it afterward?

3. You must not give occasion to wicked men to speak against Religion, for
though no such occasion will warrant or excuse them, yet it will involve you in
the guilt of their sin; you know the woe belongs to him that gives the offense,
as well as to him that makes ill use of it.

4. You must when occasion requires be ready to vindicate Religion when it is
traduced: when wicked men have their mouths open against God and Religion, you
ought not to have yours shut, as I said before: You have the advantage of the
better cause, you serve a better Master, and shall have better wages, and if
they do the one out of choice, much more should you do the other, which is your
duty. Mistake not, I do not say this is the duty of all persons in all times
and companies: God has made this a duty (for there is a sinful silence as well
as a sinful speech) but Christian prudence must direct the time and manner of
it, and other circumstances. In some cases you know God has given us an
exemption, Prove. 9.8. Reprove not a scorner lest he hate thee. Mat. 7.6. Give
not that which is holy unto Dogs, neither cast ye your Pearls before Swine,
lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you. Certainly
this if any other duty does require great prudence and understanding in the
management of it, an indiscreet defense of Religion, by an ignorant but well
meaning Christian, does often times more disparage and prejudice it, than another
man's reproaches against it.

3. This duty relates to the actions.

1. You must justify Religion by the practice of all the principles and duties
of Religion. This is the true and the principal way to justify Religion, and
to stop the mouths of all ignorant and malicious cavillers against it. This is
the way to maintain the honor of God, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is
in Heaven. This is the way to adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel, and to win
others to the love and practice of it: without this all your talk for Religion
is but empty and insignificant.

2. You must in a special manner mind those duties and graces which make
Religion most amiable among men; such as veracity in all your words, fidelity
to your promises and obligations, exact justice in all your dealings, meekness
and humility, public spirite^ness and charity, and in one word, whatsoever
things are lovely and of good report. On the contrary you must carefully avoid
not only those things which are apparently evil and scandalous, but such also
as are of ill report amongst the generality of sober and wise men. Some things
may peradventure be lawful for another man, that may not be so to a Professor
of Religion, because of the greater influence of his example, and the special
concern that Religion has in all his actions.

Use.
This may serve for the justification of Religion, notwithstanding all the
miscarriages of the Professors of it, and all the censures of enemies to it.
There is no reason either of these should beget in you any dislike of Religion.

1. Not the former.

1. Because it is unreasonable to judge of the ways of God by the practices of
men. Religion is the way of God, the way which he prescribes, yea the way
wherein himself walks, it is the offspring of the holy God, and therefore must
needs be like him, pure and undefiled, and can no more be polluted (to speak
properly) by the actions of men, than the Sun beam by the dunghill on which it
shines. As the holy God does act in the sinful actions of men, yet is not at
all infected with the guilt or filth of them. So Religion, though it be in the
sinner, does not at all partake of the blame or dishonor of his sins.

2. It is unreasonable to judge of the rule (which Religion is) by the actions
of those who swerve from the rule. Yet this hard measure wicked men mete to
Religion: they do not only debase and disparage it by judging of the rule by
the example, but (which is worse) they judge of the best rule by the worst
examples, and not by the best, as they ought in reason to do.

2. Not the latter. Because their opinions or judgments are not to be valued,
and that

1. Because they are self condemned, and self contradicting persons. Ungodly
men (as I told you before) are of one opinion in health and prosperity, of
another in sickness and calamity; yea sometimes of one opinion in the day and
in company, of another in solitude and in the darkness of the night, and this
quite invalidates their testimony. Testis contraria dicens fidem non facit,
(say the Lawyers) that Witness that contradicts himself is not to be believed.
Moreover, as the judgments of wicked men are often times contrary to themselves,
so their censures are frequently contrary to their judgments: They often times
revile that person with their tongues, whom they reverence in their hearts; and
their mouths censure those actions which their consciences justify.

2. They are men of corrupt minds, Tit. 1.15. Unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled. It
is said of the Romans, chapter 1.28. God gave them up to a reprobate mind, (...),
an injudicious mind, a mind that has lost its taste and relish, that is unable
to discern between things that differ. Two things are necessary as to
corporeal, so to intellectual, Vision, 1. Ability in the faculty. 2.
Convenience in the mean, as that the air be clear, etc. But here is neither. 1.
There is a defect and impotency in the faculty; there is a natural blindness in
men's minds, not done away but by regeneration, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him, neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned.

2. There is a defect in the mean. The Devil casts a mist and fog before their
eyes; The God of this world has blinded their minds, 2 Cor. 4.4* For any man
to be moved by the opinions of such persons, is to appeal to blind men
concerning Colors.

3. They are full of deep prejudices against Religion, by reason whereof they
neither can see the beauty of it, nor ^ill acknowledge it. We are all born with
prejudices against Religion; that natural corruption, which we bring into the
world with us, does put a plain bias upon our minds against it: Every lust is
a powerful Orator against it: Every sinful action leaves in the soul, as a
great^r inclination to sin, so a greater aversion from Religion. And these
prejudices are exceedingly heightened, especially in this degenerate Age, by the
infelicity of bad education, and by the contagion of evil example; so that if
Religion decline the Tribunal of such persons, your own consciences must tell
you there is reason for it. If Aristotle would not admit young and vicious men
to be the hearers of moral Philosophy, much less are they fit to be made judges
of Religion. But I cannot content my self with speaking of this in general,
give me leave therefore for the Farther justification of Religion, and the
invitation of sinners to the practice and love of it, to mention and remove
some of those prejudices, by which they are scared or withheld from the
entertainment of it. I shall confine my self to four, and so conclude.

1. The unreasonableness and incredibility of the principles of Religion. 2.
The insuperable diffi^ulty of the practice of Religion. 3. Differences among
Professors of Religion. 4. The fewness and meaness, as also the folly and
weakness of true Christians.
1. The unreasonableness and incredibility of the principles of Religion;
wherein many things are confessedly hard to be understood, and harder to be
believed. It speaks (say they) of a God that no man ever saw, of eternal
rewards and punishments, which none ever experienced, of the resurrection of
the body, and other things, which the deepest reason cannot comprehend.

1. Answ. This objection rises from a vain and proud conceit of a man's own
reason. A little humility or modesty would soon discover the vanity of this
argument; you must not think that you have got the Monopoly of all the wit and
learning in the world; you cannot resolve all your doubts in Religion, possibly
others of more clear and incorrupt minds, of more learning and experience can,
and to these (if you were in your wits) you would address your selves for
resolution in a matter of such deep concernment. It Is a notable passage of the
Lord Bacons, A little Philosophy will make a man an Atheist, a great deal will
make him a good Christian. And the reason is evident, because a smattering in
Learning will raise objections, which only a solid understanding of it can
answer. Thou complainest thou c^nst not resolve thy doubts; it is likely thou
did never use the means to resolve them: thou should seriously and
frequently consider things in thy own mind, thou should consult the choicest
Books, and converse with the wisest, and learnedest, and best of men. Thou
should humbly study the Mind and Word of God, for it is the humble that God
will teach his way, Ps. 25.9. God resists the proud and gives grace to the
humble, Iam. 4.6. Thou should fervently and constantly pray to God for
resolution, thou should practice what thou do know, if thou would learn
what thou do not. Ioh 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God. It is very likely the generalty of these
Objectors are guilty of the gross neglect of some or all these means* and
therefore it is intolerable arrogance and folly to conclude, that because thou
in the neglect of all these means can not resolve these things, therefore no
man in the world who diligently uses all is able to do it.

2. Consider the confessed darkness and shortness* of men's reasons even in
lower things. It has been the complaint of all Ages, that truth lay hid as it
were in a deep pit, which our eyes could not reach. One of the wis^^t of men
confessed he knew nothing, and diverse went higher, and this was their position,
Nihil scitur, nothing can be known. There is nothing but conjecture and opinion
in the world. How many difficulties are there in Nature, which the greatest
Philosophers to this day are not able to resolve? How many depths in Policy,
which put the wisest Statesmen to a nonplus? and therefore what wonder is it if
there be some insuperable difficulties in so sublime a knowledge as Religion,
that treats of infinite eternal and incomprehensible things. Nay reason it self
will allow, that there should be some things in Religion above it.

3. Consider the unreasonableness of irreligion. Suppose there be some
insoluble difficulties in the principles of Religion, what shall a man do?
shall he throw off the sense of all Religion, and the belief of a Deity, and
settle in down right Atheism? This I confess is too common an inference: But if
Religion be the disease, and this the remedy, I am sure the rem^dy is worse
than the disease. One may justly wonder at the impudence of these men that
object the incredibilities of Religion, when the wit of man cannot devise more
incredible things than those which Atheistic^l and irreligious men do swallow.
To give bu^ one instance, that a dull heap of senseles^ matter should of it
self produce this goodly Fabric of the higher and the lower world, and digest
its self into, and constantly preserve its self in, this ^xqu^^i^e o^^er in
which we see it, and all without the direction or contrivance of a wiser Agent,
is beyond all the Legends of the Papists, or (which is all one) all the
Fictions of the Poets.

2. The insuperable difficulty of the practice of Religion. There are (say
they) so many hard duties to be performed, so many delights to be forsaken* so
much time to be employed, such labors, losses and pains to be endured, that it
is in vain to attempt it, for we shall never be able to go through it.

1. Answ. Supposing the truth of Religion, the greatest difficulties are
reasonable, and should be cheerfully embraced, our very Enemies being Judges.
It has been said by some atheistical persons to careless Christians, did I
believe as you do, I should not live as you do. Did I believe there was a God,
and a future state of unspeakable pleasure or torment, I should certainly make
it my great business to escape the one and secure the other; I should wholly
give my self to reading, praying, hearing, and preparation for eternity; I
should account no time too much, no pains or hazard too great for so high a
concern. The truth is, in this they speak great reason, and it will rise up in
judgment against thousands of slothful and negligent Christians, who do indeed
believe the truth of these things, and yet are so cold and remiss therein, that
grudge to spend a little time, or to deny themselves a little in their ease, or
recreation, or worldly occasions, that they may attend the one thing necessary:
And whoever thou art that believe these things ( i. e. that art not a sottish
Atheist) be for ever ashamed to mention this as an objection.

2. There are as great difficulties in an ungodly life, as there are in the
practice of Religion. As there are no pleasures of a sinner but a Saint may
enjoy those that are parallel or superior to them, so there are no
difficulties or inconveniences which a Sa^nt meets with in the ways of God, but
sinners are frequently exposed to the same, or greater, in the pursuit of a
vain world or base lusts. Does Religion require much of thy time? so does the
world: thou must rise early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of carefulness,
and all this for trifling vanities, for dreams and shadows, as indeed all
worldly things are. Why should it be more troublesome to spend time in
attendance upon God, for substantial and eternal blessings, than to spend time
in attendance upon earthly Courts and Princes, in expectation of those things
which commonly they never obtain; and, if they do, they cannot long enjoy them.
Does Religion command thee to honor the Lord with thy substance, and to lay
out some part of thy treasure in charitable uses? Does it sometimes command
thee to suffer the loss of all things? so does irreligion too. And if a due
estimate were taken of the impressions made upon men's estates by their
Religion, and by their lusts; if perhaps it may be said, Religion, like Saul,
has slain its thousands, I am sure, it may be said, men's lusts, like David,
have slain their ten thousands. Is it torment of body and death which Religion
sometimes exposes a man to? and do not the lusts of men betray them to the
same inconveniences? To say nothing of the endless and easeless torments of the
other world, (the single consideration whereof must needs, to any prudent man,
infinitely outweigh all which this world can offer or give) if we look only to
the present life, universal experience shows what havoc men's lusts make of
their bodies, how they do not only shorten and embitter men's lives, but
immaturely and violently snatch them away. How many thousands dye Martyrs to
their lusts, and are burnt with as keen a fire (though not so honorable) as
that which the Martyrs were fried in!

3. Religion is not so difficult as it seems to be: It seems indeed intolerable
to strangers that understand it not, but to those that have experience of it,
its ways are ways of pleasantness, and all its paths are peace, Prove. 3.17. And
which of these two is most credible? Whose testimony shall I take concerning a
Country? his that has only looked upon it in a Map, and understands nothing but
by hearsay? Or his who has diligently traveled through it, and made an exact
survey of it? My yoke (says our Savior) is easy and my burden is light,
Mat. 11.30. and St. John attests to the truth of it, 1 Ioh. 5.3. His
commandments are not grievous. It Is true, Religion, like the Arts, (and all
excellent things) is hard at first, but afterward use and exercise and the
grace of God does make it easy. The difficulties also of Religion are mixed
with great sweetness, and followed with glorious rewards; there is a gracious
God to assist, a pure and peaceable conscience to support and delight, certain
hope of eternal glory to invite, whereas the sinners difficulties are quite of
another nature, and agravated with fearful circumstances; often times outward
troubles upon him, and a guilty conscience within him, and an infernal pit
opening its mouth to receive him; he cannot live, yet dare not dye. This is the
portion of the enemies of Religion.

3. Differences amongst Professors of Religion. If I would be religious [say
some men] there are so many Religions among us, one contradicting and
condemning another, that I know not what to believe, nor which to choose, and
therefore its the wisest way to be of no Religion.

1. Answ. The differences among Professors of Religion are neither so weighty,
nor so many, as is pretended. Ungodly men look upon them with a magnifying
Glass; their hatred of Religion makes them seem worse than in truth they are; I
shall not now meddle with any other Religion but our own. I suppose the vanity
and imposture of Popery is sufficiently evident to all intelligible persons,
whom lust or interest does not blind and bias. But as for the differences
among Protestants, which Papists and Atheists do so tragically aggravate, if
they come to be thoroughly scanned, the case will be found to be, as sometimes
you shall observe in a mist, where a Bird or other Object at a distance will
seem very great, which, when you come nearer, dwindless into an inconsiderable
bigness. Protestants are all agreed in the vitals and fundamentals of Religion,
they have the same Articles of their Creed, the same Rule of Faith, and Life,
and Prayer. If men's pride and passions were mortified, it is apparent enough
from the Confessions of Protestant Churches [which is the only rational
Standard to try them by] the differences are more in appearance than in truth,
more in words than in things, and generally more in circumstances than in
substance; so that a man may as well quarrel with humanity, because one man
differs from another in age, stature, quality, etc. as with Religion for the
unessential differences of its Professors.

2. Differences among Professors of Religion are an evident argument of the
truth of it; and I am persuaded this is one reason why God permits differences
amongst Christians in lesser things, that men might be more fully satisfied
concerning the truth of those substantial Doctrines wherein all are agreed.
Certainly that great variety, levity, and wildness of many men's minds, the vast
difference of men's apprehensions, educations, inclinations, affections, and
interests (which are the principal causes of diversity of opinion) does give
sufficient assurance to any considerate man of the truth of that Religion,
which forces the unanimous assent of so many persons, and them of such
differing complexions* And surely this is a strange and most perverse way of
reasoning, because a man is unsatisfied in some lesser matters, wherein
Christians differ, to forsake those essential truths wherein all are agreed.
It Is a sign the man is resolved to be quarrelsom, and that his quarrel is with
Religion.

3. Differences in Religion are not so hard, but that a prudent and pious man
may find out the truth. If a man diligently and humbly study the Word of God,
and heartily beg of God the spirit of direction, and take advice from able and
faithful Ministers whom God has established in his Church for this end ( Mal.
2.7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law
at his mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts) and conscionably
practice what they already know and believe, I dare confidently say, that man
shall either understand the right in cases of difference, or else God will
pardon his mistake. And indeed this is the right use we should make of
differences in Religion, not to throw off all Religion (for a man may upon the
very same ground abandon his reason, because of the differences and
contradictions in men's reasonings one with another) but to be the more
inquisitive into the truth. So did the Samaritan Convert, Ioh. 4.19, 20. Sir* I
perceive that thou art a Prophet, our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain, and
you say that in Jerusalem men ought to worship. She does not infer that
therefore she would worship no where, according to the new Logic of
atheistical or wanton Wits, but she applies her self to Christ for direction
concerning the true Worship.

4. The fewness and meaness, as also the folly and weakness, of true
Christians. The great Wits (say they) the profound Philosophers, the deep
Statesmen, the men of honor, these contemn Religion, which none but a few
obscure ^ools embrace. As Machiavel is said to have told the Confessor sent to
him by the Duke of Florence, when he was upon his sick Bed. He dreamt that he
was in Heaven, and that there he saw many poor unlearned Monks and others of
mean capacity and quality; and that he had been in Hell, and there saw many
great Emperors, renowned Generals, wise Counselors, and famous Scholars, and
added, that he was for the best company, and so dismissed him; and this is really
the choice that many others make.

1. Answ. You are not surpriz^d herein, it was observed by Christ himself, that
the poor did receive the Gospel; and the Apos^le confirms it by his experience,
1 Cor. 1.6. Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble,
are called: and this was designed by God for wise and weighty ends, partly to
teach men contempt of worldly greatness, which they are too apt to admire, to
convince men that he is no respecter of persons, that he values no man's Titles;
partly to reduce things to a greater equality, Luke 16.27. Son, remember that
thou in thy life time receivedst good things, and Lazarus evil things, but now
he is comforted and thou art tormented. God will not allow to any man two
Heavens, he therefore that has his Heaven and happiness in this world, may be
the better contented if a more despicable person goes away with the happiness
of the next world, especially seeing he had his choice, and that which he far
preferred before it; partly to demonstrate the truth and divine power of that
Religion that could subdue the world by a few, mean, foolish, and contemptible
i^struments. So that you see this objection confronts the wisdom of God and all
his holy designs; as also it strikes at the very person of our blessed Savior,
who came into the world in the same despicable circumstances which here they
object against his followers, not considering that it were very improper that
the Dis^iple should be above h^s Master, and that the followers of so mean a
person as our Lord thought fit to appear upon earth, should be the Grandees of
the world. The truth is, this objection arises from an overweening conceit of
worldly greatness, as if God were obliged to as high and honorable an esteem
of the great men of the world as they have of themselves. These men should
consider that Religion is not the product of man's Nature, but of Gods free
grace; I shall say to them as Luther did to Melancthon, Orandus est Melancthon
ut desinat esse rector mundi; Melancthon is to be entreated to come down from
his throne, and to suffer God to govern the world as he pleases. So these
Atheistical Objectors are entreated to permit God to dispose of his grace as he
thinks fit: If God think fit with Jacob to cross his hands and to lay the right
hand upon the younger Son, if it please God to bestow his grace upon a poor
Lazarus, and to neglect the Purple Robe, shall foolish and arrogant men
presently commence a suit against God, and quarrel with his providence, and
renounce their Religion? Shall they pull God out of the throne, unless he will
take them into his Privy Council?

2. The matter of this objection will in a great measure be found false; for it
will appear upon enquiry, that truly religious persons both in this and former
Ages, have been, and are neither few nor mean. The History of former times
assure us of vast multitudes which heartily embraced the Christian Religion,
and sealed to it with their blood; and some have made the computation of the
Christian Mart^yrs slain in the first 300 years, that there were 5000 for every
day in the year save one; and thanks be to God, there is yet a very
considerable number of such, both here and elsewhere in the world, which,
however unhappily differenced in lesser things, yet in reason* justice, and
charity we ought to believe to be truly religious persons, if we take not our
measures from the new models and definitions of Religion, which the fancies or
humors of men have coined, but content our selves with Apostolical simplicity,
and with Saint Peter's description of it, Acts 10.35. In every Nation he that
fears God and works righteousness, is accepted with him. And as religious
men have not been few, so neither have they been mean, either in outward
quality, or inward endowments. It were easy to present you with a large
Catalogue of great Princes and Emperors, valiant Soldiers, sage Counselors,
men of the greatest Wit and Counsel of their several Ages, who have given their
names to Christ, and sacrificed their very lives to Religion; and if this Age
be more degenerate than the forme^, we may thank the Objectors in a great
measure for it, who have made it their great business to debauch persons, and
to bring all Religion into contempt.

3. Admit there be many weakness^s and follies of diverse true Christians, these
men, if they had common discretion in them, would consider that Religion does
not pretend to alter the temper of men's brains and bodies, not to make men
Philosophers* but virtuous, not to raise their intellectuals, but to mend their
morals, not to make them discreet in worldly concerns, but to make them wise
unto salvation. Nor do I persuade you to imitate the folly, but the piety, of
religious persons; only take heed that those, whom you call fools, do not show
themselves wiser than those that account themselves ^he wise men of the world:
though indeed if a tr^e estimate were made of the despisers of Religion, I
doubt we should find so many weak Brethren among them, as would give little
credit to this objection; and for those that are esteemed the Wits of the
Party, I have heard a person of great honor and learning profess, that of all
the atheistical Wits which he had the unhappiness to be acquainted with, he
knew not one that was a person of solid learning and deep judgment; but this I
am sure of, there are not greater follies in Bedlam than many of these great
Wits are guilty of, they have not so much wit as to preserve their estates from
ruin, their bodies and names from rotting while they live. There cannot be
devised a greater madness, than for a man to expose himself to such tremendous
hazards of the wrath of God and everlasting burnings, and that too for such
poor and sordid recompenses, many of them purchasing their eternal damnation
with their temporal ruin, and marching through one Hell into another. And
therefore either let them cure their own follies, or let them be ashamed to
upbraid the follies of religious men. And seeing the chief pretenses and
objections of the Enemies of Religion are so trifling and impertinent, as you
see, let us all approve our selves to be the Children of Wisdom in justifying
of it, notwithstanding all the miscarriages of its friends or censure of its
enemies.

FINIS.

