A SERMON Preached to Young People, January the First, 1697. AND NOW Published
at their Request.

By SAMVEL POMFRET.



LONDON; Printed for Richard Mount, at the Postern on Tower Hill, MDCXCVIII.

LAM. iii. 27. It is good for a Man that he bear the Yoke in his Youth.
THE Royal Preacher says, Every Thing is beantiful in its Season: And if so,
then I promise my self, in this great Assembly of young People, a sweet Harmony
of Votes that my Text is so; like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, as
being a Word spoken in Season.

It is good for a Man that he bear the Yoke in his Youth.

In which Words there are two general Parts.

I. Somewhat imposed, or required as matter of Duty, viz. To bear the Yoke in
his Youth. II. Somewhat proposed, or offered as matter of Encouragement, viz.
It is good for a Man so to do.
The latter making way for the more cheerful performance of the former; as we
sweeten bitter Pills to our Children, that they may swallow them the better:
Such is God's Condescension here to young Ones, knowing how backward Youth is
to bear the Yoke, he is pleased to court and allure them to it; by assuring
them that it is their own Good and Benefit that is contained in it.

The Words being thus divided, there remains only one thing needful to be
cleared, before I lay down the Doctrine, and that is the Word (Yoke) an hard
and heavy Word, grievous for Green Heads, what may be the meaning of it?

Answ. The Yoke in Scripture is taken two ways. (1.) In a Material; and (2.) In
a Mystical Sense. A Material Yoke is an Instrument made of Wood or Iron,
serving to tame and subdue the Creature for the use of Man, Deuteronomy. 21. 3.
compared with 1 Kings 19. 10. which cannot be the meaning of the Word in this
Place: For in this Sense it is proper and peculiar to Beasts only. But here in
the Text we read of a Yoke for a Man to bear; and therefore we must look
farther, viz. to the Mystical Sense of the Word: and herein I find in Scripture
a threefold Yoke spoken of, 1. The Yoke of Relations. 2. The Yoke of
Afflictions. 3. The Yoke of Religion.


1. The Yoke of Relations. As that between Husband and Wife, they are called
Yoke-fellows: and the Apostle Paul, giving advice to Christians who were
entering into this Relation, makes use of this Word; Be not (says he) unequally
yoked with Unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6. 14. But this is not the meaning of the Word
here in my Text; for it is not good for any too early in their Youth to take
this Yoke upon them: And I may say of many that have been too eager, too early
in courting and coveting to come under this Yoke, what the Apostle says (in
another case) of those that make too much haste to be Rich, They fall into
Temptation, and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown
Men in Destruction and Perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9.

Moreover the Scripture uses this Word (Yoke) in the Relation of a Servant to
his Master, Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke, count their Masters
worthy of all Honor, 1 Timothy 6. 1. Now this indeed is good, but not the thing
intended in the Text.

2. The Yoke of Affliction. So the Word is frequently used in Scripture, Deuteronomy.
28. 48. Lev. 26. 13. Isa. 9. 4. And here in this Book our weeping Prophet
setting forth the grievous Afflictions, and Calamities that God had brought
upon his People for their Sins, in the Day of his fierce Anger, calls them by
this Name (Yoke) Lam. 1. 14. The Yoke of my Transgressions is bound by his
Hand, that is, the Afflictions brought upon me by my Sins. Now this is one
Sense of the Word here in my Text: and undoubtedly this is a Yoke, that it is
good for a Man to bear in his Youth. In this Age the All-wise God sees it
needful to put on this Yoke, to tame the Pride, and fetch out the Folly that is
bound up in the Hearts of young People: and how hard soever it may be to bear,
yet it certainly is good for them. Youth is so apt to run astray (like an
unruly headstrong Bullock) that a Yoke is of singular use to reduce and
restrain them. And this David found true by blessed Experience, Before I was
afflicted (says he) I went astray, but now have I kept they Word, Psalm. 119.
67. And hence he acknowledges in the same Psalm, It is good for me that I have
been afflicted, that I might keep thy Statutes, ver. 71. So there are many
young Ones, that in their Prosperity have lived in a total forgetfulness of
God, giving themselves over to Pride, and Pleasures, until the Yoke of Straits
and Afflictions has been put on their fair and tender Necks; and then (through
Grace) they have come to themselves by Consideration, and to God by Conversion;
as is set forth in the Instance of Manasseh, and also in the Parable of the
Prodigal Son, in the 15th of Luke. But it is the third and last Acceptance of
the Word, which I intend to insist upon, viz.

3. The Yoke of Religion. And in this I find several Expositors take it here in
my Text. The great and Learned Calvin prefers this sense to the other.
Indeed the Religion of the Jews (as it stood in Rites and Ceremonies) is called
a Yoke; and during that Pedagogy, it was an hard and burdensome Yoke, such as
St. Peter says, neither we, nor our Fathers were able to bear, Act. 15. 10.
But (blessed be God) we, who live in Gospel Times are graciously freed and
discharged from that Yoke of Bondage by Jesus Christ. Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not again entangled with the Yoke
of Bondage, Gal. 5. 1. What then (my Beloved) are we under the Gospel Yokeless?
may we live as we list? O, no, that would be not so much Liberty, as
Libertinism: wherefore the Christian Religion is also called a Yoke.
Accordingly our Blessed Savior says, Take my Yoke upon you, learn of me, for
I am meek and lowly, and you shall find rest for your Souls, Mat. 11. 29. And
every one that expects Salvation by him, must take his Yoke, and yield
Subjection to him. And as for those his Enemies that will not have him to reign
over them (the same Jesus says) bring them hither, and slay them before me,
Luke 19. 27. Thus I have explained the Word Yoke, which I told you was the
chief thing in the Text that needed opening, before I laid down the Doctrine.
As for the encouragement proposed in these words, It is good, etc. there is no
difficulty; the meaning of them is obvious and plain, that is, it is eminently
so, as that which alone can bring you to the enjoyment of God the chiefest
Good; and so may be said to be summary of all felicitating Good. The Words thus
divided and explained afford us this plain Proposition.

Doct. That to bear the Yoke of Christ, in the time of Youth, is the summary of
all that is truly Good.

In the handing of this Doctrine, I shall speak to these three things.

I. To open what Christ's Yoke and the bearing of it is. II. To clear it up to
you, that to come under, and bear it in time of Youth, is the summary of all
that is truly Good. III. To close all with some Motives to excite, and Rules to
direct young Ones to come under this Yoke, and to bear it in their Youth.
I. To open what this Yoke of Christ is?

To set this in its clear light, Man is to be considered in a double Relation,
(1.) As a reasonable Creature; and (2.) As a wretched Sinner. Now answerable to
both these, Christ's Yoke consists of two parts. (1.) Moral. (2.) Evangelical.

1. The Moral part of this Yoke chiefly respects that Duty which Man as a
reasonable Creature owes to God as his Creator; and that is to serve and obey
him as his Rightful Lord, and to love him as his chiefest Good. Now this still
belongs to us; For Man as a Creature lies under an eternal Obligation to
love and serve his Creator; neither ought you to entertain the least thought,
as if Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Savior and Redeemer of lost Souls, when
he came into the World, did ever abolish, or dissolve this Obligation and Bond
of Duty, to be in Subjection to our Creator: O, no, that would have been as if
Christ came to supplant his Father, and dethrone him of his Authority and
Government over Man. O let this be far from any of us to think; as besure it
was from any design or purpose of our Blessed Redeemer when he came into the
World. For you read expressly, that he came to redeem us to (not from) God, Rev.
5. 9. and when he suffered for us, the just for the unjust, it was to bring us
to God, 1 Pet 3. 18. i. e. that he might bring poor Apostate Man back to love,
serve, please and enjoy his God again. And this brings me to the second Part of
this Yoke.

2. The Evangelical Part of Christ's Yoke, which chiefly respects Man's Duty
considered as a wretched Sinner: And that he is, as soon as he begins to be; as
the Psalmist acknowledges, Behold I was shapen in Iniquity: and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me, Psalm. 51. 5. Now this State and Condition of Man
superinduceth a new Yoke, which tho it was none of that, which Man in Innocence
was called to bear: yet now Man having sinned, and fallen from that Estate, God
in Christ out of his abundant Mercy calls him to bear: Remember whence thou
art fallen, and repent, etc. Rev. 2. 5. The Gospel Part to Christ's Yoke
principally stands in its Commands and Precepts of Repentance, Faith,
Self-denial, and sincere Obedience, as you may see in these following
Scriptures, Repent ye for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Math. 3. 2. And
Jesus preaching the Gospel saying, the Kingdom of God is at hand, Repent ye,
and believe the Gospel, Mark. 1. 15. Repent and be converted, that your Sins
may be blotted out, etc. Acts 3. 19. But now God commands all Men every where
to repent, Acts 17. 30. And our Savior says, I am not come to call the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance, Math. 9. 13. And in Luke 13. 3. he says,
Except ye repent, ye shall perish. And so likewise for Faith, without which it
is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. And God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting Life, John 3. 16. And when the poor trembling Jaylour,
cried out; what shall I do to be saved? the Apostle said, Believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16. 30, 31. And to this purpose you
read, That this is the will of him that sent me (says Christ) That every one
that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting Life, John 6.
40. And again, This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of
his Son, 1 John 3. 23. And our Lord severely threatens, That if we believe not,
we shall die in our Sins, John 8. 24. And that he who believes not, shall be
damned, Mark. 16. 16. And so for Self-denial, and Obedience, Jesus Christ
affirms, If any Man will come after me, he must deny himself, Math. 16. 24.
and Luke 9. 23. And that, Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation to them
that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. And the Gospel-threatning runs, That Christ shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in Flaming Fire taking Vengeance
on them that obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. And hence it is that the
Children of Disobedience, in Sacred Writ, are called Children of Belial. i. e.
Qui nullis legum vinculis teneantur: such as are without Yoke, Masterless, who
are not, will not be held by the Bonds of Christ's Commandment, So that it is
evident, that by the Yoke of Christ, is meant his Commands, to repent, believe,
and obey the Gospel; all which have no other tendency, but the Good and
Happiness of fallen Man.

Quest. But here it may be demanded, why this is called a Yoke: since its chief
end, and design, is to make Man happy.

Answ. That it is for the Good and Happiness of Man is most certain, as you
will see in its proper place: But then, it is here to be considered, that it is
not now, with the humane Nature, as it was, when it first came out of the Hands
of God; but a quite different thing. It is now become apostate, and corrupt,
since the Fall. The carnal Mind is Enmity against God; it is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8, 7. It hates to be reformed, loves to
wallow in the filth of Sin, as the Swine in the Mire: It is so, woeful daily
Experience shows it, as well as Scripture. So that now Repentance, Faith,
Conversion, etc. tho it be no other, than the recovery of a lost Soul to God;
yet its irksome, and tedious to our corrupt Natures; like plucking out a right
Eye, or cutting off a right Hand. It is a pleasant thing to behold the Sun; but
it is a torment to a sore Eye: Food is pleasant to the Healthy, to the Hungry;
but loathsome to the Sick. Alas! by Nature, we are sick unto Death, and love
Darkness rather than Light: there is an aversness to Self-Reflection,
(especially in time of Youth) O how backward and unwilling are Youth to retire,
and consider their Sins, and take pains with their Hearts, to get them affected
with their Danger? they cannot endure the Yoke of Conviction of Sin, and
Reproof for Sin, nor to be restrained their vain Company, and sensual
Pleasures: but as Zophar says, Man is born like the Ass his Colt, Job. 11, 12.
exceedingly given to ramble, and run a stray, eagerly bent upon carnal Sports
and Vanities: So that upon this Consideration the Commands of Christ are called
a Yoke, and that for these two following Reasons.

First, Upon the account of that Reluctance and Opposition, that is (since the
Fall) woefully and deeply rooted in our Natures, against Obedience and
Subjection to the Commands of Christ in the Gospel. A Yoke (you know) is used
to tame, and subdue the unruly Creature, and to bring it into Subjection: So
the Yoke of Christ, serves to humble and bring down the Proud, and stubborn
Spirit of Youth; it holds an hard and strait Rein, on the Neck of those
furious and foolish Lusts, which in that Age are usually (Jehu-like) impetuous
and violent, in order to stop them in their mad Carrear, and course of Sin: it
being the very Picture and Property of Youth, by Nature, to affect an
uncontrollable Liberty, to run where they please, do what they list, and walk
after the Imagination of their own Hearts; submitting to no Government, save
that of their own Lusts. As the Wise Man intimates, in that Ironical taunt of
his; Rejoice, O young Man in thy Youth, and let thine Heart cheer thee, in the
days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine
Eyes: all this is marvelously chearing, O it goes swiftly and swiftly down with
Wind and Tide of Youth's corrupt Nature: but then comes in the pinching gauling
Yoke, in the rear of the Text; Know thou that for all these things, God will
bring thee to Judgment, Eccl. 11. 9. as if he had said, O young Man, at thy
peril proceed, pursue those forbidden Pleasures; but wisely stop in time,
consider (in order to thy speedy Repentance) what a fearful fatal end they will
certainly bring thee to, if thou stop not, if thou turn not; for God will bring
thee to Judgment for all: and therefore remember thy Creator in the days of thy
Youth; before the Evil day of Death and Judgment seize thee, as it follows in
the beginning of the next Chapter: Now what need all this? line upon line,
precept upon precept, to bind us to the blessed Service of Christ; were it not
for that cursed Reluctance, and Opposition, that is in our corrupt Natures
against it. And indeed I cannot but think, our Savior, in using the Metaphor
of a Yoke, to set out his sweet and sacred Government by, designeth the
humbling of the best of us all, even of the regenerate themselves: for as much
as we daily need to be yoked to his Service, by reason of the Remainders of
Corruption in us. My Brethren, what a Reproach does it lay us under? that the
Service of our Redeemer, which in it self is the most pleasant employment in
the World, and among the Inhabitants of Heaven, where holy Souls are perfectly
freed from the Relics of Sin, it is their Felicity and Glory, that our
Savior (who never miscalleth any thing) should with respect to us, call it a
Yoke; surely it calls us to loath our selves, and say after him, Romans 7. 23,
24. I see a Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing
me into Captivity to the Law of Sin, that is my Members: O Wretched Man that I
am, etc. Alas! there is yet Flesh in us, lusting against the Spirit in this
Life, which still needs the Yoke of Christ to be subduing and mortifying of it.
I dare appeal to all who have spiritual Life, and Sense in this thing, whether
they do not find it so? what else means that Hue and Cry that is ever and
anon raised in the Soul against indwelling Sin? O Cursed Sin, what Mischief
have thou wrought in me? what Miseries have thou brought on me? the hidings of
God's Face, the weakening my Grace, the breaking my Peace, the grieving away my
Comforter, the deadning, distracting my Heart in Prayer, etc. Hence O Wretched
Man that I am, etc. Alas! whenever I set upon any thing that is good, I find
something within me opposing more then, than at any time, enticing and drawing
off my Heart; a bitter Root springing up to trouble me; Hence, O the Hurries,
Tumults, and Distractions, many times in the most Spiritual Duties! Alas! the
Canaanites are yet in the Land lying in wait, to make new Breaches between God
and the Soul, and to fill it with renewed Doubts and Fears: So that there is no
time to be secure, to cast off the Yoke, until we put off this Earthly
Tabernacle. Indeed sometime (through Grace) the renewed Soul finds at an
Ordinance, such Heavenly Influences, and Incomes of Light, and Love, as enlarge
the Heart, set it at liberty, like the Chariots of Aminadab, to run the ways of
God's Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. (and as the Spouse says, when the King
sits at the Table, my Spicknard sends forth its Pleasant smell; then stay
me with Flagons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love: She sings, as
if she had put off her Yoke, her Harness, and ended her Warfare, and took down
her Harp, and should no more need her Militant Graces of Repentance, and
Self-denial: but alas! how soon does a fit of Security overtake her, and then
her Beloved was withdrawn, and gone, and she mourns.) Thus it is with renewed
Souls, when the Spirit of the Lord (which is like the Wind blowing where it
lists) blows and breathes, draws, and shines in, making free and fresh
Discoveries of the Love of Christ (through the Lattice of an Ordinance) to the
Soul; then there is Life and Liberty to run the Heavenly Race, as if no Clog,
no Yoke were on it; the Love of Christ constrains, it is like a Corner of
Heaven, a Penuel; the Soul sees that of the Glory of a Christ, as sets it a
singing; Lo the Winter is past and gone, the Summer is come, etc. Cant. 2. 11.
But as Bernard says, Rara hora, brevis mora; sapit quidem suavissime, sed
gustatur rarissime. Tho there are such Seasons, wherein Gracious Souls are
surprised with these sweet Illapses of the Spirit as a Comforter; yet they are
rare, and but of short continuance, by and by the Feast is over, the Ordinance
ends, the Blessing got; but Jacob goes away halting. Corruption that lay
dormant (like a Thief in the House waiting for the Sleepiness of the
Inhabitant) soon rouzes up, and is at its old work again, lusting against the
Spirit, it grows unruly and rebellious, so that there is need for the Yoke
still, and a Reinforcement of Prayers, Tears, Self-denial, holy Diligence, and
Watchfulness, to yoke down the Flesh; those Remanders of Pride, Passion,
Unbelief, etc. let the best speak, if they do not find it so: Ah blessed Lord!
thy Yoke is of constant use, Sin is so deeply rooted in us, and so often has
deceived us, that without thy Yoke, we should soon run astray, like Children of
Belial. And this may suffice for the first Reason why it is called a Yoke.

Secondly, It is called a Yoke in respect of Labor. A Yoke is an Emblem of
Labor: it is true indeed our Savior says, His Yoke is easy; but pray don't
mistake that Expression, it no ways imports as if Christians may be idle. No
(my Beloved) tho Christ's Yoke is easy; yet it is not a Yoke of Idleness. Tho
(praised be the Lord) it is not an Iron Yoke of Cruelty, yet it is a Yoke still
for Duty: and as it is a Yoke, it imports the necessity of Labor, and
Diligence. O that the Self-deluding, Soul-cheating Lazy Professors of this
secure Age, were but convinced of this; those who deem Christ's Service, to be
no other than an heap of good Wishes; also those who think it stands only in a
Circle, and Course of dull and drowsy Performances, to pray, hear, sing Psalms,
etc. (and I wish there were but so much done by some) but our blessed Savior
fully detecteth the insufficiency of these, in those two great Instances, of
the Pharisee in the Temple, Luke 18. and the young Man, in the 19th of Math.
All these (says he) have I done from my Youth: and yet he was never brought
under Christ's Yoke, never thoroughly convinced of the Sin of his Nature, never
knew what Poverty of Spirit, brokenness of Heart, pangs of new Birth meant;
never entered the strait Gate of Regeneration. And O that this were not the sad
condition, of far the greater number among us, under the Gospel: Alas! what
shall we think of those, who are wrapped up in Ignorance, blinded by the God of
this World, all quiet, while the strong Man armed keeps the House, no Outcries,
what to do to be saved? others who tho they profess high, hear, and know much,
yet live idly, and unprofitably, are at ease, pampering and indulging their
beloved Lusts, making continual Provision for the Flesh to fulfill it in its
Lusts; who cannot endure to have their Corruptions crossed, but hate Reproof,
and make their Profession of Christ to be a Cloak to their loose and licentious
Practices. Surely these are as far from the Yoke of Christ, as they are from
that great mark of true Christians; They that are Christ's have crucified the
Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5. 24. Hence we read of work of
Faith, the labor of Love, and the Patience of Hope, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. Wherein you
have a Figure which Rhetoricians call Hypallage, i. e. the Work of Faith, for a
working Faith; the Labor of Love, for a laborious Love; and the Patience of
Hope, for a Hope patiently waiting; that like an Anchor holds out all Storms,
Temptations, Conflicts: Hence also it is that the Kingdom of Heaven, is said to
suffer violence, aend the violent take it by force, Math. 11. 12. My Brethren,
there is no part of Christ's Service but calls for labor, to repent, to
believe, to love, to hope, etc. and therefore it is called a Yoke; which brings
me to open the other Branch: Namely,

Quest. What the bearing of this Yoke is?

Answ. In the general, the bearing of this Yoke is no other than a cordial and
unfeigned Subjection to Jesus Christ in the Gospel; to answer to his Calls, to
open at his Knocks, to accept of his Offers, to believe his Reports, to obey
his Commands: Or if you can conceive it better by other Terms; to bear his
Yoke, is our sincere and hearty consent, that He, and He only, bear rule over
us: But this being the main of our Duty, it requires a more distinct and
particular opening; (generalia non pungunt) wherefore I shall consider these
two Things.

1. What is necessarily requisite to it? 2. What is essentially contained in
it?
Answ. For the first of these, it is necessarily requisite to the bearing of
Christ's Yoke, that a Man come first under it: This is so plain and obvious,
that it needs no more Proof than it meets with Objection and Doubt; and that is
none at all that I know of. For as the Apostle, in another Case, makes his
Appeal to common Reason, Romans 10. 14. How can they believe on him of whom they
have not heard? So may I in the present Case, How can a Man bear the Yoke,
unless he come under it? This carries its own Light in it. So that under this
Head, it only remains needful to consider what is requisite to the coming
under Christ's Yoke? Now to give a right and clear Answer hereunto, two things
must be considered.

1. What is requisite on God's part? 2. What is requisite on our part?
1. In order to a Man's coming under the Yoke, there is requisite on God's
part, both the Wheel of his Providence, and the Arm of his Power: The one to
bring a Sinner under the Gospel, and the other to draw a Sinner under the Yoke.
For as our Savior says, No Man can come to me, except the Father which has
sent me, draw him, John 6. 44. But where and what is this drawing? why, the
very next Verse answers it fully; It is written in the Prophets; and they shall
be all taught of God: every Man therefore that has heard, and learned of the
Father, comes unto me, v. 45. So that this drawing, is no other than God's
teaching a Sinner by his Word and Spirit, under the Gospel Dispensation. Now
that this is necessary, is evident from the full Testimony of Scripture, and
the free Confession of all that ever were converted, and brought under the Yoke
of Christ, Psalm. 110. 3. Phil. 2. 12. Ephesians. 2. 1, 10. James 1. 18. And as to the
Apostle's Query, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from another? He
propounds it not by way of doubt, but concludes upon the Testimony (as well he
might) of every regenerate Person, that it was God and not Man. And (my
Beloved) whoever shall take a right Survey of the Depth of that miserable
Apostasy Man is sunk into by the Fall, together with all its Effects, in that
Darkness, Filth, Folly, Bondage, Power of Lusts, Enmity, Rebellion, Prejudice
against God, all which is attended with a Senseless Stupidity; so far from
being convinced of the evil of so wretched and vile a State, as for the most
part likeing and approving the same: I say whoever surveyeth this aright may
justly stand amazed, that ever there should spring up, in any Age of the
Church, a Pelagius, a Patron, a Pleader for the power of Man to make himself to
differ from another. The Lord awaken us to right Apprehensions touching this
Point, viz. the necessity of the Arm of God's Power to draw a Sinner under
Christ's Yoke. Alas! without this, How can of Darkness such a Soul be made
Light in the Lord? and the Dead hear the Voice of the Son of God and live? How
should Satan (called the strong Man) be cast out? or the stony Heart in a
Sinner's Breast be taken away? or the Enmity, in a carnal Mind be slain? or the
stout fierce Rebellion in the Will quelled, and conquered? All which must be
done, if ever a Soul be brought under the Yoke of Christ. Alas! there is found
in every unconverted Sinner a stiff Neck, a stout Heart, a dark Mind, and
brutish Affections; an Infinite Power is therefore requisite to be employed to
bring a Man under the Yoke. It is true indeed, God puts forth this Power in
a way suited to the Nature of Man, Hosea 11. 14. it is said, He drew them with
the bands of a Man, that is, in a way of rational Conviction; not by Force, and
Violence, but by his Word and Spirit, enlightening their Minds, and awakening
their Consciences, to know, and see the Power and Plague of their Sinful
Natures, and the sure and certain Woe and Misery, Death and Damnation belonging
to them while in their natural Estate, and that will inevitably be their
Portion if they continue and die therein: now it is in this way that the
Almighty displays, and makes bare the Arm of his Power, without offering
Violence to the Will, which is against the Nature of it; but removing the
Corruption of it, he sweetly boweth and turns it, by his gracious, and
powerful Persuasions, to come under Christ's Yoke: He does not drag a Sinner as
you would do a Stone, but he draws him by the Cords of Conviction, agreeable to
the Nature of a reasonable Creature, Hence it is, that his People are said to
be a willing People in the day of his Power, Psalm. 110. 3. That which in one
Scripture is called Creation, Resurrection, to show its invincible Power; in
another Scripture is called Illumination, drawing, turning from Darkness to
Light, to show its admirable suitableness and sweetness to the Nature of Man:
It is in this way, and by these means, the Lord demolisheth those strong Holds
of Sin, viz. Ignorance, Carnal Security, Pride, etc. and so prepares the Soul
for a closing with, and Subjection to the Yoke of Christ: and whatever
injudicious Christians may say to the contrary, yet this Truth stands sure,
that a Man must first see himself lost, and be made willing to cast off the
Yoke of Sin, before ever he will come under the Yoke of Christ; without
Conviction of his Sin, and Misery, there is no Subjection to Christ in the
Gospel. Which brings me to consider the other Branch, viz. what is requisite on
our part to come under the Yoke?

2. On our part, it is necessarily requisite, that a Man take pains to know,
and rightly understand the true State of things between God, and his Soul. As,

(1.) That God is thy Creator, and thou art his Creature; and that thereupon,
thou owe thy whole self to him, since he raised thee out of Nothing, and gave
thee thy Being.

(2.) That thou art an Apostate Creature, a grievous Revolter from thy
Sovereign and Rightful Lord, and thereby liable to the Wrath of God; so that
now thy coming under Christ's Yoke, is but thy coming back out of a State of
Apostasy, and yielding thy self to God.

(3.) You are to understand, That in this State of Apostasy, so great was the
Offense done to Divine Justice, and so binding was the Curse and condemning
Sentence of the Law upon fallen Man that there is, now, no appearing before, no
access to, no acceptance with so holy a God, but in and through a Mediator;
because of that great Gulf Sin has made between God and us: Out of Christ he
is a consuming Fire, and we are as dried Stubble. Luther used to say, absque
Christo non solum periculosum, sed horribile est, de Deo cogitare. i. e. That
it is not only dangerous, but an horrible thing to think of God out of Christ.
O that there was an Heart in you to understand this! Poor fallen Man had been
for ever abandoned to Despair, and left hopeless, had not God in great
compassion to our Miseries opened this Fountain of Grace, and Door of Hope, 2
Cor. 5. 20. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, etc. There is
not a Man to be found on Earth reconciled to, or accepted with God, but as he
is found in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 6. Such is the grievous heinousness of Sin, and the
glorious Holiness of God, that no Man may, or can approach unto him, but as he
is a God propitiated by the Death of Christ: The Lord speaks this home to your
Hearts. It is grown customary in every Man's Mouth almost, to say we are all
Sinners, but God is Merciful, and Christ has died; but alas! to how few has
this come in the Demonstration of the Spirit, and with Power! Well, this is
necessarily requisite on our part, in order to come under the Yoke, that a Man
know, and understand this aright, that there is no coming into the Favor of
God, but by Christ: hence it is that this Yoke bears his Name, Math. 11. 29.
Take my Yoke upon you, etc. For this end the Son of God came down from Heaven,
into this miserable World, to take our Nature, and in our Nature, to take upon
him the accursed Yoke of our Sins; that so (making satisfaction thereby to
offended Justice) he might make way for poor Sinners to come under his blessed
Yoke, in order to their coming back to God again, and becoming his Friends and
Favorites, in an everlasting Covenant of Peace: And having said this, it is
necessary in the fourth place, That,

(4.) You are to understand and know, in order to your coming under Christ's
Yoke, that in this state of things, such was the infinite Dignity of Christ his
Person, being God-man; and such was the unspotted Purity of his Nature, he
being holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners; that through his
once offering up himself by the eternal Spirit to God, he is now become the
Author of eternal Salvation, to all that come under his Yoke; and is able to
save (all such) to the uttermost, Heb. 5. 9. and c. 7. 25. 26. The Phrase which
the Apostle uses there, is very Emphatical, (...); it denotes both perfection,
and perpetuity; He is able to save fully, perfectly from all Sin, Misery,
Enemies both from without and within: it is so complete, and full, as that it
comprizeth all kinds and degrees of Salvation from all sorts of Sins, Original,
and Actual* yea from all the evil that is in Sin, and from all the sad and
miserable consequences of Sin. And then there is the perpetuity of it; he is
able to save to the uttermost, i. e. for ever; it is not for a time only, but
to the end of our Lives, indeed unto all Eternity; not only to save us here on
Earth, but also in Heaven, as Chrysostom. expounds it. O comfortable Doctrine!
Guilt cannot look on Majesty, and Majesty is most terrible in an Enemy, in a
Judge: but when Christ interposeth God appears fully satisfied; yea, so full
was the Merit and Satisfaction of Christ's Sufferings, as that there is not
only a fullness of sufficiency but redundancy: So that the Merit of Christ's
Sufferings, did as far surmount the demerit of our Sins, as the vast Ocean does
the least drop of Water. O the astonishing height and depth of this Grace!
especially when you shall consider the readiness of our compassionate Redeemer
to impart of this Fullness to poor undone Sinners, that come to him; and this
is also necessary, to know and understand in coming under his Yoke: for unless
the Soul be persuaded of this, it will be clogged with such insuperable
Difficulties, and Discouragements, and loaded with such innumerable Doubts and
Fears; as that it will have little heart to move toward, or venture upon
Christ and his Yoke: Wherefore he is styled a merciful and faithful
High Priest; who knows how to have compassion on the ignorant, and them that
are out of the way, Heb. 2. 17. and chapter 5. 2. How readily did this Merciful
Jesus impart of his Fullness to poor Sinners, in the Days of his Flesh, upon
their coming to him? and how affectionately did he invite the heavy laden, in
the day of their trouble for Sin, to come unto him? Math. 11. 28. and how
pathetically did he weep over obstinate Jerusalem, that would have none of him
to reign over them? Luke 19. 41, 42. how lovingly did he treat that froward and
perverse Woman of Samaria? saying, If thou know the Gift of God, and who it
is, that says unto thee, give me to drink; thou would have asked of him, and
he would have given thee living Water, John 4. 10. And in the 5th of John. 40.
how does he breath out his Grief at our backwardness to come to him? saying, ye
will not come unto me, that ye might have Life. In a word never was the full
Breast of a tender Mother more desirous of being drawn, than Christ (in whom
all Fullness dwells) is willing and ready to let out Supplies of Grace and
Mercy to poor Sinners; now this is necessary to be known in order to our coming
under his Yoke: Which leads me in the fifth place to show you, That,

(5.) You are to understand, if ever you come under Christ's Yoke, what his
Terms are on which he (who is able to save) is willing to bestow himself, and
all his saving Benefits upon you. Here now, I would by no means be
misunderstood, as if by Terms, I intended any thing of Merit, or any degree or
shadow of it; as if what we do, could commend us to God. For my part, I do
freely acknowledge, that I know of no Merit of Ours, but that of Hell and
Damnation; but for that of Salvation, it must be for ever left entirely to the
Blood of Christ; which alone could make satisfaction to the Justice of God. So
that by Terms, or what lies upon you to do, you must by no means think to
recompense God, or hope, thereby to compound with him, and make amends for the
Wrongs your Sins have done, and so piece up a Peace, between his offended
Justice and your guilty Souls: O, no, this would be the direct way to loose
all; your Souls, your Prayers, Services, and Hopes for ever; he is too Great,
too Holy a God, to be dealt with, on any such Terms; it was no less a Price,
than the costly precious Blood of his own Son, that could expiate your Guilt,
and make your Peace: but then if ever you come savingly to share in the
Blessing of Peace and Pardon purchased by that Blood, it is necessary that
there be an effectual application of it to your Souls; and that can never be
without a Union between him who shed that Blood, the Lord Jesus, and you, whose
undone Case required so Great a Sacrifice: Now there can be no Union without
Faith; whereupon the infinitely Wise, and Holy God, in his Love, and Grace,
has (by the Constitution of the Gospel) established, and appointed his Son
Jesus, as the only center of Union between himself and poor Sinners, and also
Faith as the great Instrument, and Term of Union between his Son and Sinners,
in order to their actual Interest in the Benefits of Justification,
Reconciliation, Adoption, etc. purchased by his Death. O then, How may they
return ashamed, who have nursed up a parcel of blind Hopes, and vain
Confidences of Pardon and Heaven? Saying, God is now their reconciled Father,
Christ has died; and never consider the indispensible necessity of Faith, as
the only way, and means of Union with Christ: but all this while, have
continued under the Power of Unbelief, and Love of Sin in their unregenerate
State; as if Christ had died, and shed his Blood in kindness to their Sins, and
his Name had been called Jesus, to save them in (and not from) their Sins. O
Damnable Delusion! to talk of hopes to be saved by Christ, in your wretched
unsensibleness of your lost and sinful Condition, by Nature, in your Ignorance
and Pride, and constant neglects of so great Salvation. Ah poor Creature! see
how thou have befooled thy self, and cheated thy Soul with such carnal
groundless Presumptions. Look ye Sinners, as the Sin of our first Parents,
could never have hurt us except there had been a Union with their Nature, by
Generation; so the Redemption wrought out by Christ, will never benefit us,
except there be a Union with him by Faith, in the time of our Regeneration, and
effectual Calling. Let Christ be never so able, and willing to save Sinners,
yet (according to the Tenor of the Gospel) not one adult Person, that ever was
in the World from Adam to this Day, or ever shall be to the end of this World,
can ever be saved by Christ in their Unbelief and Impenitency, Mark 16. 16.
Luke 13. 3. Now this is necessary to acquaint your selves with, if ever you
come under Christ's Yoke, viz. the necessity of coming to Christ by Faith, out
of a deep sense, and feeling of your Sin and Misery, repairing to him, and
casting your miserable selves down at his Feet, spreading your Case before him,
imploring his healing Blood to be sprinkled on your guilty Souls, entreating
his Holy Spirit to cure you of your blind Minds, and hard Hearts. And this
brings me in the sixth place to tell you,

(6.) That in order to your coming under Christ's Yoke, you must understand,
that it is the Greatest, and most Important Business you have to mind, and
attend in this World, viz. Compliance with God's established way, and means of
Life, and Salvation; or your coming under Christ's Yoke, by Faith accepting of
Christ as thy Savior, and Lord, with humble Reverence, and Thankfulness,
entirely resigning, surrendering, and subjecting your self to the governing
Power of Christ. Pray what have you Life, and Time in this World for, but this?
Can you soberly and reasonably think it was to mind and attend the Trifles, and
Toys of this foolish, and deceitful World? in which you have no long abiding
place, and out of which you must shortly, and may suddenly be removed. Have you
not an Immortal Soul that must be eternally saved or damned, as soon as thy
Mortal Body is dissolved? And can you tell any other Terms? Or do you know
another way besides this of coming under Christ's Yoke, to save, and secure
your Immortal Souls from the Damnation of Hell? Can their remain then any Doubt
in this thing? (viz. The importancy and weight of coming under Christ's Yoke,
and that betimes, or making over our precious Soul to Christ in an everlasting
Lease or Bond) when you are a lost Soul for ever, if you do not; and there
remains no way but one with you, even eternal Damnation, unless you thus comply
with God's established way of Life and Salvation, as he has plainly declared
in the Gospel. O then with what continual Solicitude and Carefulness should you
mind and attend this! one would think, that it should swallow up your Thoughts
Night and Day; and that to talk of Indifferency, and Remissness in this Case,
should be esteemed, and entertained, as talk of folding the Arms, and betaking
your self to sleep in case you were in a Ship that was ready to sink, or an
House that has taken Fire: So likewise one would think (in so weighty a case)
to talk of Difficulties, that there is a Lion in the way, were a strange
Impertinency, and trifling, when such an absolute necessity lies upon you, in
good earnest, without delay to come to Christ, and yield Subjection to his
Yoke, or be sentenced to an everlasting Destruction from his Presence, 2 Thessalonians.
1. 8, 9. to comply with, and stand to his gracious Terms, or fall into the
Hands of a Sin-revenging living God. Now since its thus, I make a solemn appeal
to you young People before the Lord of Heaven and Earth this Day; whether ever
condemned Malefactor, trembling under the fearful expectation of a shameful
Death, had more just cause (supposing he received some hints that upon his
Submission a Pardon for Life might be obtained) to esteem it a Business of the
most important deepest Concernment, speedily to seek, and humbly to sue, for
the King's Grace, and Mercy; than you have, to Day, while it is called to Day,
to look upon it, as the most serious awful Business, that ever your Thoughts
could converse with, viz. to come in, and comply with this way, which God has
provided for and proposed to you, not only as the best, but the only way: So
that if this be refused, there is no other, you have no other Choice; eternal
Death lies upon the Neglect of it. The Lord awaken you this Day to consider it.
You and I must at the Judgment of the Great Day stand accountable for this
Sermon. I have insisted the longer upon it, because of that abounding Sloth and
Aversion of our backward Hearts hereunto: Which in course leads me in the
seventh Place to tell you,

(7.) That it is necessarily requisite on your part, in order to come under
Christ's Yoke to understand, that since things are as you have heard, surely it
is no time for sitting still, when you have a Business of that Infinite Weight
and Importance depending, which must be done, or you undone for ever; but to be
up and doing, that you may escape the final Doom of Unbelievers, and Impenitent
Sinners. There remains not the least Doubt, but that (in this Case) Diligence
and Care is the Duty of all, and every Mothers Child here; but who almost among
us is there that is stirring and striving in the diligent use of Means, viz.
Retiredness from a vain World, deep Musings, and Soliloquies, servent and
frequent Wrestlings in Prayer, vehement Desires, firm and fixed Resolutions,
etc. O! what a wretched Stillness and Carelessness is there to be found in your
Closets and Consciences, as to these things: Tears are fitter than Words to
lament it. There is a Jesus that has come to seek you, when all were lost;
that has done much to save you, when all were undone and under the condemning
Sentence of God's fiery Law: He bore the Yoke of your Guilt, that a way might
be made to restore you to his gracious and easier Yoke of Service, which was so
necessary (with respect to your Fallen State) that he could not love, and save
you, had he left it out, and suffered you to follow the Inclinations of your
own corrupt and wicked Hearss, and let you had your Wills in a course of
Rebellion and Sin. Now pray what have you done, toward securing the present
and eternal State of your miserable Souls, in coming under his blessed Yoke?
After all that Christ has done, his Agonies, bloody Sweat, his Death on the
Cross, where are thy Prayers, Tears, Cares, Fears, Tremblings? When did thou
go apart, and solemnly set thy self to meditate and commune with thy own Heart,
about the State of thy poor Soul? using some such Soliloquy as this, viz. O my
Soul! How is it with thee? What State art thou in of Nature or Grace? What are
thy Wants, thy Ails, thy Maladies? Art thou in Christ, or Christless? What are
thy Dangers, Temptations, Sins? Have thou fled for Refuge under Christ's Cross?
When was the time thou did close with his Person? Did thou ever sincerely
like and comply with his Terms? Can thou come up before God's Tribunal, and
stand to it, that thou have made a free Surrender of thy Self to him, and with
a Loyal Heart given thy Neck to his Yoke? Will thy Evidences hold Weight in
God's righteous Balance? Or are they light, false, and deceitful, like Flowers
on a dead Corpse, or Varnish on a rotten Post? Was It thou ever thoroughly made
sensible of, humbled for, and by renewing Grace quickened, raised out of that
Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity, wherein thy Original Guilt did entomb
thee? This sort of Soliloquies is called in Scripture, communing with ones own
Heart, making a diligent Search there, Psalm. 77. 6. And then, upon a Discovery
of an yet abiding and remaining in the Chaos of corrupted Nature, a solemn
Enquiry is to be made: O my Soul! what have thou been doing? How have thou
spent thy time till now? Did thou never hear or read of this thy vile State
of Apostasy and Enmity? Wast thou never called upon to turn and live e're this
time? Have not thy Parents many a time told thee thou wast conceived and
brought forth in Sin, and were a Child of Wrath by Nature, and that thou must
be born again, or perish? Have not God's Ministers told and taught thee this,
although thy Parents had not? What if Death had come and haled thee out of this
World to the Judgment Seat, in all thy Guilt and Sin? Have thou not seen many
as young as thy self snatched away? O how could thou divert and drive away
Melancholy Thoughts of thy present Sin, and approaching Misery, and turn to
Sports, and Mirth, and Follies, and the vain Pleasures of a transitory
deceitful World? O! What a desperate Hazard have thou run all the Days and
Nights thou have been in this World? O foolish wretched Soul! who has
bewitched thee thus to forget thy self, yea to undo and destroy thy own, and
only Darling Self (thy Soul) which the whole World, (could thou gain it)
would be infinitely below its worth, and would prove in the end, a breaking,
ruining, beggarly Bargain, Math. 16. 26. O what have thou done! Had there been
no hope, no help, in a sent and sealed, in a slain and crucified Jesus? Or
had thou never heard of him, or had a Call to come to him, or an Offer made
of him? Why then, thy Sin had not been so henious, and thy Sloth so odious; but
to stand idle under the Gospel, which as it tells thee thy Sin, and Danger,
so it directs thee to Christ thy only Help and Remedy; and yet to sit still,
all thy Days unconcerned, tho unconverted, and under the Wrath of God, who out
of Christ is thy Enemy, and tells thee so, Psalm. 7. 11. on purpose to awaken
thee to a sense of thy Danger, and to chase thee to fly for Refuge out of thy
Sins, to Christ, whose merciful Arms stand open still to receive thee: and yet
to this day, how madly have thou (O my Soul) despised a precious Savior, and
refused his pleasant Yoke, while by thy sinful Ease and Idleness, thou have
ventured to cast thy self under the cruel Yoke of thy Lusts, and that old
Soul-murdering Serpent, the Devil? O how heavy a Guilt lies upon thy
Conscience within thee? And how dreadful a Charge lies against thee in the
Court of Heaven, above thee? And yet, O astonishing Mercy! thou art still under
the Offers of Grace; it is not yet too late to obtain Mercy upon thy present
Return; O joyful Tidings! But now (O my Soul) thou have heard these things,
what are thy Resolves for time to come? What! to go on, as thou wast wont in
thy Sloth, and carnal Security: God forbid, that would be a fearful thing
indeed; to go on in a neglect of such a Savior, and so great a Salvation,
against so many Gospel-Arguments, in Rebellion and Opposition to so Great and
God, that professes if thou remain stubborn and gainsaying, he will turn thee
into Hell, and the longer thou go on in Sin here, the greater shall thy
Torments be there. O my wretched Soul! tho thou could be contented to go on in
Sin all thy Days on Earth, can thou be contented to suffer for them to all
everlasting in Hell? What mean thou therefore to demur and hang back from
coming under Christ's Yoke? What, are his Demands unreasonable? it is only to
yield that he should rule over thee, and thou art happy for ever; sure nothing
can be more reasonable: and do thou not yet stir? O up in good earnest,
quickly resolve, Halt, Halve, Hover no longer; but say as the Lepers, If we
stay here we die, etc. 2 Kings 7. 3, 4. So if I stay under the Yoke of Sin, I
certainly perish; if I get under Christ's, I shall surely live for ever: Well,
tho I have been a wretched Prodigal, I will arise, and go, and cast my self
prostrate before him, and say, Lord Jesus tho thou don't want a Sinner, yet I
vile Sinner, want a Savior; tho thou don't need a Servant, yet I need a
Service, and none but thine; the Service of my Lusts have even ruined me. Thus
breath out thy Desires and Resolutions, and tell him thou have been a Child of
Belial too long already; humbly beseeching him to accept and pardon thee, as
being now resolved, never to live as thou have done in Disobedience, but in
Subjection and Loyalty; and art therefore come in on purpose to offer, and
yield thy Neck to his blessed Yoke.

Thus you see, how requisite our utmost Diligence is, in this great and
necessary Duty treated on, of coming under the Yoke of Christ: Without
Self-reflexion (or bethinking our selves, as it is called in Scripture, 1 Kings
8. 47.) there can be no judicious Self-resolution to come under this Yoke; and
without Diligence, and Self-denial, be sure, there will be no suitable and
serious Self-Reflexion: For Proof whereof I should not need, if you would but
put it to proof within your own selves: And as he ingeniously proved that there
is Motion, against one that denied it, by rising out of his Chair and walking
up and down; so your own Hearts, without me, would make this clear, if you
would but solemnly set apart a Portion of Time, chosen for this very purpose,
to hold a Debate, Conference and Communication within, and with your own Souls;
and when you have done so, then to enter upon it, with great seriousness, and
retiredness, becoming the nature of so weighty a Work, as the setting up a
Court in thy Conscience, citing thy self before it is Bar, searching, ripping up
thy Heart and Life, thy State and Course, sitting in Judgment on, and talking
close and home with thy self; till thou stand'st convicted, that thou art the
guilty Person, condemned by the holy Law of God, and that Sentence is already
passed and must be executed upon thee, John 3. 18. compared with the 36th.
Unless thou come under the Yoke of Christ; and hereupon the Affections are
moved, and the Will is resolved to yield to his Yoke: Now I say, if you would
but make Trial and Experiment of this, your selves would soon acknowledge, and
testify that our utmost Diligence is requisite in this Affair. O! it is no easy
matter to come Home to a Man's self; it is a secret, inward and retired Action,
that has no Observation, no Ostentation from without; and our Hearts are
bitterly set against it: There is nothing (through the whole course of
Religious Duties) that our Wicked Hearts do so naturally oppose as this.
External Acts of Religion, as falling down on our Knees, lifting up our Hands,
uttering of Words in Prayer, reading of Chapters, hearing Sermons, and the
like, all these are easy to this. Ah my Brethren! sad Experience witnesses
this; I appeal to your own Hearts, if they will but speak the Truth, and I
beseech you to put them to it, whether they had not rather spare, and spend 20
Hours in public Attendances as hearing, praying, singing, etc. than one in
secret Retirement, to search and see how matters stand between God and our
Souls: O that we could bewail it! we love to be inquisite about others, and
their Affairs, and in the mean time neglect to consider and enquire about the
State and Affairs of our own Souls. I have the longer insisted on this, because
it is a Sine qua non, a Duty, without which, it is not possible you can ever
come under the Yoke of Christ; without this there can be no right believing,
repenting, and obeying the Commands of Christ: Which are the main Essentials of
bearing his Yoke, and which (according to my purposed Order) falls next under
Consideration, having opened what is necessarily requisite to the bearing
Christ's Yoke.

2. Quest. What is essentially contained in it?

I shall briefly (and yet I hope clearly) answer and open it, under these
following Heads.

First, There is contained in it, an entire and Loyal Subjection of our Minds
and Understandings unto his heavenly Doctrine and Wisdom, as he is as our
Prophet to teach us by his Word and Spirit, the Will of God, for our Salvation;
renouncing to lead to our own Understandings and set up our own Conceits as our
Rule; verily accounting all that Wisdom and carnal Reason to be but mere
Foolishness, which lifts up it self against any Truth of Christ in the
Gospel. As for instance, it is one of the great and most concerning Truths of
Christ, Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate: for many I say unto
you, will seek to enter, and shall not be able. Now when the Mind gives a free
and full assent to this Truth as it is in Jesus, not listening to any, that
shall rise up in opposition to the Wisdom of this great Prophet, and say, what
need so much ado about this striving? The Gate and way that leads to Heaven is
smooth and broad; but on the contrary heeds it, hides it in the Heart by Faith,
that it may thereby be excited, quickened to Diligence in striving the more
earnestly: This is one main Ingredient in coming under, and bearing the Yoke.
Hence you read, Ephesians. 4. 21, 22. and John 10. 27. Of learning the Truth as it is
in Jesus, and of Christ's Sheep hearing his Voice, and following him, not a
Stranger. And in 1 Cor. 2. 14. speaking of the natural Man, i. e. a Man
unsubdued to the Yoke of Christ, That he receives not the things of the Spirit
of God. Young People naturally receive not the Truths that directly and more
especially concern them; such as, Eccl. 12. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 22. To remember their
Creator, to know the Scriptures, to flee Youthful Lusts, to hearken to
Instruction, etc. but foolishly imagine it is time enough, to mind the
Concernments of their Souls; herein now consists Rebellion to Christ's Yoke,
when the Mind attends not, but holds in Unrighteousness, stifles, resists these
Truths. On the other hand when the Mind becomes studious to know, opens, yields
to the light, quarrelleth not with it, but welcomes, reverenceth, and receives
it, as becomes a meek, tractable, and humble Disciple, pondering and revolving
such Thoughts as these; I may never have the like Advantage again, savingly to
know the things of my Peace; it cannot be too soon to hearken to Instruction,
it may be too late; if I now trifle my Danger is great, I stand upon the brink
of Eternity; and hereupon as the new born Babe desires the sincere Milk of the
Word, that he may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. looks into the Scriptures, and
then looks up to Heaven, and says, Lord! What I know not teach thou me, and
wherein I have done Iniquity, I Will do so no more; I confess my Blindness,
Darkness, Dullness, Foolishness; I am a poor ignorant erring Creature, none
more apt go astray: But there is none can teach like thee, thou have the Key of
David, that openest, and none can shut, etc. thou have the Eye Salve, for the
cure of blind Hearts; O take away the Vail that is upon my Heart, and write thy
Law there; anoint my Eyes, with the heavenly Unction of thy Holy Spirit, open
my Understanding, that I may see the wondrous things contained in thy Law,
give me to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Thus a sound, and
sincere Mind seeks, and savoureth the Truths of Christ; and herein consists
its Subjection to his Yoke, the Understanding is subdued to the Wisdom of
Christ in his Prophetical Office; so as that when at any time, he shall please
by his Word and Spirit to let into the Mind the light of any Truth, it yields
quietly, and readily to the Authority and Power of that Truth; will not, dare
not, invent Excuses, to defeat its Erraud, be it never so hard to cut off a
right Hand Lust, etc. but says, Amen Lord, be it so, I am content thou
should use the severest Methods for slaying my Corruptions; O let it be
done, whatever it cost me: any thing (Blessed Jesus) rather than Sin unsubdued.
O let thy Word King it over my Lusts, and be enthroned in my Heart: accordingly
when it falls like a two edged Sword upon such a Sin, the sound and
submissive Mind willingly lies under the Blow, and says, more of this good
Lord, strike again and again, lay the Ax of this Truth to the Root of my Heart
Lust, and down with it Root and Branch. What then shall become of those whose
Minds are so far from a ready compliance with the Truths of Christ as a
Prophet, as that they rebelliously control him in his Office? It may be he
has come in such a Sermon, and by his Spirit has directed the Arrow of
Conviction, to such a Man's Conscience, and thereby instructed him how ready he
is to assist in getting off Sin's Yoke, and putting on Christ's: Well! what has
been the Carriage and Behavior of this Wretch under this; why, instead of
siding and taking part with the Light of the Spirit in this Truth of Christ, he
has sided with Satan, and his own Corruption, laboring to extinguish this
Candle of the Lord, and to blow out this Light of Conviction, and set his Lust
in battle array to fight against the Truth, and will rather part with his Blood
and Life than with his Sins: O this is high and open Rebellion against Christ:
The Lord keep you young Ones from it. This then is the first thing contained in
bearing Christ's Yoke, viz. Subjection of the Understanding and Mind, to the
Truths and teaching of Christ the great Prophet of his Church.

2. It contains in it a subjection of the Will to Christ, both to obey him as
King, and fiducially to receive and trust in him as the Great High Priest, who
alone was able to make Atonement and Reconciliation for Sin, by his once
offering up himself a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice. Now herein chiefly
consists our Subjection to Christ's Yoke, when the Will is won over to a full
consent, to receive and obey him both as Jesus and Lord, Col. 2. 6. This
answers both the great Design, and Intendment of the Gospel of Christ, and
also the Exigency of our lost and undone State, when the Will comes up to a
true Closure, to say, as in Isa. 26. 12, 13. O Lord, thou will ordain Peace for
us; for thou have wrought all thy Works in us. O Lord our God, other Lords
(besides thee) have had Dominion over us: but by thee only will we make mention
of thy Name. Also in Acts 9. 6. And he trembling (speaking of Paul at the time
of his Conversion, or coming under Christ's Yoke) and astonished, said, Lord,
What will thou have me to do? Hence Psalm. 110. 3. we read, Christ's Subjects
are said to be a willing People in the Day of his Power. And Acts 11. 23.
Barnabas exhorts to cleave to the Lord with full purpose of Heart. There is
indeed an imperfect ineffectual Work, often found in young People,
Agrippa-like, Acts 26. 28. Then Aprippa said unto Paul, almost thou perswadest
me to be a Christian. The Phrase, (...) imports within a very little thou
perswadest me: So there are such in our Times, in whom there are hopeful
Appearances, of their being persuaded to come under the Yoke, not only rouzed,
awakened in their Consciences, but their Affections moved, yea their Wills
stirred up to Resolutions, that they will never live as they have done under
the cruel Yoke and Slavery of their Youthful Lusts; but will repair to Christ,
and submit their Necks to his Yoke of Service: And yet after all this return to
their vomit with the Dog, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. are entangled with their
Youthful Vanities again, and through the Enchantments and Allurements of evil
Companions, and their own Hearts Lusts, all their Convictions, and Resolutions,
are choked, and perished, like an imperfect Embryo, and nothing comes to
Perfection: This is a common but woeful Case. But now, in this Subjection of the
Will to the Yoke of Christ, there is an abiding stedfastness; the Will says
(when through Grace it is set right) let Titles of Honor, Treasures of Gold
and Silver, etc. sink or swim, go which way they will, a Christ I must and will
have; he, and he alone, shall rule in me, and reign over me; his Interest shall
prevail with me, over all other Interests; let the World come veiled over with
the most glorious and glittering Allurements; let Satan come with an All these
will I give thee, if thou will quit the Service of Christ; let Sin present it
self with its Decoys of Gain and Pleasure, etc. all these would be scorned, as
too mean and poor a Bribe, to draw off the Will of one of Christ's Loyal
Subjects from his gracious Yoke: You have a lively Instance of this, in Paul,
after his Conversion, and coming under the Yoke, Acts 20. 22. tho he knew that
nothing but Bonds and Imprisonments waited for him in every City; yet, says
he, None of these things move me: And when the good People would have persuaded
him not to venture himself among the Enemies of Christ at Jerusalem, he
bravely, and boldly rejoins, Why weep ye, and break my Heart? I am not only
ready to be bound, but to die at Jerusalem for the Name of Christ. No
Disswasions, Difficulties, Dangers could either divert or stop his Loyalty and
Obedience to Christ, when called to suffer. Hypocrites indeed call Christ Lord,
but it is no more than an empty Title; as is evident in an Hour of Temptation
and Trial, when Christ and the World come in Competition, then it appears who
is their Lord, according to that known Scripture, Romans 6. 16. Know you not,
that to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are whom ye
obey; whether of Sin unto Death, or Obedience unto Righteousness. Ah (my
Brethren) it is a sure and certain Truth, that no Man can serve two Masters,
Math. 6. 24. If thy Will be subdued to the Kingly Office of Christ, thou will
be glad to find every Thought and Imagination in thy Soul brought into
Subjection to him, and none of his Commands will be grievous, but joyous; and
it will be grievous to thee to find any thing remaining in thee, that savoureth
of Rebellion against his Sovereignty. So it is likewise with respect to his
Priestly Office: A Will Subject to him herein, renounceth all its own
Righteousness, desires to be found alone in Christ's Righteousness, stands
fully assured in this, that no Prayers, Tears, Duties, Services of our own,
could ever have availed any thing, with an impartially jealous and righteous
God, unless Christ by his own Blood had made Atonement, etc. Hence its constant
Language is, In the Lord alone have I righteousness and strength. And here it
ventureth the eternal weight of the Soul, alone upon the Merits, and Mediation
of Christ; saying, If I perish, I perish.

3. Coming under and bearing Christ's Yoke contains in it, A Subjection of
our Lives to Christ, in the Duties of Obedience; or as the Apostle phraseth it,
1 Timothy 4. 7. Exercising our selves unto Godliness; and in Acts 24. 16. the same
Apostle says, Herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience void of
offense toward God, And toward Men: Again Romans 2. 7. it is called a patient
continuance in welldoing, seeking for Glory, etc. It stands not only in
Principles of Knowledge and Faith, but also in Matters of Practice and keeping
his Commandments. 1 John 2. 4. He that says I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him. A Scripture, which if
duly considered, is enough to discover many Professors to be Liars, that have
got so much Notional Knowledge, as is sufficient, to set their Tongues a moving,
but not to set their Hands a working, or their Shoulders a bearing the Yoke of
Christ: And of these the Scripture speaks in the last Times, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
that They have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power of it. And in Titus 1.
16. they profess they know God, but in Works deny him. I could wish it were not
the prevailing Plague and Distemper of our Times. My Beloved, bearing Christ's
Yoke, is not hugging of a Darling Opinion, or spinning the Cobweb of a sine
Profession; but it consists in the living Spirit of Christ dwelling in us,
within as the Principle, and in a Spiritual and Holy living to Christ extant
without us, as the Genuine Improvement thereof: The Kingdom of God (as the
Apostle speaks) consists not in Word, but in Life and Power. Hence we have
it, in Titus 2. 11, 12. The Grace of God that brings Salvation, has
therefore appeared, that it might teach us, to deny all Ungodliness, and
worldly Lusts, and that we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this
present World; and in ver. 14. Christ gave himself, that he might redeem us
from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar People zealous of good
Works. Pray how does our Savior describe his Sheep, but by their following of
him, or that Fleece of Holiness which they wear: So here by bearing his Yoke,
wherein I might show you how it includes, both the exercise of those several
Graces of a Christian, as Repentance, Faith, Love, Thankfulness, etc. and also
the performance of all those Duties of Christianity, as Hearing, Praying,
Receiving, and Sanctifying the Sabbath, doing justly, and showing Mercy, etc.
But that it would exceed the Limits of a single Sermon: Wherefore I shall pass
on to the second general Head which according to my Method laid down is,

II. To clear it up to you, that to come under and bear the Yoke of Christ in
the time of Youth, is the summary of all that is truly good.

Now for the clearing up of this, I shall sum the proof of it up in these two
things.

1. That it is so, if you consider it absolutely, and in its own Nature. 2.
That it is so, if you consider it relatively in respect to its Effects and
Consequences.
1. For the former nothing can be more unquestionable and plain, if you do but
survey what has been largely spoken of the Nature of Christ's Yoke, and the
bearing of it: All which amounts to this, viz. That (on his part) it is no
other than a restoring Apostate Man to the Image and Favor of God again; the
bringing you under the Gospel, and there by his Word and Spirit to open your
Eyes, to renew you in the Spirit of your Minds, to slay the Enmity, to
circumcise your Hearts to love the Lord your God, to alter and change that
Hellish Bias that was on your Wills; whereas otherwise you would run upon your
own Ruin, and soon be made the deplorable Spectacle of a Sin-revenging
Justice: So that the very Nature and Use of Christ's Yoke (on his part) is a
main part of your Happiness, and true Felicity; for pray tell me what miserable
Wretches were you, continuing under the Power of a carnal Mind, that is not,
cannot be (while such) subject to the Holy Law of God; the most material Branch
of which Law, is to love and delight in the Blessed God, wherein so much of
Heaven it self lies, that without it, Heaven would be a kind of Hell; for
their could be no Agreement, and so, no Enjoyment, what Communion can Light
have with Darkness? Or Christ with Belial? Can two walk together (i. e. take
delight in living together) that are not agreed? I have read of the Irish
Earth, that no Venomous Creature can endure to to live upon it: But (my
Brethren) the Irish Earth would better brook a Toad, than Heaven a carnal Mind,
or a carnal Mind Heaven. O young Man! What will thou do with that carnal
corrupt Heart of thine? It is impossible (while such) to obey this Law of Love;
which if thou can not obey, Woe to thee living, Woe to the dying, for enter
Heaven and enjoy God thou never can, if thy Heart before hand be not framed
to love and take Complacency and Delight in him; and this can never be till
Christ's Yoke, and Government take place in, and over you, the first and chief
Branch whereof (on his Part) Is to circumcise your Hearts to love the Lord your
God. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. And therefore nothing can be more evident than this; that to
bear the Yoke of Christ is the summary of all that is truly good. And it will
be no less evident, if you survey (on our part) the nature of coming under and
bearing this Yoke; which is no other, than a yielding our whole selves to God,
Romans 6. 13. Or a cordial unfeigned surrendering upon the Gospel-Proclamation:
which may be shadowed forth thus, suppose in a well-governed State, there
should be a Conspiracy among the Subjects, and instead of continuing in a
Dutiful Subjection, they hatch Rebellion and it breaks out openly: Now in this
Case, the Law proclaims them Rebels, and justly condemns them to a shameful
Death; but the Prince out of his Grace and Mercy, puts forth a Proclamation of
Pardon, upon their throwing down their rebellious Arms, and returning to their
Obedience: Now as in all Similitudes, some difference is allowed, so it must be
here be sure; for amongst Men it may so happen, that the Rebelling Party, may
be the stronger, or upon equal ground; and so may stand upon their own Terms,
treat, and capitulate with their Swords in their Hands, having Strength to
defend themselves, and subsist without Peace with, or a Pardon from their
Prince: But now here it is otherwise between the Great, and Almighty God, and
poor sorry rebellious Man! God is infinitely powerful, justly provoked, able to
destroy wretched Rebels, both Soul and Body in a Moment. Now in this State of
Things, I demand of thee poor Sinner, art thou able to contend with the
Almighty? Can thou subsist or live without Peace with him? Should he come
forth in a way of Wrath and Vengeance, where would thou appear or show thy
Traitrous Head? Surely in thy State of utter Impotency, thou dare not say
thou art in any capacity of meeting God in the Field: well, notwithstanding all
this Disparity, yet the High and Lofty One, whose Name is Holy, against whom
you have sinned, he who stands in no need of you, nor your Subjection, nor your
Salvation; it is he that sends forth a Proclamation of Pardon, and Peace,
founded in the Blood of his own Son; and that at a time, when you lay in your
own Blood and Filth of Sin, and all was lost; and when you were Enemies, whom
in Justice he might have sent to Hell in all you Gore, and Guilt, Romans 5, 6, 7,
8. And when there could have been no remission, without the effusion of the
Blood of Jesus; then did he commend his Love to you and spared not his one, and
only Son, but delivered him up to the Death for poor Sinners, and enters a
new Covenant, issues out the Gospel-Proclamation, viz. That notwithstanding
all your Sin and Unworthiness, and that dreadful Charge and Sentence of the Law
that lies against you, yet has the Great God made rich Provisions of Mercy,
(upon your Return and Submission) for your gracious Reception, and Remission,
he has found out a Ransom, viz. the Price of his own dear Son's Blood; and
has set him forth in the Gospel, To be a Propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, Romans 3. 25. So that, let the Wicked now forsake his evil ways, and turn
in unto this strong Hold, and make Peace, and he shall make Peace; I will have
Mercy, I will abundantly pardon, tho his Sins be as Scarlet, I will make them
as white as Snow; I will not only forego all the Advantages my Justice had
against him, but will be pacified toward him, and embrace, and receive him to
favor, and reward him with an eternal weight of Glory, as if he had never
offended, and rebelled against me. O Infinite astonishing Condescension of the
Blessed God! thus to beseech rebellious Sinners to be reconciled to him in his
Son: Certainly you will say (if there be the least spark of Ingenuity toward
God, or drop of Tenderness and Care left in you toward your own Souls) O
wondrous! O joyful News! enough to melt down a Stone; unspeakable are the
sweet Bonds, and dear Obligations lying on us, to surrender our selves upon
this Proclamation. Why now be it known to you, ye young Ones, that your coming
under, and bearing this Yoke, is no other thing, in the nature of it, on your
part: Thus an hearty yielding, subjecting of your Minds to Christ, as your
Prophet; saying, Lord Jesus I yield, here is my Mind, bring into it what Light
thou please; and so of your Wills, and Life, subjecting the same to him as
Priest and King, to be your Atonement and Peace, to save you from your Sins,
and govern and rule you by the gracious Scepter, and Yoke of his sacred and
sweet Precepts. I now refer it to your selves, whether this be not the Summary
of all that is truly good? If any should object, and say, all this is true,
only there is one hard and harsh Word in bearing this Yoke, and that is the
Word Repentance, that seems a hard Word, and an harder Work, especially for
Youth. In answer whereunto,

(1.) Admit it were hard and difficult; Pray who is it that has made it so?
None but your selves; there is nothing bitter or difficult in the Yoke of
Christ but what your Sins have made so: Wherefore you must thank your selves,
it is your Disease, your Sin, that has made Repentance necessary, it is your
hard Heart makes this part of Christ's Yoke hard; it is the Pride and
Stubbornness of your Spirits makes it tedious and irksome. But,

(2.) I add Repentance it self is so far from being any real ground of
Discouragement, as that I shall show you, out of the Word of God (which can
judge things better than you) and also out of the Testimony of true Penitents,
who have tried it, and therefore are fittest to give Evidence in this Matter,
viz. That it carries in it the most solid ground of true Comfort, and sweetest
Contentment. To begin with Scripture, How conclusive herein are those precious
Words of our Redeemer? Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be
comforted, Matthew. 5. 4. As also are those in the Parable of the repenting
Prodigal, Luke 15. 24. And they began to be merry. How comfortably was the Case
altered with him? upon his Repentance he meets with an Heavenly Banquet of Free
Grace: Had he any such Rest and Peace in his Rioting and Revelling, as he met
with in his Repenting and Returning? Then he had none to pity him, but lay
exposed to perishing; now he had a Father both to pity and receive him. Again,
in Psalm. 126. 5, 6. They that sow in Tears, shall reap in Joy. He that goes
forth and weepeth, bearing precious Seed, shall doubtless come again rejoicing,
bringing his Sheaves with him. But now on the other hand, the Scripture
speaks of a State of Impenitency, as a State of Gaul and Bitterness, enough
to banish all that is truly good and pleasant from the Heart forever. Isa. 57.
20. The Wicked (i. e. the Impenitent) are like the raging Sea, that cannot
rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt. And ver. 21. There is no Peace (says
my God) to them. And in Job 20. 16, 17, 23, 24, 25. there Zophar sets out the
Impenitent Man's Case is a tremendous Manner. And you read in Psalm. 11. 6. Upon
the Wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest;
this shall be the Portion of their Cup. So that if you can credit the Testimony
of God himself, in his Holy Word, who cannot lie, this Matter is resolved, that
Repentance it self, in the very exercise of it, is that which carries in it a
great deal of Comfort and Content: It Is true indeed, it discovers sad things
to the Sinner, it shows him his Sins, and the Wrath of God, as due to him for
Sin; but then it shows them so, as to deliver him from them: whereas
Impenitency blinds the Sinner; so that he sees not the Pit of Hell that is just
before him, and every Moment is upon the Brink of it ready to drop in. You know
a Man that has mist his way, is glad to return, or that has swallowed Poison,
is glad quickly to vomit it up again. Why! Repentance is the Soul's Vomit,
whereby it casts up the Poison of Sin, it is the Soul's return out of the broad,
into the narrow way; and it is that which makes Joy in Heaven, Luke 15. 7, 10.
Upon which Bernard says, Deliciae Angelorum sunt lachrymae poenitentium, i. e.
The Tears of Penitents are the Delights of Angels: And I may add, in some
Sense, they are the Delight of God himself. Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God
are a broken Spirit. And in Isa. 66. 2. To this Man will I look, that is of a
contrite Spirit. O how great Respect had God to young Josiah, because his Heart
was tender? 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. And to the poor Publican, upon this account? Luke
18. 13. preferring his humble Sense of his own Unworthiness, and his penitent
melting Prayer, God be merciful to me a Sinner, before all the Pharisee's, God
I thank thee, etc. Hence Isa. 57. 15. Thus says the high and lofty One that
inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy Place;
with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit; not with him that is of
a proud impenitent Spirit. O how dear is a selfbemoaning Ephraim to the Father
of Mercies? Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. I might here add many other pregnant
Scriptures, were it needful, to strengthen this Truth, That Repentance
considered in it self is admirably desirable and good. But I shall briefly
consider the other Argument, viz. The Testimony of all true Penitents that have
made trial hereof. You know sufficient Testimony is acquiesced in, among Men in
the greatest Affairs, even such as relate to Life and Death, especially where
there is not the least Temptation to deceive. Now in our Case, both those hold
good, the Godly are Persons of solid and sufficient Judgment to determine what
themselves have found upon Experience, and questionless they are not under the
least Temptation to delude others. Now they all with one consent affirm it,
that Repentance has a spring of Pleasure in it; and that they never knew what
true Quiet and Content was, till they have come to the exercise of Godly Sorrow
for Sin, kindly to melt and dissolve in the Dust before the Lord: Let not this
(I pray) seem strange to you that there should be found so much Sweetness in
bitter mourning for Sin; for all who have had their Spiritual Senses exercised
to discern between Good and Evil, will tell you, that there is a great deal of
Hearts-ease accompanying this brokenness of Heart, which Repentance toward God
includes. Indeed their Grief, and Sorrow, is only for what they have been and
done, not for what they are now doing; that they have been Foolish and
Disobedient serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, but that now, through Grace,
the Heart that was dead toward God, now begins to move, and return to him, O
it carries in it matter of unspeakable Content and Satisfaction: When the Soul
finds it self enabled to pour out it self in Tears and Humiliation; O! it gives
abundance of Ease, yea of inward Delight and Pleasure to it, inasmuch as hereby
it perceives (in some good measure) a blessed Cure begun in it self. Ask any
true Penitent that is come under, and bears this part of the Yoke, and he will
tell you, that he is never so joyful as when he is most mournful; his Godly
Sorrow is like the Water that our Savior turned into Wine at the
Marriage Feast. It was upon this account, that the Apostle Paul rejoiced, that
he had made the Corinthians sorry; sure then themselves, who were made sorry,
had more cause to rejoice, in that it was after a Godly sort not unto Death and
Damnation, but unto Life and Salvation, a Repentance never to be repented of:
And the same Christian will tell you, that he is never so sad as when he feels
his Heart hard and unrelenting. So that upon the whole, this Objection against
the Yoke, as if it were not good to bear, because Repentance is required in it,
which you have thought to be so sour and unpleasant; you see it proceeds from a
mere palpable Mistake and Error, it has been want of Judgment and
Understanding in you; as Christ told the Woman of Samaria, John 4. 10. If thou
knew the Gift of God, thou would have asked of him, and he would have
given thee living Water: So if thou knew the sweetness of Gospel-Repentance,
thou would not endure to live a Day longer in an Impenitent State. It Is
certain Sin has no such Pleasure as Repentance has. Hos. 2. 7. I will return
to my first Husband, for then it was better with me than now. Consult but thine
own Experience, or if thou have had none, ask thine own Conscience, which Day
of a Sinner's Life yields the sweetest Rest and Repose at Night? whether the
Day wherein he has been a Drudg to his Lusts, heaping Guilt upon Guilt, against
the Day of Reckoning? Or the day wherein a Man has been in the Fear of God,
confessing and forsaking his Sin, that all may be blotted out, when the Times
of Refreshing should come from the presence of the Lord? O the Hell upon Earth
of the former! Could you search the Bed, dig up the Conscience of such a Man; O
what bitings, tormenting Despair might you find at the bottom? The deeper they
have sunk in Rebellion the faster have they tied Damnation to their Souls. O
fearful miserable Condition! But O the Heaven upon Earth of the latter! How
welcome may he be to both, to his God and his Conscience? And so how merry may
he be in the dark Night on his Bed? After a Seasonable April-Shower, and
breaking out of the Sun again, how are the Flowers and Herbs refreshed? In like
manner after a penitent Soul has gone forth largely and freely, Weeping and
Mourning for Sin, how Sweet an Odor does it leave in Conscience? It returns
not ashamed but refreshed, especially when it can espy a Bow in the Cloud, or
The Sun of Righteousness, breaking through it and shining upon the Soul? Mat.
4. 2. Thus having cleared up this that the most difficult part of Christ's
Yoke, viz. Repentance it self (which usually through Satan's Cunning and Malice
is represented to Youth, as frightful, and formidable) is good, i. e. pleasant,
which (according to the School-distinction of Good into jucundum, utile and
honestum) is a material part of what is Good: I say, having done this, and so
waded through the most difficult, craggy part of my way and work, that was most
liable to Objections, it may shorten my work as to what remains: This Fort of
the Jebusites being won, we may conclude all will yield; if the most
exceptionable part of Christ's Yoke will pass Muster, we need not question the
rest. Thus I have done with the first Head of Argument, to prove the Truth
treated on, viz. That it is Good in an absolute Sense to bear Christ's Yoke:
Now that it is so, especially in time of Youth, I shall reserve the proof of
that to the Close of the second Head of Argument. Wherefore I now shall pass on
to the second Consideration mentioned for the clearing up the Doctrine, That to
bear the Yoke of Christ is the summary of all Good, viz.

2. That it is so relatively, with respect to the Effects and Conquances of it.

For the Demonstration and Proof of this, it is to be considered, that some of
the blessed Effects of bearing Christ's Yoke in the time of Youth, do respect
this present Life, and others that which is to come: For what the Apostle says
of Godliness, I may say of bearing the Yoke of Christ (it being the same thing
in Sense tho different in Sound) It is profitable for all things, having the
Promise of the Life that now is, and that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4. 8.

1. Touching those that concern this present Life, take these following.

(1.) The bearing this Yoke is good in this respect, viz. That now a Man may
hereby come to know that his Sins are all pardoned, and that the dreadful
Controversy is at an end, between the Great God and him. This the Prophet David
lays down as the summary of Blessedness, Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is the Man whose
Transgression is forgiven, etc. This Load of Sin is laid on Christ, So that
there is now no Condemnation to him, Romans 8. 1. O how ravishing a thing is it
to be able to say, Well! Here I stand under this Yoke of Jesus with a full, a
free, a final Pardon, there is an Act of Grace, and my Name is in it? If Satan
come with his Charge of my former Vileness, Conscience sprinkled with the Blood
of Christ may discharge all; for Christ's Yoke and Blood go together. Before a
Man come under and bear this easy Yoke of Christ, he abides under the cruel
Yoke of the Guilt of all his Sins; O cursed Case! poor Christless Sinner,
had thou but thy Spiritual Senses restored, thou would find, and feel the
Yoke, the Load of Guilt upon thy Soul to be incomparably a greater load than
Mountains, or all the dead Weights in the World can be to thy Body: A Giant
that can bear a great Stone on his Back cannot endure a little one in his
Bladder, but roars out; and the Earth it self that can bear the Hurricanes,
Tempests and Storms on her Surface, cannot bear a little Wind in her Bowels, but
heaves, and sets, and roars, and opens, and overturns Cities, etc. So the case
is here, when a Sinner's Conscience awakes in Power, and by the Law (which is
the strength of Sin) arrests, charge, curses, condemns, throwing (like
Fireballs) into the Soul an exquisite Sense and feeling of its Sins, in all
their Aggravations, and Guilt; O till this poor wounded Spirit comes under the
sweet Yoke of Christ, it is impossible to express the Stabs, the Wounds, the
Throws it feels within; so true is that of Solomon, The Spirit of a Man may
sustain his Infirmity, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? i. e. A Spirit
feeling the Yoke of Guilt, or unpardoned Sin; Racks, Stakes, Fire, biting
Worms, rendering Tortures, are tolerable to this of a wounded Spirit. The
Psalmist felt a great deal of it, Psalm. 38. 4. when he cries out, Mine
Iniquities are gone over my head, a Burden too heavy for me to bear, and Psalm.
32. 3. But the greatest part of unpardoned Sinners are altogether unsensible of
it, and in the greatness of their Madness and Folly, sport themselves under
this Yoke of Guilt, Prove. 14. 9. Fools make a mock of Sin, which makes a
serious Christian sigh and groan, Thus now Contraries illustrate one another;
what a Luster and Glory does this reflect and cast upon the bearing of the Yoke
of Christ? Under which the Soul is delivered from the intolerable Yoke of
Guilt: Now the Man may dwell at ease, and in patience possess his Spirit, all is
well, Sin is pardoned; if Death comes, the next remove is to Life Eternal.

(2.) To bear Christ's Yoke is good, in respect of that comfortable Sense he
may now have of his Adoption. My Brethren, coming under Christ's Yoke, is
coming into his Family; he is now no longer a Fugitive, a Vagabond, a
Foreigner, a Stranger, as he was before, without God, without Christ, an Alien
from the Covenant, having no hope; but now in Christ Jesus, you who were
sometimes afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Jesus; yea Fellow-Citizens
with the Saints, and of the Household of God, Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. compared with ver.
19. O how good is it then to come under the Yoke of Christ? and so be under the
blessed Order, Rule, Care and Provision of his Family: There Is bread enough,
and to spare, in your Father's House. You may conclude upon Paternal Care and
Affection. Psalm. 103. 13. As a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord, etc.
Jer. 31. 20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? my Bowels are troubled for him. Your
Heavenly Father, in case of Danger, has a Bosom for your Refuge; and in case
of Miscarriages, he has Bowels to pity you; he will say, it is a Child of mine,
I will not cut him off, Temptation has been too hard for him, Corruption has run
him down; The Spirit was willing, but the Flesh was weak; I Will visit his Sin
with Stripes, but my loving kindness I will never take away. Again, you may
conclude upon Access to God as to a Father, with a Child-like Boldness; Sin was
that (...) that great Gulf betwixt God and you: now Sin being pardoned, the
Partition Wall is removed, and there is no Bar to Communion, but within you a
sweet Spirit of Adoption, and above you an eternal inheritance kept in
Reversion for you. But O! the sad Condition of those that never came under this
Yoke of Christ, they lie abroad, open, and exposed to all the Miseries of this
Life, and Pains of Hell for ever; while out of Christ, they are of their Father
the Devil, and can look for no Child's Portion from Above, but from Beneath. Is
it not then Good to bear this Yoke betimes?

(3.) It is Good, in respect of Freedom from the Yoke of Sin's Dominion. O,
young Man, do but think what an Hellish Life the Service of thy Lust is! its
Commands are always unreasonable, cross to the great End of Creation,
Preservation, Redemption, etc. and sometimes they are cross one to another: So
every Sinner, till he come under Christ's Yoke, is miserably haled, pulled,
this way and that way; an Ambitious Lust calls him up Stairs, a Covetous Lust
calls him down; a most fearful intolerable Thraldom! The Lord open your Eyes
that you may see and escape it, e're it be too late. But now when a Man comes
under Christ's Yoke, he is no longer under the Law, but under Grace, and so no
Iniquity shall have Dominion over him, Romans 6. 14. His old Sin-mates may call,
and knock till they are weary, the answer now is, Ego non sum ego, and with
David, Psalm. 119* 115. Depart from me ye evil Doers; for I will keep the
Commandments of my God. I am a Companion of all them that fear thee: I have
sworn and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments, ver. 63.
and 106. This is (through Grace) now the final Resolution of one under Christ's
Yoke, and now the Heart is fixed; till now it was halting between two, and you
know a Man can never be quiet, while unresolved; but now being united to
Christ, he is at his Center. R^th. 1. 16, 17. Millions of Gold and Silver cannot
draw him thence. Cant. 3. 4, I held him, and would not let him go. Poor Judas
wanted this, therefore his Friends, his Money, his Chapmen, could give no
quiet; but under Christ's Yoke the Soul is at rest: As a Woman when married,
all her troublesome Suitors have now done their Solicitations. O how good is it
then to bear Christ's Yoke?

(4.) It is good in respect of acceptance of our Persons, and performances.
Ephesians. 1. 6. He has accepted us in the Beloved. It is a fearful case for a Man's
Person and Duties to be rejected of God; yet this is the very case of every
Child of Belial, i. e. without Christ's Yoke. O it is none but those that yield
Subjection to Christ, that find acceptance with the Father, Believers their
Duties (tho attended with much imperfection, like lame Mephibosheth) yet being
themselves under Christ's Yoke, they are not despised, the Father sees his Sons
Name, and Image on them, and so (tho there is much Alloy in the Metal) yet it
passes in the Court of Heaven. And is it not then good to bear Christ's Yoke,
etc.

(5.) It is good in respect of that Peace of Conscience which it possesses the
Soul with. O what a Paradise of Pleasures are the Reflections of a good and
peaceable Conscience! Now bearing Christ's Yoke has a direct tendency to it.
Psalm. 119. 165. Great Peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall
offend them. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Mercy, and Peace shall
be upon them, Gal. 6. 16. When a Man subjects himself to this Yoke, he meets
with Rest and Peace in his own Conscience: My Heart (says Job) shall not
reproach me so long as I live. Ah poor rebellious Sinners! do but suffer your
own Consciences to tell you all they know, and it is enough to make your Ears
to tingle, and your Hearts to tremble, yea to make you Magor-Missabib, an
Afrightment and Terror round about; Felix his Throne could not secure him.
Alas! that negative Quiet the Children of Disobedience have at present, is but
the effect of their Ignorance, an Hours Sickness may break it; and then their
Conscience of Guilt appears like Hell, and as the Hand upon the Wall to
guilty Belshazar; O the tremblings, misgivings, intolerable Torments that such
do undergo, after a wretched Course of Obstinacy and Opposition; they would not
have Christ reign, and now they begin to feel Despair to reign in their
Breasts, and such a Tempest to arise in their Consciences, as is ready every
Moment to carry away, and sink down all to Hell, Soul and Body: This Storm was
breeding, and gathering all the time of Rebellion against the Lord, they were
treasuring up Wrath, as the Apostle styles it, Romans 2. 5. and the Great God
held his Peace, and was silent; Sentence against their evil Works, was not
speedily executed: Hence they bless themselves, and say, they shall have Peace,
and on they go with more Violence and Presumption than ever. Well, what is the
Fruit and Consequence hereof? Why! an angry Majesty rises up and calls up
his Officer, Conscience, out of all its Slumbers, gives forth his
uncontrollable Order to reprove the Rebel, to set all his Sins in order; Well,
Conscience must obey, the Book is opened, the Indictment (as with the Voice of
Thunder) is read, and the guilty Wretch roars out; as one abandoned to Despair:
It is like some Writings invisible till brought to the Fire, and then all is
legible. But now on the other hand, after a Man has come under Christ's Yoke,
and continues under it as a Loyal Subject in Faith, Patience, and sincere
Obedience. Now Conscience has Peace, and that upon sure and solid Ground, Romans
5. 1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace, etc. 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our
Rejoicing, the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity, and Godly
Sincerity, not with Fleshly Wisdom; but by the Grace of God, we have had our
Conversation, etc. Is it not then good to bear, etc.?

(6.) It is good in respect of that security a Man has under it, that whatever
befalls him here in this Life, all shall now work for good. I may now eat my
Bread, or want it, with a cheerful Spirit; if I am tempted, afflicted, meet
with Crosses, Losses, Disappointments in my Calling; Well, be it so, yet this I
know that being found in Christ, and under his Yoke, all lies under that
blessed Promise, Romans 8. 28. We know that all things work together for good,
etc. Afflictions shall do thee good, What good? Ans. Try thy Patience, exercise
thy Repentance, learn thee Obedience, make thee humble, wean thee from the
World, conform thee to Christ, show thee more of the Corruptions of thy own
Heart, fill thee with more Pity and Compassion to others: and finally fit thee
more for thy Translation to Heaven. Ah poor Desolate Sinner! thou have not one
Syllable of this Promise, or any other in the whole Book of God belonging to
the while thou art Christless, and Yokeless, abiding under the Power of
Unbelief and Impenitency, thou abidest under the Terrible Threatenings of Divine
Wrath and Vengeance, thou have not one poor Tag to hold to hang by for thy
good, only Divine Patience at present keeps thee out of Hell, and that Darling
Attribute thou abusest too; but thou have not one Promise to comfort thee. Look
into the Bible, all is against thee while thou refusest Christ's Yoke thy Part
thy Portion in that Book, lies only among the Penal Statutes and Curses
contained therein. Look into the World, all the Providence of God are against
thee, sculk were thou will, send from County to County, from one end of the
Land to the other, thou art but like a Rebel, a Rogue, Heavens Writs are out
against thee; so that no Place under Heaven is safe only under the Yoke of
Christ, and there thou will not come. Ah, my Brethren, who would live in such a
Case, that but reflects, reviews these things? But now turn over a new Leaf,
come but over to blessed Jesus, and under his easy Yoke, and then all is for
thee, every Providence, every Promise turns to and smiles upon thee, every Wind
whatever shall blow thee some good; but till thou turn, do what thou will, thou
can devise, consult, cast about thee to make thy Life comfortable, all is in
vain, Miseries attend thee, thou dwell on the dark side of the World, not a
Smile from God, no he is angry with thee every Day; at present thou art cursed,
and hereafter (abiding out of Christ) thou will be damned; whereas would
thou be but advised and persuaded to yield thy self to the Lord Jesus, and his
Yoke, then even now in this Life would thou reap these six Benefits, Thy
Sins pardoned; thy self adopted; the Dominion of thy cruel Lusts subverted; thy
Duties accepted; thy Conscience pacified; and all the Providence of God
sanctified to do thee good: And then for the Life which is to come, thy self
eternally saved. Which is next to be spoken to, as falling under the second
Branch, viz. The blessed Effects and Consequences of bearing Christ's Yoke
respecting the other World.

2. It is good to bear the Yoke, etc. in respect of time to come: And that
briefly will appear, if you consider, That now the grievous Sting of Death is
removed, and the glorious Rest of Heaven remains: So that I may now say,
Blessed be God my Eternal State is secured; let Death come when it will, I am
safe as to the other World. O Sirs, when dreadful Fears of mis^arring for ever
fall upon a poor Creature, it is sad indeed; that Word for ever, the Thoughts of
it work strongly and mightily on the Spirit of a tender Doubting Christian,
Hence I remember I have read of the Primitive Christians, that they use to say,
Domine hic seca, hic ure, etc. i. e. Lord cut here, burn here; so thou spare
hereafter. Ah poor unconverted Sinner! thou art not sure of this Life another
Hour, that Deuteronomy. 28. 66. is but a sad Case. O but then, what is it to hang in
suspense about everlasting Life! if it were but a measuring Cast, it were
enough to disquiet a Man all his Days, to go up and down in suspense about
Eternity: Ah I don't know but I may be damned for ever! But, my Brethren, when
it is ten, twenty, nay an hundred to one, but I am lost and undone for ever, my
next remove will be into Hell! O! how can I eat, or drink, or sleep, or laugh,
when there is but a Paperwall between my Soul and Hell? When eternal Flames are
even ready to kindle on me? When if I am not found under this Yoke of Christ,
God's Truth stands engaged for my Damnation? Unconverted young Ones, Have you
no Pangs? Can your Youthful Vanities quite drown the Fears, the Thoughts of
Eternity? Do you never think of that Day of Judgment? Or dare you in good
earnest? Poor Creature! Suppose thou should make a Shift (at best a sorry
one God knows) to rub through the Miseries that attend a Christless State in
this Life; Ah! what Shift in all the World can thou imagine thou can
make, when thou come to die? and thence to be consigned to the dreadful
Tribunal of an inexorable Judge? This will be a Dilemma thou will never be able
to answer. Each Step of thy present Life thou now take, is toward Hell; each
Morsel thou now eat'st, is but a feeding, a fatning thee for the Day of
Slaughter, And what Peace can a Thief take in a long Table of Dainties, with a
Gallows at the end of it? Sirs, for the Lord's-sake, think of the After-claps
of Death and Judgment, how bitter the Effects and Consequences of a vain and
sinful Life will be! What a Recoil, what a Shriek will thy Soul give, when it
finds nothing opening before it but the eternal World, and feels it self a
sliding down, a launching forth into that amazing Ocean of Eternity, and has no
Christ, no Hope to fly to! But now once come under the Yoke of Christ, and it
shall go well with thee to all Eternity; an end will shortly be put to the
Christians weary days on Earth, his best is to come, 2 Cor. 5. 1. and 1 Thessalonians.
4. and last, Wherefore, comfort one another with these Words, ye shall ever be
with the Lord. Hence says Job, when his Friends censured him, his Estate and
Relations failed him, yea his Body ready for the Grave, Job 19. 25. I know my
Redeemer lives, and that tho after my Skin, Worms destroy this Body, yet shall
I see God. And upon this account you read, 2 Cor. 4. 16. to the end, of the
flourishing Joys and Comforts of those afflicted Christians, while they by
Faith looked not to the things seen, that are temporal, but to the things not
seen, which were eternal. Sinners have but there Hope here, and a very
uncertain Tenure of their Enjoyments, all is but (at utmost) for Term of Life,
and that is but as a Vapor; but the Saint is a Freeholder for ever, and ever:
Christ makes a Jointure for Eternity, and settles it upon every one that
bears his Yoke in time. And thus now I have finished the Proof of this
Doctrine, That it is good for a Man to bear Christ's Yoke: There remains only
that Branch of it to be cleared, viz. That it is so especially in time of Youth.

Now this I shall dispatch in few Words, and I wish they may be piercing, and
reach the Consciences of all this Assembly of Young People this Day, that you
may stand fully convinced of the Truth preached, and go home, and give Glory to
God, acknowledging, That to bear the Yoke in time of Youth is the summary of
all Good: Wherefore ponder but these two Things.

1. The time of Youth, is the fittest, and most acceptable time, to bear the
Yoke. 2. That in time of Youth, to bear the Yoke is the most commendable
Practice.
1. That this is the fittest and most acceptable time to bear Christ's Yoke in;
and this will appear, if you consider that the time of Youth is the freest
time; freest from bodily Infirmities, and worldly Distractions. The Wiseman
does elegantly set out the Infirmities of old Age, in Eccl. 12. 2, 3, 4. all
which Youth is free from; for in Youth the Blessing of Life is in its Verdure
and Flower; thy Body strong for Service, thy Spirits quick and vigorous, thy
Mind freest from Cares and Encumbrances; which afterward in a married State,
usually invade and loads both Hand and Head, and Heart too: So that the
Obligation now in time of Youth, to bear the Yoke is greatest, and should make
the deepest Impression on thy Mind. Besides this Age is the fittest to receive
Instruction, as being more tender; grown Sinners are more stiff, and
untractable, as we see by Experience: Now upon this Consideration, it is good
to come under Christ's Yoke in Youth, before the Heart and Neck become so
stiff, and obdurate, that there is no bowing them to the Yoke: we should
endeavor to prevent the Devil and his Temptation all we can, and lay hold of
all Advantages for Heaven and Salvation; now you cannot reach this, by any
thing you can do, like coming under the Yoke of Christ betimes: this is a sure
Rule, the earlier the time the easier the Yoke will be; not only because your
Sins will be the fewer, your Burden the lighter, but because the evil days of
Sickness, and Death are coming a main, Eccl. 12. 1. Youth is prone to delay and
say, I am but a Child as yet, I have time enough; but if you will go into
Churchyards, and measure your little Body, you will find as short, if not
shorter Graves and Coffins than would fit you. Moreover the time of Youth is
most acceptable to God: Is it sit (O young Man) that God should accept the
Devil's leavings? That thy Youthful Vigor and Spirit should be given to thy
Lusts? And when these are spent in the Service of Sin, so that nothing but Skin
and Bones remains, then to offer these to the Lord. The most acceptable
Sacrifices under the Law were young Bullocks, and the Firstborn, and the
First Fruits, etc. So now God desires the first ripe Fruits.

2. It is good to bear, etc. because this is the most commendable practice in
time of Youth. This is the chief Glory of that Age, and it is that which most
glorifies God, and credits the Gospel, and is one of the greatest blessings the
Church enjoys in the World, when she can say with the Church of old, Take us
the little Foxes, for our Vines has tender Grapes. Again how gloriously do
their Names shine like Stars in the Firmament of the Church? And with what
Honor does the Holy Ghost in Scripture make mention of their Names that have
listed themselves under Christ's Yoke in time of their Youth? 1 Kings 18. 12. 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. 2 Timothy 3. 15. and ordinarily such prove the most eminent
Instruments of Service, and Blessing to the Places where they live. Again it is
a most comfortable Evidence of Sincerity to bear the Yoke in their Youth; it
argues that you love, esteem, and value God's Service above the World, and that
it is not extorted merely from the fear of Hell, as Psalm. 78. 34, 35. And as
many when they lie sick, and are ready to die, O then they are marvelously
concerned for their Souls; and all is no more than as an Iron in the Fire, or a
Mariner in Storm, like Jonah's Gourd, or a Morning Cloud: But now in time of
Youth, and Health, when besieged with 1000 Temptations to Sin, O then to acquit
your selves as Loyal Subjects to Christ under his Yoke and Banner: how
glorious! how commendable is it! And thus I have accounted for the second
General Head, viz. To clear it up that to bear the Yoke in Youth is the summary
of all good. And now I come to the third and last General Head proposed to be
treated on, and that is,

3. To give you some Motives, and Directions to excite, and assist you to bear
the Yoke of Christ, in the time of Youth. First, for Motives, wherein I fear
there is but too much cause to insist; for although in lesser, and lower Matters,
where the least Overture of Gain, or Pleasure appears, Men need no Motives to
excite them, our Natures are presently affected, we are all upon the spur, no
Stone left unturned: yet in Soul-concerns, such as I have been treating on,
viz. the bearing Christ Yoke in Youth, Alas! we are like a Company of Stoics,
as if we had no Passions about us, ferventissimi in terrenis, frigidissimi in
caelestibus (as one has it) we are red hot for Earth, but Key cold for Heaven.
Wherefore to excite you, in order to recover your Souls to Christ and his Yoke,
Consider.

1. The Paucity of Conversions, and coming under Christ's Yoke in these sinful
times of Ours, as also the awfulnes; of such a Consideration. Ah Friends, let
me tell you, Conversion-work is no common thing, we talk in a customary manner
of Conversion (the Lord be merciful to us) and its much to be feared, for the
most part, it is but Talk: Had we Ministers a clearer, realizing view of the
Truth of Matters between a Holy God, and Multitudes of the Professors of this
Age, it were enough to make us with Ezekiel stamp with the Foot, lie on our
Side, and eat Dung, and with weeping Jeremiah, to cry out, O that our Head were
Waters, etc. and with Isaiah to cry aloud, and lift up our Voice like a
Trumpet, to show Professors their Sins, mournfully complaining, who has
believed our Report? To whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? Ah, I fear, the
Lord is angry, his Spirit retired, and withdraw'n from our Assemblies, a Spirit
of Carnality has broke out, and brought forth a Spirit of Division, in these
Days of Liberty; Church Members, many prove rotten, and are become like Salt
that has lost its Savor; we grow Bulky, instead of Holy, run out into Leaves
and Stalk instead of Fruit; hollow instead of hearty, the honor of our
Profession is laid in the Dust, Ministers die away apace, gray Hairs are on us,
but who lays it to Heart. O that this were not our Case! Verily unless the Lord
of Hosts had left among us a Remnant, we had been as Sodom and as Gomorrha,
Isa. 1. 9. And a Remnant there must still be, or the ruin of the Land is near.
My self, with many others are upon the Brink of Eternity, and will be removed
from you by Death shortly: wherefore you young People had need beware, and
tremble at any further delays of your Conversion, and coming under Christ's
Yoke, in such Days as these, wherein our Iniquities are increased over our
Heads, and reach up to the Heavens, and there is so much of a dead Formality
reigning among Professors, and so little of the Power of Christianity. It is
sad to see how some young Men descended of Religious Parents, are so yoked to
Evil Company, etc. That Parents Tears, Sighs, Groans, melting Entreaties, and
Expostulations are weak as Water cast upon the Ground, and their Childrens
Lusts strong as Goliath, or the Sons of Zerviah, too hard for all; so that one
may (almost) as soon draw a Camel through a Needle-Eye, or pull one Limb from
another, as draw or pull them from their Cups and Evil Companions. Moreover, it
is lamentable to consider (enough one would think to turn this Place into a
Bochim) how many Yokeless Christless young Men, and Maidens, and Children are
here before the Lord this Day, and that are like so to live, and so to die
after all our Endeavors to save them; O do not think I am uncharitable; the
Searcher of Hearts knows what my Hearts Desire and Prayer has been, and is
for you; and how glad I would be (in this Matter) to be mistaken. O young
People, Presumption is the reigning Sin among you in this secure Age, both in
City, and Country: Conversion is another manner of matter, than many apprehend,
there is (according to Scripture) much required to make it sound, and bespeak
it saving: (The Lord keep you from Flatteries, and Deceits in this thing) so
that it is upon this Consideration, that we manage our present Entreaty to come
under the Yoke; and what can be more awful? Wide is the Gate, and broad is the
way to Hell, and many (says Christ) go in there: but strait is the Gate, etc.
Ah how bitter is it to think how many are now yoked in Chains of Darkness with
Devils, for refusing Christ's Yoke the last Year! How numerous is your last
Year's Printed Bill of Mortality! near one and twenty thousand that have died
in and about this great City; and it is computed by some, that the one half
(according to the Term and Date of Man's Life set down in Psalm. 90. 10.) had
not lived out half their Days; now as many of these, as died unconverted,
whether Young or Old, are now perished, and are past all hope of recovery to
all Eternity.

But now, what if many of you that have escaped the last Year, and now are
hearing me, should be found going after them in the same Steps of Impenitency,
and Unbelief, refusing the gracious Yoke of Christ; and so before this New-Year
is finished, you should have finished and filled up the measure of your Sins,
and be turned among them into Hell too; would not that be a Woeful and Dreadful
thing? Verily, Sirs, it is bitter as Death, to see some of you just of the same
stubborn Temper, making light of all that God, or Man say to you; on you go
still in your former Course of Undutifulness, Pride, etc. Notwithstanding the
warnings of Providence, the threatenings of Vengeance, the checks of Conscience,
the waitings of Patience, and all the melting Methods of Divine Clemency and
Indulgence, yet mad upon your Youthful Lust, trifling in the momentous concerns
of your precious and immortal Souls, and you seem as if you were resolved to
continue so; my earnest desire is that it may not be so, with any of you here
this Day: But yet I am not without Jealousies and Fears least this Sermon
should leave diverse of you as very Belialites, i. e. refusing the Yoke of
Christ, as it found you: Well! the Lord be witness between you and I, whether I
have not set Life and Death, Good and Evil, before you? and whether if any of
you should perish, you perish for want of warning or no?

2. Consider how uncertain the youngest of you are, of out-living the present
New-Year. Young Man, what is thy Life? Is it not as a Vapor, Jam. 4. 14. It is
wholly concealed from every Soul of you, whether the present Day may not be
your last, and a Writ of Ejection be served upon you before another Day, Luke
12. 20. It is but a slender weak Thread, that ties thy Soul and Body together,
viz. The Breath that goes out of thy Nostrils, if that be once stopped, which
may soon be, thou art gone hence; and must return no more. Ah how many now in
the beginning of this New-Year are big with Projects, and Purposes about the
World, that will be numbered with the Dead, and be laid in the Dust, before the
half of its Month's be numbered and accomplished! Certainly a serious
Consideration hereof is enough to enforce and constrain you, without one
Moments delay, to come under the Yoke of Christ. It was Augustine's Speech,
that he would not for a Million of Worlds, be an Atheist one half-hour; because
he knew not, but God might take him away in that half-Hour of Atheism. O young
Man, awake now out of this sinful Security, and fly for Refuge to Christ, and
his Yoke; since thou know not but thy next time of Sleep thy Soul may be
required, and thou may awake no more.

3. Consider, how many of God's own Children walk in the bitterness of their
Souls to this very day in bearing the reproach of their Youth, for not bearing
the Yoke of Christ earlier in their Youth. Jer. 31. 18. 19. Ephraim bemoaned
himself, saying, I have been as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the Reproach of my Youth. Job
13. 26. Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the
Iniquities of my Youth. O young People, did you but know what some have
suffered, and undergone, crying out in the Daytime, thy Hand, O Lord, lies
heavy on me, and in the Nightime their Sore running grievously upon this
account; surely you would be awakened to other Apprehensions, about the
necessity of an Early Coming under the Yoke. For my own part, I have passed the
Days of my Youth, but the bitter remembrance of my Vanity, Pride, Self-conceit,
Idleness, and foolish mispending of precious Time, etc. will stick by me, and
like a Goad stick in me, so long as I live: So that as is reported of the
Jewish Rabbis, that they use to say concerning the Great Sin of the Isrealites
worshipping the Golden Calf, that after it there never was any remarkable
Judgments befell that People of the Jews, but there was an Ounce of the Calf in
it, that is, there was a Lash in it for that Sin: such have been my Thoughts,
that to this day, I never met with any bitter strokes in the Course of God's
Holy Providence toward me, but that place of Ephraim and Job runs in my mind,
which I mentioned but now, Thou make me to possess the Iniquities of my
Youth. It may be some of you may be apt to think and say, he is a good Man,
would my Soul was in his Soul stead, and condition; Alas! Alas! you know not
what you say, the Heart knows its own Bitterness, a Stander by, a Stranger
does not: It Is true I bless the Lord, who gave me Council at length; and for
what ever he has done for me, wrought in me, O Eternity it self, is little
enough to praise him! I am sure it is his own, and not of me; Oh no, let me be
vile in my own Apprehensions, as low as Hell, whether I had certainly run, had
the Lord left me to my self: But all I say is, O that I had bore the Yoke
earlier in my Youth! I could repeat it from my very Soul a thousand times; O
that I had, etc.! Those Words of Augustine have often affected me, Sero ^e
amavi Domine, O Lord too late have I loved thee. The Heart-searching God
knows (if my Heart deceives me not) that I could wish I had born the most
torturing racking Pains and Miseries of this Life, rather than delayed so long
to come under Christ's Blessed Yoke.

But why do I thus run out in public on this Subject? it may be, some may
think it were fitter for the Closet than the Pulpit: Well! be it known to you,
my private Recesses have been no Strangers to these things: But who can tell
what good the Lord may do by it? (as since the Preaching of it, I praise the
Lord, I have had an account of one that hereby was awakened) Is there any Evil
in declaring it? for one that has heedlesly run upon a Rock, and suffered
Damage, to call out to others, (that are failing the same Course) to stop and
tack about, least they fall into the same Distress; So for me, that to the 19th
Year of my Age was Foolish, and Disobedient, etc. to call out to you, that have
not as yet fulfilled those Years, or if you have exceeded them, that you would
proceed no further in your foolish, and trfling Delays. I see there be many of
you, that are are just entering the Teens; well, hear it for your Good, you are
in the Posession of a Jewel, which some here, would give the whole World for,
if they had it, supposing they had their Eyes opened to see the Cheats of Sin,
and Youthful Pleasures. etc. The Lord make you wise for Eternity.

4. Consider what a World of Suitors, you (above all others) have Jebovah,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, Court and Council you; hence a great part of the
Scriptures are penned for your Sake, God has a kindness for your Age, and
makes his first Applications to you, he covets the beginning of your Strength,
and you may therefore be assured, that what he seeks, he will accept, if you
come in and yield to his Yoke. But it is probable some be ready to object if he
so much desire us, why don't he he conquer and convert us? Answ. O take heed of
replying against God, least your Bonds be made strong; know it therefore, the
way wherein he will be found and let out of his powerful Spirit and Grace, is
the way of fervent, frequent Prayers, redeeming Time, waiting diligently at
Wisdom's Gates, and watching against the Enticements of Sinners, in all which
there is Infinite Mercy and Grace; and after all will you dare to Blaspheme his
Wisdom in appointing, and his Mercy in affording you these Means, and then cast
out your Foam against the God of Heaven, and say, why don't he convert me? O if
you understood all, you would rather stand admiring, and say, why has he not
damned me? Is it fit a Holy God should be thus reproached, by so mean a Worm as
thou? Or is it reasonable you should expect that he should force you against
your Wills? Moreover Satan, the World, and the Flesh, are desirous of your Age,
the Devil knows your Weakness, want of Experience, proness to put off the
thoughts of Death and Judgment, what Folly is bound up in your Hearts, etc.
Hence he is very busy with Youth, as being very desirous of the Male in your
Flock: O then what need had Youth to bestir themselves, least so subtle and
malicious an Enemy blind them to their own Perdition.

5. Consider what an Advantage you have, above old Sinners, First, as you have
more hope in your present Case; you have not so often grieved the Spirit, nor
repulsed so many Checks of Conscience, nor stifled so many Convictions, nor is
Sin grown so old, and deeply rooted in you, by a long Custom, as it is in
others. Which, Secondly, is a mighty Advantage in your turning to God, viz.
preventing the Power and Plague of an evil Custom. Jer. 13. 23. Can the
Ethiopean change his Skin, etc. It Is an amazing thing to consider, how some
that have accustomed themselves to that beastly Sin of Drunkenness, have
thereby been brought so under its Power, as in despite of all Arguments, the
bitter Cries of a starving, ragged Family, the Danger of Arrests, the Flashes
of Hell in their Consciences, that by times have met with, Reproofs of
Ministers, etc. yet have still continued in that Sin to their Destruction. O,
young Man, you have this Advantage above old Sinners, you may avoid the Plague
of an ill Custom; a Plague I think, a Man had better never been born, than to
be under.

6. Consider what you are till you come under the Yoke; you are Children of
Belial, a Rout of Rebels, a Brood of Vipers, Confederates with the Devil
against God, Psalm. 68. 21.

7. Consider Christ bore our Sins, in his own Body, on the Cross, 2 Pet. 3. 24.
And so he bore the Wrath of God, and the Curse of the Law, to deliver us from
it: O then, How ready should we be to bear his easy Yoke?

8. If you bear not his Yoke, it is unreasonable you should bear his Name upon
you, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

9. Consider, If you bear his Yoke in time of Youth, he will bear you up in
time of Death, when Flesh fails, Psalm. 73. 25.

10. Consider, If you refuse to bear his Yoke, this Sermon will bear witness
against you at the Day of Judgment.

Direction 1. Would you bear Christ's Yoke, then bear with Hardships, break
through all Difficulties, bear the Smitings of Faithful Friends without, and
Conscience within for Sin, esteem it a Kindness; bear with, and be glad of
Convictions of the Spirit, and the Interdictions of Providence in sinful Paths:
When you find your vile Hearts opposing difficult Duties, as secret Prayer,
Self-examination, etc. confess the Naughtiness of your Hearts, say, Lord,
here is a Duty that my wicked Heart stands averse to; O create in me a new
Heart, change my Nature, and then oppose the necessity of it against the
difficulty in it, say, I must take pains in coming under and bearing of the
Yoke, or I must suffer the pains of Hell for ever. O my Soul which is hardest?
Repent or perish, turn or burn, coming to Christ and his Yoke, or departing
accursed into Everlasting Fire; is not Hell a more terrible Word, than repent
and believe? Is not the stroke of Vengeance, worse than the Yoke of Repentance?
Can the Devil name any thing in Christ's Yoke, so hard as we can prove all
things in Sin to be, and all Places in Hell to be? Sure Physic is better than
Poison, letting Blood than a Mortal Stab through the Heart. It Is better to be
preserved in Brine, than rot in Honey; and whet this on your Heart that there
is no Remedy, Sin must have Sorrow here, or for ever. Wherefore be nor Slothful
in Business, but fervent in Spirit; in secret Duties take heed of three things.
1. Of being Slite and Formal. 2. Sluggish and Slothful. 3. Too short and
hurrying. The Lord bless this to you,

2. Would you bear the Yoke in Youth, be not fond of Heshly Youthful Pleasures,
if you belong to God he will make you rue it bitterly, your sensual Pleasures are
Satan's Traps, whereby he takes and trapans Multitudes of young Ones to Hell.
If the love of Games, Sports, Plays, Meats, Drink, take thy Heart, thou will
never endure to take Christ's Yoke.

3. Labor to get, and when got, to keep and preserve a tender Conscience, for
want of this when I was young, I suffer to this Day. O never make light of any,
the least Sin, but keep at the utmost distance from the appearance of Evil.

4. Accustom thy self to continual, Reverent Thoughts of God's Omnisciency, and
Omniprescency.

5. Keep out of Evil Company, Wisdom it self has told you a Companion of Fools
shall be destroyed, Prove. 13. 20.

6. Study the Duties of thy particular Calling, art thou a Servant, keep thy
self free from Injustice and Defrauding, it is a Sin will make a fearful Noise
in Conscience when awaked. But I may not enlarge.

Wherefore to close all, O young People to day, while its called to day, harden
not your Hearts, but hear his Voice, etc. Take my Yoke upon you, etc. I have
spread it before the Lord in secret, and now I declare it to you; that I should
esteem it a rich recompense before I go hence, and be no more seen; if (through
the Cooperation and Blessing of God) I might Yoke in some of you, yea all your
Souls to Christ this day. O how easy would it make my Pilgrimage, my Passage
through this Vale of Tears? I would not go with the Guilt of the blood of any
Soul of you upon me; O that this may be the day of God's Power! I know it is
the Lord alone that can convert a Soul: But let me tell you, I would never
despair of that Soul's Conversion, that is brought on its Knees incessantly to
cry, with Ephraim, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. O its a blessed sign
when Sermons end in Groans and Tears, Lord I must be converted or condemned, I
will not let thee go without thou bless me. The Lord say. Amen.

FINIS.

