Speculum Theologiae in Christo: OR, A VIEW OF SOME Divine Truths, Which are
either Practically Exemplified IN JESUS CHRIST, Set forth in the GOSPEL: Or may
be reasonably deduced from thence.

By EDWARD POLHILL of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire.

LONDON: Printed by A. M. and R. R. for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in
the Poultrey, over against the Stocks-Market. MDCLXXVIII.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IT was anciently observed by St. Austin, touching the Prophets under the Old
Testament, Non tantum lingua illorum hominum, verum etiam vita fuit Prophetica:
They did not only prophecy, or reveal the mind of God by words; but by things
done by or upon them. Isaiah must walk naked and barefoot, to show the shame of
the Egyptian captivity. Jeremy must go down to the Potters House, and there see
the Vessel marred, to give the Jews a pregnant demonstration, that God could
unmake and destroy them. Ezekiel was to remove and bring forth his stuff, to
give them a lively representation of their captivity. Above all, this was
eminently seen in our great Prophet Jesus Christ; He did not only reveal the
Gospel, but he himself is the substance and marrow of it. He is the very mirror
of Divine Truths and Perfections. His style is the Image of the invisible God,
the brightness of the Fathers Glory. As an eternal Son, he is such in himself;
As incarnate, he is such to us. The Messiah (say the Rabbis) is facies Dei,
the face of God. The Glory of God (faith the Apostle) is in the face of Jesus
Christ. The Divine perfections appear in him, as beauty does in the face. The
invisible one may here be seen; the inaccessible Majesty may be approached
unto. Infinity, to accommodate it self to our Model, appears nube carnis, in a
Cloud of flesh, that his glory might not swallow us up. In our Emanuel we have
a body of Theology, an excellent Summary of Divine Truths, in a very lively
manner set forth to us. The Atheist, who owns not a God in Heaven, might here,
if he had eyes of Faith, see God in the flesh. The Wisdom of God does here
appear, not in the orders and harmonies of nature; but in a plot much greater,
and more admirable: God and Man, infinite and finite, Eternal and Temporal are
met in conjunction, that the human, finite, temporal nature in Christ, might be
the Theater for the Divine, Infinite, Eternal nature to show its perfections
in. The Truth of God manifests it self illustriously, in that no difficulty
could hinder the early promise of the Messiah made immediately after the fall
of man; neither could any time bury it in oblivion. He would be true in that
which was the hardest thing for him to do, in parting with his only begotten
out of his bosom for us. After many ages the Promise must bud and blossom, and
bring forth the Messiah. We see here, That God is the holy one, his hatred of
sin is writ in Red Characters, in the blood and wounds of our dear Lord. His
love to holiness was such, that he would send his own Son in the flesh, to
recover holiness into the heart of man again. We have here Providence
accurately watching over our Savior all-along; first over his Genealogy, then
over his birth, life, death, resurrection: And lastly over the issue of all; a
Church raised up to sing Hosannah's to him for ever. Omnia plena Sacramentorum,
says an Ancient; Every thing in Christ reads us a Lecture of Divinity. He
being the second Adam, who brought in righteousness and life unto men; we are
sure that there was a first, who brought in sin and death to them. From his
conception, being an extraordinary one, we may plainly gather what the Two
states of Nature and Grace are; By the common generation we are flesh of flesh,
unclean creatures. By the power of the regenerating spirit overshadowing our
hearts, we become spirit of spirit, holy new-creatures. In his life and
preaching we have miracles triumphing over nature and all the order of it;
Mysteries exceeding Reason, and all its Acumen; and a Samplar of humility,
Meekness, Mercy, Righteousness, Holiness, Obedience, such as the Sun never saw.
In his death we have, what the proud Socinian thinks impossible, Infinite
Mercy, and Infinite Justice kissing and embracing each other. Mercy was seen,
that God should give his only, his dearly beloved Son for us. Justice was seen,
that God should exact of him, standing in our stead, as much as would
counterpoize the sin and suffering of a World, in his glorious satisfaction. We
see what that is, which justifies sinners, and makes them stand before the Holy
God. In his excellent example, we see how justified ones, which are mystical
parts and pieces of him, ought to walk and tread in his steps. These things are
the subject matter of the ensuing Discourse; may all, who are called
Christians, study Jesus Christ. The little (...), the Reason of Man, is much
cried up in this Age; may we much more adore the Infinite Word and Wisdom of
God. The temper of St. Bernard may be recommended to all, Si scribas, non sapit
mihi, nisi legero ibi Jesum; si disputes aut conferas, non sapit mihi, nisi
sonuerit ibi Jesus: The devout Father could not relish any thing but Jesus
Christ; may our hearts ever burn and be inflamed with love to him, in whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; may we desire none but Christ:
Non aliud praeter illum, non aliud tanquam illum, non aliud post illum; Nothing
besides him, nothing like him, nothing after him. This is the scope of my Book;
if it profit or do good to any, it is enough, and as much as is desired by him,
who is

A Lover of Truth, Edw. Polhill.
Jan. 21. 1677.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. A short View of Gods Allsufficiency and condescension in revealing
himself, p. 1, 2. The various ways of manifestation; In the making of the World
and Man; p. 3, 4, 5, 6. After the fall, in the Moral Law; and in types and
shadows, p. 7. Lastly, and above all, in and by Jesus Christ, p. 8. CHAP. II.
Christ considered as a Prophet, and a Speculum, p. 9. The Divine Attributes
shine in him; particularly, Wisdom, p. 10. The obstacles of Redemption to be
removed, p. 11, 12. The Son of God fit for the work, p. 13. Many admirable
conjunctions of God and Man, of Justice and Mercy, of Punishment and Obedience
in Christ's sufferings, p. 14, 15. Of Satisfaction and a kind of execution of
the Law, p. 16. Of Satisfaction and Merit, p. 17. Of Merit and Example, p. 18.
All tending to our salvation, ibid. The rare conquest of Sin, Satan, the World,
Death, p. 19, 20, 21. Humility of mind necessary, p. 21. The desperate issue of
the pride of Human Reason, p. 21, 22. Need of Humility from the threefold state
of Reason, in Integrity, after the Fall, after Faith, p. 23, 24, 25. CHAP. III.
Holiness the glory of the Deity, p. 26. By it God acts like himself, and does
all for his own glory, p. 27. It imports an hatred of sin, and love of holiness
in man, p. 27, 28. In all these respects it was manifest in Christ, p. 28, 29,
etc. It was not indecent for God to come in the flesh and dye, p. 29, 30. The
glory of God breaks forth therein, p. 31, 32. His hatred of sin, and design to
extirpate it, p. 33, 34, 35. His love to holiness, in doing so much to recover
it, and linking it with salvation, p. 35, 36, 37, 38. We should be followers of
God therein, p. 38, 39, etc. CHAP. IV. Gods Punitive Justice asserted from
Scripture and Nature, p. 42, 43, 44. It was necessary that there should be a
Satisfaction for sin, p. 45. Rectoral Justice required it, p. 46, to 48. Unless
Christ's sufferings were satisfactory, no good account can be given of them, p.
49, 50. It Is not enough to say, That he was an Example of Patience, p. 50. That
he confirmed the Covenant, p. 51. That Gods immense love was manifested
therein, or that his Resurrection assured ours, ibid. 52, 53. Gods Justice
appears, in that He, though of infinite Mercy, inflicted those sufferings on
Christ, p. 54, 55. In that Christ, the Patient, was Man, the Son of God, an
holy innocent One, p. 55, to 58. In that the sufferings of Christ were
proportionable to the sinning-powers in man, p. 59. To the Law, p. 60, 61. To
the sin and sufferings of a World, p. 61, 62, 63. The fruits of his sufferings
as to Himself, and as to us, p. 64, 65. The dreadfulness of sin in respect of
the sufferings of Christ, and the miserable end of impenitent sinners, p. 65,
66, etc. CHAP. V. Gods Love and Mercy manifested, in that he stood not upon the
old terms as he might, and in giving his Son for us, p. 70, to 75. The Socinian
objection, (That if God loved us, he was not angry) answered, p. 76, 77, 78.
The earliness and freeness of Gods love in giving his Son, p. 79, 80, 81. The
greatness of the gift, p. 82. The manner how he was given, p. 83, 84, 85. The
persons for whom, p. 85, 86, 87. The evils removed, and the good procured by
it, p. 87, to 91. The excellent Evangelical terms built upon it, p. 91. These
are easy and sure, p. 92, 93, 94. The Love and Mercy of God an excellent
Motive to stir up our love toward God and man, p. 95, 96, 97, etc. CHAP. VI.
The Power of God manifest in Christ, p. 99, 100. In his incarnation and
conception, p. 100, 101, 102. In his Miracles, p. 103, 104. These were true in
the History, p. 104, 105, 106. True in the nature of Miracles, p. 107. They
were numerous and great, 108, 109, 110. They were suited to the Evangelical
Design, p. 111, 112. Divine Power manifest in converting the World,
notwithstanding its deep corruption, and the opposition of Potentates and
Philosophers to the Gospel, p. 113, to 124. The instruments mean, that the
power might be of God, p. 124, 125. The Gospel proposes super-rational
Mysteries, supermoral Virtues, super-mundane rewards; things so much above us,
that without a Divine power the proposal would have been fruitless, p. 126,
127. CHAP. VII. The Truth of God manifested in Christ, p. 133, 134. The Promise
of the Messiah, p. 134. The Messiah is already come, ibid. 135. Jesus is the
true Messiah, p. 136, 137, 138. All the other promises are built upon him, 138,
139. The truth of the Moral Law evidenced in him, 139. The Mandatory part
proved by his active Obedience; The Minatory by his Sufferings, p. 139, 140,
141. He is the substance of the Types and Sacrifices, p. 142, 143, 144.
Somewhat in him answers to them, p. 144, 145. And somewhat in him infinitely
transcends them, p. 146, to 149. The truth of Worship set forth in him, p. 150.
He unclogged it from Rituals, opened the spiritual mode of it, communicates
Grace for it, reveals the great Reward of Eternal Life, p. 150, 151, 152. CHAP.
VIII. Gods Providence asserted from Scripture, Philosophy, and Reason, 156,
157, 158. It has a double act, Conservative and Ordinative, p. 159, 160, 161.
Both are manifested in Christ, p. 162. It was over Christ, over his Genealogy,
Birth, Life, Death, p. 162, 163, 164. Over the fruit of his Satisfaction, in
raising up a Church, p. 165. It aimed at a Church, directed the means, and
added the blessing, p. 166, 167. That opinion, That Christ might have dyed, and
yet there might have been no Church, is false, p. 168, 169, 170. All other
Providence reduced to those over Christ and the Church, p. 171, to 176.
Epicurus's Objection against Providence answered, p. 176, 177, 178. Providence
over free acts of men asserted, and yet Liberty not destroyed, p. 178, to 186.
The objections touching the afflictions of good men, and the event of sin,
solved, p. 186, to 192 The Entity in sinful actions distinct from the Anomy,
the Order from the Ataxy, p. 192, 193, etc. CHAP. IX. The Doctrine of Original
sin, the great moment of it, p. 202, to 205. Adam's sin imputed to us, p. 206.
The proof of it from Scripture, p. 207, to 209. Adam's capacity, p. 210. Adam's
righteousness, ibid. Objections answered, p. 211, to 215. Our inherent pravity,
p. 216. The proof of it from Scripture, p. 217, 218. The experience of our
hearts, p. 219, to 221. The actual sins in the world, p. 222, 223. The doctrine
of Original sin manifested from Christ's extraordinary Conception, p. 224, 225.
His Headship opposed to Adam's, p. 226, from the institution of Baptism, p.
227. The wickedness of the Jews in crucifying of Christ, p. 228, 229. The
purchase of Regeneration and Salvation made by Christ, p. 230, to 234. A short
improvement of this Doctrine, p. 235, 236, etc. CHAP. X. Touching Grace, p.
239. The fountain of it Gods love, ib. 240. The streams supernatural gifts, p.
240, 241. The center Heaven, p. 242. Its freeness, in that all perish not in
the fall; Original sin meriting death, and Christ being a free gift, p. 242, to
248. Its freeness in choosing a Church to God, p. 248. Election not of all, p.
249. No Legislative act, but a singling out of some to life in an infallible
way, and merely of Grace, 250, to 259. It Is freeness in the external and
internal Call, p. 259, to 262. The distinction between the two Calls, 263, to
269. The efficacy of Grace as to the Principles of Faith and other graces; with
the manner of their production, p. 269, to 276. As to actual believing and
willing; with the proofs of it, 276, to 285. As to perseverance in faith and
holiness, p. 285, 286. The Habits of Grace desectible in themselves, but not in
their dependence, p. 287, to 295. CHAP. XI. Touching Justification as to the
Law, p. 325, to 327. Christ's Righteousness constitutes us righteous, p. 328. A
double imputation: One to the proper Agent, another to those in conjunction, p.
329, 330. The conjunctions between Christ and us, p. 331, to 334. How Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us, p. 335, to 337. That it is not only the
Meritorious, but Material cause of our Justification, 338. This is proved from
that phrase, The Righteousness of God, ib. 339, 340. From the nature of
Justification, p. 341, to 343. From the parallel of the two Adams, 344, to 351.
From other phrases in Scripture, 351, to 357. From a pardon as not being the
same with Justification, 357, to 364. From Christ's suffering in our stead, 364,
365. The Objections against imputed Righteousness answered, 365, to 374. What
justifies us as to the Gospelterms, 374, etc. The necessity and connection of a
twofold Righteousness, 375, to 381. How we are justified by Faith, 381, 382.
How Good works are necessary, 382, to 387. A short conclusion, 387, 388, etc.
CHAP. XII. Touching an Holy Life, 390, to 392. It is not from principles of
Nature, 393, 394. It is the fruit of a renewed, regenerated heart, 395, to 401.
It issues out of faith and love, 401, to 407. It proceeds out of a pure
intention toward the will and glory of God, 407, to 414. It is humble, and
dependent upon the influences of Grace, 414, to 421. It requires a sincere
mortification of sin, without any salvo or exception, 421, to 427. It stands in
an exercise of all Graces, 427, 428. It makes a man holy in ordinances, alms,
prosperity, adversity, contracts, calling, 428, to 441. There is such an
exercise of graces as causes them to grow, 441, to 447. The conclusion of the
Chapter, 447, to 449.
CHAP. I.


GOD All-sufficient must needs be his own happiness; he has his Being from
himself, and his happiness is no other than his being radiant with all
Excellencies, and by intellectual and amatorious reflections, turning back into
the fruition of it self. His Understanding has prospect enough in his own
infinite Perfections: his Will has rest enough in his own infinite Goodness;
he needed not the pleasure of a World, who has an eternal Son in his bosom to
joy in; nor the breath of Angels or men, who has an eternal Spirit of his own:
he is the Great All, comprizing all within himself: nay, unless he were so, he
could not be God. Had he let out no beams of his glory, or made no intelligent
creatures to gather up and return them back to himself, his happiness would
have suffered no eclipse or diminution at all: his Power would have been the
same, if it had folded up all the possible Worlds within its own arms, and
poured forth never an one into being to be a monument of it self. His Wisdom
the same, if it had kept in all the orders and infinite harmonies lying in its
bosom, and set forth no such series and curious contexture of things as now are
before our eyes. His Goodness might have kept an eternal Sabbath in it self,
and never have come forth in those drops and models of Being which make up the
Creation. His Eternity stood not in need of any such thing as time or a
succession of instants to measure its duration; nor his Immensity of any such
Temple as Heaven and Earth to dwell in, and fill with his presence. His
Holiness wanted not such pictures of it self as are in Laws or Saints; nor his
Grace such a channel to run in as Covenants or Promises. His Majesty would have
made no abatement, if it had had no train or host of creatures to wait upon it,
or no rational ones among them, such as Angels and men, to sound forth its
praises in the upper or lower World. Creature-praises, though in the highest
tune of Angels, are but as silence to him, as that Text may be read, Psalm
65.1. Were he to be served according to his Greatness, all the men in the World
would not be enough to make a Priest, nor all the other creatures enough to
make a Sacrifice fit for him; Is it any pleasure to him that thou art
righteous, says Eliphaz, Job 22.3? No doubt he takes pleasure in our
righteousness, but the complacence is without indigence; and while he likes it,
he wants it not.

That such an infinite All-sufficient One should manifest himself, must needs
be an act of admirable supereffluent Goodness; such as indeed could not be done
without stooping down below his own Infinity, that he might gratify our
weakness. Those two Hebrew words, (...), which imports flesh or weakness, and
(...), which is to annunciate and declare good tidings, are of a near affinity.
In the mystery of the Incarnation God came down into our flesh; and in every
other manifestation of himself, he comes down, as it were, into the weakness of
creatures or notions, that we, who cannot hear or understand the eternal Word
in it self, or enter the Light inaccessible, might see him in reflexes and
finite glasses, such as we are able to bear. Every manifestation imports
condescension. The World, as fair and goodly a structure as it is, is but
instar puncti aut nihili, like a little drop or small dust to him.
Creature-reason, though a divine particle, and more glorious than the Sun it
self, is but a little spark for the Infinite Light to show himself in. No
words, no not those in the purest Laws and richest Promises, are able to reach
him; who, as an Ancient has it, is (...), Essence, Goodness, Wisdom, all in
hyperbole, in a transcendent excess above words or notions. His Name is above
every name; nevertheless, he humbles himself to appear to our minds in a
Scripture-image; nay, to our very senses in the body of Nature, that we might
clasp the arms of Faith and Love about the holy beams, and in their light and
warmth ascend up to their great Original, the Father of Lights and Mercies.

God has manifested himself many ways. He set up the material World, that he,
though an invisible Spirit, might render himself visible therein: all the hosts
of Creatures wear his colors. Sensible things (say the Platonists) are but the
types and resemblances of spiritual, which are the primitive and archetypal
Beings. Every thing here below (say the Jewish Cabalists) has some root above,
and all Worlds have the print and seal of God upon them. Eternity shadows forth
it self in time; infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, pourtray out themselves
upon finite things in such legible characters, that, as soon as we open our
eyes upon them, we see innumerable creatures pointing to the Creator, and
teaching that Wisdom, which Archytas the Philosopher placed in the reduction of
all things to one great Original. Almighty Power has printed it self upon the
World, nay, upon every little particle of it: all the creatures came out of
nothing, and between that and Being is a very vast gulf. It was an infinite
Power, which filled it up and fetched over the creatures into Being; it was an
Almighty Word, which made the creatures at an infinite distance hear and rise
up out of nothing. The old Axiom, Ex nihilo nihil sit, is Natures limit and a
true measure of finite powers; but when, as in the Creation, Nature overflows
the banks, when Nullity it self springs up and runs over into a World, we are
sure, that the moving Power was an Infinite one. And as infinite Power appears
in the being of the creatures, so does infinite Wisdom in their orders and
harmonies. The curious Idea's and Congruities, which before were latent in the
divine breast, are limned out upon outward and sensible things, standing in
delicate order and proportion before our eyes. The World is a System of
contraries made up into one body, in which disagreeing natures conspire
together for the common good: each creature keeps its station, and all the
parts of Nature hang one upon another in a sweet confederacy. Mere natural
Agents operate toward their ends, as if they were Masters of Reason, and hit
their proper mark, as if they had a providence within them. Such things as
these teach us to conclude with Zeno, that (...), Reason, is the Great Artist
which made all; and to break out with the Psalmist, O Lord! how manifold are
thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all. And as the two former Attributes
show forth themselves in the creatures, so also does infinite Goodness: all the
drops and measures of goodness in the creature lead us to that infinite
Goodness, which is the Fountain and Spring of all. Pherecydes the Philosopher
said, That Jupiter first transformed himself into Love, and then made the
World; he, who is essential Love, so framed it, that Goodness appears
everywhere: it shines in the Sun, breathes in the Air, flows in the Sea, and
springs in the Earth; it is Reason in Men, sense in Brutes, life in Plants, and
more than mere Being in the least particles of matter. The Manichees, who would
have had their Name from pouring out of Manna, did brook their true name from
Mania, that is, Madness, in denying so excellent a World to be from the good
God. The light in their Eyes, breath in their Nostrils, bread in their Mouths,
and all the good creatures round about them, were pregnant refutations of their
senseless Heresy: the prints of goodness everywhere extant in Nature, show the
good hand which framed all.

In the making of Man in his original integrity, there was yet a greater
manifestation. In other creatures there were the footsteps of God, but in Man
there was his Image; a natural Image in the very make of his Soul, in the
essential faculties of Reason and Will, upon which were derived more noble and
divine prints of a Deity than upon all the World besides. And in that natural
Image there was seated a moral one, standing in that perfect knowledge and
righteousness, in which more of the beauty and glory of God did shine forth,
than in the very essence of the Soul it self. His Mind was a pure Lamp of
Knowledge without any mists or dark shades about it, his Will a mirror of
Sanctity and rectitude without any spot in it; and, as an accession to the two
former images, there was an image of Gods Sovereignty in him, he was made Lord
over the brutal World; without, the beasts were in perfect subjection to him:
and within, the affections. Now to such an excellent creature, in his primitive
glory, with a Reason in its just (...) or full stature, the World was a very
rare Spectacle; the stamps and signatures upon the creatures looked very fresh
to his pure Paradisical eyes: from within, and from without, he was filled with
illustrious rays of a Deity: he saw God everywhere; within, in the frame and
divine furniture of his Soul, and without, in the creatures and the impresses
of goodness on them: he heard God everywhere, in his own breast in the voice
of a clear unvailed Reason, and abroad in the high language and dialect of
Nature. All was in splendour, the World shone as an outward Temple, and his
heart was in luster like an Oracle or inward Sanctuary; every thing in both
spoke to Gods honor. Such an excellent appearance as this, was worthy of a
Sabbath to celebrate the praises of the Creator in. But alas! Sin soon entered
and cast a vail upon this Manifestation; on the World there fell a curse, which
pressed it into groans and traveling pains of vanity; the Earth had its
Thistles, the Heavens their spots and malignant influences, all was out of
tune, and jarring into confusion. In Man all the Images of God more or less
suffered, the orient Reason was miserably clouded, the holy Rectitude utterly
lost: without, the beasts turned rebels; and within, the affections.
Nevertheless God, who is unwearied in Goodness, would further manifest himself.
Promises of the Messiah, and of grace in him, brake forth unto lapsed man; and
as appendants thereof there came forth Sacrifices and other types to be figures
of heavenly things, and a kind of Astrolabe to the pious Jews, that by earthly
things they might ascend unto Celestial. Also the Moral Law was given forth by
God, the spiritual Tables being broken, material ones were made; Holiness and
Righteousness being by the fall driven out of their proper place, the heart of
man, were set forth in letters and words in the Decalogue. This was so glorious
a manifestation, that the Rabbis say, that Mountains of sense hang upon every
Iota of it. The Psalmist in the 19th Psalm, having set forth how the Sun and
Heavens show forth Gods glory, raises up his discourse to the perfect Law,
which, as it enlightens the inward man, is a brighter luminary than the Sun
which shines to sense; and, as it comprizes all duties within it self, is a
nobler circle in Morality, than the Heavens which inviron all other bodies are
in Nature. The Commandment, says the Psalmist, is exceeding broad, Psalm
119.96: it is an Ocean of Sanctity and Equity, such as humane Reason, the soul
and measure of civil Laws, cannot search to the bottom. Love to God and our
Neighbor is the center of it; and as many right lines as may be drawn thither,
so many are the duties of it. Whatsoever it be, that makes up the just posture
of man toward his Maker or fellow creatures, is required therein. Humane Laws
are (...), movable orders, such as turn about with time; but the Moral Law is
by its intrinsecal rectitude so immortalized, that, as long as God is God, and
man man, it cannot be altered.

After all these Manifestations, God revealed himself to the World in and by
Jesus Christ; this is the last and greatest appearance of all. In the inferior
creatures there is a footstep of God, but not his Image; in man there is his
Image, but a finite, a created one: but Jesus Christ is the infinite increated
Image of God. The nearer any creature does in its perfections approach to God,
the more it reveals him; life shows forth more of him than mere being, sense
than life, Reason than all the rest: but oh! what a spectacle has Faith, when
an humane nature shall be taken into the Person of God, when the fullness of the
Godhead shall dwell in a creature Hypostatically! Here the Eternal Word which
framed the World was made flesh; the infinite Wisdom which lighted up Reason in
man, assumed an Humanity; never was God so in man, never was man so united to
God, as in this wonderful Dispensation: more glory breaks forth from hence than
from all the Creation. We have here the Center of the Promises, the substance
of the types and shadows, the Complement of the Moral Law, and Holiness and
Righteousness, not in letters and syllables, but living, breathing, walking,
practically exemplified in the Humane nature of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II.
speculum. The Divine Attributes shine in him, particularly Wisdom. The
obstacles of Redemption to be removed. The Son of God fit for the work: many
admirable conjunctions of God and Man, of Justice and Mercy, of Punishment and
Obedience in Christ's sufferings; of Satisfaction and a kind of execution of the
Law; of Satisfaction and Merit; of Merit and Example; all tending to our
Salvation. The rare conquest of Sin, Satan, the World, Death; Humility of mind
necessary. The desperate issue of the pride of humane Reason; need of Humility
from the threefold state of Reason, in Integrity, after the Fall, after Faith.

JESUS CHRIST, as he is the eternal Son of God, is the brightness of his glory,
and the express Image of his person, Heb. 1.3. But because our weakness could
not bear so excellent a Glory without being swallowed up by it, he veiled
himself in our flesh, that he, who was light of light in the eternal
Generation, might become the light of the World in an admirable Incarnation;
and such he was under a double notion. He may be considered either as revealing
the Gospel, and thus he is the great Prophet, who from his Fathers bosom
brought down so many precious truths and mysteries to the World; or else as set
forth in the Gospel in his conception, birth, life, death, resurrection and
exaltation at Gods right hand; and thus he is speculum Theologiae, a pure glass
of Divinity. Hence the Apostle tells us, that the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God is in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. This latter Notion is
that which this discourse aims at, to contemplate those many Truths which are
either lively expressed in the Incarnate Word, or may be reasonably drawn from
that incomparable Dispensation.

God, that he might help our weakness, and attract our faith to himself, has
been pleased to come, as it were, out of his unapproachable light, and manifest
himself in Attributes, such as Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Grace, Mercy, Power,
with the like. These Rays of the divine Perfection are let down on purpose,
that we might sanctify him in our hearts, that our souls might be in a posture
of holy humility, faith, fear, love, joy, and obedience, suitable to those
Excellencies in him. My first work therefore must be, to show how these
Attributes are displayed in Jesus Christ: We all with open face behold as in a
glass the glory of the Lord, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.18. Jesus Christ is
that pure Glass wherein the glory of God, that is, the divine Attributes, so
eminently shine forth to us, that we may contemplate them with open face.

To begin first with the Attribute of Wisdom; this is the great Disposer, which
in all things places the Center and draws the lines, fixes the end and
harmonizes the means thereunto. There is a fair impress of it in the work of
Creation, much more in that of Redemption: a Nobler end there cannot be than
Gods glory in the Salvation of lost man, nor a more admirable means than God
manifest in the flesh. This is the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7; a
thing more sublime than all the secrets in the Creation. Humane reason may by
its own innate light go into the outward Temple of Nature, but into the
Sanctuary of Evangelical mysteries it cannot, unless supernaturally
illuminated, ever enter; and when it is there, it is capable but of a little
portion thereof: nay, the very Angels, who stoop down to pry into it, are not
able to search it to the bottom, nor to tell over the treasures of Wisdom which
are in it. This is (...), the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. Never was
such a constellation of Attributes as there is here: that Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness which appeared in Creation, are here in greater luster; and over and
above Holiness, Justice and Mercy shine forth in their orient Excellencies:
never did the glory of God so break forth, as it does in this wonderful
Dispensation.

That we may the better view it, it will be requisite to consider, first, the
obstacles in the way, and then how admirably the divine Wisdom did pass through
them and accomplish the great Work.

The Obstacles were such as these:

1. Man turning apostate from his God and primitive Integrity, justly sunk
himself into an horrible gulf of sin and misery. Sin lay upon him, and wrath
for sin; the broken Law pronounced Death, an eternal curse against him; divine
Justice appeared through the threatening like devouring fire, ready to catch
hold on him as fit fuel for eternal flames; unless Satisfaction were made, he
must have gone into Hell, the proper place for irremediable sinners: in this
forlorn estate, what may he, can he, do? Shall he melt himself into repentant
tears, or consecrate himself unto perpetual Holiness? Alas! depraved Nature
cannot elevate it self unto these, nor will Grace dispense them to an unatoned
sinner: nay, could they be had, they would be as finite nothings in comparison
of that infinite Satisfaction which Justice calls for. Sin is an infinite evil,
objectively infinite, a kind of deicidium, a striking at the Majesty, Holiness,
Justice, nay, the very Life and Being of God, and without another deicidium, a
crucifying the Lord of glory, which is a Sacrifice of infinite value, not to be
expiated. Which consideration also tells us, that all the Angels in Heaven,
though creatures without spot, could not have been able to have satisfied for
the sin of man; all that they have is but finite, the burden of Gods wrath was
much too heavy for them: one sin sunk their fellow-Angels into chains of
darkness, and how could they stand under a world of iniquity? The titles of
Savior and Redeemer, which equal, if not exceed that of Creator, were too high
for them: and how could they who knew their own station, and were confirmed
therein, attempt or so much as cast an aspiring glance after them? Upon the
whole matter, we see this first Obstacle is such, as no creature in Heaven and
Earth was able to remove out of the way.

2. Ex part creaturae, the impossibility is apparent: may we look up to
Heaven? There seems to be a division above, a kind of variance among the divine
Attributes: On the one hand Mercy, that tender indulgent Attribute, seems to
melt and cry out over fallen man; What! shall man, made after the divine Image;
a poor seduced creature, shall he, nay, his whole race Eternally perish! shall
I have never a Monument among the sons of men, nay, nor in the whole Creation?
shall nothing of the humane nature serve God or enjoy him? On the other,
Justice pleaded, That every one must have his due, the wages of sin is death;
the Majesty of Heaven must not be offended, nor his sacred Law violated without
a just recompense. Holiness, which cannot but abhor sin, could do no less than
stand on the same side. Truth remembered, that that threatening, moriendo
morieris, Thou shall surely die, was too sacred a thing to be made nothing of;
some way or other it ought to be satisfied. Thus the Attributes themselves seem
to be at a distance.

3. Could a Ransom be found out to the content of Justice, how should man,
depraved polluted man, be made capable of receiving such a benefit? who should
unscale his eyes, that he might look upon such a mystery? who should break his
iron-sinewed will, that he might yield to such terms, as Salvation was to be
given upon? It is certain, that blind impenitent creatures cannot enter into
Heaven; before they can arrive thither, their eyes must be opened upon the
great Offer, their hearts must be dissolved into the divine Will; and how this
shall come to pass, is another difficulty. Now after the difficulties, let us
see the admirable solution of them: when all finite understandings were posed
and nonplust at the case of fallen man, when neither men nor Angels could so
much as start a thought touching a remedy, infinite Wisdom found out a way of
Salvation for us. The incomparable contrivance was thus: A creature, a finite
person could not satisfy Justice, but an infinite one shall do it. There are
three persons in the sacred Trinity, but the Son of God shall do it; He shall
assume an humane nature; in it He shall obey and die upon a Cross, and thereby
he shall satisfy divine Justice, and purchase Grace and Eternal life for us.
That the Son should do it rather than any other person, was very congruous many
ways. Gods beloved One was fit to reconcile us, his essential Image was fit to
repair the gracious one; none could be more meet to usher in Adoption than Gods
natural Son, nor to enlighten the World than the brightness of his glory: the
Eternal Word Incarnate must needs be an excellent Prophet, the middle person in
the sacred Trinity a most congruous Mediator. The blessed Father showed forth
himself in a former work in Creation; the holy Spirit appears in a subsequent
work, in Sanctification; it was therefore very meet that the Son, the second
person in the Trinity, should manifest himself in the middle work, in
Redemption. But that we may look a little further into this admirable Design,
it will not be amiss to fix our eyes upon those rare Conjunctions, which the
divine Wisdom has framed in order to our Salvation.

1. There is a Conjunction of Natures, God and Man in one person. Jesus Christ,
who was consubstantial with the Father as to his Divinity, was made
consubstantial with us as to his Humanity; Heaven and Earth were united
together in an ineffable manner: the distance between God and man was, as it
were, filled up in this wonderful Incarnation, supremum insimi did attingere
infimum supremi, the creature came as near God as possibly could be. Admirable
are the tendencies of this Union. He was Man, that he might be capable of
suffering, and that by suffering he might satisfy in the same Nature which had
sinned. He was God, that he might stamp such an infinite value upon his
sufferings; that those, though but the sufferings of one, might answer for a
World, and, though but temporal sufferings, might counterpoise Eternal. He was
Man, that in condescension to our weakness he might speak to us through a vail
of flesh. He was God, that he might speak to our hearts in divine
illuminations; in words of life and power. He was Man, that he might be touched
with a feeling of our infirmities, and melt into tender compassions toward us.
He was God, that he might break all the powers of darkness, and erect an holy
Throne in our hearts. This was the first fundamental Conjunction, a thing
worthy to attract from us a much higher admiration, than what is due to the
Wonders in Nature.

2. There is a Conjunction of Justice and Mercy. These in men do usually, like
the Sun and Moon, reign by turns; but in this wonderful Dispensation these are
in exercise and glory both at once. Justice appears, in that Jesus Christ our
Sponsor was smitten and wounded to death, and that an accursed one for our
sins: Mercy shines forth, in that Sinners repenting and believing are spared,
nay, and advanced to glory. Justice did not spare the Surety, but exacted all;
Mercy does not exact ought from the believer, but forgive all. The sufferings
of Christ respect both Attributes, they satisfied the Law, and founded the
Gospel. Justice had a full compensation, and Mercy sprung up in promises of
Grace and Life.

3. Holiness in God, which hates sin, is the fundamental root of that Justice,
which punishes it. Punishment issues out of Justice; Justice springs out of
Holiness. Now that Holiness may be contented, and so Justice satisfied, not
only in it self, but in its very foundation, there was in Christ's Sufferings a
Conjunction of punishment and obedience. It Is true, the Socinians think these
two altogether inconsistent, Si Christi passiones rationem obedientia habent,
rationem poenae habere non possunt; obedientia enim virtus est, poena autem
propter inobedientiam infligitur. Schlict. contr. Meisn. 128.
because obedience is a Virtue, but punishment is inflicted for disobedience.
But in Scripture the thing is clear; there was a virtuous action in his
Passion, a signal obedience in his Sufferings: he poured out his soul, he was
obedient unto death. Pure entire obedience run through his whole life to the
last gasp upon the Cross: it was not at all broken or interrupted by the bloody
Agony, nor lost or forsaken in that night of desertion, when he cried out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. His Sufferings were very penal in
themselves, and inflicted by Justice, yet freely undertaken, and obedientially
undergone. Here therefore was an admirable work of Wisdom; his Sufferings as
penal satisfied Justice, and as obediential gratified Holiness.

4. The Truth of God was concerned in that first Threatening, Thou shall surely
die; and in that other, which is a kind of Commentary upon it, Cursed is he
that continues not in all things. These Threatenings, which were the sanction
of that eternal Law, touching which our Savior assures us, that one jot or
tittle of it shall not pass away, are not to be confounded with those
conditional Threatenings which are extant in Scripture, and were by God used to
induce men unto repentance. Now that Truth might be salved, there was in
Christ's Sufferings a conjunction of a Satisfaction, and a kind of execution of
the Law. Indeed, an execution of it in the rigor or strict letter of it there
was not, neither could that be but upon the Sinner himself; yet there was a
kind of execution of it in an equitable sense in our Sponsor Jesus Christ: his
Satisfaction, though it was not the idem, the very same which the letter of the
Law called for; yet in infinite Wisdom it was accommodated to the terms of the
Law, as far as the decorum of his Sacred Person could admit of; in the
threatening there was Death and a Curse, and both these were in the sufferings
of Christ: hence the Apostle says, That sin was so condemned in his flesh,
that the righteousness of the Law was fulfilled, Romans 8.3, 4. It was in a sort
executed in our Surety, that in the same sufferings there might be a
satisfaction to Justice, and a compliance with Truth. He that considers these
Conjunctions will have cause to cry out with the Psalmist, Mercy and truth are
met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other, Psalm 85.10.

5. That poor lapsed man with his blind eyes and hard heart, utterly incapable
in himself of Heaven, may be made meet for it; there was in Christ's sufferings
a conjunction of Satisfaction and Merit; Justice was compensated, and Grace
impetrated. Indeed the Socinians, blind with their own corrupt reason, cannot
see how these two should stand together, ubi est satisfactlo, ibi non est
meritum; Satisfactio est solutio debiti de jure, meritum autem opus indebitum.
Soc.
Satisfaction being the payment of a just debt, and Merit the doing of an undue
work. To which I answer: It is true, that when one pays a finite sum for his
own debt, there is not, there cannot be a merit in it; but when Jesus Christ
paid down sufferings of an infinite value for us, there cannot but be an
immense merit in them. Infinity is an Ocean, and may run over in effects as far
as it pleases; those sufferings had a kind of Infinity in them, enough to pay
divine Justice, and over and above by a redundance of merit to purchase all
grace for us. Hence the Apostle says, That the Holy Ghost is shed on us
abundantly through Jesus Christ, Tit. 3.6. Christ ascended up to Heaven in the
glory of his Merits, and from thence poured down the Holy Spirit on men, that
their blind eyes might be opened upon the mysteries of the Gospel, and their
hard hearts might be melted into repentance. Thus a fair way is opened to make
fallen man capable of Eternal Life.

6. Because the inward vital principles of Grace in men must needs flourish
most, when there is an outward excellent pattern of Holiness set before them;
there was therefore in Christ's sufferings a conjunction of Merit and Example:
the Merit procured the principles of Grace, and the Example by its divine
beauty drew them out into imitation. Vix fieri posse videtur, ut una and eadem
re and satisfiat, and simul exemplum relinquatur, Socin. Prael. cap. 20.
Socinus thinks, that a Satisfaction and an Example can very hardly meet
together in the same thing; the like scruple may be made touching Merit and
Example: and the very truth is, Satisfaction and Merit are a Cup which we
cannot drink of, a Sea in which we cannot trace or follow our Savior.
Nevertheless, infinite Wisdom laid one plot under another; and under inimitable
Satisfaction and Merit, couched an incomparable pattern of Holiness for us. We
may clearly see in him, how we are to mortify corruptions, bear afflictions,
learn obedience by sufferings, and obey unto the death. In these he has left
us an Example, that we might follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21.

Having seen the contrivance in these rare Conjunctions, let us now consider
how the Divine Wisdom set Ambushments for our spiritual Enemies: I mean, Sin,
Satan, the World, and Death; all which are in a very admirable manner overcome
by Jesus Christ. Sin, which meritoriously was the bloody crucifier of the Son
of God, was crucified together with him when he suffered; it was in his flesh
condemned as an accursed thing worthy to die; no sooner are we in him by Faith,
but it loses its kingdom, and by a divine Virtue from his Cross, it droops and
languishes away in us.

Satan the arch-enemy, at Christ's death seemed to be a Conqueror; that God
Incarnate should be slain by his hellish Instruments, that the whole Church
should die in its Head, looks like a mighty Victory: when the Head shall die,
what shall the Members do? when the Sun, the great Globe of Light in the
spiritual World, shall be turned into blood; what should remain but that
darkness, which Satan has the power of? Upon the death of the Duke of Guise,
Henry the Third broke out thus, Nunc demum Rex sum. Now at last I am King. Upon
the death of our Savior, Satan might suppose himself absolute Prince in the
lower World; a greater Adam than the first being fallen, no man can probably
stand before him. But here infinite Wisdom shows forth it self. Satan is taken
in his own snare; by that very death of Christ, which was procured by his own
Agents, is he utterly overthrown. Christ upon the Cross did spoil
Principalities and Powers, and triumph over them in it, Col. 2.15. The
satisfaction in his sufferings, paid off divine Justice, and the Merit in them
procured that divine Spirit, which is able to bind and cast out Satan from the
hearts of men. The Cross was now turned into a triumphant Chariot: and, as an
Ancient has it, there were two affixed to it; Du^ in cruce affixi sunt,
Christus visibiliter, sponte ad tempus, diabolus invisibiliter, invitus in
perpetuum. Orig.
Christ visibly, freely, for a time; the Devil invisibly, coactively, for ever:
that Cross was a final Victory over him. He was overcome not by a man only, but
by a man suffering, bleeding, dying upon a Cross; the Lord reigns (...), from
the Cross (as some of the Ancients read that 10th verse in the 96 Psalm),
through death he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devil,
Heb. 2.14. The Devil was destroyed by Death his own weapon, and overcome in
that which he had the power of.

The wicked World at the death of Christ triumphed and insulted even to
blasphemy, He saved others, himself he cannot save, Matthew. 27.42; as if all his
miraculous power were now swallowed up in weakness; Let him come down from the
Cross, and we will believe him, Matthew. 27.42; as if without a fresh Miracle all
his holy Doctrines would vanish into nothing. The Jews, who were for Signs,
stumbled and fell in the midst of those glorious Miracles which he wrought
among them. The Greeks, who were for Wisdom, saw nothing but foolishness in the
midst of the divine Mysteries, which he brought down out of his Fathers Bosom.
A crucified Christ looked like a spectacle of weakness and folly. But here the
divine Wisdom appears, in that, as the Apostle has it, The foolishness of God
is wiser than men, and the weakness of God stronger than men. This crucified
Christ shall attract a Church out of the corrupt Mass of mankind; the
foolishness of Preaching shall do it. The Plato's or Aristotle's of the World
shall not be employed in the work; no, there shall be only Piscatoria
simplicitas, a few Fishermen shall catch men, and draw them home unto God; to
the effectually called, this despised Christ shall be the power and wisdom of
God. The divine Spirit, merited by him, shall endue them with a wisdom much
higher than that of Nature and Philosophy, and cloathe them with a power to
make them live above all the hopes and fears of this World.

Death, the last Enemy, which had devoured so much humane flesh, did not spare
that Sacred portion, which was assumed into the Son of God: but in his death,
Death it self was swallowed up in Victory. It passes indeed upon all men; but
when it comes to a Believer, it lays by its sting, and becomes only a passage
into life Eternal.

To conclude: In all these Conquests, we may see one Contrary brought out of
another: Life out of Death, Power out of Weakness, a Blessing out of a Curse,
and a Victory out of Sufferings, which speaks no less than an admirable
contrivance therein.

These appearances of Divine Wisdom naturally teach us humility of mind. Humane
Reason is indeed in its own Orb an excellent Light; but a greater than it, the
Reason of God himself, comes forth to us in supernatural Mysteries, to make us
sit down at his feet for Instruction. Nothing can be more just and purely
rational, than for our Intellect being finite, to be subject to the infinite
Truth; and being lighted up by God, to do homage to its great Original. It Is
true, ever since man tasted of the Tree of Knowledge, his Reason has had a
malignant pride in it: of a Minister it would be a Lord over our Faith;
assuming the Magisterial Chair, it would fall a-judging Divine Mysteries; it
would comprehensively span them within it self: and what could not be so
comprised, it would out of enmity cast away as spurious. This in the issue
has, so far as it has prevailed, desperately overturned all Faith, in the act
and in the object: in the act, for to believe a thing, because I can comprehend
it, is not faith in God, but trusting in my own heart; not a sealing to his
Veracity, but a subscribing to my own Sagacity. Hence the learned Maresius
says of the Socinians, That they have manus oculatas, hands with eyes in them;
that only do they believe which they see; they will trust God no further than
they see him. Also in the Object; this has been very subversive to the Gospel.
In the Pagan Philosophers (whose Motto was, Soli rationi cedo), it cast away
Christ crucified as foolishness, and the Gospel as an absurd Fable; it
reflected on Christians as mere Simpletons, men of an easy and irrational
faith; hence that jeer of Cato, Stultitia est morte alterius sperare salutem;
it is folly to hope for salvation in the death of another. In the Socinians,
(whose Rule is, Nihil credi potest, quod a ratione nequeat capi, nothing can be
believed, which cannot be comprehended by Reason); it has blown up the
fundamental Articles of Christianity: the sacred Trinity to them is a
contradiction; the Hypostatical Union an irrational repugnancy; the
Satisfaction of Christ a contumely to Gods grace: and in all this they do but
build a Tower, a Name to their own Reason; and, as a just punishment, in the
doing of it they fall into confusion and inconsistencies. Mar. Hydra. Tom.
2.460.
Sometimes they make the Law to exact a more perfect obedience than the Gospel:
Sometimes the Gospel to call for a more accurate righteousness than the Law. To
evert Satisfaction, they lift up Grace; but to elevate Free Will, they depress
it. They own a God, yet deny his Prescience; they say Christ is but a creature,
yet they worship him. Thus that great thing, Reason, falling from the supreme
Truth, becomes a forlorn spectacle of vanity. In a kind of self-splendor it
goes out in the darkness of error and confusion. But now to humble our minds,
it is of excellent use to consider the divine Wisdom, which is so much above
us. When our Reason stands by sense, it has a noble stature and greatness;
but, as soon as it turns about to infinite Wisdom, it perceives a greater
Presence than it self, and must in all reason confess it self a little spark, a
very Nothing in comparison. It cannot step out into the sphere of Nature, but
it finds matter of humility; being true to it self, it can do no less than say,
that it is everywhere posed and nonplust. It is not able rationally to stand
under the secrets of Nature, much more must it stoop and do reverence before
such a Mystery as that is, God manifest in the flesh; in which the transcendent
Mystery amazes us, and the unparalled Pattern draws us into humility. Thither
must we come, or else turn Infidels, and allow Reason for a Deity; saying with
Seneca, Quid aliud voces animam, quam Deum in humano corpore hospitantem? What
is the rational Soul but God dwelling in flesh, a kind of Christ, or rather
Antichrist? This, I am sure Christian ears cannot bear. But a little more to
demonstrate how necessary a thing humility of mind is; let us consider Reason
in a threefold state: then it will appear, that Reason in its Integrity could
not find out supernatural Mysteries; in its Fall cannot spiritually know them;
and lastly, in the irradiations of Faith cannot comprehend them.

1. Reason in its Integrity could not find them out. The pure primitive light
in Adam could dive into the secrets of Nature, but it could not reach such a
Mystery as that of the sacred Trinity, which is the fundamental center of
Christian Religion. He could name the creatures, and that significantly to
their natures, but that Question, What is his sons name, Prove. 30.4, would have
been too hard for him. There are, say the Schoolmen, some obscure Images of
the Trinity in the Volume of Nature, but they were found out a posteriori, and
not to be read till after Revelation; and how should humane Reason dictate in
those things which it could not find out? or know any thing from it self, when
it has all from Revelation? Nothing can be more absurd than such a presumption.

2. Reason in its Fall could not spiritually know them. Evangelical Mysteries
being proposed, it can go as far as its own line, unto letters, and words, and
sentences: it can gather in a Notion, a form of knowledge, but it wants a
congruous light; it cannot spiritually discern them, there being no alliance or
resemblance between an unregenerate mind and supernatural Mysteries. Were it
not thus, the new creature would be new only ex part, there would need no
renovation in the spirit of the mind; God, who proposes the Object, need not
shine into the heart; the Spirit of Wisdom which reveals the Gospel, need not
open the eyes. We must either affirm such things as these, or else confess that
Reason of it self has not light enough to be Umpire in supernatural Mysteries.
It does not spiritually discern them, and for that cause cannot be an Umpire;
and, as soon as by supernatural Illumination it discerns them, it will not,
dares not be such, but with all reverence acquiesces and reposes it self in the
divine Testimony: Deus dixit then is enough.

3. Reason in the irradiations of Faith cannot comprehend them: a discerning
there is, but no comprehension; let the Believer sail as far as he can in the
pursuit of holy Truths, still there will be a Plus ultra, an Abyss, a vast
Ocean, such as the humane understanding can never pass through. Faith seals to
Gods Veracity, but it offers not to measure the Mystery; it believes the thing
so to be, but it pryes not into the Modus, nor says, How can these things be?
that is the voice of depraved Reason, not of Faith, whose excellent genius is
to crucify How Is and Why's, and to subject the mind to the Word and Authority
of God.

These things being so, we should be all over clothed with Humility,
Understanding and all. The higher the faculty is, the more excellent is the
Humility; then is God honored indeed, when (...), all the Intellect, the
highest thing in man, is subjected unto Him.

CHAP. III.


HAVING seen the Attribute of Wisdom in God, I proceed to that of Holiness,
which is the glory of the Deity. He is called the Hoty One above thirty times
in Scripture: the Seraphims in an Ecstasy cry out Holy, Holy, Holy; denoting by
that repetition the superlative Eminency of his Holiness. This is an universal
Attribute, which runs through all the other. Hence we find in Scripture that
His Power or Arm is Holy, Isa. 52.10. His Truth or Promise Holy, Psalm 105.42.
His Mercy Holy, Acts 13.34. A vein of Purity runs through His whole Name.
Without Holiness his Wisdom would be Subtilty, His Justice Cruelty, His
Sovereignty Tyranny, His Mercy foolish Pity; all would degenerate into
something unworthy of God. Holiness is the infinite Purity and Rectitude of his
Essence; and it may be considered either respectively to himself, or to the
creature. Respectively to himself it includes two things:

1. That God, in all that he does, acts like himself, in a just decorum to his
excellent Being and Attributes, having no Law without or above himself. He
conforms to his Essence, and carries himself so fitly to himself, that no spot,
no darkness, no shadow of turning, no indecency or irregularity can possibly
happen to him. He cannot deny himself, or do any thing unworthy of his Being or
Attributes. He does whatever he does, in such a manner as becomes Him. Hence
Anselm observes, That when God spares and is merciful toward sinners, Justus
es secundum te, misericors es secundum nos. Prosol. cap. 10.
he is just to Himself, and that because he acts condecently to his infinite
Goodness. This is the first and prime part of his Holiness, to be just and true
to Himself, to do all congruously to his own Excellency.

2. That God does all things for Himself, his own Glory. He that is Alpha, the
first Principle of all things, must of necessity be Omoga, the last End of
them: his Sanctity requires, that all his works should return and give glory to
their Original; he should not be true or just to Himself, if he should have any
Center besides himself; his Holiness is a Transcendent above that in Man.
Supreme Self-love, which in man is a Belial thing, is a Perfection in Him: To
do all for one's self, which in man is Idolatry, it is true Sanctity in Him. It
is most proper for him, the supreme Cause and Essence, to make all things for
Himself; as of and through him, so to him are all things.

Again, Gods Holiness taken respectively to the Greature, imports two things:

1. It imports an hatred of sin: His pure Eyes cannot not look upon it with
approbation; His righteous hands will not let it go unpunished. Sin is a very
vile thing, it despises Gods Authority, casts off his Sovereignty, contradicts
his Purity, provokes his Justice; nay, it strikes at his very Being: it says,
Who is Lord, that he should be obeyed? It is the most prodigious. Rebel that
ever was; weakness, folly, corruption rising up in arms against Power, Wisdom,
and infinite Perfection. The Holy One, because he is such, must needs hate such
a filthy abominable thing: He can no more cease to hate it, than he can cease
to be Holy. His antipathy against it is so great, that he can no more admit one
drop of it into himself, than he can suffer an extinction of his Essence.

2. It imports a love of Holiness in the creature. Holiness is a very choice
thing; it is a pure breath from God, a participation of the Divine Nature: an
Image or resemblance of the Deity; more of the beauty and glory of God shines
forth in it, than in all the world besides. The other creatures are but a dark
shadow to it; nay, it is a thousand times more divine than the Soul it self.
The Holy One, who loves himself, must needs love so excellent a Picture of his
own Sanctity. The righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm 11.7; because he
is righteous in himself, therefore he loves righteousness in the creature.

Such, as I said, is Gods Holiness; The display of it in Jesus Christ succeeds.

1. The first part of his Holiness, by which he does all in a just decorum to
his excellent Being, seems to be contradicted in this Dispensation. May God be
made flesh? May Majesty be humbled? May the immutable One be changed in an
Incarnation? May the immortal One die in a bloody Passion? These things at the
first blush look as if they could not be congruously done. But I answer, The
corrupt Reason of Man, which would shape all things according to its own model
and Idea, has, under color of avoiding indecencies and inconveniences, made
very strange work about this Mystery. In the Pagan Sophi, it looked upon a
crucified God as mere folly and indecency. In the unbelieving Jews, it
reproached Christ as a Talui, a poor hanged man, altogether incapable to be a
Messiah or Savior. In the Heretics of the Church, it tore and mangled his
sacred Person all to pieces, and that under pretense of avoiding one
inconvenience or other. Arius, that he might not fall into that Gentile-vanity,
a plurality of Gods, took away Christ's Deity. Apollinaris spared his Deity, but
took away his humane Soul; the room of that being better supplied by the Deity.
Saturninus and Basilides took away his body, leaving only a Phantasm, a mere
Vmbra in the room of it: or if there must be a real Body, Apelles thought fit
that it should be a Sydereal one, which in his passage from Heaven he assumed,
and after his Resurrection restored again. Nestorius, Noli gloriari, Judaee,
non crucifixistl Deum. So Nestorias.
lest the impassible Deity should suffer, would have two Christ's; one the Son
of man who suffered, another the Son of God, who dwelt in the other as in his
Temple. Eutyches, supposing that there could not be two Natures in Christ,
without two Persons, thought it convenient, that after the Union there should
be but one Nature in Christ; the humane Nature being swallowed up in the
Divine. And the reason of all this is, because, as an Ancient has it touching
the Eutychians, In hanc insipientiam cadunt, qui, cum ad cognoscendam veritatem
aliquo impediuntur obscuro, non ad propheticas voces, non ad Apostolicas
literas, non ad Evangelicas authoritates, sed ad semetipsos recurrunt: ideo
magistri erroris existunt, quia veritatis discipuli non suere. Leo primus,
Epist. 10.
they look not so much to the Sacred Scriptures, as to themselves, being
willing that their own Reason should be Umpire in sacred Mysteries; they become
Masters of Error, who would not be Disciples of Truth. By this heap of
Experiments we may plainly see, that the decorum of this Mystery is too great
a thing to be judged by humane Reason: if we will know any thing of it, we must
address our selves to the divine Oracle, Jesus Christ, the infinite increated
Wisdom of God, who never had so much as an indecorous thought, delighted in the
sons of men, Prove. 8.31. in the prospect of a future Incarnation. It was (...),
a thing becoming him, to fulfill all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15; when yet it
could not have become him in an unbocoming Nature. There was a (...), a must,
upon his Death and Sufferings, Mutth. 16.21; when yet it was utterly
impossible, that my necessity should press him into an indecency. There was
therefore an excellent congruity in this Mystery. God indeed was made flesh,
but how? Non mutando quod erat, sed assumendo quod non erat, not by changing
his Deity, but by assuming his Humanity. Majesty was humbled, not in it self,
but in the assumed flesh, which was as a Veil over all the Glory. The change
and death was not in the Divine, but Humane nature, which was taken into his
Sacred Person in the Incarnition, and suffered death in his Passion upon the
Gross. There was a just decorum in all: Nay, in this very Mystery, at which
humane Reason cries out of indecency, God has hid such an Abyss of Wisdom, as
no created Understanding is able to fathom; a glimpse of which appears in the
next particular.

2. That part of Holiness, by which God does all things for himself, for his
own Glory, eminently appears in Jesus Christ.

In general it appears, that God is the great Center, the ultimate end of all;
and all creatures, none excepted, are as so many Lines and Mediums tending
thereunto. The Humane nature of Christ, a Creature above all creatures, lifted
up above the highest pitch of Angels, elevated into an Union with an insinite
Person, was not yet a Center to it self. It had no subsistence of its own,
neither did it operate for it self; I seek not mine own glory, says Christ,
Joh. 8.50. Nay, He adds, If I honor my self, my honor is nothing; as much as
to say, a creature referred to it self is an unprofitable Nullity. In all his
Doings and Sufferings, he did but minister to the Will and Glory of God; in the
end he will deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, that God may be all in all, 1
Cor. 15.24, and 28. Hence it is demonstratively evident, that no Creature, no,
not the highest, is or can be an End or Center to it self; all of them are but
as Medium's to the glory of God: all must circulate into their first
Fontal-principle, that it in all things may be glorified. In particutar, the
Glory of God breaks forth in this Dispensation. Jesus Christ, who in respect of
the eternal genetation is the (...), the splendour or glorious effulgence of his
Fathers glory, is in the Incarnation the Glass or bright Evidence of the
Divine. Excellencies. Never was there such a Constellation of Attributes as
here. Wisdom in the deep of its unsearchable Counsels laid the great plot of
our Salvation. Justice was paid to the full in Sufferings infinitely valuable,
such as did more than balance the sufferings of a World. Holiness was
abundantly gratified in the pure and spotless obedience of our Savior, which
was as a Gloss and living Commentary upon the whole Law. Mercy and Love opened
a bosom of infinite sweetness to receive penitent souls into favor and a
blessed Immortality. Power raised up an humane Nature in an extraordinary way,
and then showed forth it self therein in the glory of innumerable Miracles.
Truth triumphed, in that He who is the complement of the Law, the substance of
the Shadows, and the Center of the Promises, was come into the World. Never did
the brightness of Glory so excellently manifest it self as upon the Theater of
Christ's humane Nature. Hence Heaven and Earth ring with the high Praises of it.
At his Nativity an Host of Angels cry out, Glory to God in the Highest, Luke
2.14. In the Church there is glory to him by Jesus Christ throughout all Ages,
world without end, Ephesians. 3.21. Saints and Angels must now fall upon their
faces, and say, Blessing, Glory, and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honor, and
Power, and Might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen, Revel. 7.12. Eternity
it self will be little enough to spend in the praises of this incomparable
Mystery.

3. Holiness, as it imports an hatred of sin, signally demonstrates it self in
this Dispensation. God has many ways manifested his hatred of sin. It appears
in the Threatening, in which he speaks, as it were, out of the fire, and
breathes out a Death and a Curse against it. It further appears, when the
Threatening comes forth in actual Judgments, in which God falls upon his own
creature, the work of his own hands. It more appears, when Wrath comes down,
not upon this or that sinner, but upon multitudes; and not upon the offending
persons only, but upon their Infant-relations; upon their fellowcreatures, upon
the very places where they acted their iniquities. Adam sinned, and Wrath fell
upon the whole Race of mankind: nay, and a Blast and a Curse fell upon the
Creation; such as makes it groan and travel in pain with an universal Vanity.
The old World was drowned in sensualities, and a Deluge sweeps away them and
their fellowcreatures. The Sodomites burned in their unnatural lusts, and fire
and brimstone was rained down upon them. Korah, Dathan and Abiram turned
Rebels, and the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed up them, and all that
appertained to them. These are notable Tokens of displeasure, but a greater is
yet behind. The Eternal Son of God cannot assume our flesh, and stand as a
Sponsor for us, but he must bear an infinite Wrath, such as was due to the sin
of a World. Though he were the Wisdom of God, he must be sore amazed, and ready
to faint away in a fit of horror; Though the Fathers joy, he must be (...),
surrounded with sorrows even unto death. He bore up all things, yet now under
the burden of Wrath he must fall and grovel upon the ground: He must pour out
tears and strong cries to God, that the bitter Cup may pass; He must be in an
Agony, a dismal conflict with the Wrath of God, and sweat great dropped and
clotters of blood under the pressure of it. The blessed and beloved One of God
he was, yet he must be made a Curse, and upon a tormenting Cross cry out, My
God! My God! why hust thou for suken me? The Sun must now withdraw his light,
and the Earth quake in sympathy with their Creator. Oh! What a spectacle of
displeasure was here! What is a Deluge, or the groans of a dissolving World in
comparison? There mere creatures suffer, but here God in the flesh. The Marks
of divine Wrath were now set upon that humane Nature, which, as assumed into an
infmite Person, is far above all the Greation. Never was there so high a
demonstration of Gods infinite hatred and antipathy against sin, as there is
here. No created Understanding of Men or Angels could ever have found out such
a wonderful Manifestation as this is, Infinite Wifdom did it, to make sin look
like it self, infinitely odious.

Moreover, As it is the nature of Hatred to be a Murderer, to seek the not
being of the thing hated; so it was the great Design of this Mystery to
extirpate sin out of the hearts of men. For this purpose was the Son of God
mantjested, that he might the stroy the works of the devil, 1 John 3.8. There
are three things in sin: the guilt, the power, and the being. The aim of a
crucified Christ was to extirpate there all: Christ was made Sin and a Curse
for us. He did by his sweet-sinelling Satrifice fully fatisfie the Law and
Justice of God: And why did he do it, but that the bonds of guilt might be
broken off from us? The strength of sin, in binding us over to Death and Hell,
is the Law; and the Law, in its threatening of a Curse and Condemnation, is the
voice of vindictive Justice: these two being fully satisfied in Christ, the
guilt of sin becomes powerless, and unable to hold such sinners, as by Faith
and Repentance partake in that Satisfaction. There was in Christ's Sufferings,
not only a fullness of Satisfaction, but a redundance of Merit: Thereby he
procured the Holy Spirit for us; and why so, but that the power of sin might be
dissolved in us? Our own spirit of it self could not, would not do this; but
the divine Spirit, which Christ has procured, does in true Believers effect
it. Sin is no longer a prevailing-Law in the heart; the Holy Spirit takes away
its dominion, that the Throne of Christ may be set there. It is true, as Saint
Bernard says, Velis, nolis, infra fines tuos habitat Jebusaeus. Sin has a
being in Believers; but even that does the holy Spirit in the Article of Death
remove from them, that their Souls may fly away into that pure Region, where
are the spirits of just men made perfect. Thus God manirests his hatred of sin,
in that he laid in the Sufferings of Christ a design for the extirpation of it.

4. Gods Holiness, as it imports a love of holiness in man, is here, clearly
seen, in that, when it was lost, he did so much for the recovery of it.
Holiness, that divine Life (being by the Fall beaten out of the heart of man)
stood without in the letter of the Law; but that it might be recovered into the
heart of man again, that his heart might be made a Sanctuary, an holy Place for
the divine Majesty to dwell and take pleasure in, God has done very much, and
been at a vast expense about it. He has not only wished for Holiness; O that
there were such an heart in them! Deuteronomy. 5.29; but he has sent his own Son into
the flesh to be a rare Pattern and Samplar of it; nay, and to bleed and die
upon a Cross, that it might be revived in poor fallen man. It could not be
revived there without the holy Spirit, and that could never have been had,
unless Justice were satisfied; and Satisfaction could not be made without a
Sacrifice of infinite value. Christ therefore was made such an One, that the
holy Spirit might come and re-imprint Holiness in man again. God died in the
flesh, that man might live in the Spirit. One great end of Christ's sufferings,
was Holiness; He gave himself for us, that he might purify to himself a
peculiar people, Tit. 2.14; that he might have a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.27. Rather than lose Holiness, which is the Glory, He
would humble himself to the shame of a Cross; rather than we should not be
sanctified, or consecrated to God in Holiness, he would sanctify and
consecrate himself to be a sacrifice to Justice. Oh! What a rate or value does
God set upon Holiness in man! How highly must he delight and take pleasure in
it, when he will come in the flesh and die, rather than suffer it to be extinct
in the World? a greater demonstration of Love to it than this cannot possibly
be imagined.

Further, Gods love to Holiness appears in this, that he orders things so, that
no man can partake of Jesus Christ, unless he subject himself to the holy terms
of the Gospel: he that names the Name of Christ, must depart from iniquity.
What if Christ be a most glorious Savior and Redeemer? What though he
fulfilled Righteousness and made Satisfaction? What though he opened a way into
the Holy of Holies, into the Glory and Immortality there? Notwithstanding all
this, without Repenting there is nothing but perishing; without Holiness there
is no seeing of God. A life after the flesh must end in death. The divine
Justice and Law, which was fully satisfied in Christ, will seize upon
rebellious sinners, and ask a second Satisfaction, as if there had been none
before: the divine hatred of sin, which was so signally evident in the
sufferings of Christ, will appear again in their utter ruin and destruction.
Things are so knit together, that Holiness must be necessary to make us happy.
Christ is a Savior and a Lord too; where he saves from Hell, there he rules in
the pure ways toward Heaven. His blood and Spirit are ever in Conjunction: if
the one deliver from Guilt and Wrath, the other subdues sin, and implants
Holiness. Promises and Precepts, which are intermixed in the Word, must be both
taken together into the heart; where the latter has not obedience, the former
can minister no comfort. True Faith receives an entire Christ; as it rests upon
his Merits and Righteousness, so it subjects to his Spirit and Word in all
things. That hope of Heaven, which purifies not, is indeed a Prefumption and
not an Hope; a Cobweb hanging in a vain heart, and not an Anchor sure and
steadfast, entering into that within the Vail. God out of love to Holiness has
linked it in with Christ, Promises, Faith, Heaven, and Salvation, that no man
can or may enjoy the one without the other; till Christ can be divided, his
Sacrifice from his Scepter; till Promises can be rent off from the holy
Precepts, to which they are annexed; till a vital Faith can cease to do its
function in acts of obedience; till the holy Heavens can admit an unclean thing
into them: till then, an unholy person cannot arrive at Happiness. In all this
we see, how high a respect God has for Holiness.

Now what remains, but that Christians, who have this glorious Attribute set
before them, should bethink themselves, what manner of persons they ought to
be. God acts like himself; Should not they do so? their decorum stands in an
holy Assimilation to him. Christianity is, as an Ancient has it, (...), a
likeness to God, to be after him in his imitable Perfections: to be loving,
merciful, holy, patient, as He is, is to be, and act like themselves. One
Virtue of God or other should be still breaking forth from them, to tell the
World that they are Christians: Their finite love and mercy to
fellow creatures, should speak their sense of that infinite love and mercy
which they have tasted of: Their patience under injuries should carry a
resemblance of those Riches of goodness and forbearance, which God has spent
upon themselves: All their holy Graces should appear as so many Rays and little
Images of Him, who is the great Fountain and pattern of Holiness. For them to
walk worthy of God, and in imitation of him, is to walk condecently to
themselves, and in correspondence to Christianity. Again, God does all things
for Himself, his own Glory, and this must be the aim of Christians: To be a
Center to themselves, they must not do it; an higher and nobler End than God
himself cannot be. It is naturally just, that He, who is the first Principle of
all things, should be the last End. That Axiom, That God in all things must be
glorified, is fundamental Divinity; that is the very thing, which they must
look to as their ultimate scope. They should put away the by-glances at Self,
and the unbecoming Squints at base and false Ends; that they may have a single
Eye, and a pure Intention to the true and great End of all things. This is the
very life and marrow of Religion: it sanctifies holy Duties; it spiritualizes
civil and natural Actions; it elevates the life unto the great Center of all
things, and by consecrating the Actions unto God, gives them a kind of
Immortality. It transforms the Soul into a deiformity or divine Nature, that it
becomes one spirit with the Lord, and falls in with the same Will and End with
him. If we will be like Christians, the frame of our heart must be above the
interests of flesh and self. All those things, which are off from the true End
and Center, must be in our eyes as so many impertinent follies: the whole of
our hearts and lives must be under a consecration to that Eternal Design, The
Glory of God blessed for ever. Moreover, God has an hatred of sin, and a love
of Holiness; and what is the work of Christians, but to follow him? Sin is so
vile an evil, that it cannot but be worthy of hatred. To the holy God and his
Attributes it is mere enmity and rebellion; to the World it is a Gurse, a blast
of Vanity; to the Soul an Ataxy, turpitude, and corruption; to the Lord Christ
as Nails, a bloody Cross, and Cup of Wrath. A horrible evil it is, and to be
hated accordingly; a mere evil without mixture of good, and to be hated with a
pure hatred without mixture of Love. An All-evil opposite to God the
All-goodness, and to be hated with all-hatred: not a drop or degree of hatred
should be let out upon any thing else. All of it in the most intense degree and
measure should be poured out upon it; in what place or time soever it be, still
it is evil, and upon that account to be hated perpetually and in all places.
And indeed, if we do bethink our selves, the groans of the poor creatures,
which are constant and everywhere round about us, do very strongly move us
hereunto; the blots and turpitudes upon our own Souls tell us, that we must
hate it, as much as we love the beauty and glory of our immortal Spirits. The
blood and wounds of our dear Savior, cry out for Justice and Vengeance to be
executed upon it. And, if we have any love for him, we must crucify it and
cast it away as an accursed thing. On the other hand, Holiness cannot but be a
fit Object for our love. It is a pure thing let down from Heaven; and, if our
love be there, it can do no less than embrace so divine an offspring as that
is. It is the very rectitude and true temper of Souls, that which sets them in
a right posture toward God and all holy things: and for that reason, more love
is to be set upon it, than that which is due to our own Souls. Though in man it
be but a little Ray or spark; yet, because of its divine Nature, it does in
little resemble him, who is all Holiness and Purity; and upon that account, our
love, which in its highest measures ascends up to Him, must in proportion be
due to it. The amiableness of it in the Letter, made the Holy man cry out, Oh
how I love thy Law! Psalm 119.97; and how illustrious and attractive must it
be, when it is in its proper Vbi, living and breathing in the spirits of men?
Rather than it should not revive there, God would be manifest in the flesh, and
die in it. And how should we die to our selves and the World, that it may live
in us? Which, when it does, we live indeed, and that a life more divine and of
higher Excellency, than is the life of mere Sense or Reason; nay, this life is
complicated with Happiness, and makes us meet for life Eternal. If we would
live for ever in Bliss and Glory, we must follow after Holiness; heart and life
must be consecrated unto God, else Heaven will not be capable to receive us,
nor shall we be fit to enter in there.

CHAP. IV.


HAVING discoursed of Gods Holiness, I now come to his Vindictive Justice;
which, as a learned man says, is a Branch or Emanation from the other. That
pure Essence which cannot but hate sin, Justitia vindicatrix in Deo sanctitatis
and summae rectitudinis pars quaedam est, and (...), Turret. de satisfact.
must needs have a propensity to punish it. That propensity cannot be separated
from the hatred of sin, nor that hatred from infinite Rectitude. The Socinians,
that they might raze Christ's Satisfaction to the very foundation, deny this
Attribute: This Justice, say they, is not an Attribute in God. Neither is it
called Justice in Scripture, but rather Severity, which is not resident in God,
but only an effect of his Will. But, that there is such an Attribute in God, is
evident in Scripture: He is called (...), Right, and (...), Righteous. As the
first chiefly respects his Universal Righteousness, so the second does his
Judicial one. He is said to be just in his judging, Revel. 16.5. His judgment
is a righteous judgment, Romans 2.5. It is a righteous thing with him to render
tribulation, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. Punishment is called a just Recompense, Heb. 2.2.
Punishment, how afflictive soever, cannot be Punishment unless Justice be
declared in it; nor can Justice be declared in that, which it requires not. The
Greek word, (...), sometimes denotes the Punishment, Jude v. 7. Sometimes the
Punitive Justice it self, Acts 28.4. One (...) is from another, just Punishment
issues out from Vindictive Justice: with respect to that only it is, that God
is called a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. As he is Light in his Essential Purity,
so he is Fire in his Essential Justice, which is ever in Conjunction with his
Purity, and, as it were the ardour of it, breaking out in flames of Wrath in
such sort, as seems fit to him. Thus Scripture. But further, Nature concurs to
make it good. This, that God is Just, is graven in the minds of all men: The
very Heathens, by the indelible Characters which they find there, are able to
read the Judgment of God, and say, that he has (...), an avenging Eye; a Ray
of it shines in their own bosom. The Barbarians, upon the sight of the Viper on
Paul's hand, cry out of a (...), a Vengeance that pursued him as a Murderer. The
very instinct of Nature told them, that there was a Connection between Guilt and
Punishment. Conscience is Dei vicarius, a kind of Representative Numen in men:
it has a secret Tribunal in the Heart, and from that Seal and impress which
divine Justice has set upon it, dooms and judges Offenders unto misery. Hence
that saying, -- Prima est haec ultio, quod se
Judice, nemo nocens absolvitur.
Punishment is coetaneous to Guilt. Sin in its egress out of the heart leaves a
sting behind. The Offender cannot be well within, his distemper is (...), a
conscience of his evil-deeds; his mind reflects torment upon it self: inwardly
he is nothing but Wounds and amazing Horrors; the Apparitions of Wrath haunt
him; Conscience is sensus and praejudicium judicii divini, a kind of
anticipation and presensation of the last Judgment. After all this, to deny God
to be just, is to offer violence to the Principles of Nature, and put a lie
upon those Notions which are born with, and instamped-upon our Reason: It is to
say, That the Image and Impress of a Deity upon our hearts, is but a
Counterfeit; That Conscience is but a Cheat, and all the Terrors there but a
false Alarm. In a word, It is to eradicate all Religion, and open a Flood-gate
to all wickedness and impiety. These being intolerable absurdities, it cannot
but be granted, that there is such an Attribute in God: (...), says Plutarch;
Justice follows God, or rather it is his very Essence.

It is an enquiry among Divines, How far it was necessary, that sin should be
punished; that without Satisfaction there should be no Remission. It is an
indubitable Verity, That it was necessary by virtue of Gods Decree: He has
declared himself, that he will by no means acquit the guilty. But this is not
all. In Scripture, Punishment is not attributed merely to his Will or Decree,
but to his just and righteous Nature; Thou art righteous, O Lord, because thou
have judged thus, Revel. 16.5. Though the mode and circumstance of Punishment
be determined by his Sovereign pleasure, yet the punishment it self issues out
from his Justice. Sin merits punishment; They that do such things are worthy of
death, Romans 1.32. It is not merely Gods Will, but his Justice, which renders
unto sin its due. The proportion which is between Sin and Punishment, shows who
holds the balance: Were it merely at the divine Pleasure to punish sin or not,
God need not punish obstinate and impenitent persons. This the Socinians
themselves cannot bear. They say, There is one Justice in God, una^est justitia
Dei, qua perpetuo utitur, dum scelestos, and contumaces, ac perditae spei
homines plectit, atque exterminat. Soc. de Serve. pars prima. cap. 1. Indignum
Deo est, eorum scelera impune dimittere. Crell. de Deo and Attr. cap. 23.
which he ever uses in punishing contumacious sinners: nay, it would be
unworthy of God not to punish them. Now, here two things may be observed: The
one is this; Obstinacy is not punished for it self, for in good it is Constancy
and worthy of praise; but it is punished because it is in evil. Sin is punished
(...) for it self, but Obstinacy for the sin only; and if sin be punished for
it self, then every sin must be punished. The other is this, If Jesus Christ
had not come and satisfied for us, all sinners would have been impenitent and
contumacious; the grace of Repentance would never have been given by an
unatoned God; neither is it now derived to us, but through a Mediator. Him has
God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance, Acts 5.31. Hence it appears, that without Christ, all sin would
have been in conjunction with impenitency, and consequently necessarily
punished. But a little more to clear this Necessity, I shall lay down some
Particulars.

1. Man, a rational Creature, could not be created, but he would immediately by
the very frame of his Soul be under a Law. His Reason by the innate notion of a
Deity, could not but be bound to know the Supreme Truth. His Will by its
propension to its proper Object, could not but be bound to love the Supreme
Goodness. The Respects, which are in the rational Powers toward their Creator,
are a Law never to be altered. God will no more dissolve them, than he will
contradict his own work: Man cannot loose himself from them, which are
interwoven with his immortal Faculties. As long as God is God, the Supreme
Truth and Goodness; and Man Man, an Intellective and Elective Creature; It must
needs be indispensably just for us to know and love our Creator. The
differences of Good and Evil are founded in Nature. The Image of Righteousness
is not a movable thing, for then the love of God might be it to day, and by a
Counter-motion, the hatred of him might be such to morrow, which is utterly
impossible.

2. Man by his very Creation being under a Law, it could not be otherwise but
God must be a Rector and Judge over him. He that made, must rule him; He that
put a Law into his Faculties, must be his Judge; His Rectitude and Justice made
him fit to be so. Hence that of the Apostle, Is God unrighteous who takes
vengeance? I speak as a man, God forbid; for then how shrll God judge the world?
Romans 3.5, and 6; As if he had said, Unless God cease to be Himself; unless his
Righteousness and Justice fail, He must needs be Judge.

3. God being Rector and Judge, He must needs carry himself as becomes one of
infinite Rectitude and Justice. It is right, that sin should be punished; And
shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? After Man, nay all the Race of
mankind, had for many Ages turned Rebels against God, and violated, and, as
much as in them lies, made void his Sacred Laws: After they had by the
contempt of their sins despised his Majesty and Sovereignty, and by the
turpitude of them offended his Purity and Holiness; should all this pass
unpunished, how black would the Consequence be? Would it not be a blot to his
Government to nod and let fall the reins of Discipline? a slight to his Law to
neglect it as a thing ill-contrived, or unworthy of a Vindication? Would not
the great things of the Law appear very small, and the horrible Ataxy of sin a
minute inconsiderable nothing? Must not the divine Attributes of Rectitude and
Justice be co-sufferers with that Law, upon whose Commands and Comminations
their very Image is engraven? Would not the face of things look, as if the
moral Foundations, the Differences of good and evil, were shaken and destroyed;
as if all things were indifferent, and sin or no sin, were all one to the Holy
One? Which way should his infinite hatred and abhorrence of sin be manifested;
no more displeasure outwardly appearing at a world of sin, than there would at
none at all? The total managery of things no way demonstrating Sin to be
odious, or Holiness grateful; Obedience failing, and there being nothing
vicarious, no Punishment to supply the room of it; How could the order between
the Creator and the Creature be preserved? or what would become of that moral
dependence and subjection which we owe to our Maker? Doubtless no defect, no
jeofail can be in his Sacred Government. His just Anger requires, that
Discipline should be kept, Manners corrected, and Licentiousness suppressed. As
an Ancient speaks: Man being under a Law, Surgimus ad vindictam, non quia lasi
sumus, sed ut disciplina servetur, mores corrigantur, licentia comprimatur:
haec est justa ira, quae sicut in homine necessaria est, ita in Dto, a qno ad
hominem pervenit exemplum. Lact. de Ira Dei.
God must needs be Rector; and being such, He cannot choose but act like
himself, in a just decorum to his holy Attributes and Law: No blot or
irregularity can light upon his Government. Sin, which makes a breach upon the
sacred Order, must be reduced in such a punitive way, as may bear witness to
his Rectitude and Justice. There are two things in Sin; a Macula, a corrupting
Spot; and a Reatus, an obliging Guilt. The Spot is such a Turpitude and
ill-temper of mind, that the Soul, in which it is resident and regnant, cannot
have Happiness; the Guilt is such a Chain and strong binder unto Wrath, that
the Soul, to which it adheres, cannot have Impunity. The Wisdom of God secures
and ascertains the first, Why should not his Justice secure and ascertain the
second; seeing God by the Law of his Essence, is as much bound to act in
congruity to his Justice, as to his Wisdom?

4. Upon supposal that a Punishment or Satisfaction were not necessary, What
should those millions of Sacrifices and slain Beasts under the Law mean? If the
substance, the Sacrifice of Christ might have been spared, what should the
types and shadows do? Nay, why should the Son of God come, and sweat, and
bleed, and dye upon a Cross under Divine Wrath, if all this might have been
spared? God does not multiply things without cause, much less did he make his
dear Son the Curse causeless. The Apostle tells us, That it was not possible
that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin, Heb. 10.4. But why so?
if a mere nothing, a no-sacrifice might do it? He signally distinguishes; the
blood of Beasts purifies the flesh, and takes away Ceremonial Guilt. But, which
is infinitely more, the blood of Christ purges the Conscience, and takes away
real Guilt, Heb. 9.13, 14. But will not this distinction be altogether vain, if
no blood at all were requisite to take away guilt? Also the Apostle asserts,
That we are justified by Christ's blood, Romans 5.9; But why not without it, if a
Satisfaction were unnecessary? It is very hardly imaginable, that the All-wise
God should fetch a compass, and go round about by his Sons blood, when a word,
a merciful pleasure, might have done the work without it.

These things premised, I now proceed to show how Punitive Justice was
manifested in the Sufferings of Christ. The Apostle speaks memorably, God set
forth Christ to be a propitiation to declare his righteousness, for the
remission of sins; as if he had said, There could be no remission without it:
and to make it the more emphatical, he doubles the phrase, To declare, I say,
at this time his righteousness; and withal he adds, That he may be just, Romans
3.25, 26. Righteousness, that is, Punitive Justice was eminently demonstrated
in the propitiatory Sufferings of Christ; unless this were so, no sufficient
account could be possibly given of them. The Socinians, who deny Christ's
Satisfaction, cannot give a tolerable reason thereof: For what say they? Christ
in his Sufferings was an example of Patience. I answer, he was so; but there
was a Cloud of suffering-Martyrs before his Incarnation: and then what singular
thing was there in his Passion? It Is true, he was the greatest Pattern that
ever was; but had that been all, why did he suffer as our Sponsor and Mediator?
why did he bear the Sin of a World, and the Wrath of God due to it? Here he was
alone, no man, no Angel was able to trace or follow him. The Saints may fill up
the Sufferings of Christ in his mystical body; but they cannot, dare not aspire
so far, as to go about to imitate him in those satisfactory Ones, which were in
his own proper body. Had he been only an exemplary Savior, he could have saved
none at all: Not those under the Old Testament; for Example does not, like
Merit, look backward to those who were before it: Nor those under the New; for
no mere Example, no, not that of an Incarnate God, could have raised up Man out
of the ruins of the Fall, unless there had been in his Sufferings a
Satisfaction to Justice. The Guilt of Sin could not have been done away, unless
there had been therein a Merit to procure the Holy Spirit. The Power of Sin
could not have been subdued; a mere exemplary Christ would have been but a
titular Savior. The great design of raising up a Church out of the corrupt
Mass of Mankind would have failed, a Pattern only being too weak a bottom for
it to stand upon. Again they say, Christ suffered, that he might confirm the
Covenant with his own blood. I answer, the Covenant was confirmed in Abraham's
time, Gal. 3.17. It was made immutable by Gods Word and Oath, Heb. 6.17. It was
ratified by the glorious Miracles of Christ; it was sealed up by the precious
blood of Martyrs: and why must the Son of God dye for it? or if he must, might
not a simple death serve? Why was there a Curse, and an horrible Desertion upon
him? There can be no imaginable coherence or connection between his bearing the
tokens of Gods Wrath, and his confirming the Covenant of Grace; the one can
have no congruity or subserviency to the other. The Scripture therefore, which
gives a better account, tells us that he dyed to pay a (...), a Ransom for us;
obtain eternal Redemption, abolish and make an end of sin; deliver from the
world, and the wrath to come; reconcile to God, purchase a Church, and bring in
everlasting Righteousness, and an happy Immortality suitable thereunto. These
noble and excellent ends could not be compassed, but by Sufferings penal and
satisfactory, such as had the bitter ingredients of Divine Wrath and
displeasure in them. Christ was not a mere Witness, but a Priest, Redeemer, and
Mediator: His blood was not only (...), a Testimony, but (...), a Propitiation;
neither was it only confirmative of the Covenant, but fundative: all the
Promises of Grace and Glory sprung up out of his satisfactory and meritorious
Passion. Further they say, that in his Sufferings the immense Love of God was
manifested. I answer, His immense Love was indeed very Illustrious in giving
his Son; but to what purpose was he given, but to be a Propitiation? (...), In
this was love, that he sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins, says
the Apostle, 1 John 4.10. When inexorable Justice-stood as an Obstacle in the
way; when Satisfaction must be made, or mankind eternally perish; then infinite
Love appeared in giving the only begotten Son to be an expiatory sacrifice for
us, to satisfy Justice, that we might partake of Mercy. But if a Satisfaction
were needless, if the Sufferings of Christ might have been spared; Where is the
vehemence of Love? It may seem rather to be in Remission of sin, than in the
Passion of our Savior. That Remission should come to us through his
intervenient Death, when that Death was not necessary, looks not so much like
an act of Love, as of Sapience: and yet how Sapience should unnecessarily, and
without just cause, order so great a thing as the Death of Christ to be, I
cannot understand. Moreover they say, Christ suffered, that his Death
intervening, we might be assured by his Resurrection, of our own, and of life
eternal to be obtained in a way of Obedience. But I answer, This is rather to
assign the end of Christ's Resurrection, than of his Death: for his Death here
comes in only by the by, as a mere intervenient thing, a causa sine qua non, a
thing which has no proper end of its own. It is not to me imaginable, that
such an one as he was, should dye merely to testify to those things, which
were before fecured by the immutable Word and Oath of God himself. O beatos
nos, quorum causa Deus jurat! miseros, si ne juranti credimus! says
Tertullian: his Oath cannot but be a sufficient security. It Is true, Christ's
Death and Resurrection do assure Believers, that they shall rise and live for
ever in Glory: But how do they do it? what, exemplarily only? no surely, his
Death was satisfactory for sin, and meritorious of life eternal. His
Resurrection was a Seal, a pregnant proof, that the Satisfaction made by his
Death was full and consummate. Hence arises in Believers an assurance of Life
and Immortality, the same being purchased and paid for by the blood of Jesus.
Had his Death and Resurrection been exemplary only, which way should an
assurance be drawn from it? The argument, if any, must run after some such rate
as this: Jesus Christ, God as well as Man, one having Power over his own life,
free from all sin, never seeing corruption, able to overcome death it self, did
rise from the grave; Ergo, mere men, having no power over their lives, tainted
with sin, subject to corruption, unable to conquer death, shall rise also: the
inconsequence is apparent. On the other hand let the argument run thus: Jesus
Christ did by a passion of infinite Merit and Satisfaction, purchase eternal
life for Believers; Ergo, they shall be sure to have it: here the consequence
must needs be sure and infallible. Upon the whole matter it appears, that no
tolerable account can be given of Christ's Sufferings, unless Justice were
satisfied and declared therein. But to explicate this more distinctly, I shall
a little consider three things: 1. God the great Rector, who inflicted those
Sufferings on Christ. 2. Christ the Patient, who bore them. 3. The Sufferings
in themselves, and in their fruits.


1. God, the righteous Rector, who inflicted them, was one of infinite Mercy.
Mercy in men, though but finite, is sometimes a remora to punishment. Joseph,
being (...), a just, that is (as the word there must be taken) a merciful man,
would not (...), make Mary a public spectacle of Justice, Matthew. 1.19. But
though God were one of infinite Mercy, and that not merely resident in his
Nature, but as it were in motion, triumphantly going forth in a most
compassionate design toward mankind; yet he would have Justice satisfied in
the Sufferings of his Son: To declare, I say, at this time his righteousness,
says the Apostle, Romans 3.26. Observe, it was at this time, it was then a day
of Salvation, a Jubilee of Redemption to Mankind; yet for all that, Justice
must have its due, and be declared in the Sufferings of Christ. But here the
Socinians object, That infinite Justice, and infinite Mercy are opposites, and
cannot both be together in God; or if they were, God, who cannot act contrary
to any thing in his Nature, could neither punish because of his Mercy, nor yet
pardon because of his Justice. But I answer, Mercy and Justice are not
opposites in Man. After the Idolatry of Israel in the Molten Calf, Moses would
in Justice have every one slay his Brother; yet in an high excess of Mercy and
Charity he would pray, Forgive their sin; if not, blot me out of thy book,
Exodus 32.27, and 32. Neither are they opposites in God, when he proclaims his
Name in those stately Titles; The Lord merciful, gracious, long-suffering,
abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, and transgression, and sin: He yet adds in the close of all, That he
will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34.6, 7. Mercy and Justice in God have
different objects: the Penitents, who partake of Mercy, are not the objects of
Justice; the Impenitents, who feel Justice, are not the objects of Mercy. Yet
these Attributes are not contrary the one to the other; being both Divine
Perfections, they can no more be contrary the one to the other, than the Divine
Essence, which both of them are, can be contrary to it self. Cruelty, not
Justice, is opposite to Mercy; Injustice, not Mercy, is opposite to Justice.
Neither does God in pardoning or punishing, act contrary to any thing in his
Nature. In pardoning Penitents, he acts not against his Justice, for that was
satisfied in their Sponsor Jesus Christ: In punishing Impenitents, he acts not
against his Mercy; for that, as the Socinians themselves confess, extends not
to obstinate sinners, neither are they at all capable of it. These two
Attributes do mutually illustrate one another: the Mercy of God is the more
Illustrious, because when Justice was inexorable, it sent his Son to suffer for
us. The Justice of God is the more glorious in Christ's Sufferings, because they
were inflicted by one whose Mercy was infinite in his nature, and in his design
toward Men.

2. Christ the Patient, who bore those Sufferings, may be considered under
diverse respects, each of which show Justice to be Illustrious in his
Sufferings. Take him as Man, Justice appears, in that the penal Sufferings were
in the same nature which had sinned. The nature of Angels was not assumed, the
facrifice of Beasts would not serve the turn, neither had the same nature with
man; but that Justice might be exact, that the Sufferings might be in the same
nature which had sinned, the Son of God was made flesh, and suffered in it as
an expiatory Sacrifice for us. Notable is that of the Prophet, All their
wickedness is in Gilgal, there I hated them, Hos. 9.15. Sin was found in the
humane Nature, and there it must be punished. Take him as the Son of God,
Justice appears, in that so great, so dear a person suffered for us. David
spared Joab, because he was a great, a potent man in the Army. And Absalom,
because he was a dearly beloved Son. In the former he said, The Sons of Zerviah
are too hard for me: and in the latter, Deal gently with the young man. But
though Jesus Christ was very great, God, and Gods Fellow, one who thought it no
robbery to be equal with God; though he was very dear, a Son, and an only
begotten, the Fathers essential Image, and eternal joy: Yet for all this,
standing in the room of sinners, he must not be spared. It was a great Wrath in
Henry the Second of France, Thuan. l. 20.564.
which made him by a passionate throw to smite, though but occasionally, his
own Son then sitting at his feet. But oh! how great, how wonderful was the
Justice of God in Christ's Sufferings, when no greatness, no dearness, though
infinite, did obviate or turn away the stroke? When he bruised and wounded to
death his own Son, and that intentionally, and on purpose to vindicate the
Honor of his Justice and Law? In other punishments he falls but upon mere
Creatures; but here, with Reverence be it spoken, He falls upon himself; the
Son of God, very God, (and a dearer or greater person there could not be) was
the sufferer. Further, take him as an holy Innocent One; Justice, which usually
has only to do with sinners, will yet appear. He was Holiness it self, in his
Divine Nature: He was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, in his
Humane; yet, if he will stand as a Surety for mankind, he cannot be excused. It
is observable in Scripture, that penal Sufferings stay not merely at the
offenders door, but run over upon those in conjunction with him. Achan sinned
in the accursed thing, and his Sons and Daughters were stoned, and buried with
fire. David sinned in numbering the people, and no less than seventy thousand
subjects fell by a Pestilence. But the Holy Jesus is an instance above all
others: their Sufferings fell indeed upon Relations, yet still upon sinners;
here they fell upon the Holy One. Justice is illustrious, when sinners suffer
in conjunction with sinners; but how highly does it act, when Innocence it self
suffers in conjunction with them; I mean, as a Sponsor on their behalf? But
here the Socinians cry out, Nibil divinae justitiae magis contrarium est, quam
insontem sontis loco puniri, Volk. de Sat. Quid hoe aliud est, quam saevum
tyrannum facere? Sclicting. cont. Mels. Insignis immanitas atque saevitia,
potius quam liberalitas appellanda est, Soc. de Servat. pars 3. c. 2.
That if God should punish the innocent for the guilty, Christ for us Sinners,
he would be unjust, a cruel Tyrant, one like Hannibal, who looked upon a ditch
full of Humane blood, as a fair spectacle. Unto which I answer, the Scripture
is very pregnant; our sins were laid upon him, they were condemned in his
flesh, he bore them in his body: he was wounded and bruised for them, and that
even unto death, and that not a mere simple death, but one that had a penal
curse in it. And if these phrases express not punishment, no words can do it.
Yet for all this, corrupt Reason is so desperate, that rather than subscribe to
the Sacred Oracles, it will blaspheme and call God Tyrant. Indeed an innocent
cannot be punished for the guilty compulsorily, but Christ suffered by consent:
Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.7. The Law of Redemption was in his
heart, he gave himself for us, an offering, and a sacrifice, Ephesians. 5.2. And what
is freer than Gift? or what color of Injustice can there be in such a
Suffering? The Reason and Justice of all Nations agree in this, that one may by
his own consent be punished for another. It Is true, he cannot justly consent to
suffer in that which he has not a just power over. Men have not such a power
over their lives, as they have over their estates. The only blemish in the
(...) of old, who engaged life for life, was this, That they had not a just
power over their lives to give them as a Compensation for others; but Christ
might justly consent, he had power over his own life: I have power, says he,
(...), authority to lay down my life, and authority to take it up again, Joh.
10.18. Hence it appears, that his consent to suffer punishment for us, was a
very just valid one, it being in that, which he had authority over; and where
there is such a just consent, there an innocent one may suffer for the guilty.
It Is true, an innocent one merely as such cannot be punished; neither did our
Savior suffer as such, but as one in conjunction with us, as our Goel and
Sponsor, who undertook to bear the punishment of our sins. It could not be
unjust for him to undertake it; and after undertaking, it could not but be just
for him to perform it; especially, seeing his person could not sink under his
Sufferings, and his Sufferings could not be in vain, or to no purpose. He rose
as a glorious Victor, and out of his Penal Evils sprung that great Good, the
Redemption of a World.

3. The Sufferings of Christ are to be considered in themselves, and in their
fruits. Take them in themselves, Justice appears in the proportionableness of
them: in punishing Justice holds the Balance, it weighs and measures out Penal
Evils for Moral: Judgments on Sinners are called, the portion of their
measures, Jer. 13.25. as being inflicted in a due proportion. Now the
Sufferings of Christ were proportionable in diverse respects.

1. There was a proportion between the seats of Suffering in Christ, and the
seats of Sin in us. Man sinned in his body, Sin was organically and
instrumentally there; proportionably Christ suffered in his body, no part of it
but was racked upon a tormenting Cross: because our Corporeal Parts had been
weapons of Iniquity, Justice made his the subjects of Misery. Man sinned in his
Soul, there was the prime and chief seat of Sin; proportionably Christ suffered
in his Soul; nay, there was the prime and chief seat of Suffering: because the
main residence and venom of sin was in our Souls, the greatest pressure, and
bitterness of wrath was upon his. He was exceeding sorrowful, even to death; He
was sore amazed, and as it were fainted away; yea, for very anguish he sweat
drops of blood, and upon the Cross, cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? All this befell him, who was fortitude and constancy it self. Under
the Law, Justice had eye for eye, tooth for tooth, wound for wound, stripe for
stripe; in Jesus Christ it had a Suffering body and soul, as a Compensation for
the sinning bodies and souls of Men.

2. There was a proportion between the Penal Sufferings in Christ, and those in
the threatening of the Law. Christ suffered not the very Idem, neither indeed
could he do so; because there was a change of person, and in strictness, Si
alius solvit, alind solvitur: but his Sufferings came as near to those in the
Law, as could possibly stand with a just decorum to his Sacred Person; as
little was abated as might be. This will appear by the many steps of his
Humiliation. He, the Son of God, very God, assumed our frail Nature. But might
this infinite and wonderful Condescension satisfy Justice for the sin of the
world? no, He must be under the Law, and fulfill all Righteousness. Well, that
being done, might that obedience (wherein so high an Honor was reflected upon
the Law, as that it was obeyed perfectly in all things, and that by its Maker)
satisfy for sin? No, that alone was not enough, there must be shedding of
blood, or no Remission. But if there must be blood, might not a few drops of
his blood, the same being of an infinite value, do the work? No, the Law calls
for Death, without that he could not be an expiatory Sacrifice for us. But if a
Death must be, might not a simple one, being of so great a person, serve the
turn? No, the Law pronounces a Curse, and that he was made, the marks and
tokens of Wrath were upon him: and why all this, but that God would have his
Sufferings comply, and come as near the terms of the Law as might be? It Is
true, he did not bear the accidentals of punishment, his Sufferings were not
eternal; but in the Law punishment is eternal, only as it relates to a finite
Creature, which can never satisfy, but not as it relates to a mighty Sponsor,
who could pay down all at once, and swallow up death in Victory. He suffered
not the worm of Conscience, or Desperation: But the first of these is from Sin,
inherent, and putrefying in Conscience; and the second from the Imbecility of
of the Creature, sinking under its burden, neither of which could be in him. He
bore not the accidentals of punishment; but as great a person as he was, the
essentials could not be abated. There was in his Sufferings Paena sensus, when
the fire of wrath melted him into a bloody sweat; and paena damni, when the
Eclipse of favor made him cry out of forsaking. Though God in his Sovereignty
would relax the Law, and introduce his own Son, as a Sponsor to satisfy for
us; yet his Son standing in that capacity, He would in Justice have him suffer
as near the penalty in the Law as could be.

3. There was a proportion between the Sufferings of Christ, and the Sin of a
World. Sin is an infinite evil; and his Sufferings, to compensate it, were of
an infinite value. Sufferings are not to be estimated as money, which, in whose
hands soever it be, is one and the same; but according to the Dignity of the
Person. Hence that of the people to David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18.3. Hence that Spanish Proverb, used to Charles the Ninth, Thuat. l.
42.446.
to move him to seize upon the chief Protestants: One Salmons head is more
worth than the heads of fifty Frogs. In the Roman Laws, punishments are varied
according to the condition of Persons. Freemen were not under the same
punishments as servants. The Lex Porcia would not leave Rods upon the back of a
Freeman: the Sufferings of a Prince and a private man, are not to be valued at
the same rate. At the Death of Abner, David took special notice of it, and
cried out, A Prince, a great man is fallen this day in Israel, 2 Samuel 3.38. The
Sufferings of great men are very estimable; What then are the Sufferings of a
God, such as our Savior? The Scripture is very emphatical in setting forth
this to us: God purchased the Church with his own blood, Acts 20.28. God laid
down his life for us, 1 John 3.16. The Lord of Glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8.
The man Gods fellow was smitten, Zach. 13.7. He offered up himself through the
eternal spirit, Heb. 9.14. The Prince of life was killed, Acts 3.15. His Deity
stamped an infinite value upon his Sufferings, such as made them a full
Compensation for the sin of a world. That therefore of Socinus, Quicquid passus
est Christus, nullam majorem vim per se habere potest, quam si quilibet purus
homo idem passus esset. De servatore, pars 3. cap. 4.
that the Sufferings of Christ have no more virtue in themselves, than if a
mere man had suffered, is no less than horrible blasphemy, and for ever to be
abhorred by us.

4. There was a proportion between the Sufferings of Christ, and the Sufferings
of a world. One dyed for all, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.14. But what an one
was he? No less than very God: his Deity elevated his Sufferings into a kind of
infinity. Upon this account his Sufferings, though but the Sufferings of one,
Unum si multiplices, habthis tandem numirum omnium hominum; omnium vero bominum
collectio, quantumcunque multiplicetur, nunquam Christi potentiam,
authoritatem, dignitatem, sapientiam, sanctitatem, deitatem aequabit, These.
Salmur. de pass. Christi.
did equalize, nay, superexceed the Sufferings of a world. For as the French
Divines have observed; if you multiply one, you shall at last have the number
of all men: but a Collection of all men, however multiplied, will never equal
the Power, Authority, Dignity, Wisdom, Sanctity, and Deity of Christ. In the
Sufferings of a world, every sufferer would have been but a mere Creature; but
in his Sufferings, the sufferer was no less than God himself. Here therefore
Justice appears more signally, than if all the world had suffered, and that for
ever. His Sufferings, though but Temporary, did more than counterpoise the
eternal Sufferings of a world. Should we suppose, which is impossible, that all
men had paid and passed through eternal Sufferings, those would have delivered
them from the Curse of the Law; the Sufferings of Christ (which shows their
Equivalency, and more) produce the same effect, and over and above merit life
eternal. There is a double order in punishing: The order of Justice would have
a punishment infinite in Magnitude; but because a finite Creature cannot bear
it, the order of Wisdom will have it infinite in Duration. But as the French
Divines have observed, These. Salm. denecess. Sat.
Christ being substituted in our room, the order of Justice returns again. Our
Saviors Sufferings were of an infinite value, the sum of Sufferings was paid
down all at once. In these therefore Justice is more Illustrious, than it could
have been in eternal Ones; wherein mere finite Creatures would have been ever a
paying a little, and a little, but could never have satisfied Divine Justice.

Thus the Sufferings of Christ in themselves, do by their excellent
proportionableness manifest the Justice of God; but besides, the consequents
and fruits of them, show the fullness of his Satisfaction to that Justice. And
these may be considered with respect to Christ himself, or else with respect to
us.

As to Christ himself, What were the consequents of his Sufferings? The pains
of death were loosed, as not able to hold such a Satisfier as he was; He was
taken from prison, Isa. 53.8. as having discharged all: He had an acquittance
in his Resurrection, as a sure proof, that he had made full payment in his
death: The God of peace brought him again from the dead, Heb. 13.20. Observe,
it was the God of Peace. First, the Divine Justice was appeased, and then the
Divine Power raised him up. He had all the Power in Heaven, and in Earth,
Matthew. 28.18, as an infallible witness, that he had by his Blood reconciled all
things there. He ascended, and entered into the true Sanctuary, into Heaven it
self; and this tells us, that the expiatory and satisfactory blood was shed
before in his Death: He appears in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24; and
that assures us, that the Divine Anger is over: having by himself purged our
sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1.3. His
satisfactory-work was perfectly done, and then he rested in state. All these
glorious Consequents make it appear, that his Satisfaction was a plenary one.

As to us, the fullness of his Satisfaction appears, in that Justice has
nothing at all to demand from such as are in him, and by Faith become mystical
parts and pieces of him; the atoning Blood is upon them, and the damning Law
passes over them. Thus the Apostle says, There is no condemnation to those
which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. The Apostle says not, that there is nihil
condemnabile, for the relics of sin are in them: but he says, there is nulla
condemnatio, no condemnation to them; for the Satisfaction applied, cleanses
away sin, and delivers from Wrath. It Is true, Believers may have afflictions;
but what are they? They are only Castigatory, and for their good; not
Vindictive, or for the Satisfaction of Justice. Again, the fullness of his
Satisfaction appears, in that his Sufferings were not merely satisfactory, but
redundantly meritorious. These have opened Heaven, as well to let down those
influences of Crace to us, which, unless Justice had been appeased, would never
have fallen upon us, as to introduce us into that life and blessed Immortality
which we guilty and defiled Creatures, while such, could not be capable of. We
see here, that the Satisfaction of our Savior was not a poor, short, or scanty
thing; but good measure, pressed down, and running over in the purchase of all
good things for us.

It was a good saying, Vulnera Christi sunt biblia practica, the Sufferings of
Christ, in which Justice so eminently appears, are a strong Motive to
Repentance; enough, if duly considered, to set all men a weeping over their
iniquities: What, did the Creator suffer? Was the Lord of Glory crucified? Was
the blessed One made a Curse? Did the Son of God, very God, so dear, so great a
person, sweat, bleed, cry out, and expire upon a tormenting Cross, and all this
to take away sin? What a spectacle is this? Who can look upon it with dry eyes,
or an unmelting heart? When the Son of God was broken, should our hearts be
untouched? May we spare our tears, when he parted with his blood? To look upon
his wounds, and not mourn over our sins, can be no less than unnatural
hardness. Oh! what a thing is sin? how horrible, how infinite an evil, that it
could not be expiated at an easier rate, than the blood of God himself? What
Plea can be made, or color given for so vile a thing, that it should have a
Being in the world, or so much as a residence in an humane Thought? Should that
be indulged which cost Jesus Christ so dear? or that go free, which nailed him
to the Cross? Can thou love that which stabbed him at the heart? or live in
that for which he dyed? May that be light, which pressed him into an agony and
bloody-sweat? or that sweet, which put so much Gall and Vinegar into his Cup?
Can thou bless thy self in that which made him a Curse? or follow after that
which made him cry out of forsaking? Think, and again think, if thy blind eyes
and hard heart will let thee, what, and how dreadful a thing it is for thee to
go on in thine iniquities. In so doing, thou do not merely run upon the
Authority and Sovereignty of the Almighty, but upon the wounds and blood of thy
dear Savior, impiously trampling them under thy impure feet: and how grievous
a thing is this? If thou art fearless, and stoppest not here, what hope can
thou have? It becomes thee to sit down and lament that hellish impetus in thy
own heart, which moves swiftly toward Hell, without admitting any remora. A
few words from God gave check to Abimelech, Genesis 20. And shall not the wounds
and blood of thy dear Lord do as much to thee? The sword of an Angel put a stop
to Balaam in his perverse way, Numb. 22. And will thou go on, who have seen the
sword of God drawn against the Man, his fellow, for thine iniquities? If the
groans of the Creatures, all round about, sounding in thine ears, did not
startle thee, yet should thou be deaf and senseless to the Sufferings of thy
Savior, bleeding and dying upon a Cross, in comparison of which the dashing
down of a world is a poor nothing? If the breaches of the Sacred Law, dearer to
God than Heaven and Earth, do not move thee, yet will thou not be moved, when
thou see that amazing sight, God for our sins bruising and breaking his Son,
his essential Image, in our assumed Nature? If thou do not blush at the blots
and turpitudes which sin has made in thy own soul, yet methinks it should
deeply affect thee, that the Son of God was made sin and a Curse for thee.
Should God let thee down to Hell, and after some scorches from the fire
unquenchable, take thee up again, would thou yet go on in sin? no surely;
and why will thou do it now, after thou have seen such a spectacle of Justice
in the Lord Jesus, as more than countervails the Sufferings of a world? When a
Temptation approaches, How is it that thou see not the price of blood writ
upon it? Which way do thou forget the nails and bloody Cross of thy Redeemer?
Thou see plainly, that God is ae just, a righteous One; and for a full proof
of it, he has written Justice in red Letters, in the Passion of his own Son;
if thou run on in thy sins, how, which way can thou escape? God spared not
his own Son, standing in our room, and will he spare thee in thy impenitent
sinning? Wrath fell very severely upon the Holy, Innocent, meek Lamb of God:
and will it pass over thee, wallowing in thy filthy lusts and corruptions?
What, did God exact so great a Satisfaction for sin, that it might be allowed?
Did he vindicate his broken Law at so high a rate, that it might be more
broken, and that with Impunity? It Is utterly impossible: those Sufferings of
Christ which did witness Gods hatred of Sin, could not open a gap to it: the
Surety did not sweat, pray, bleed, and dye under Wrath, that the impenitent
sinner might be spared. O how profane and blasphemous is such a thought, which
makes the great Redeemer a Patron of iniquity! He came to save us from our
sins, not in them; to redeem from iniquity, not to encourage it; What then?
where is thy hope, O impenitent sinner? Is it in Gods Mercy? As infinite as it
is, it will not let out a drop to the impenitent, neither indeed can it do so,
unless, which is impossible, one Attribute can cross another; Mercy can
reproach Holiness or Justice. Believe it, Salvation it self cannot save thee in
thy sins: Is it in Christ and his Merits? He is the Savior of the Body, but
thou art out of it. He is the Author of eternal Salvation to them that obey
him: but thou art a Rebel. May Christ be divided? Can thou have a part in his
Priestly office, who art in Arms daily against his Kingly? Shall the Promises
comfort thee, who castest off the Righteous Commands? It cannot be. What
Concord has Christ with Belial? How ill-suited are an hard heart and a
bleeding Savior? How can thou trust in that Jesus, whom thou despisest, and
crucifiest afresh by thy Rebellions? or depend on his Merits, when thou live
in enmity against his Divine Spirit and Life? These are mere inconsistencies.
Thy case, while thou art in thy sins, is very forlorn and desperate. God will
be a consuming fire to thee; thy self must be as dry stubble before him; every
lust will be a never-dying worm; thy soul will furiously reflect upon it self
for its prodigious folly; abused Mercy will turn into fury. Christ, the great
Savior, will doom thee to perdition; fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest will be rained down upon thee, and that for ever. If then thou have any
fear of God, or love to thy self, cast away thy transgressions, and return to
him, that thou may escape the Wrath to come, and enjoy the pure beatitudes
which are in Heaven.

CHAP. V.
Socinian objection (That if God loved us, he was not angry) answered. The
earliness and freeness of Gods Love in giving his Son. The greatness of the
Gift. The manner how he was given. The persons for whom. The evils removed, and
the good procured by it. The excellent Evangelical terms built upon it. These
are easy and sure. The Love and Mercy of God an excellent Motive to stir up
our Love toward God and Man.

HAVING spoken of Gods Justice, I now proceed to his Love, Mercy, and Grace.
These are eminently ascribed to him in Scripture: He is love it self, 1 John
4.16. essentially such. He is the Father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. Mercy is his
offspring and joy. He is the God of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. The fountain of it
is in him, and all Graces in the Creature issue from thence. Love communicates
good to the Creature. Mercy communicates it to the Creature in misery. Grace
communicates it to a Creature, though unworthy. All the drops and measures of
goodness in the Creature, are from Love: when the good is suited to the misery
of the Creature, it is Mercy; when it exceeds desert, and as it were triumphs
over unworthiness, it is Grace in a special manner. I shall not discourse of
these distinctly, but, as the usage in Scripture is, promiscuously; these are
in a very signal manner manifested in Christ. So admirable a Glass is he, that
not only Wisdom, Holiness, and Justice are represented in him; but Love, Mercy
and Grace also. In these it is that this wonderful Occonomy terminates. Wisdom
laid the plot, Holiness and Justice appeared in our Saviors Passion, but the
Center of all is Grace and Mercy. These are highly exalted in the
Reconciliation and Salvation of Men.

The first appearance of these stands in this, That God did not stand upon the
first terms, upon the Old Covenant of Works: God made Adam a very knowing and
righteous Creature, he gave him excellent Laws, Moral ones inscribed in his
heart; and over and above, one positive Law in the Tree of knowledge: He entered
into a Covenant with him, as the head and root of all mankind; the terms were,
That all his Posterity should stand or fall in him. He transgressed the Command
of God, and so Sin and Death came upon all the humane World. Here God might
have stood upon the first terms; he was not bound to make new ones, but might
have stood upon the old, and prosecuted them to the utter ruin of all Mankind.
This is plain by these Considerations.

1. The Laws given by God to Adam were such, as became God to give, and Adam to
receive, very just and righteous. The Moral Ones were congruous to his holy
Faculties, and conducible to his Happiness: they were interwoven into his very
rational Powers, and Obedience might have come forth in the easiness of his
Holy Principles. The positive one was a just one. God, who made Man Lord of the
lower World, might well except one Tree, as a token of his Supreme Sovereignty,
when the thing forbidden was not a thing in it self evil, but indifferent. Gods
Authority appears the more Sacred, and Man's Obedience would have been the more
pure; the Tree, as lovely to the eyes, was a fit curb to the sensitive
appetite. And as a Tree of knowledge was a just restraint to intellectual
curiosity, the prohibition of such a Tree was an excellent Item to man to look
to both faculties; the terms were just, not only as to himself, but as to his
posterity. Had not God made them, he would never have told us, that all sinned
in one; and that by one, judgment came upon all, Romans 5.12, and 18. Which,
without such terms, would have been impossible; and if he made them, it was no
less impossible that they should be unjust. Adam was the root and head of
Mankind; we were in him naturally as latent in his loins, and legally as
comprised within the Covenant. His Person was the fountain of ours, and his
Will the representative of ours. The thing therefore was equal: unjust Laws
should be abrogated; but in this case, the Laws and Terms being Righteous, God
might have stood strictly upon them.

2. Adam having holy Powers, sufficient for Obedience, was bound to keep them
with all diligence: that, which was formerly spoken to the Church in Thyatira,
Hold fast that which thou have, Rev. 2.25. was virtually spoken to Adam: Nature
dictates, that Duty should be returned where benefits are received. The Law of
fidelity requires, that a Trustee should keep the depositum. God entrusted man
with excellent endowments; but if he will by his transgression cast them away,
must God make them good? Must he follow after a Rebel, a wasting bankrupt
Creature, to repair the lost Image, and set him up again with a new stock of
Grace? No: He, who made him ex beneplacito, cannot be bound ex justitia, to
new-frame him, being broken; He might without the least spot of injustice, have
left all mankind in the ruins of the Fall.

3. The case of the fallen Angels determines this point: When they left their
Principle, or first Estate, Did God capitulate, or enter into new Articles with
them? Was there a tabula post naufragium, a room for Faith or Repentance? Had
they a Christ, or a Gospel tendered unto them? No, they were cast down
immediately into chains of darkness. The sentence was irreversible, their
misery eternal; annihilation would have been a kind of favor to them. That
God, who stood upon the first terms with Angels, superior creatures, might have
done so with man, being a little lower than those glorious Creatures. I know
there are differences assigned between the two Cases. Angels were the first
transgressors, the ringleaders in sin: Man followed after. The Angels had a
most pure light, and that without any allay of flesh: Man's intellect was lower,
and in conjunction with matter. The Angels sinned by self-motion, and of their
own merely: Man sinned by seduction, and through the guile of the Serpent. In
the Fall of Angels, all the Angelical nature fell not: In Adams Fall, all the
humane Nature fell, no Religion was left in the lower world. But not
withstanding all this, God might in Justice have stood upon the first terms
with Man, as well as with Angels; and that he did not do so, it was from mere
Grace, as the primary Reason thereof.

4. Grace is in a very eminent manner lifted up in the Gospel. Grace gives
Christ, and Faith to believe in him. Grace justifies and sanctifies. Grace
faves and crowns with a blessed Immortality. Everywhere in the Gospel sounds
forth, Grace, Grace; but if God might not justly have stood upon the old terms,
the giving of new ones to Man, was not Grace, but Debt; not Mercy, but Justice.
Those Novatores, who say, That it would have been unjust for God to have
condemned Adams Posterity for the first Sin, do thereby overturn the Grace of
the Gospel. The Apostle, who is much rather to be believed, says expressly,
That by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation, Romans
5.18; that is, according to the terms of the old Covenant; but if the old terms
might not have been stood upon, the new ones must be necessary and due to
mankind, and so no Grace at all. They who deny the Justice of the old Covenant,
overturn the Grace of the new.

God, as we see, might have stood upon the old terms, even to the utter ruin of
fallen mankind. But, oh! immense Love! He would not; he would do so with.
Angels, but he would not with Men; an abatement was made to them, not afforded
to those nobler Creatures; once Inmates of Heaven. In the case of Sadow, God
came down lower and lower, from fifty righteous persons, to forty five; and so
at last to ten, I will not do it for tens sake, Genesis 18.32. But in the case of
fallen man, when all had sinned, when there was none righteous, no, not one;
God comes down from the first terms made with Man, to such lower ones as might
comply with his frailty. Under the Law there were Sacrifices called by the
Jewish Doctors, Gnoleh najored, ascending, and descending. The rich man offered
a Lamb, the poor, whose hand could not reach so far, offered two Turtle-Doves.
While Man was rich in Holy Powers and Excellencles, God called for pure perfect
sinless Obedience; but after the Fall, he being poor in Spirituals, altogether
unable to pay such a sum, God stoops and accommodates himself to Humane
weakness; a faithful conatus, a sincere, though imperfect Obedience, will serve
the turn in order to Man's happiness. This is the first step which infinite
Mercy takes in raising up Man out of the ruins of the Fall, The old terms were
not stood upon.

But now, that new terms might be made and established, that the second
Covenant might have an happier issue than the first, Mercy goes on to give the
Son of God for us: God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life,
John 3.16. This (so) is unutterable, this Love unmeasurable, diffusing it self,
not to Jews only, but to a World, and that overwhelmed in sin; giving, and that
freely, without any Merit of ours, a Son, and an only begotten Son, that we
through faith in him might have life eternal, and there enjoy him who is Love
it self, for ever. Here is a Mine of Love too deep and rich for any Creature to
fathom, or count the value of it. But before I open it, I shall first remove
the ill use which the Socinians make of this Love, to overturn Christ's
Satisfaction. If God (say they) so loved us, as to give his Son for us, then he
was not angry with us; Oportuisse Deum jam placatissimum esse, Soc. de Serve. l.
1. c. 7. Non vos pudet, iram divinam, eamque immensam, ibi fingere, ubi nil
nisi immensus amor elucet? Cui irase^batur Deus, cum unigenitum filium in
mortem dabat? Sclicting. contr. Meisn.
and if not angry, then there was no need at all of a Satisfaction to be made
for us. Unto which I answer; Anger and Love are not inconsistencies, in
Scripture both are attributed unto God: He gave his Son for us, was not that
Love, immense Love? He wounded and bruised him for our iniquities: he made him
to be sin and a curse for us; Was not there Wrath, great Wrath? We have both
together in one Text, Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved
us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4.10. The high
Emphasis of his Love, was in giving his Son to be a Propitiation for us: unless
there had been just anger, a Propitiation would have been needless; unless
there had been immense Love, his Son should not have been made one for us. We
have a plain instance in Job's friends; Gods Wrath was kindled against them,
and yet in love he directs them to atone him by a Sacrifice, Job 42.7, 8. God
could not but be angry at the Sin of the World, and yet in love he gave his Son
to be an expiatory Sacrifice. But for a more full answer, I shall lay down
several things:

1. God may be considered either as a Rector, or as a Benefactor. As a Rector,
he acts out of a just anger in vindicating his broken Law by Penal Sufferings.
As a Benefactor, he acts out of admirable love, in giving his Son to be a
Propitiation for us. When he vindicates his Law by Punishments, Is it not
Anger? when he gives his Son for us, Is it not Love? If he be a Rector, Can he
not be a Benefactor too? Then he could not give his Son without laying down of
his Government. If he be a Benefactor, Can he not be a Rector too? Then he
could not govern, without laying down his Love; but if, as the truth is, he may
be both, then Anger and Love may consist together.

2. Gods displeasure may be taken either as it terminates on the sin, or as it
terminates on the sinner; as it terminates on the sin, it is altogether
unremovable. God himself, with reverence be it spoken, can no more remove it,
than he can lay down his Sanctity, which in the very notion of it, includes an
abhorrency of sin: As it terminates on the sinner, so it may be removed. This
appears, in that God pardons sin, and that (as the Scripturephrase (...)
imports) in such a way, that the Penal Sufferings are translated from the
sinner himself to his Sponsor. The Divine displeasure did pass off from us, or
else we could not have been pardoned or saved; and it did light upon Christ, or
else that Holy One could not have been made a Curse, which no mere Sufferings,
if abstracted from Divine Wrath, can amount unto. We see here, there is
displeasure at the sin, and yet infinite love toward the sinner, in
translating the punishment upon another.

3. Gods Love is double, a Love of Complacence, which delights in the Creature,
and a Love of Benevolence, which designs good to it. The first takes pleasure
in the Saints, who bear his holy Image. The second diffuses it self to sinners,
who in themselves are worthy of Wrath. Hence the Apostle tells us, God
commended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us, Romans 5.8. Sinners are objects of displeasure, and yet Love breaks out
toward them in that great instance, the Death of Christ. If ever there were
anger in God, 'twas at the Sin of a World; if ever there were Love in him,
'twas in the Gift of his Son. These two may very well stand together.

4. Man may be considered, either as a Sinner, or as a Creature. A man who has
a rebellious Son, may be angry with him as rebellious, and yet compassionate
him as a Son. In like manner, God may be angry with us as Sinners, and yet love
us as Creatures.

Having removed the Socinian-Cavil, I shall now proceed to speak of Gods Love,
in giving his Son for us. Here I shall distinctly consider the giver. The Gift.
The manner how it was given. The persons for whom. The evil removed, and good
procured by it, and the excellent Evangelical terms built upon it. Each one of
these will illustrate this Love in giving his Son for us.

The Giver is God himself, no other could do it. And here two things offer
themselves to us:

The one is the earliness of his Love. It was no Novel temporary thing, but
ancient, nay eternal; upon the Prescience of the Fall he eternally designed,
that his Son should assume our Nature, and in it dye as an expiatory Sacrifice
for us: Christ was the Lamb foreordained before the foundation of the world, 1
Pet. 1.20. He was set down for a Redeemer in the eternal Volumes before the
world was up; and slain above in Decree, long before he was slain below in
Time. A Plaster was provided before the wound, a Savior before the Fall of
Man. When David would set forth Gods Mercy in the highest strain, He does it
thus, His mercy is from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 103.17. Such is his
Love in Christ, reaching, as I may say, from one end of eternity to another:
Each one of us may cry out, as that Ancient did, Sero te amavi, Domine, Lord,
'twas late e're I loved thee. Our love is but of yesterday, a temporary thing,
but his was as early as eternity it self.

The other is the freeness of it. Love, (...), Arist, Rhet. l. 2. c. 4.
as the Philosopher speaks, wills good to another for his sake, not for our
own. In that wonderful Gift of Christ, the Love was Gods, the profit ours.
Mercy in man has a kind of respect to the Donor: frail Humanity, and the wheel
of a mutable world tell him, That himself, the now giver, may peradventure come
to be a receiver. Hence the Apostle would have us remember them in adversity,
as being in the body, Heb. 13.3, and restore the lapsed, considering thy self,
Gal. 6.1. It may be our own case. There is in such acts of Mercy, a kind of
respect to our future self, which possibly may become an object for Mercy. But
Mercy in God, which is the suavity of his Essence, issues out in a pure
gratuitous way; no such respect can fall upon him, who is immutable and blessed
for ever. In the freeness of his Love, there are two things considerable: On
Gods part there was no want, on Man's no attractive.

On Gods part there was no want of us, or our Services; were there want with
him, he could not be God: Could we supply him, we should be greater than
himself in furnishing him with that which he could not do for himself; He is
All-sufficient, and what want can be in him? Infinite, and what can be added to
him? An Ocean, though vast, yet, because finite, may receive an addition from a
little drop. But what can be added to infinity, which in its unmeasurable
excellency comprizes all things within it self? All nations to him are but as
the drop of the bucket, and as the small dust of the balance, Isa. 40.15.
Their Righteousness cannot add one beam to his essential Glory, neither can
their iniquity in the least eclipse it. However it be with the Creature, he is
still himself. His own happiness a sphere of all Perfections, a Theater of
Glory to himself. Hence it appears, that Gods Love in giving his Son for us,
was not a Love of indigence, but of fullness and redundance, flowing out in a
pure gratuitous manner toward us, that the honor might be his, and the profit
ours. He gives like himself, out of super-effluent goodness, as becomes one who
is a Donor only, but no Receiver.

On Man's part there was no attractive, to move God to give his Son for us. Man's
Love is usually drawn out by some excellency or other in the object: but what
can draw out Gods? Could the Origin of all goodness be attracted by any thing
in the Creature? Yet is it possible that any thing should be found in a fallen
Creature to attract it? Man's misery was indeed the occasion, but what was the
attractive? Was our Love first, and a charm to his? Oh! no; to say, that a
Creature is first in Love, is to blaspheme the Supreme Goodness, which sets up
Love in it. The Apostle is express, Herein is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, 1 John
4.10. Between men, Love is ordinarily reciprocal; he that loves, is beloved
again: but here the Love was on one side only. (...), Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 4.
God loved his very Enemies so far, as to give his Son for them, to raise up
their Love to its great Original. Among men an harmony of spirits, a sameness
of tempers is a motive to Love. But what? was there, could there be any such
thing in fallen man as such? How then was he fallen? What need was there of a
Savior? That holy Harmony was Man's Primitive rectitude; and whilst it lasted,
there was no need of any restorer. Alas! fallen man was a very Chaos of
corruption, his very rational Powers were depraved; there was flesh in his
spirit, enmity in his mind against him, who lighted up a pure Reason in him at
the first. There was bondage in his Will, it could not; nay, such was its
horrible perverseness, it would not elevate it self to the fountain of its
liberty. Among men, goodness is an allective to Love: but what goodness was
there in a fallen, degenerate Creature, full-fraught with sin, and opposite to
its Maker? The very relics of the Divine Image, which sin could not utterly
expel out of the humane Nature, were yet so captivated and imprisoned there,
that gross Idolatry filled the world in spite of all the notions of a Deity
implanted in the hearts of men. We see clearly, there was no attractive on our
part: Why then did God give his Son for us? The only reason was from himself,
it was mere Grace, self-moving Mercy, a pure emanation of Love toward us
unworthy Creatures, who might have been made the objects of his Wrath and that
for ever.

The next thing considerable is the Gift it self, and that was the Son of God,
very God; a greater, a dearer person could not be given; if we measure Gods
Love by the Gift, it is like that, altogether unmeasurable. Hence the Apostle
tells us, That there is a breadth, and length, and depth, and height, infinite
dimensions in it, such as pass the knowledge of men and angels, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
When God gave us the Creatures for our use, he gave us but the drops and models
of his Goodness: but when he gave his Son for us, he gave himself; God was the
Giver, and God the Gift. When God could swear by no greater, he swear by
himself; when he could give no greater, he gave himself. Here was Love acted to
the uttermost, elevated to the highest point; a greater Gift there could not
be. 'Twas great Love in Jonathan to David, that for him he would strip himself
of his Robe, nay, and venture the cast of a Javelin from an angry Father. But
what manner of Love was it in God, that he would strip himself of his Orient
pearl; that he would give his Son, his eternal Joy out of his bosom, to assume
an humane Nature, and in it to bear the horrible stroke of Justice, which was
due to us for our iniquities? In giving Laws and Promises, God gives but a
created Image of his Sanctity and Grace; but in giving his Son, he gave his
essential increated Image to suffer in the flesh for us, that his holy Image,
broken in the fall, might be repaired again in us. When we were off from God,
the Center of Souls, and wandering in the foul ways of sin, God out of his
immense Love, sent no less person than his only begotten. Son to seek us, and
bring us back unto himself, that we might be for ever happy in the fruition of
him.

The greatness of this Love will yet further appear, if we consider the manner
how the Son of God was given for us. The lower a man stoops and condescends to
do another good, the higher and more eminent is his Love; the steps wherein the
Son of God came down and humbled himself for us, evidently declare the infinite
height of that Love, which made him stoop so low to compass our Salvation. The
first step was his Incarnation, the word was made flesh; he, who was in the
form of God, took on him an humane Nature. In the Creation infinite produced
finite, but here infinite assumed finite; there Eternal brought forth Temporal,
but here Eternal took Temporal into it self: and what a wonderful Condescension
was this? It Is true, Reason in the Socinian laughs at it, but Faith in the
Christian must needs admire it. Had the greatest Monarch on Earth confined
himself to the poorest Cottage there, it would have been nothing to God
Tabernacling in the flesh. Should the highest Angel in Heaven have put off his
Perfections, and come down into an humane Nature; and from thence have passed
into a brutal bestial one, and so on into a tree or stone, and at last into
nullity; it would not have been a Condescension comparable to that of the Son
of God coming in the flesh. His Sacred Person was infinitely more above humane
Nature, than an Angel is above matter or nullity it self: and what unparalled
Love was here? The Creator became a Creature; the Son of God assumed our
nature, and that after it was in us tainted with sin. Dr. Bates of the
Attributes, fol. 171.
The natural distance (says that excellent Man) between God and the Creature
is infinite; the Moral between God and the sinful Creature, if possible, is
more than infinite. Yet the mercy of our Redeemer overcame this distance. What
an ecstasy of Love transported the Son of God so far, as to espouse our nature,
after it was defiled and debased with sin? He was essential Innocence and
Purity; yet he came in the similitude of sinful flesh, which to outward view
was not different from what was really sinful. Thus he. St. Austin calls Love,
junctura duo copulans, a coupling of two together: That after man had rent off
himself from God by his Apostasy, God should assume an humane Nature into
himself, to make up the breach, and reduce Man into an Union with himself
again, Miror Deum in utero Virginis: miror omnipotentem in cunabulis: miror
quemodo verbo Dei caro adhaeserit, Cypr. de Not. Christi.
must needs be Love in a transcendent excess infinite. This made St. Cyprian
overlook the wonders in Nature, that he might ravish himself in the admirations
of an Incarnate God. The Condescension was here so great, that God seems to
neglect his own Majesty, that he may comply with our necessities; yet infinite
Love would have the Son of God stoop a little lower, and do honor to that
Sacred Law which we had violated. His humane Nature being an inmate in his
infinite Person, could not but have a right to Heaven, and might have been
immediately rapt up thither; but Love set him another task. He, the great
Lawgiver, was made under the Law: He, who knew the Father in an infinity of
light, now knew him in a finite Reason: He who embraced the Father in an
infinity of Love, now loved him in a finite Will: He, who was Lord of all, was
subject to Parents and Magistrates: He, who upholds the world, went up and down
as a man doing of good; he stooped as low as the Ceremonial Law: His pure flesh
was circumcised, he kept the Passover, and so obedientially stood under his
own shadow. This is a Condescension much greater, than if all the Angels in
Heaven had put themselves under the Laws of the lowest matter; yet infinite
Love would have the Son of God go down a little lower. We have him hungry,
thirsty, weary, weeping, suffering the contradiction of Sinners, enduring the
temptations of Satan, all his life-through a man of sorrows: at last we have
him bleeding on a Cross, hanging there as a spectacle of shame; his hands and
his feet were pierced, his body was racked and tortured to death in a stinking
Golgotha. But, which was the greatest of all, he bore the Wrath of God: and
what was that Wrath, which was due to the sin of a World? or what those
Sufferings, which satisfied Justice for it? What a great thing was the Passion
of God? and how much beyond the dissolution of a World? Words cannot utter it,
thoughts cannot measure it. That Love must be no less than immense, which made
the Son of God stoop so low, to take us up out of the ruins of the Fall.

The Love of God will yet more appear, if we take notice of the persons for
whom Christ was given; it was for man, poor impotent man, a creature worth
nothing, a bankrupt in Spirituals, one void of all those Primitive
Excellencies, which at first Crowned the humane Nature; for him it was, that
God was at so vast an expense, as that of his own blood. Spond. Annal. Anno 431.
'Twas great Charity in Paulinus, Bishop of Nola, that he would give himself in
pawn to the Vandals for a poor Child; but it was transcendent superlative Love
in God, to give his Son, one worth Millions of Worlds, and as rich in
Excellencies as a Deity could make him, to be emptied and humbled to death for
poor worthless worms, such as we are. Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that ye
through his poverty might be rich, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.9. The Riches of
a God were laid out to set up broken man again. But further, it was for
Sinners, for Enemies, such as were in Arms against God; such as had broken his
Laws, despised his Authority, cast off his Sovereignty, and as much as in them
lay, stained his Glory. These were the persons, upon whose Salvation infinite
Love set so high a rate, that rather than fail, the Life of God should be paid
down for it. The Apostle notably sets forth this, Scarcely for a righteous man
will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye: But
God commended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us, Romans 5.7, 8. Sometimes possibly, though but rarely, one may dye
for a righteous good Man, who is a blessing to the place where he lives. But
this was Christ's Prerogative to dye for Sinners: this was the supereminency of
Divine Love to give him so to do. Greater love has no man than this, that a
man lay down his life for his friends, Joh. 15.13. Thus our Savior. A greater
proof or effect of Love than death there cannot be; but Love is then in an
higher and more excellent degree, when that death is, as in our Saviors case
it was, for Enemies, than it is, when the death is for Friends. Damon and
Pythias, two intimate friends, were willing to dye one for another; but Christ
died for Enemies. In Creation God overcame Nullity, but in Redemption he
overcomes Enmity it self, and that in a wonderful way: He assumes an humane
Nature, and in it pours out his precious blood, to melt and break that horrible
Enmity, which was in us against him.

If we would see more of this Love, let us turn our eyes upon the evils
removed, and the good procured by our Savior Christ.

All evils are either Moral, such as sin; or which waits upon the other,
Physical, such as punishment: all of them are removed by our Savior, who saves
from Sin and Wrath. Man was under the guilt of Sin, and so under the Wrath of
God. Wrath in the threatening hung as an horrible Tempest over his head, and
within there was the dreadful Echo of it in Conscience. But the Sufferings of
Christ were so satisfactory and meritorious for us, that as soon as we return
and believe on him, all our guilt is done away. It Is true, the guilt in it
self, in the intrinsecal desert of punishment, is perpetual, because sin cannot
cease to be sin; but it does no longer redound upon our persons, to oblige us
to punishment. The heavy burden is now lifted off from Conscience, the black
Cloud of Wrath is dissolved, the cursing Law has nothing to say against us;
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ, Romans 8.1. It Is true,
afflictions may fall upon a Believer, but there is no Condemnation, there is
not a jot of Wrath in them; they are rather Castigatory than Penal, managed in
the hand of Mercy, rather than Justice. In the issue it appears, that there was
Love and Faithfulness in them, that even in those afflicting paths, Mercy and
Truth are found: all things shall work together for good unto the Believer,
Afflictions and all. These serve for excellent purposes, to fan off his Vanity,
melt away his Corruption, alarm his spiritual Watch, refine his golden Graces,
cast him into the Image of a meek suffering Christ, unearth, unself him, and
elevate his affections toward the everlasting rest which is above. Affliction,
after it has budded and blossomed with such precious fruits, is no longer
evil, but an excellent good. It Is true also, that death Temporal will seize
upon him, but the curse is gone, the sting out; death, which at first was a
punishment, now has a blessing in it. It was Originally introduced by sin; but
through the admirable Grace of our Savior it carries away those relics of
sin, which no Tears, Prayers, Watchings, Pious endeavors could utterly
extirpate, whilst we are in the body: it throws down the earthen walls into
their mother-dust. But who would not dye, and with Hilarion bid his Soul, Go
out, that he might be rid of sin? There is indeed a passage out of a Temporal
life, but it is into an Eternal one. The soul, when it leaves its old friend
the body, flies into the blessed Region, there to enjoy God in an immediate
manner; to read truth in its Original, and taste goodness in the Fountain: the
body, which at present dissolves into dust, shall wake again, and be made like
to the glorious body of Christ. Mortal shall put on immortality, corruptible
incorruption, death shall be swallowed up in victory; it is no longer an evil
to the Believer.

Again, Man was under the Power of Sin, and so under the Tyranny of Satan. Sin
was a Lord, a Ruler over him; not only over his outward man, whose members were
the weapons of it, but over the inward too. It had strongholds in his Reason,
and a throne in his Will; he was a drudg, a slave to his lusts, hurried up and
down by one Corruption or other; wandering in error, or swelling in pride, or
pining in envy, or boiling in malice, or burning in lust, or drowning in
sensual pleasures, some way or other serving his Iniquity. Satan, the Ruler of
darkness, has a Palace in his heart, and keeps possession there; upon all
occasions he blows up Original Corruption into sinful motions, motions into
consents, consents into acts, acts into habits. Thus he carries on the sinner
in a circle of sinning, till inevitable ruin overtake him; but in and through
Christ there is deliverance from this horrible servitude. The Holy Spirit comes
and rescues the sinner; it opens his eyes to see himself standing, as he does,
at the brink of Hell and Death; it melts him into tears and godly sorrows for
sin; it breaks down the strongholds and throne of sin in the heart; it casts
out Satan and the hellish furniture; it translates the poor sinner from the
power of darkness, into the Kingdom of Christ, into a Region of Grace and
Power, where Sin and Satan cannot have the Victory. Those precious Promises,
that sin shall not have Dominion, that Satan shall be bruised under our feet,
are now sealed and experimented in the heart. The poor Captive is now brought
out of Bondage, into the true liberty of Holiness and Obedience. Here we see
the matchless incomparable Love of God, which delivered us from so many great
Evils. Hezekiah being rescued from Death, made his acknowledgments: O Lord,
thou have in love to my soul delivered me from the pit of corruption: or, as
the Original has it, Thou have loved my soul from the pit of corruption. Every
Believer, who has tasted of the great Salvation, may say, Lord, thou have
loved me from Sin, Satan, Death, Hell, by delivering me from all these evils.

Moreover, as all evils were removed, so all good things were procured by
Christ. Temporals were so, the world owes its standing to him. Justice, but for
his expiatory Sacrifice, would have dashed it down about the sinners ^ears.
Sin, but for the Cement of his blood, would have unframed all things in nature:
that right to the Creature, which we forfeited by our iniquity, was restored
again by his Merits. The Believer shall now have so much of the world, as
infinite Wisdom and Mercy (more competent Judges than humane Reason and Will),
shall think a fit portion for him; and what he has, he shall have with the
Love of God, which, as it is the highest suavity in it self, so it pours out a
delicious relish into all outward things. Spirituals were so; those initial
Graces of Faith and Repentance, which introduce us into an Union with Christ,
are from him. He is a Prince and Savior to give repentance, Acts 5.31. To you
it is given in the behalf of Christ to believe on him, Phil. 1.29. As soon as
we repent and believe, we are justified in his blood, and by a conjunction with
him the natural Son, we have power and right to become the Sons of God by
Adoption and Grace. The Holy Spirit, the fountain of Graces and Comforts, which
was upon him the head above measure, will fall down upon us his Members in a
proportion; every Grace, every piece of the glorious new creature is created in
him. In the power of his Merits and Spirit, every comfort, every beam of Divine
Favor comes down to us through him. He is the true Mercy-seat, where God meets
and communes in words of Grace with us. Eternals were so too; all the weights
of Glory, and Crowns of life in Heaven, were purchased by him. His blood opens
the Holy of Holies, the pure River of life springs out of his Merits, the gift
of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.28. Had it not been for
him, we could never have entered into such a blessed Region as Heaven. What a
Gift is Christ, which virtually contains all gifts and good things in him! How
incomparable that Love, which gave us so comprehensive a Gift!

In the last place let us consider the excellent Evangelical Terms, which were
founded on the Death of Christ. Here two things are considerable.

The one is this, The terms are easier. The Covenant of Works was, Do this and
live: The Covenant of Grace is, Believe, repent, and live. The first called for
pure, sinless, perfect obedience: The last stoops and condescends to fallen
man; it accepts of sincere, though imperfect obedience; uprightness passes for
perfection, the main of the heart for all of it: the will is accepted for the
work, pure aims are taken for complete performances, infirmities are covered
with indulgence, duties are taken into the hand of a Mediator, and perfumed
with his infinite Merits; and hence they are acceptable, and as sweet Odours to
God. O how low does infinite Love and Mercy stoop to poor sinners! It will save
a repenting believing sinner, and how can it possibly go lower? That God should
justify an impenitent unbelieving sinner, is utterly impossible to his
Holiness, unless he would open a gap to all sin and wickedness, and make it
capable to have a Crown of happiness at last. He could not more condescend,
than he has done in the terms of the Gospel: there is a Kingdom for the poor
in spirit, a Comfort for the mourners, an acceptance for a willing mind, a
favorable respect for the least spark of grace, which is latent in a desire,
and but as a little smoke, or wiek in the socket (as the expression is, Matthew.
12.20.) And what condescending Love is here? How could God stoop lower for the
Salvation of Men?

The other is this, The terms are surer. It Is true, Adam, had he stood in
Righteousness, would have had a reward. But the difference is this, Under the
first Covenant it was not certain, that Adam, though he had sufficient grace,
should stand; but under the second it is as sure, as Gods Truth and
Faithfulness in the promise can make it, that a people shall be gathered up out
of the corrupt Mass of mankind; that Christ shall have a repenting believing
seed, and that they shall abide and persevere till they come to the recompense
of reward in Heaven. St. Austin distinguishes of a double adjutorium gratiae,
De Corrept. and Great. cap. 12.
or help of grace. Adam had that grace, without which he could not have obeyed;
Gods People have that, which causes them to obey. The first gave him a posse, a
power to obey and persevere: The second gives us the very velle and perficere,
the very willing and working with perseverance. Hereupon he observes, that
Adams will, though sound and without spot, did not persevere in an ampler good,
whilst our will, though weak and infected with indwelling Corruption, does
persevere in a lesser. Adam, with all his Holiness fell before an Apple, a
little titillation of pleasure; but the Christian Martyrs have stood it out,
notwithstanding the relics of sin in them, against racks and torments. Under
the first Covenant the stock of Grace was in Man's own hand, the stress lay upon
his Will; the principle of Holiness in him was subjected to it, to be continued
or forfeited. But under the second Covenant, which was founded at so vast an
expense as the Blood of God, Man's Will is not made Trustee a second time, the
stock is not in his own hand; Grace is a Victor, and subdues the Will unto it
self. Hence this Covenant cannot, as the other did, miscarry: God was a friend
to innocent Adam; but in the second Covenant God comes nearer to us in a double
Union, such as Adam never dreamt of. There is an Hypostatical Union, the Son of
God taking our nature into himself, and, which is founded thereon, a Mystical
Union, Believers being in a wonderful manner united unto Christ, as members
unto their head. In the first Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in Christ,
there is one Person. In the second, Christ and Believers make one Christ, 1
Cor. 12.12. Believers are but Christ displayed: he lives in them, he counts
himself incomplete without them. By virtue of these two Unions it is, that
Believers finally persevere; Because I live (says Christ) ye shall live also,
John 14.19. Their life is bound up in his; as long as Christ the head is alive
above, the believing Members below shall not fail of quickening grace, to
maintain spiritual life unto eternal. The Holy Spirit is in them a well of
water, springing up to everlasting life, John 4.14; and to secure the abode of
the Spirit with them, Christ is a Priest after the power of an endless life,
Heb. 7.16. In the Covenant of Works, there was no promise of perseverance; but
in the Covenant of Grace there are many such promises: God shall confirm you
unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. He will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. The Apostle praying for the Thessalonians,
that they may be preserved blameless unto the coming of Christ, immediately
adds, Faithful is he that called you, who also will do it, 1 These. 5.23, 24;
evidently God undertakes it, and engages his Faithfulness in it. To take these
Promises conditionally, is utterly to evacuate them; to make them run thus, If
we will persevere, we shall persevere; and so much was true under the old
Covenant, and without any Promise at all. The clear scope of those Promises is,
That Believers are not left in their own hand, but kept in Gods; and how sure
an hand that is, our Savior tells us, None can pluck them out of my Fathers
hand, John 10.29. I know some take these words with a limitation, None can
pluck them away without their own voluntary consent: but this limitation makes
the words altogether insignificant; it is not possible, that they should be
plucked away without their consent: The words therefore, with that limitation,
run thus, None can pluck them, but in such a way as the same is possible to be
done; and thus they signify nothing. That which our Savior makes impossible
in the Text, becomes in the Gloss as possible as any other thing. Here we see
the incomparable Love of God to his People; there is in Christ an everlasting
Covenant ordered in all things, and sure; they are preserved in Christ, and
that unto salvation.

This infinite immense Love of God in Christ can do no less than call for a
return. What? was it not enough for him to give us a World of Creatures? Has
he given his Son, his only begotten, dearly beloved Son for us? Has he given
him so far, as to be made flesh, and made under the Law, the command and curse
of it? Has he thereby removed all Evils, and procured all good things for us?
Has he done this for Sinners, for Enemies, and that out of an eternal design
of Grace; out of such Love, as was an impulse to it self, without any
attractive on our part to move him thereunto? And after all this, shall not our
hearts take fire, and burn within us with Love to him again? When his Love was
up in Eternity, shall not ours appear in time? When he loved us worthless,
meritless Creatures, shall not we love him upon the highest and greatest
attractives? When he gave his Son, when the Giver and the Gift were both
infinite, shall our finite affections be shut up from him, or denied unto him?
Our Love to his is but a little drop, a poor inconsiderable nothing: and with
what face or reason can we withhold it, when infinite Love calls for it? Has
God himself come down, as it were, from his altitude, and in admirable Grace
followed us? First into our flesh, and then into a Law-subjection, and at last
into a Curse and Penal Sufferings; and all this upon an errand of Peace and
Reconciliation to reduce us again to himself, and to happiness in him: and
shall we yet fly away from him, and by an horrible indignity turn our backs
upon such admirable pursuits of Love and Grace? After such a deliverance from
Sin and Hell as this, May we think our selves our own, or turn away our hearts,
so much as in the glance of a thought, from so great a Savior? After such a
purchase of Grace and Heaven, should we not lie down at his feet in extatical
admirations, and send up our dearest affections to the great Donor? If
Creatures, if Laws, if Ordinances move us not; shall we yet be unaffected at
the spectacle of a God incarnate, obeying, bleeding, dying, for us Sinners and
Enemies? It Is horrible ingratitude, having such a prospect of infinite Love
before our eyes. Let us do, as becomes us; give God our heart, not a piece or
corner of it, but all; not in some weak languid velleities, but in the highest
strains and raisures of spirit; not in some drops or rivulets, but in a full
stream and current of affections, such as is due to him who is the Original of
souls. Our desires, before vagrant on Earth, should now take Wing and fly up to
Heaven; our Love, once in corrupt conjunction with Creatures, should now aspire
after a pure Union with him, who is Love it self: Our delights should no longer
toy or sport with vanity, but spread, and sweetly dilate themselves in the
Beams of infinite Goodness: All the Powers of our Souls should now be gathered
in from the World, and upon on a full deliberate choice should be placed upon
the Center of Perfections. The proof of all this must be in a life of
Obedience; without this it is mere vanity to say, that we love him. Holy Love
goes not alone, or without a train of good works following after it: the warmth
and ardor of it in the heart purifies the life; the inward suavity of it
facilitates the outward Command, and naturalizes us to Obedience: as it sets a
high rate and estimation upon God himself, so upon every jot and tittle of his
Law. The complacency, which we find in him, makes us take pleasure in all the
pure ways, which he has set before us; if we esteem him above Worlds and
Creatures, we will allow his Will to be above all Wills, and subject ours to it.

Moreover the Love of God moves us to love our Neighbor. What? has God gone
before us in such admirable steps of Love? and shall we not be followers of him
as dear children, and walk in love, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.1, 2? Can
there be an higher or nobler pattern than Love it self? Shall he do good in the
sphere of Nature, and more and higher good in the sphere of Grace, and we do
none in our little sphere? Shall infinite Bowels and Mercies be open, and
finite ones shut? When God has given so great a Gift as his own Son, May we
withhold our little Pittances of Charity? Would we receive all, and give
nothing? Exact pence from our Brother, when Talents are forgiven to our selves?
Is God come into our flesh? and shall we hide our selves from it, I mean, in
the neglect or contempt of the poor? Did he take humanity, that we should put
it off? No, in so doing we should reproach not our Maker only, but our Redeemer
too. Inhumanity is now double, treble, to what it was before our Savior took
an humane Nature, to read us a Lecture of Love and Goodness in: the old
Commandment of Love is now a new one, urged upon us by a new Motive, The
incomparable Love of God in his giving his Son for us. If we now shut up our
Bowels and Mercies from others, how dwells the Love of God in us? What sense
can we have of it upon our hearts? Charity was the badg of the Primitive
Christians. The impress of Gods Love upon Mr. Fox was so great, that he never
denied any that asked for Jesus sake. Our Love toward men should be a little
picture or resemblance of Gods Love toward us. Our Mercies and Compassions
should tell the world, that we have tasted of that infinite Grace and Mercy
which is above. Our Charity toward all should bear witness, that we have been
great receivers from God. Our Love toward Enemies should be a thankful
acknowledgment, that we being such, were reconciled to God by the Death of his
Son.

CHAP. VI.


IN the next place I come to consider the Power of God. Power being a
Perfection, must needs be in him, and being (as all other Attributes are) his
very Essence, it must needs be infinite. The very light of Nature reveals this
Attribute. In the Grecian Philosophers he is called (...), Omnipotent; Nihil
est, quod Deus efficere non posset, says Tully. Ludovicus Vives wonders,
Comment. in Aug. de Civit. l. 5. c. 10.
that so learned a Man as Pliny should cavil at Gods Omnipotence, as if he
could not do all things, because he could not dye. In Scripture he is called
Gibbor, a mighty one; Shaddai, an All-sufficient God: he is the only Potentate,
1 Timothy 6.15. He can do every thing, Job 42.2. Nothing is too hard for him, Genesis
18.14. Power belongs to him, Psalm. 62.11. Whatever is an act of Power, that
he can do; that he cannot do contradictories, is not Impotency, but Power and
Perfection: for him to lie, were to deny his own Truth; for him to dye, were to
cast off his Immortality; for him to make a thing be, and at the same instant
to make it not to be, were to act repugnantly, and overturn his own action.
These argue Impotency, not Power. We may more properly say, that these cannot
be done, than that God cannot do them: he can do all things, which being done,
do argue Power or Perfection; but what argues Impotency, can no more fall upon
him, than darkness can seize upon the Sun.

This excellent Attribute of Power was eminently set forth in Christ: He is
called the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. Divine Power shows forth it self in him
in several respects.

First it breaks out in his Incarnation. The word was made flesh, John 1.14.
He, who was in the form of God, took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.6,
7; that is, he, who had the Essence and Majesty of God, assumed so low a thing
as an humane Nature: He did not lay down his Deity, but assumed an Humanity;
two Natures, a Divine and Humane, were in one person. Never did God come so
near the Creature as here. He was in the world by his Universal Presence; he
was in the Temple in types and symbols; in the Saints he is by his Grace, in
Heaven he is in immediate Glory: but in the Incarnation he is hypostatically in
an humane Nature. The person of the Word, which was from Eternity an Hypostasis
to his Divine Nature, became an Hypostasis to his humane Nature in time. O what
wonders of Power are here! Here God was made Man, the Creator became one with
his Creature! Had the whole world been crowded into a single Atom, it would
have been infinitely a less wonder than this; the putting a greater finite into
a less, cannot be comparable to the taking of finite into infinite. Here are
two Natures, a Divine and an Humane, in themselves infinitely distant, met in
personal conjunction; finite is not absorp't by infinite, infinite is not
changed by finite. Here Eternal dwells in the same person with Temporal, yet
runs not into succession; immortal dwells with mortal, yet falls not into
passion. Here an humane Nature is united to a person infinitely simple, and
infinitely complete; yet he loses not his simplicity, nor yet does he receive
any additional perfection. Here Is an humane Nature without any Personality of
its own. Naturally the humane Nature of Christ would have had a Subsistence of
its own; a Personality would have flown from it: but the resultance was
miraculously prevented; the want of its own finite Subsistence was supplied by
the Presence of an infinite one; Mr. Jeans of the words Incarn. fol. 81.
the Son of God communicated his Hypostasis to it, to sustain it. Here we have
in some respect more of Divine Power manifested, than there was in the making
of the World. When mere nothing was by an Almighty word elevated into Elements,
Plants, Beasts, Men, Angels, still it was but into finite; but here a finite
humane Nature was taken into infinite: and between the infinite God and the
humane Nature, the disparity must be far greater than it is between a world and
nothing. Here indeed God did not create an infinite (that being impossible),
but he came as near it as possibly could be, by assuming a finite Nature into
himself. All other Creatures are comparatively extra Deum; but here the humane
Nature was in the very instant of its production, interwoven with the infinite
Person of the Son. Thus we see, that in this stupendous work, Divine Power
acted magnificently and congruously to its own infinity; never any work did so
fully answer and correspond to Omnipotence as this.

A second instance of Power we have in the Conception of our Savior: his body
was not formed in an ordinary way, by the concurrence of Man and Woman, but in
a way supernatural; A Virgin was with Child. As the body of the first Adam was
wonderfully framed out of the dust; so the body of the second was admirably
framed out of the Virgin. That a Virgin should be with Child, was a great, an
high Miracle, far above all the Power of Nature. How then was it effected? The
Evangelist tells us, The Holy Ghost came upon her, the power of the highest did
overshadow her, Luke 1.35. This is a sublime tremendous Mystery; the Holy
Ghost, as the word (overshadow) imports, did, as it were, cast a Cloud over
her; to teach us, that we should not over-curiously pry into so great a Work as
this was. The body of our Savior was not produced spermatically, out of the
substance of the Holy Ghost, but Operatively, by the Power of it. The matter of
his body was from the substance of the Virgin; the active Principle was the
infinite Spirit. The seed of Man was not here used; it was not congruous, that
he, who had God for his Father, should have any Man to be so: it was a
miraculous extraordinary operation. Hence Christ is called, The stone cut out
of the mountains without hands, Dan. 2.34. There was an Almighty Power in the
framing his humane Nature; the Tabernacle of his body was not pitched by Man,
but by the Lord, Heb. 8.2. There was a supernatural operation in the making of
it; it is called a tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say, not of this
building, Heb. 9.11. It was not made in a natural ordinary way of generation.
It Is true, he took part of our flesh and blood; but the manner of framing his
body was in an extraordinary way, the structure of it was Divine, and much
above that of our bodies.

Another instance of the Divine Power we have in the Miracles wrought by Jesus
Christ. The Jewish Rabbis distinguish of a twofold Work of God; they call his
ordinary Works of Nature, opus Bereshith, from the first words of Genesis; and
his miraculous works, opus Merchebha, from Ezekiels Chariot. A miracle is a
work lifted up above the Order and Power of Nature: it is a specimen of
Creation, something is made out of nothing. What second causes cannot reach,
that is done by the first; no Man, no Angel can do such a work. These are but
parts of Nature, and therefore cannot in their Operations exceed Nature; Quod
est totaliter sub ordine constitutum, non potest ultra istius naturae ordinem
agere; it is only Gods Prerogative to work Miracles. He that set the order of
Nature, can work above it; he can lift Nature off the hinges, and set it on
again; and when he does it, he does it as becomes his infinite Wisdom, upon
very great and weighty Reasons. When he brought his People out of Egypt, then
his wonders appeared; when he delivered his Law on Sinai, his wonders appeared
again. In those great dispensations he showed himself, not in the ordinary
dress of Nature, but in Royal State and Majesty; much more did he do so, when
his Son, very God, was manifested in the flesh. Then the water was turned into
Wine, the Wind and the Seas did obeisance to their incarnate Creator: the blind
received their sight, the lame did walk, the Lepers were cleansed, the deaf did
hear, the dead were raised, the devils were cast out of Men. Here the right
hand of the Lord was glorious in Power. Nature did, as it were, leap and
triumph in miraculous elevations above it self, at the coming down of its
Creator, to redeem the world: a mighty train of wonders attended on that
greatest wonder of all, God incarnate; a life of Miracles ensued upon his
miraculous Conception. Now touching the Miracles of Christ, there are three or
four things to be taken notice of.

1. The Miracles of Christ were true, and that upon a double account.

The one is this, They were true in the History of them, they were really done:
we have them upon Record in the Sacred Volume of Scripture; they were not done
in a corner, or before a few, but openly, and before multitudes; there were
thousands of eyewitnesses, from whom the truth of them has been handed down
in all ages of the Church. There is no color at all to imagine, that those
first reporters did utter an untruth, or go about to put a cheat upon the
world: their own integrity would not suffer it, neither was the thing it self
indeed practicable. How should so many thousands, for the most part unknown to,
and distant from each other, ever agree and conspire together in the very same
story? Or, if they could, what should they propose to themselves? or which way
could they think, that a Relation of things to have been done openly, if false,
should ever pass in a contradicting World? They knew very well, that there were
innumerable prying malicious Enemies round about them, who would persecute them
for that Relation, though true, and brand them as liars for it, if false.
Christianity was then a poor persecuted thing, and it would have been strange
folly and madness in them, to have ventured their lives and estates merely to
broach a lie unto the world; especially seeing it must have been such an one,
as would have been surely discovered to be such, and severely punished upon the
Authors. In all reason therefore, what the first Witnesses spoke was true; and
what after-ages heard, was but the Echo of their report. The Miracles wrought
by our Savior were so great, that none of the Adversaries ever durst deny,
that they were done. The Jews did not deny it: P. Gal. de Arc. l. 8. c. 5.
their ancient Rabbis take those words of the Prophet, Then the eyes of the
blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped: the lame
shall leap as the heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing, Isa. 35.5, 6. to
be spoken of the Messiah. Their own Josephus speaks of Jesus as one more than a
man, and a worker of great Miracles; only the Jews, out of their desperate
malice against our Savior, defamed his Miracles as done by Magic: and, as Dr.
Lightfoot tells us, Harm. fol. 30.
it is said in Talm. Bab. that Been Sarda (which is a blasphemous name they give
to Jesus of Nazareth) did bring enchantments out of Egypt in incision in his
flesh. But there cannot be a vainer thought than to imagine, that Satan should
contribute wonders to confirm that Doctrine, which he knew would utterly ruin
his Kingdom. When the Pharisees said, that Christ did cast out Devils by
Beelzebub. He answered two things: First, that Satan's Kingdom, if divided,
could not stand, Matthew. 12.26. And then, that they, in saying so, did
maliciously oppose their light, and run into the unpardonable sin, verse. 31,
32. But when the Jews saw that this pretense would not serve their turn, they
betook themselves to a contrary shift, and said, That the Messiah, when he
came, should do no Miracles at all. The Pagans did not deny Christ's Miracles.
In Pilates Letter to the Emperor Tiberius, there is an enumeration made of his
Miracles. In the Epistle of Lentulus to Tiberius he is styled, Magd. Hist.
Cent. 1. l. 1. c. 10.
Homo magnae virtutis. The Pagans, conscious to themselves that the thing was
not to be denied, Aug. de Consensu Evang. l. 1. c. 9.
cried up Aesculapius and Apollonins, in opposition to Christ; and withal
framed an impudent lie, that our Savior had Magical Books, according to which
he did his Miracles. Such devices as these, were, I suppose, first started by
Julian the Apostate, and by him instilled into others. The Mahometans, fairer
than the other, confess Christ's Miracles to have been done, and that from God.
Morn. de Ver. Christ. Relig. c. 33.
Their Alcoran says, That Gods Spirit was a help and witness to Jesus, that
the Soul of God was given to him. Thus it appears on all hands, that the matter
of Fact touching our Saviors Miracles, cannot be denied.

The other is this, They were true for the nature of Miracles: they were not,
as the Devils wonders are, mere Spectrum's or Apparitions, but real Miracles,
things which are above the order of Nature, and lie within the line of
Omnipotence only; the matter, mode, and end signally declare them to be such.
Some Miracles of Christ, such as raising the dead, were such for the matter of
them, that no conatus of nature, no concurrence or conjunction of created
Powers could ever have effected them, no, not in Millions of Ages; some of
them, such as Curing the sick, Nature might have done, but in a tract of time,
and with the help of second Causes. But our Savior dispatched them out of hand
instantly, immediately, with a word or a touch: To operate after this sort, is
only proper to God, who is excellent in working. When Satan, who labors to
emulate Divine Works, does wonders, the end of them declares their Original;
suitably to the Author they serve only to lead men into lies and Idolatries.
Antichrist comes with lying wonders, 2 These. 2.9. Lying wonders in themselves,
as being phantasms and mockeries of sense; and lying wonders, as tending to
confirm men in false Doctrine and Worship: but the Miracles of Christ, being
real ones, were done to ratify the supernatural Truths and pure Worship of
God. The Jews have a rule, that we should believe him who does Miracles, unless
he be the Author of Idolatrous Worship: had they adhered to this rule, they
could not but have embraced our Savior, who with so many Miracles sealed up
the true Doctrine and Worship of God.

2. The Miracles of Christ were not a few, but very numerous; not in one or two
places, but diffused over the Creation, thereby to proclaim that the Creator
was come down to redeem the World. There were Miracles upon the Water, he
turned it into Wine, John 2.9. Showing himself to be the Lord of Nature; here
doing that in an instant, which he does every year in the Vine: Miracles in the
Sea, a fish brings him the tribute-money, Matthew. 17.27. to declare, that all
Creatures were Tributaries to him. After an whole nights toil to no purpose,
the Net being let down at his word, enclosed a great multitude of fishes, Luke
5.5, 6. So that the awe of his Divine Power fell upon all the Spectators.
Miracles upon the Sea and Air together; in a Tempest he rebuked the winds and
the Sea, and there was a great calm, Matthew. 8.26, as a proof that all the
Elements were his servants. Miracles upon the loaves, in multiplying of them,
John 6.11, and upon the fig tree, in making it to wither away, Matthew. 21.19; as
a clear demonstration, that his blessing and curse were great things. Miracles
upon the bodies of men, in healing all manner of sickness and disease, Matthew.
4.23; and upon their souls too, in making them every whit whole, John 7.23; in
token that he was the great Physician of both. Miracles in Heaven: at his Birth
a star conducted the Wisemen to him, Matthew. 2.2; at his passion the Sun was
darkened, Matthew. 27.45. The star waited upon its Creator at his Birth, the Sun
sympathized with him in his Passion. Miracles upon the Devils, in casting them
out by his Word, Matthew. 8.16. A sure sign, that the Powers of Hell could not
stand it out against him. Very various are the Miracles of our Savior recorded
in Scripture: But if all had been written, the world could not have contained
the books, says St. John, Chap. 21. verse. 25. The words are Hyperbolical, yet
they import, that many of his Works were not committed to Writing. Arnobius
enumerates the miraculous Works of Christ, and then cries out, Adv. Gent. l. 1
Quid simile Dii omnes, a quibus opem dicitis aegris and periclitantibus latam?
When did the Pagan Cods do the like, from whom you say, that help is afforded
to men in sickness or danger? Never was there such plenty of Miracles as here.

3. The Miracles of Christ were very great: He did those works which no other
man did, Joh. 15.24. It was never so seen in Israel, Matthew. 9.33. I shall
instance in two or three things: First, he raised up the dead: The maid in her
Fathers house, the young man carried out upon the byer, and Lazarus four days
dead and stinking in the Grave. What things are these? How much above all the
Powers in Nature? In the sixth Council at Constantinople, Crab. Tom. 2.386.
Polychronius a Monothelite, in Confirmation of his opinion, offered to raise
up a dead man; but upon trial he could do nothing at all, which made the people
cry out, Novo Simoni Anathema, Polychronio seductori populi Anathema. The
Emperor Basilius being in great grief for his deceased Son, Spondan. Annal. 879.
Theodorus Santabarenus presented his Son to him as alive; but this was but a
mere spectrum, an illusion of sense: After a few kisses and embraces, the
Emperor saw his Son no more. Apollonius did call up the Ghost of Achilles, that
is to say, a Devil, De Verit. Relig.
as the noble Mornay speaks. Elisha raised the Shunamites Son to life, but he
was only a Minister and a Type of Christ; the Power of God did the work: but
our Savior raised the dead by his own Divine Power. Another instance is, his
restoring sight to one born blind, John 9. Touching which the blind man says,
Since the world began was it not heard, that any man opened the eyes of one
that was born blind, verse. 32. It was a work fit for the Messiah. It is indeed
storied, that Vespasian the Emperor restored sight to the blind; but it may be
the person was not really blind, at least not naturally. Satan (as Bellarmine
well observes) might possibly reside in his Eye, and impede the use of that
part, that he might seem to cure, when he did but cease to hurt. But our
Savior by a Power above Nature and Art, did cure one really and naturally
blind, and that with Clay; a thing in it self more probable to put out Eyes,
than to cure them. And so there was, as the Rabbis speak, Miraculum in
miraculo, one Miracle within another; much as it was, when the bitter waters
were made sweet by salt, 2 King. 2.21. Another instance we have in his casting
out Devils: this was the Finger and Power of God. It is said indeed, that
Apollonius did cast Devils out of Men: But how? Rayn. de lib. Ap. Tom. 2. fol.
990, 991.
It was in the very Method and Discipline of Devils, by such words and symbols
as they themselves had prescribed; so it was not an ejection, but a going out
by consent, to honor the Sacraments of their own making. But our Savior did
not cast them out in their own way; but whether they would or not, by his
Almighty Power. It is further to be noted, that soon after the Death of our
Savior, the Devils Oracles were struck Dumb. The Oracle told Augustus, That
the Hebrew- Child bid him leave that house, and be gone to Hell, no more
answers were to be expected from thence. Whereupon Augustus erected an Altar in
the Capitol, with this inscription upon it, Haec ara est primogeniti Dei; the
Altar of the first-begotten of God. The Evangelical light made the Oracles
cease, the Priests of Delphos were brought to beggary. Plutarch, Morn. de Ver.
writing touching the ceasing of Oracles, at last comes to this point, That
the Spirits were mortal, and by their Death the Oracles ceased. Oh! what an one
was our Savior, who made the Pagan Gods shrink and hide their heads? What a
Divine Light was he who chased away those false Lights? These Works were for
Greatness, such as became God manifest in the flesh.

4. The Miracles of Christ were excellently suited to the Evangelical design.
Miracles in their general Nature are excesses of Nature, and therefore things
very congruous to seal up those supernatural Truths, which are above our
Reason. Evangelical Mysteries are such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have they entered into man's heart. They are above the line of Reason,
and so very aptly ratified by those miraculous Works, which are above the line
of Nature. We are in all Reason to conclude, that God, who acts above Nature,
is to be believed, even when he speaks above Reason; which, being but a part of
Nature, may be as well exceeded by Mysteries, as other parts of Nature are by
Miracles. But further, his Miracles had a special aptitude in them to confirm
the Gospel; they were not destructive, as the wonders in Egypt were, nor merely
to raise an admiration, as Simon Magus's were, who would present himself flying
in the air, Spond. Annal. 68.
frame walking-statues, and make bread out of stones, that he might be esteemed
a great one, a kind of Deity among men: No, our Saviors Miracles were for the
good of mankind; he went up and down doing of good, he healed the distempers of
men, and cast Devils out of their bodies. And what works could be more
admirably fitted to the Gospel, which was ordained to heal inward distempers,
and cast Satan out of the Souls of men? What can better accord together than
healing Miracles, and healing Doctrines? It is very reasonable to believe, that
he, who did such wonders on the bodies of men, can do as much and more upon
their souls. He, who cast Satan out of the outward man, can eject him and all
his furniture out of the inward. Moreover it is to be observed, that his
Miracles were ordinarily wrought upon Faith. Thus he said to the Centurion, As
thou have believed, so be it done to thee, Matthew. 8.13. Thus to the blind men,
According to your faith be it unto you, Matthew. 9.29. Thus to the Father of the
possessed Child, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that
believes, Mark 9.23, as if the Divine Power were made over to Faith. We see
here, how our Savior in doing his Miracles, did put an honor upon Faith,
which is the Condition of the Gospel; and withal, what great reason we have to
go to him for Spiritual Miracles, who has done so many Corporal.

The last instance of the Divine Power, is in converting the world to
Christianity, in raising up a People to God out of the ruins of the Fall. The
Son of God did not come in the flesh, merely to do Miracles upon the bodies of
Men; No, his greatest work is upon their souls. Corporal Miracles were pledges
of Spiritual. Some of them, as the inlightning of the blind, and raising of the
dead, did, as Estius observes, type out the giving of the Vital Principles of
Grace, In Sent. lib. 2. fol. 337.
to restore the fallen faculties in men. Some of them, as Peter's walking on the
Waters by the helping-hand of Christ, did shadow forth the giving of auxiliary
Grace to Saints, to keep them from sinking under Temptations. As the external
Miracles were wrought by the Power and Spirit of God, so are the internal also.
When a blind mind is irradiated, there is a word of Power, such as at first
commanded light out of darkness. When a dead sinner is raised up to a Divine
Life, the Glory of God may be seen in it, even as it was upon Lazarus's coming
out of the Grave. Now, that we may see some Rays of this glorious Power,
several things are to be considered by us.

First of all, let us look upon the state of the World, as it was at our
Saviors coming. The world was made up of Jews and Gentiles, both of them were
not only tainted with Original sin, but deeply corrupted with Actual; out of
both God would raise up a Church to himself, to make the Power of his Grace
known.

The Jews, once Gods special People, were now desperately degenerate; blindness
was upon them, notwithstanding that Rabbinical learning was at the height in
the Schools of Hillel and Shammai: they interpreted the holy Scriptures, as the
Vail upon their hearts would let them, in a very gross, carnal manner, as if
they had lost all savor of things Divine and Spiritual. Thus the establishing
the mountain of the Lords house in the top of the mountains, Isa. 2.2, is with
one of them, the bringing of Tabor and Carmel, and setting Jerusalem upon the
top of them. Buxt. Syn. c. 10.
The calling the sabbath a delight, Isa. 58.13, is to eat and drink, and
indulge their genius. They made the Sacred Law, whose primary aim was at the
heart, to bind only the outward Man. According to their corrupt gloss, there
was no Murder, but what purpled the hand with blood; nor no Adultery, but what
was in the gross Act: evil thoughts and purposes were not so much as
peccadillo's; neither did God take notice of them, so as to punish for them. A
thought or purpose of sacriledg in Antiochus, was nothing with Josephus;
regarding or seeing iniquity in the heart, was nothing with David Kimchi, as
appears by his gloss upon the 66th Psalm. Thus the Law was dispirited and
stripped of its Divinity. Religion went off from its Center, the heart, to paint
and varnish over the outward Man. Sin might reign and do what it would within,
so as it did not break out and profane the Life. Having thus humbled the Law
according to their own Model, they stood upon their Terms with God: they would
establish their own Righteousness, though it were a poor cadaverous thing,
without any Divine Life or Spirit in it; yet they would prop it up, and make it
stand before God: they were full of their own Righteousness, and complete in
themselves; they looked only for a Temporal Messiah, one who by his outward
greatness might subdue their Enemies, and feast them in the holy Land. A
spiritual Savior they expected not, neither could it be thought according to
their Principles, what such an one should do for them. As for his suffering or
dying for them, they jested at it as an horrible absurdity, saying, Tobias
deliquit, Weems of the Jew.
and sigog plectitur; their own Temporal death was expiation enough for all
their sins. Hence the sick man was to pray thus, Buxt. Syn. c. 35.
Sit mors mea expiatio pro omnibus peccatis meis. As for regenerating-Grace to
be procured for them, they dreamed of no Regeneration, but a ritual one. The
baptized Proselyte was accounted by them as recens natus, one newborn. The
sick man, having but his name changed, was esteemed as nova creatura, a new
creature. As for Eternal life, they thought they could earn it by their own
Works. In none of these respects would the pride of their hearts suffer them to
see any need of a Spiritual Savior. Further, they advanced their Traditions
above the written Word; their Talmud is, Lux illa magna, that great light, Isa.
9.2. it is fundamentum legis, the foundation of the Law. Dr. Li. Harm. fol. 38.
The words of the Scribes (say they) are more worthy than the words of the Law,
and more weighty than the words of the Prophets. Thus departed they from the
Scriptures, and run themselves into a Labyrinth of Errors; the power and vigor
of Religion was evaporated into rituals and empty formalities; if their
Phylacteries were broad, it was no matter how narrow the Law or Obedience to it
were. A clean outside would serve the turn, though within there were nothing
but hellish pollution. Great vices might pass, so as they were but sub umbra
virtutis, under a shadow of virtue; their honesty was confined to those of
their own Religion, none else were neighbors with them: they might lie or deal
falsely with a stranger, he was no neighbor; if they did kill a stranger, Seld.
de sure Not. Dr. Li. Harm. fol. 46.
they were not to dye for it by the sentence of the Sanhedrin, he was no
neighbor. Nay, and among themselves their Corban was able to untie the bonds
of Nature, and free them from Duty and Charity to their very Parents; they
seemed to be for cleansing the outside, yet they fell into gross abominations.
The very Scribes and Pharisees, their great Rabbis and Leaders, (from whom
they were not to decline, though they were told by them, that their right hand
were their left) would devour Widows houses: and what but frauds and
oppressions could be looked for among the ordinary sort? Indeed, among great
and small ones, there was a deluge of iniquity; they had made their sins great,
and to fill up the measure, they killed the Lord of life. This was the fearful
state of the Jews.

The Gentile World lay (...), 1 John 5.19. in the evil one; in the hand and
power of the Devil, or in that which is evil, in wickedness, corrupting as a
dead man does in his Grave. It Is true, within they had an implanted notion of a
Deity; without, they had the Creatures proclaiming their Creator. But alas,
They held the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. That little spark in their
bosom, which revealed a Deity, was but a Captive; it could not break out to
give Glory to its Maker, nor was it able to bear up the Honor of God in the
World. They could not but know God, yet acknowledge him they would not: though
he made and bear up all things; yet they owned him not, no, not in his own
World. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like
to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed leasts, and creeping things,
Romans 1.23. And a little after, They changed the truth of God into a lie, and
worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for
ever, Verse. 25. They fell into all manner of Idolatries; any thing might be
God, but the true one. An high dishonor it was for them to prefer the vilest
Creatures before the Optimus Maximus, the best and greatest of Beings. An
horrible lie it was for them practically to say, That a brute, or a man, or a
star was a God; or that a stock, or a stone, or a little dead matter in an
Image, did resemble the infinite Spirit. Upon their Idolatry, being an accursed
departure from God the fountain of Goodness, immediately followed a black train
of abominations: They were filled with all unrighteousness, fornication,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder, debate, deceit,
malignity; whisperers, back-biters, haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters,
inventers of evil things, disobedient to parents, without understanding,
covenant-breakers, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful, Romans
1.29, 30, 31. They were in these things, as in their Element, acting out of
sinful hearts and habits, and so gratifying their first and second corrupt
Nature both at once. And for all this they seemed to have a Patent from Heaven
in the Vices of their gods, which their own Authors set before them; they did
but follow their Deities, their sins were made Divine by the highest Example.
This was the state of the Gentiles.

And now, what manner of Power was that, which raised up an holy People to God
out of so corrupted a World? And how much work was there to be done about it?
The light was to be commanded out of darkness. The blind minds were to be
opened upon Divine Mysteries. The Law was to come forth in its pure
Spirituality. The great necessity of Christ and Grace was to be inwardly felt.
Shadows were to be turned into substance. Religion was to be brought back to
the heart. The musty Traditions were to vanish before the Word. The old Idols
to be cast to the Bats and the Moles, those blind Creatures. The fallen Nature
was to be new-framed. The sinful habits to be unravelled. Sinners twice dead in
sin, were to be raised up into a Divine Life. Here a very excellent Power was
manifested. Hence the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, That they may have eyes
to see it, that they may know what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. The words
are very magnificent, Power, mighty Power, exceeding greatness of Power, all
working, and in act, as it was in the raising up Christ from the dead; so great
a work is it to bring home sinners to God!

The Divine Power will yet be more illustrious in our Eyes, if we look upon the
state of the World in the great Men of it, such as were great in Power or
Wisdom.

The great men in Power, the Emperors and Potentates of the World, were utter
Enemies to Christianity, breathing out nothing but blood against the Professors
of it. Nero first kindled the furnace of Persecution against them; he took
occasion, as pure malice uses to do, from his own barbarous act; first, causing
Rome to be set on fire, and then casting the odium of that horrid act upon the
Christians. He set forth Edicts commanding to persecute them unto Death, as
Enemies of mankind; which made Tertullian say, That it was grande bonum, Apol.
cap. 5.
some great good that Nero condemned. Domitian first slew his Brother Titus,
and then blowed up the furnace of Persecution against the Christians. He spent
most of his time in catching of flies, yet would not omit the Christians.
Trajan, no Nero, no Domitian, but in esteem a pattern of uprightness, carried
on the bloody work; he would not indeed have the Christians sought for, yet, if
found, he would have them punished. Antoninus Philosophus was amiable to all
others, yet cruel to Christians. Severus, though illustrious in Moral virtues,
was stained with their innocent blood. Afterward Maximinus, Si Tyberis
ascendit in mania, si Nilus non ascendit in arva, si coelum stetit, si terra
movit, si fames, si lues, statim Christianos ad leonem acclamatur, Tert. Ap.
cap. 39.
Decius, Valerianus, Aurelianus, Dioclesianus, turned their bloody swords upon
them. The very name of a Christian was crime enough; upon every ill accident
the Christians were cried out upon as worthy of death, as the only causes of
the incumbent Calamity. Thus the Powers of the World, for the three first
Centuries, though ordained for good, were Patrons of that great Evil, Idolatry,
and utter Enemies to that great good, Christianity: No Christian in those times
could imagine to retain his Religion, unless he were willing to part with his
life for it.

The great men in Wisdom, the Philosophers of the World were Adversaries to
Christianity; their Wits, as well as the Emperors Swords, were bent against it:
outwardly they were in the splendour of Morality, and seemed to make some
approaches toward Christian Virtues; but inwardly they were black with Enmity
against the Gospel, and at a vast distance from the holy Temper of it. Many
cavils they made against the Christians, but the root of their Enmity lay in
two or three things:

1. Their carnal Reason would not stoop to the supernatural Truths revealed in
the Gospel: they were for Humane Wisdom, but against Divine. Those natural
Truths which were within the sphere of Reason, they looked on as Wisdom: But
those supernatural ones, which were above it, they esteemed no better than
foolishness; scorning that which they could not measure, and casting that down
below their Reason, which indeed was above it. With them St. Paul was but a
babbler, Act. 17.18. one who had gathered up some vanities, that he might
scatter them abroad to others. The Resurrection was a matter of mockery, verse.
32; as if the limits of Nature could not be exceeded, no, not by the God of it.
They thought that there was nothing in the Christian Doctrines, Magd. cent. 2.
cap. 15. Fat. c. Graecos.
praeter stultitiam and nugas, but toys and follies. That God should be born a
Man, was against Reason, a thing utterly incredible. That a crucified man
should be second to God the Father of all, Just. Mart. ad Anton.
was madness and intolerable folly. They thought that all the Wisdom lay on
their own side. Celsus could find much wiser things in Plato, than in the
Sacred Scriptures. Julian boasted, that the Gentiles had all the learning,
Spond. Ann. Nazian. Or.
the Christians had only their Creed; as if Faith, which is a key to infinite
treasures of Wisdom, were a poor inconsiderable nothing. These wise men of the
World would not be made wiser than their own reason had made them, and upon
that account they set themselves against the great Mysteries of the Gospel.

2. Their corrupt hearts would not brook that simplicity and sincerity, which
the Gospel called for: they knew well enough, that there was but one God; yet
in their very Worship (in which, if in any thing, they should have been sincere
and pure-hearted) they dissembled, and made as if there were many, complying
with the Idols of the place where they lived, and doing many things, Non
tanquam Diis grata, sed tanquam legibus jussa, not as grateful to the Gods, but
as commanded by the Laws. Hence St. Austin says of Seneca, Aust. de C. D. l.
6. c. 10.
that Colebat quod reprehendebat, agebat quod arguebat: He worshipped what he
reproved, he acted what he found fault with: under all the beauty of Moral
Virtues there lay a false heart, such as could not bear a Command of internal
Purity.

3. They were animalia gloriae, Creatures which lived upon popular air.
Accordingly their design was as opposite to that of the Gospel, as pride is to
the Grace of God. That which the Gospel aimed at, was, that Pride might be
stained, that no flesh might glory in it self; that we might be saved by mere
Grace, that God might be exalted therein. But the aim of the Philosophers was
quite contrary to this, they were lifted up in self-excellencies: in all their
Moral Virtues they did but sacrifice to the pride of their own Reason and Will;
they needed no such thing as Grace or Prayer for it. Quid votis opns est? fac
te faelicem, says Seneca; What need of Prayers? Epist. 31.
thou may make thy self happy. Their fundamental maxim, the very firmament of
their happiness was, sibi fidere, to trust to themselves; they would be
virtuous, as Ajax would be victorious, without the help of God, that the glory
might be entirely their own. In homine id landandum quod ipsius est, that only
is praiseworthy which is a man's own. Their Virtuoso was Deorum socius, a Peer
to the Gods: He did cum Diis ex pari vivere, live equally with them; nay, he
did in one thing go before them, they were such by Nature, he by Virtue. This
makes Seneca cry out, Epist. 53.
Ecce res magna, habere imbecillitatem hominis, securitatem Dei. Behold! a
great thing, to have the frailty of a Man, the security of a God. This horrible
Pride, the venom in their Moral Virtues, (which was so near and intimate to
them, that one looking into Plato's vomit, said, I see his choler here, but not
his Pride, meaning, that that stuck too close to him to be cast up by him) was
a temper as opposite to the Gospel as any thing could be; it did utterly
evacuate Christ and Grace. What room could there be for Grace, when Nature
might do the work? What need that the Eternal Word, the brightness of Glory,
should be incarnate, when the little (...), the sinall spark of Reason in our
bosom, was enough to make us virtuous and happy? No frame of mind, no, not that
of the profane man could be at a greater distance from Heaven than this. Salv.
de Gub. l. 4.
Inter maltos reos, nullus est criminosior, quam qui fe non putat criminosum.
Among many guilty persons, none is more criminal than the presumptuous
self-justitiary, who thinks himself not criminal at all. Thus stood the
Philosophers, all in Armor of Pride, opposing the Gospel, and the Grace of it.

We see here, to make men Christians, was an admirable work, a great deal of
Power was to be laid out upon it. Such a Faith was to be raised up, as might
render them victorious over all the Power and Wisdom of the World. Veniant
Crux, ignis, ossium confractiones, modo Christum bakeam, Ignat.
Such a temper of mind was to be wrought, as might make them ready to welcome
death in what shape or terror soever it came, and to pour out their dearest
blood and life for the Gospel. Those spirits, which before hung about Earth,
and these lower things, were to be tuned for Heaven, and wound up to so Divine
a pitch, that the whole world should not be able to unbend them, to loosen them
from Christ, or let them down into earthly Vanities. The great Emperors, with
all their Engines of Power and Cruelty, could not rent them off from the World
to come, or piece them to the present evil one. The Philosophers, with all
their Arts and Eloquence, could not decoy them from supernatural Mysteries, or
induce them to take up their repose in humane Learning or Wisdom. The whole
World was annihilated to them, and they unto themselves; they became fools,
that they might be wise, and Nothing that God might be All: the Ornaments and
Self-excellencies were put off, that they might be complete in Christ. They lay
at Gods feet for Mercy, and lived in a continual dependence upon the influences
of his Spirit and Grace. In such a work as this the Arm of God must needs be
revealed in a very eminent manner. Here we have just cause to say, What has
God wrought!

The Divine Power will yet more appear, if we look upon the instruments in this
Work. In making the World there were none at all, no Leavers or Engines to rear
up the great Fabric. An Almighty word absolved it: in converting it
instruments were used; but such, that by the no-proportion between them and the
great effect, it might appear that the Power was of God only. He sent not the
glorious Angels to Preach up a crucified Christ, but Men. The treasure was in
Earthen-vessels, in poor frail Mortals, who carried about bodies of Clay, That
the excellency of the power might be of God, 2 Cor. 4.7; that it might be
clearly seen, that the great Work was Gods. Among men he sent not the Anshe
Shem, Persons of Renown for Learning or Wisdom, but mean illiterate men. Hence
the Apostle says, God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, 1 Cor. 1.27,
that the Divine Power might appear in the Work. These mean men preached, not
with excellency of speech or wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.1, with the charms of Eloquence,
or the pomp of humane Wisdom; but with plain words: their Preaching was looked
upon as foolishness. That salvation should be by a crucified Christ seemed
foolish; that it should be communicated by Preaching, Sclat. in Pools Synop.
seemed more foolish; that it should be done by Preaching in a low, simple,
plain manner, seemed most foolish of all. Yet in this way it was that Christ
would ride conquering, and to conquer the World to himself. The great success
of their Preaching, was a signal proof that God was with them of a truth. At
Peter's first Sermon three thousand souls were converted unto God, Act. 2.41.
and at his second they were increased to five thousand, Act. 4.4. multitudes of
Believers came in to Christianity. In a little time the Gospel was propagated
over a great part of the World; one Paul spread it from Jerusalem to Illyricum:
And what did all the rest of the Apostles, who carried about this Evangelical
light, do? What did the seventy Disciples do, who, as Ecclesiastical Writers
say, had their several Provinces to Preach the Gospel in? The word did then
run, and was glorified; it passed through many Countries with a Divine
swiftness and success; at the sound of the Gospel the World was spiritually
turned upside down, and of Pagan became Christian. Tertullian enumerates diverse
Nations, and at last adds touching us, Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca,
Christo tamen subdita sunt; the Evangelical Power entered there where the Roman
could not. By such weak means to produce so great an effect, was a work worthy
of Omnipotence.

Moreover, the Divine Power will yet more appear, if we consider the things
proposed in the Gospel. Narces the Roman-General, discontented at the Empress
Sophia, to invite the Lombards into Italy, sent them many sorts of excellent
fruits from thence. The Present being congruous to sense, the project took
effect. The Gospel indeed proposes very excellent things to us. But they are so
great, and so far above humane Nature, that the proposal, if not accompanied
with a Divine Power, would have been altogether ineffectual. I shall instance
in two or three things:

1. It proposes super-rational Mysteries, such as the Doctrine of the Sacred
Trinity. The Incarnation of the Son of God. The Satisfaction made to Justice by
his Blood. These are objects of Faith, and so depend one upon another, that
unless we believe the Trinity, we cannot believe the Incarnation; and unless we
believe that, we cannot believe a Satisfaction; and without believing that, we
cannot fulfill the condition of the Gospel, which requires us to rest upon
Christ for salvation. These therefore are necessary objects of Faith; but
without an Act of Divine Power, Faith in these cannot be had. Two things
evidence this: the one is ex part objecti, the things are above Reason. As the
things of Reason are above Sense, so the things of Faith are above Reason:
without a Revelation Reason could not have found out these Mysteries, after it,
Reason cannot comprehend them. It may shadow them out by similitudes; but there
is in them a light unapproachable, such as Reason cannot look into; an infinite
Abyss, such as Reason cannot measure. The other is ex part subjecti; man, who
is to believe these things, is fallen, and in his fall not one or two faculties
fell, but all of them; and among the rest his intellectual and believing
faculties fell also. The intellect has lost its subjection to God the Supreme
Truth. The believing faculty centers in the Creature, and without the Power of
Grace cannot lift up it self to supernatural Truths. A Divine Power is
requisite, to captivate the understanding to the first Truth, to elevate the
believing faculty to super-rational Mysteries. Hence in Scripture Faith is
called the Gift and Work of God, such an one as is the product of Divine Power:
it is wrought by Power, Ephesians. 1.19. it is fulfilled and consummated by Power, 1
These. 1.11. it is styled the spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. It is not from our
own spirit, but Gods outwardly revealing the mysterious object in Scripture,
and inwardly inlightning and elevating the heart to entertain it. Hence
Fulgentius compares the production of Faith in the heart, Carnem illam nec
concipere Virgo posset nec parere, nisi ejusdem carnis Spiritus Sanctus
operaretur exortum; in hominis cord nec concipi sides poterit, nec augeri,
nisi eam Spiritus Sanctus infundat and nutrint: ex eodem Spiritu venati sumus,
ex spuo natus est Christus, Fulg. de Incar. cap. 20.
with the conception of Christ in the Virgins Womb; both are by one and the
same Spirit. Christ is no less formed in the heart by it, than his flesh was in
the Virgin. It is therefore a work of Power to raise up the mind of man to
believe those supernatural Mysteries, which are far above it self.

2. It proposes super-moral Virtues. It would have us to be humble and deny our
selves. To sanctify the Lord in our hearts. To have a love for his Goodness; a
fear for his Majesty and Greatness; a faith for his Truth and Mercy; a
sincerity for his all-seeing eye; and such a posture of soul, that the inward
affections and motions may in an holy manner answer and correspond to one
Divine Attribute or other. It calls upon us to have internal purity, to indulge
no lust, no, not in a thought; to baulk never an holy Duty, to love our very
Enemies, and overcome evil with good. These I call super-moral, because they
are above the Power of Nature. Mere Moral Virtues may spring out of the
Principles of improved Nature, but these do not do so. The Philosophers, those
improvers of Nature, and Masters of Morality, never arrived at them. They were
so far from humility and selfdenial, that Pride was their temper, and Self
their center. Their splendid Virtues did not glance only, but directly look at
vainglory. They did not sanctify God in their hearts, but set up their own
Reason, taking it, not in its own place as a Minister of God, but abstractively
from him; they turned it into an Idol, and sacrificed unto it in their virtuous
actions, doing them as congruous to Reason, but not in respect to God, who
inspired it; or to his Will, which was declared in it; or to his Glory, which
was to be promoted by it. They would talk of internal purity, but were indeed
strangers to it. Internal corruption was no burden to them; Regenerating-grace
no desire. They dissembled and complied with the outward Idols of the place
where they lived, and within, in the secret of the heart, they had their Idols
and indulged lusts. Socrates had immoral impure corruptions. Zeno and
Chrysippus allowed unnatural lust. Seneca was in-insatiably covetous. In the
very best of them sensual sins were but swallowed up of spiritual. The beauty
in their life, was but to gratify the pride in their heart, they knew nothing
touching love to Enemies. Vltion looked like a piece of natural Justice. Cicero
tells us, Justitiae primum munus est, ut ne cui noceat, nisi lacessitus
injuria; they thought that upon injury they might revenge, or if revenge might
be forborne, they little thought of love to Enemies. Nature, we see, cannot
ascend above it self, nor produce these Evangelical Virtues; the Divine Power
and Spirit must do it. Hence they are called the virtues of God, 1 Pet. 2.9, as
being far above the virtues of men; and the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, as
being produced by a spirit and power much higher than that of Man. Without a
Divine Power it is not imaginable, how such excellent Virtues should ever be
found in the heart of poor fallen Creatures.

3. It proposes super-mundane Rewards, which are no attractives to a carnal
heart, unless it be elevated unto them by the Power of Grace. This plainly
appears by comparing the heavenly Rewards and the earthly Man together. The
Rewards are at a great distance from sense. They lie in another world. The
treasure is in Heaven. The recompense is above. A red Sea of death is to be
passed through before we can come at it. The Man, to whom the tender is made,
is earthly, carnal, living by sense, wrapped in the vail of time; one like the
infirm Woman in the Gospel, who is bowed together, and can in no wise lift up
himself, no, not to a Heaven of Glory and Blessedness freely offered unto him.
He hangs in the Clay of one earthly thing or other, and by bonds of strong
Concupiscence is fastened to this lower world; and, which is a prodigy in an
immortal soul, he loves to be so, and thinks that it is good being here. A
little Earth with him, is better than Heaven. Sensual pleasures out-relish the
pure Rivers above. O how unfit is such a man to close in with such a reward!
How much work must be done to make him capable of it! The man must be unearthed
and unbound from this lower world. The concupiscential strings, which tie him
thereunto, must be cut, that his soul may have a free ascent toward Heaven. A
precious faith must be raised up, that this world may appear, such as it is, a
shadow, a figure, a nothing to make man happy; that Heaven with its beatitudes
may be realized and presentiated to the mind. A Divine Temper must be wrought,
that he may be able to rent off the Vail of time, and take a prospect of
Eternity; to put by all the World, and look into Heaven. He must be a pilgrim
on Earth, living by Faith, walking in Holiness, every step preparing for, and
breathing after the heavenly Country. He must pray, work, strive, wrestle,
watch, wait, serve God instantly, and all this to be rewarded in another world;
without such a Temper Heaven will signify nothing, and without a Divine Power
such a Temper cannot be had. Hence St. Peter tells us, That God has begotten
us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
to an inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. The lively hope, which takes
hold upon the great Reward, is not from the Power of Nature; no, it is from a
Divine Generation, it is an heavenly touch from Christ risen and sitting at the
right hand of Majesty, from thence to do Spiritual Miracles, as upon Earth he
did Corporal. Hence St. Paul argues, If you be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, Col. 3.1. The natural man dead in sin cannot seek them;
only those who are spiritual and risen with Christ can do it. It is therefore
from the Divine Power and Spirit, that men, naturally carnal and earthly, are
made capable of closing with the heavenly and supernal Rewards, which are
tendered in the Gospel.

The Power of God being so gloriously revealed, how humble should our minds be?
How should our Reason kneel and bow down before such a Mystery as that, God
manifest in the flesh? There was a pattern of humility in the Condescension of
it, and withal there was matter of Adoration in the Mystery. Presume not, O
man, to measure Divine Mysteries by thy Reason, which bears not so much
proportion to them, as a little shell does to the great Ocean. Remember, thy
Reason is short and finite: The Mysteries are deep and infinite. If God could
not work above the measure of Man, he would cease to be God. If Mysteries were
not above the line of Reason, they would cease to be Mysteries. When these are
before thee, do, as an Ancient advises, (...), bring forth thy Faith, subject
thy intellect to the Supreme Truth, captivate thy thoughts to Scripture, humbly
adore and confess, That the Lord does great things and unsearchable, marvelous
things without number, Job. 5.9. This is the way to have knowledge and
establishment, like the pious Man in Gerson, whose certainty in Articles of
Faith was not from Reason or Demonstration, but from humiliation and
illumination, a montibus aeternis. The Socinians, who in intellectual pride do
(...), fight against God and supernatural Truths, lose themselves and the
Mystery together. But the humble soul, who subjects his Reason to God and his
Truth, is rooted in Faith, and established by Grace.

Again, The Power of God being revealed in a way of Grace, How should we look
up to him by Faith, that he may do great things for us? He, who gave his own
Son to come in the flesh, can do every thing for us. He can raise up Children
to Abraham out of the very stones: He can melt the Rocky heart into Repentance:
He can write his Law in the inward parts: He can make us willing in the day of
his Power: He can subdue the most strong and inveterate lusts: He can new-frame
the heart, and draw his own Image upon it: He can make all Grace abound toward
us, and supply all our need according to his Riches in Glory by Christ Jesus:
Let us look unto him and be saved. Let our Souls ever be in a posture of
waiting and dependence upon him, that the Divine Power, which was so eminently
manifested in Christ, may in a measure be felt and experimented in us, that we,
who are poor impotent Creatures in our selves, may be able to do all things
through Christ strengthening us.

CHAP. VII.


HAving spoken of other Attributes, I proceed in the last place to consider the
TRUTH of God. It was a notable speech of a Philosopher, That Truth is so great
a Perfection, that if God would render himself visible unto men, he would choose
Light for his Body, and Truth for his Soul. Indeed God is Ipsissima Veritas,
very Truth it self; and can no more cease to be such, than he can cease to be
Himself. He is true in his Essence: Others are only gods by fancy or fiction,
but he is God by nature and essence. He is true in his Promises; he means what
he promises, and he does what he means. Promissa tua sunt, Confess. l. 12. c. 1^.
quis falli timeat, cum promittit veritas? says St. Austin. He is true in his
Commands; these are the counterpanes of his Will: he approves what he commands,
and rewards what he approves. He is true in all his Works: the Creatures have
first an Ideal being in him, before they have a real one in themselves; they
are therefore true, because congruous to the first Truth. He is so true, that
it is impossible that he should lie. A lie, which arises from weakness or
wickedness, can no more be found in him, than Weakness can be found in Power,
or Wickedness in Sanctity it self.

The Truth of God does in an excellent manner appear in Jesus Christ; He is the
Complement of the Law, the Pearl of the Gospel. The Truths of the Old Testament
run unto him as to an Ocean, to be swallowed up in his Perfection. The Truths
of the New meet in him as in the Center, to receive all their strength and
stability from him. The Divine Truth is manifested in Jesus Christ several ways.

First, It is manifested in him, in that all the Promises and Predictions of a
Messiah to come, are accomplished and completed in him. Two things will
clearly evidence this:

The one is this: It is plain that the promised-Messiah is already come: The
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be, says
Jacob, Genesis 49.10. Shiloh is the Name of the Messiah, the ancient Rabbis
confess it: Messiah, says one of them, shall not come till there be a clean
riddance of Judges and Magistrates in Israel. The Jews had Kings in their own
Land, Heads or Princes of the Captivity in Babylon; and after their return from
thence, they had Governors and Judges: but now Government and Judiciary Power
has been for 1600 years departed from them. The Messiah therefore is already
come. Again, within the compass of the Seventy weeks mentioned in Dan. 9, many
things were to come to pass; The re-edifying the City and Temple of Jerusalem,
the coming and cutting off the Messiah, the confirmation of the Covenant, the
cessation of the Sacrifices; and after all these, the universal destruction was
to ensue. However these weeks be computed, yet it evidently appears, that first
the Messiah was to come and be cut off, ver. 26; and afterward the Oblation
and Sacrifice was to cease, v. 27: this being the true order of things in the
Text, the Messiah must needs come whilst the Sacrifices were standing. If the
Sacrifices under this second Temple have for these 1600 years ceased, as they
have, then the Messiah must needs be come many Centuries since. Scho. Sacr.
disput. 10.72, 73, 74.
Franzius used this argument to a learned Jew, who only returned this answer,
Perhaps one week in Daniel might be one thousand years. Franzius replied, If
that were admitted, Yet, if he thought that Daniel's weeks were not expired, he
would entreat him to show where the Jews do now sacrifice: seeing, according to
Daniel, the Messiah was to come before the abrogation of the Sacrifices, it
must needs be that the Sacrifices must still stand in being, if the Messiah
were not yet come. To this no answer at all was made, the knot being indeed too
hard to be untied. Further, the Messiah was to come while the second Temple was
standing; hence that of the Prophet, The glory of this latter House shall be
greater than of the former, Hag. 2.9. The first Temple had more of outward
glory and magnificence than the second. Under the first there were (as the
Rabbis observe) five things, the Ark, the Fire from Heaven, the Majesty, or
Shecinah, the Spirit of Prophecy, the Vrim and the Thummim, which were wanting
under the second: From whence then came that greater glory in the second? The
Prophet tells us, God would shake the heavens and the earth, that is, do a very
great work; the Messiah, the Desire of all Nations should come, v. 6, 7; His
presence should put a greater glory upon the second Temple, than was upon the
first. In the first there was the types and symbols of Gods presence, but into
the second the Lord himself came in our assumed nature, Mal. 3.1, and so filled
it with glory. This is the only tolerable account can be given of that greater
glory: This second Temple being long since destroyed, it must needs be that the
Messiah did come before the fall of it.

The other is this: Our Jesus the Son of Mary, is the true Messiah; he is that
seed of the woman who broke the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15; no other seed, no
mere man could do it; but the Son of God, being made of a woman, did destroy
the works of the devil, 1 John 3.8. Partaking of flesh and blood, he did
through death destroy him who had the power of death, that is, the devil, Heb.
2.14. That first Promise made almost Four thousand years before, was
accomplished in him. He is that seed of Abraham in whom all the nations of the
earth were to be blessed, Genesis 22.18. Never was it said of any man but himself,
That all Nations should be blessed in him: Never was any man but he, who was
God as well as man, able to turn that Curse which lay upon the human nature,
into a blessing. He is Jacob's Shiloh, Genesis 49.10; at his coming the Scepter
departed: Herod an Edomite ruled over the Jews; and, to make himself the more
absolute, he slew the Sanhedrin; in a little time all government was taken away
from the Jews: Hence that outery in the Talmud, Vae nobis, Woe to us, because
the Scepter is departed from Judah. The temporal Scepter vanished, but our
Savior had a spiritual one; to him, as to the true Shiloh, was the gathering
of the people, multitudes of Jews and Gentiles were converted to Christianity.
He is Moses's Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15. never man spoke as he spoke; none but
himself ever brought down sacred mysteries from the bosom of God unto the
world. He is the Star out of Jacob, Numb. 24.17. The Jews Barchochebas was but
Barchozba, the son of a Lie, a false light, and soon extinct: But our JESUS is
the bright and morningstar, Rev. 22.16, who chases away darkness, and
communicates a divine light to men. He is the Lords anointed, against whom the
Heathen did rage, and the Kings set themselves, Psalm. 2, but all in vain; God
laughed at them, and set up his King upon Zion. The Jews cannot but confess
that this Psalm speaks of the Messiah; but that the Minaei, the Christians,
with them esteemed Heretics, may be answered, they think it expedient to
interpret it of David. He is the Child in Isaiah, who was born of a Virgin,
Isa. 7.14, which never man was; who has these high titles, Wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa.
9.6, which are too great for a mere man. He is the righteous Branch, whose name
is, The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.5, 6. No other man since the fall had
righteousness enough for himself; but he had enough for himself and a World. He
is the Messiah in Daniel; his blood made an end of sin; his perfect Sacrifice
put an end to all the legal ones. Under the Messiah there was only to be the
Sacrifice of Thoda or Thanksgiving. He is the Ruler come out of Bethlehem
Ephratah, Mic. 5.2. As God, his goings forth were of old, from everlasting; as
Man, he came in time out of Bethlehem: Never such an one as he came from
thence. He is the desire of the nations, in Haggai, who filled the second
Temple with glory: The Man, Gods fellow, in Zachary; who was smitten for us,
and in his wounds opened a fountain for sin and for uncleanness. The Son of
righteousness, in Malachi, who with enlightening and healing-beams shines into
the hearts of men. The Promises of the Messiah are all accomplished in him.
What the old Testament foretold, the New exhibited. The respects and sweet
correspondencies which are between the two Testaments, clearly and punctually
show that Jesus is the Christ.

Again, here appears the truth of all the other Promises in the Gospel, which
are as so many superstructures upon the first fundamental promise of the
Messiah. P. Gal. lib. 2. cap. 23.
The earth (says Rabbi Eliezer) stands upon Tsadich, upon the righteous one,
that is, upon the Messiah. I may add, Heaven and all the Graces which lead
thither, stand upon him too. In him all the promises are yea and amen, 2 Cor.
1.20: sure and stable, as being founded upon his blood; hence his blood is
called the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 13.20, as procuring it for us; and the
New Testament is called the new testament in his blood, Luke 22.20, as being
founded upon it. God is now obliged to perform the Evangelical Promises, not
merely by his own infinite Veracity, but by his Contract with his Son, from
whom he has received a valuable consideration in his blood for the doing of
it. The Promises are secured by a double seal, God's Veracity and Christ's
Blood; so they can no more fail, than the Truth of the one, and the Merit of
the other. The Apostle argued thus: God spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things? Romans
8.32. We may thus argue; If God would not go back, but perform the promise of
the Messiah, which could not be done but at an expense so vast, that in the
doing of it he must part with his Son out of his bosom, and his Son must part
with his blood for us; how shall he not fulfill all other Promises? The Promise
of the Messiah was the most difficult of all, either for God to perform, or for
us to believe: the foolish builder lays the foundation, and is not able to
finish; but the wise and true God, who laid the foundation of Promises in his
Sons blood, will be sure to accomplish them; not one thing of them shall fail:
upon what Promise soever we can regularly set our faith, we may take it as our
own; all the blessings of it shall be made good to us.

Further, we see here the truth of the Moral Law, that is made up of two parts,
a Mandatory part, and a Minatory. The Mandatory part stands in Precepts; the
truth of these consists in this, that they are the Counterpanes of Gods heart,
real copies of his approving will; the matter of them is consonant to his
Sanctity and Rectitude, acceptable and well-pleasing in his eyes: obedience to
them is very grateful, and sure of an Euge, an approbation from him. A notable
evidence of this we have in our Savior. It Is true, the Law proves it self to
be divine, by its intrinsecal Rectitude and Justice; but the sin of a World
lying as a cloud upon that glory, God would have it proved such by obedience:
no man since the fall being able enough for this work, the Son of God came down
from Heaven to do it. As God, he could not be under the Law, but he assumed
humanity, and with it moral duty: he was made of a woman, and so made under the
law, Gal. 4.4, which reflected a greater honor upon it, than the being of all
men under it could do. He perfectly obeyed it, and in his obedience the Law had
its end, and an higher proof of its Divinity than it would have had if all men
had obeyed it: None can now doubt that the Law came from Heaven, from the
Father's bosom, when the Son of God who came from thence, did subject himself,
and obey it. Never was such a seal set to the Law as here; never did such a
person as he obey it. Here the Lord did magnify his Law, and make it
honorable, and that after a long and dark eclipse put upon it by the sins of a
World. Here the Antinomian, who opposes the Law, might satisfy himself: The
Law does not condemn believers, but it is and must be a Rule. Our Savior's
whole life was a proof of it, and Commentary upon it; and our lives should
imitate his, we should tread in his steps, and walk as he walked; in both an
homage is done to the Law. The Minatory part of the Law denounced a death and a
curse against the transgressor. It Is true, here God acted by Prerogative, he
relaxed the rigor and letter of the Law, that the death and curse might not
fall upon the sinner himself; but was the threatening totally neglected? was sin
altogether unpunished? No, our sins were punished in our Sponsor Jesus Christ.
It Is true, Socinus will not admit this; De Servat. pars 3. c. 4.
Quas nos dicitis Christi poenas, non vere and proprie sunt poenae; Christ's
sufferings, however we call them, were not such as were properly and truly
penal. He would not have them properly penal, lest they should be properly
satisfactory. But I answer, Where sin is not the impulsive cause, there
sufferings are not penal. Sin is the foundation of punishment; there cannot be
poena sine fundamento; a punishment without a why or a wherefore, is a
punishment for nothing, that is, no punishment. But in Christ's sufferings there
wanted not an impulsive, our sins were laid upon him, Isa. 53.6. they were
condemned in his flesh, Romans 8.3. he bore them in his body, 1 Pet. 2.24. he was
wounded and bruised for them, Isa. 53.5. His sufferings were for sin, and
therefore penal. Where mere Sovereignty inflicts, there sufferings are not
penal. What is penal is from Justice, not Power. What is from Power is mere
suffering, not punishment. But our Saviors sufferings were inflicted by
Justice. Indeed the relaxation of the Law, the introduction of a Sponsor, were
acts of Prerogative and Supreme Power; but the inflicting of sufferings upon
our Sponsor, the punishing of our sins in him, were acts of Rectoral Justice.
Jesus Christ was set forth to be a propitiation, (...), Romans 3.25, to declare,
not the Dominion, but Justice of God. His sufferings were inflicted by Justice,
and therefore penal. But if they were penal, might they not have been somewhat
less than a death and a curse? No, he bore both; God had a respect to his
threatening: his sufferings were, as much as might be, to comply with the terms
of the Law. Though the threatening was not executed in a strict rigorous manner
in the first debtor, yet in an equitable way it was in a sort executed in the
Sponsor; he did undergo the essentials of punishment, though not the
accidentals. Thus the truth of both parts of the Law was manifested in our
Savior.

Moreover the truth of all the types and shadows was set forth in our Savior,
who was the body and substance of them all: there was in him somewhat that did
symbolize with them, and somewhat that did infinitely transcend them. Manna
came down from Heaven, and so did Christ; but from the highest Heaven, the
place of Gods glorious presence, to give, not a temporal life, but a spiritual,
an eternal one; not to one Nation only, but to a world: Ex hoc pane coeli
sancti reficiuntur and Angeli, With this bread of Heaven Saints and Angels are
refreshed, as an Ancient speaks. The Rock smitten by Moses's Rod, supplied the
Israelites; and Christ smitten by the curse of the Law, supplies the Church,
not with earthly water, but with heavenly, with rivers of living graces and
comforts; following believers not for a time, but indeficiently, and for ever.
Hence the Jewish Rabbis say, that the turning the Rock into water, was the
turning the property of Judgment into the property of Mercy. All Mercies issue
out from this spiritual Rock. The brazen Serpent was lifted up upon a Pole, and
Christ was lifted up upon the Cross; that healed the wounds made by the outward
Serpents in the body, and he heals the wounds made by sin in the conscience.
The corporal cure came by the eye, by looking to the brazen Serpent; the
spiritual one comes by faith, by looking to our Savior for salvation. God
dwelt in the Tabernacle and Temple, and in Christ he dwelt in the flesh; not in
types and symbols, but really and hypostatically; not for a time, but for ever.
Christ is the true Tabernacle and Temple, who has all the holy things in him.
Here Is the Shecinah, the Divine Majesty appearing in our nature. Here Is the
Ark, where the Tables of the Law, broken by men, are kept inviolate. Here Is the
Mercy-seat, or Propitiatory, which covers our sins, and from whence God
communes with us in words of grace. Here Is the vail, the flesh of Christ, which
hid his Deity, and through which there is a way into Heaven it self. Here are
the holy Lamps, the Spirit of Wisdom and Grace derived from our Savior. Here Is
the Altar of Burnt-offering, the Deity of Christ sanctified his Humanity to be
a sufficient sacrifice for a World: And the Altar of Incense, the odours of his
Merit perfume all our services, and render them acceptable unto God. Almost
every thing did breathe forth Christ, and speak to his Honor. He was, in one,
all the Sacrifices, and more than all of them. Sacrifices began with the first
promise of the Messiah, The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head,
Genesis 3.15: and after almost 4000 years standing, they ended in his death: a
singular respect they had to him, and a full complement in his perfect
Sacrifice. De Sacrif. Disp. 4.
Adam and the ancient Patriarchs (as the learned Franzius observes) used at the
sacrifices to speak of the Messiah and his sufferings: these being the scope
and ultimate mark of all the sacrifices, were not altogether unknown to them: A
hint of them we have in that first promise of the Messiah, the seed of the
woman, Genesis 3.15, who was to suffer a bruise in his heel, his human nature,
that the Serpents, that is, Satan's head might be broken. Those Ancients knowing
something of Christ's sufferings, though imperfectly, and at a distance, did in
all probability at their sacrifices speak of them. The believing Jews did not
hang upon the shadow, the outward sacrifices only, but look at Christ the
substance and marrow of them; else they did, as it seems, worship God in their
sacrifices in an ignorant manner, without knowing the spiritual meaning of
them: nay, else they offered them up in a mistake, in the belief of that false
impossible thing, that the blood of Bulls and Goats could take away sin: They
knew that there was no remission without expiation; they knew, that moral guilt
did as much, nay more require it, than ceremonial; and if they knew nothing of
an Expiating Messiah, they sought no further for the expiation of moral guilt,
than the blood of bulls and goats. Now touching the Sacrifices, two things are
to be noted:

The one is this, there is somewhat in Christ which answers to the Expiatory
Sacrifices. The sacrifice was to be perfect and without blemish, that it might
be accepted; the blind, or broken, or maimed, or corrupted thing, was not to be
offered up to God: answerably, the human nature of Christ, which was the great
Sacrifice, was without spot or guile; it was formed by the Holy Spirit, and
breathed out nothing but sanctity, that it might be a pure offering unto God.
Had there been any blemish in it, it could not have been united to the Person
of the Word, nor offered up as a sacrifice to God for us. The Sacrifice, pure
in it self, was substituted in the room of sinful defective men; there was
(...), the life of a Beast instead of that of a Man. Sutably, Christ the meek,
patient, immaculate Lamb of God, stood in our room; he died for us, he gave his
life a ransom (...), instead of many, Mat. 20.28. His Person was put in the
room of ours, and his sufferings too in the room of ours. Had he not stood in
our stead, he could not have been capable either to bear the stroke of penal
sufferings, or to free us from the same; not to bear penal sufferings, he being
nothing but mere innocence in himself; nor to free us from them, he being in no
conjunction with us. The sacrifice being put in the sinners room, had sin
imputed to it; they were to lay their hands upon the head of it, Lev. 1.4: a
confession of sins was made over the Scapegoat, Lev. 16.21; their sins were in
a sort transferred upon the sacrifice, that it might bear them away. Thus it
was with Christ, he was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. The Lord laid on him the
iniquities of us all, Isa. 53.6. Our guilt, as it was fundamentum poenae, was
imputed to him so far, as to render his sufferings penal; and, as an Ancient
has it, he was delictorum susceptor, non commissor; having no guilt of his
own, he stood under ours, in order to a glorious expiation and abolition of it
in his death and satisfaction. Sin being charged upon the sacrifice, there was
destruction rei oblatae, a destroying of the thing offered: so it was with
Christ, when our sins were laid upon him; with the Corn he was bruised, with
the Wine and Oil poured out, with the Lamb slain and roasted in the fire of
Gods wrath, and with the Scapegoat driven into the wilderness of desertion,
crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? His sufferings were very
many and great for us. The sacrifice being slain, its blood did expiate sin, an
atonement was made, remission ensued upon it: Thus Christ dying on the cross,
his blood was expiatory, our fault was compensated, Justice was satisfied,
wrath was averted, and God appeased and reconciled toward us. In these things
appears a fair analogy between those ancient sacrifices, and Christ the grea
Sacrifice.

The other is this: There is that in Christ which infinitely transcends all the
legal sacrifices. In the sacrifice there was only a brute in perfection, but in
Christ there was an human nature in perfection; an human nature which had the
Spirit above measure, and was as full of grace as the capacity of a creature
could hold: there was in his humanity such a beauty and unmatchable perfection
of grace, as far surpassed the united and accumulated excellencies of all the
Angels in Heaven. The sacrifice stood and suffered in the room of offenders by
constraint and compulsion, it was bound with cords to the horns of the Altar:
but Christ stood and suffered in our room by choice and voluntary sponsion; his
soul was not snatched away, but poured out; his life was not merely taken away,
but laid down; he was under no constraint but that of his own compassion; he
was tied with no cords but those of his own love. In the private sacrifice some
particular sin was charged upon it; in the public one, the sins of the Jewish
Nation were charged upon it: But upon Christ were laid the sins of a World,
sins of vast distances, as far remote in place as the quarters of the earth,
and in time, as the morning and evening of the world, met all together upon
him. In the sacrifice there was a mere simple death, and the blood was but the
blood of a brute: but Christ's death was not a mere simple one, but a death with
a sting and a curse in it; a death with as much wrath in it, as was due to the
sin of a world; nor was his blood the blood of a brute, but the blood of a man,
nay of God himself: and what manner of Sacrifice was this! how compensative for
sin! how satisfactory to Justice! how aversive of wrath! how impetrative of all
good! In every respect it was infinitely valuable and sufficient. The Sacrifice
suo modo did expiate sin, it took away civil guilt, by freeing the offender
from that temporal death which in the strict sanction of the Law was due to
him. It took away ceremonial guilt, by freeing him from those legal impurities
which excluded him from the public Worship; hence the Apostle says, That the
blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean,
did sanctify to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.13. Thus far went the
sacrifice, but it could go no further: the moral guilt was still unremoved,
Justice was still unsatisfied, the wrath to come was still unaverted, God as
yet was unreconciled; there was somewhat done to the flesh, nothing to the
conscience; somewhat in foro soli, in the Jewish Judicature, nothing in foro
poli, in the Court of Heaven, to give a full satisfaction to Divine Justice.
Hence the Apostle says, that those sacrifices, though often repeated, could
not make the comers thereunto perfect, Hebr. 10.1. The blood of bulls and goats
could not take away sin, v. 4. Still there was a conscience of sin, and a
remembrance of it every year, v. 2, 3. Hence God reprobated all those
sacrifices, and would have none of them; they were not rejected for the
hypocrisy of the offerer, as they were Isa. 1.12, 13; nor comparatively as
being in the outward work less than mercy, Hos. 6.6: But they were rejected as
not able to do the great work, to expiate sin; they were to vanish as Clouds
before the Sun, as Types before the substance. But when Christ gave himself an
offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2, there
was a penal, total expiation of sin; not the flesh but the Conscience was
purged, not ceremonial, but Moral guilt was done away. Thus the Apostle,
comparing his Sacrifice with the legal ones, says, The blood of Christ, who
through the eternal spirit offered up himself without spot to God, shall purge
your conscience from dead works to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. Emphatica
omnia, and totidem pene causae, quot verba, aeternae (...); per Christum
partae, says the worthy Paraeus; all things in the Text are Emphatical, and
there are almost as many causes, as words, of the eternal redemption obtained
by Christ. He offered, not as the Gentiles to Devils, but to God; he offered,
not as the Priest under that Law, a Sacrifice distinct from himself, but he
offered himself: the thing offered and the Priest, beyond all parallel, were
one and the same. He offered, not as the deceiver, a corrupt thing, Mal. 1.14;
but his pure and innocent self, in whom there was no spot or blemish. He
offered up himself, not merely through an human spirit, but through a Divine
Eternal one; through his Divinity, which aspired an eternal vigor and fragrancy
into his Sacrifice, so that it needed not, as the legal ones, any reiteration:
for, as the Apostle has it, he has by one offering perfected for ever them
that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. This is that great Sacrifice, more than all
other sacrifices, which satisfied Justice, expiated moral guilt, averted the
wrath of Heaven, and procured an eternal redemption for us.

Further, Christ was not only the substance of the sacrifices, but of the
Highpriests also. He has the true holy garments, the graces of the Spirit:
the true Vrim and Thummim, lights and perfections. His girdle is Truth, his
golden bells pure Doctrine, his anointing the Spirit and Power. He entered not
with the blood of Goats and Calves into the Holy of Holies here below, but with
his own blood into Heaven, there to appear in the presence of God, and bear the
names of his people upon his heart. He is an High Priest above all
highpriests; not a mere man, but God, whose Deity poured out an infinite
virtue upon his Sacrifice. He was not made an High Priest only, but made such
by an oath; The Lord swear, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck, Hebr. 7.21. The Aaronical Priesthood was temporary and of less
moment, but Christ's was unchangeable and of far greater moment; hence God
pawned his Holiness, Life, Being it self, to make it immutable for ever. Other
highpriests died as men; but Christ, though he died as a Sacrifice, yet as an
High Priest he lives for ever: hence the Apostle says, That he was a Priest
after the power of an endless life, Heb. 7.16. His Deity made him an everliving
Priest, and transfused an endless life of merit into his Sacrifice. He is
consecrated for evermore, Heb. 7.28. He is a perfect Priest, the efficacy of
his Sacrifice is perpetual: the holy Unction on his head is indeficient, and
ever running down upon believers. This is the great High Priest, the substance
of all those under the Law.

Lastly: The truth of Gods Worship is set forth in and by Christ. Though the
truth and sincerity of Worship were required under the Law; though external
Worship as well as internal, be due under the Gospel; yet the truth of Worship
was never so excellently set forth, as it is in and by Christ. This appears in
three or four things.

1. The matter of Worship is now more free and pure than it was; the clog of
Ceremonies and ritual observances, is now removed. Under the Law there was
abundance of Corn, Ordinances, a great number of Sacrifices, Circumcisions,
Washings, Purifyings, Fringes, Festivals, Travels to the Temple, and
distinctions of meats; but in and by Christ the yoke is broken, the carnal
Ordinances cease, and all is turned into spirituality. Our Sacrifice is to
present and consecrate our selves to God, which is a service highly reasonable,
and indeed no other than the right posture of the soul toward him. Our
Circumcision is in the spirit, and a cutting off the corrupt flesh of it. Our
Washing is that of Regeneration and Reformation. Our Purifying is that of
Faith, which purifies the heart by the Blood and Spirit of Christ apprehended
by it. Our Fringes are no outward ones, those being supplied by the Law in the
heart. Christ is our Passover; the Holy Spirit poured out, our Pentecost. Our
Feast is (...), to do our duty, as one says: To delight in works of Virtue, as
another has it. There is now no tie to this or that place: Omnis locus viro
bono templum, Every place is a Temple to a good man; Everywhere we may lift up
holy hands to God. Nor any distinctions of meat; To the pure all things are
pure. The Levitical uncleanness in beasts, did shadow out the moral uncleanness
in men: Quod Judaei vitabant in pecore, id nos vitare oportet in more; What the
Jews avoided in the beast, that we are to avoid in our conversation. If there
be no discretion of things in us, the beast does not part the hoof; if no
heavenly rumination, it does not chew the cud. An idle person is a fish without
fins or scales, seldom in motion. An earthly man is a creeping thing, that goes
upon his belly, and feeds on dust. Thus in and by Christ Religion is refined,
the load of carnal and ritual observations is cast off, and Worship is brought
forth in its pure and spiritual glory.

2. The mode of Worship is excellently set forth in the Gospel. God, who is a
Spirit, must be served as becomes him, in spirit and truth: There must be a
lowliness and humility of mind, a reverence and godly fear, an elevation and
devotional ascension of the soul to God, a filial love and obedience to his
command, a single eye, a pure intention at his glory, a divine fervor and
freedom of spirit in the work, a faith in the great Mediator for acceptance, a
waiting and holy expectancy upon God, that he would bless his own Ordinance,
and irradiate the duty with the light of his countenance. It Is true, this mode
of Worship was known under the Old Testament; but it was never so illustriously
set forth as by our Savior Jesus Christ. As a Painter, says Theophylact, does
not destroy the old lineaments, but only make them more glorious and beautiful;
so did Christ about the Law, by his pure discoveries he put a gloss and glory
upon the Divine Worship.

3. The help to Worship is communicated in and by Jesus Christ. The Holy
Spirit, which first newframes the heart for pure spiritual Worship, and then
stirs up and actuates the holy Graces in it, is more largely afforded under the
Gospel than ever it was before. Under the Law there were some dews and
droppings of it in the Jewish Church; but under the Gospel it is poured out
upon all flesh. It was a Judaical axiom, The Divine Majesty dwells in none
without the Land of Israel. But after Jesus Christ had by his sweet smelling
Sacrifice purchased the Spirit, and in the glory of his Merits had ascended
into Heaven, he shed forth the Spirit in a rich and abundant measure upon all
sorts of men, Jews and Gentiles: Into what place soever the Gospel comes, there
the Spirit is at work to frame new creatures, and set them in motion, that God
may be served, not in the oldness of the letter, but in the newness of the
spirit; that his Worship under the gales and sweet influences of the Spirit may
come forth, as it ought, in its life and pure spirituality.

4. The great motive to Worship, the reward of eternal life, was never so
manifested as it was by Jesus Christ. It Is true, holy men of old had some
glimmerings of it; Abraham sought after an heavenly Country; Jacob waited for
Gods salvation; Moses had respect to the recompense of Reward; Job speaks of
seeing God in his flesh; the believing- Jews could see eternal things in
temporal, and measure Heaven by an Astrolabe of Earth. In their Ikkarim, in the
Articles of their Creed, there is one touching the Resurrection of the dead.
Those Ancients had some obscure knowledge of life eternal: but in and by Christ
it is set forth plainly and clearly, in lively and orient colors. Heaven, as
it were, opens it self, and in pure discoveries comes down and approaches near
unto our faith. It is now plain that the true worshippers shall ever be with
the Lord, shall see him and be like him; shall enter into his joy, and be
swallowed up there; shall have a Crown of life, a weight of glory, and that to
all eternity. All this is as clear as if it were writ with a Sunbeam: Hence
the Apostle says, That Christ brought life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy
1.10: and again, That before, the way into the holiest of all was not made
manifest, Heb. 9.8; that is, That light or manifestation of this Reward which
was under the Law, was as none at all in comparison of the pure and great
discovery of it which is under the Gospel. The servants of God need not say,
What shall we have? The Reward is before them, the Celestial Paradise is in
plain view, to attract their hearts into the holy ways which lead thither.

In this display of Truth, we have a notable proof of the truth of our
Religion. Admirable are the harmonies and compliances between the two
Testaments; the Substance, though but one, corresponds to the Types and
Shadows, though very many. The Messiah in the flesh, notwithstanding the vast
distance in time, fully answers to the Messiah in Promises and Predictions. All
things concur and conspire together to evidence the truth of our Religion. It
was the observation of some of the ancient Fathers, That there is umbra in
lege, imago in Evangelio, veritas in coelo, a shadow in the Law, an image in
the Gospel, the Truth in Heaven. Hence we may thus conclude, That Religion,
which was in the Law in shadow, in a darker representation; which is in the
Gospel in the image, in a more lively representation; and which leads to
Heaven, where is perfection of light, and eternal life in the thing it self;
That Religion must needs be true. Or we may go higher than the Mosaical Law,
and conclude thus: That Religion which in the morning of the World, immediately
after the fall of man, appeared in the first Promise of the Messiah; which
afterward appeared in types and more Promises; which after these, shone out
illustriously in Jesus Christ; which at last introduces into the perfect day in
Heaven; That must needs be true. The succession and harmony which is in these
things, tell us, that infinite wisdom did order and dispose the same. Now after
the Evangelical light is clearly revealed to us, what manner of persons ought
we to be? How thankful should we be that we live in the shining days of the Son
of man? The Pagans are in gross darkness, but we have the Divine light shining
round about us. The Jews had some dawnings and strictures of light; but we have
the Sun, the full Globe of light: We need not now grope in the dark after
happiness, Christ the true light is come, the glory of the Lord is risen upon
us in the pure light of the Gospel. How should we believe and adhere to the
Promises! God has performed the great Promise of the Messiah, and it is not
imaginable that he should fail in the other, which are but appendants to that
great Promise. The Promises now have a double seal, Gods Veracity, and Christ's
Blood; and in all reason we should seal them up by our faith; not to do so, is
practically to say, that God may lie, or Christ's Merits fail. In what truth and
obedience should we walk! No lust should now be indulged, no duty should now be
baulked. Every holy beam must be welcome, as coming from Heaven to guide us
thither. Every Command of God must be precious, as being the Counterpane of his
heart, and proved to be such by the obedience of his own Son in the flesh. Now
to walk in darkness, is to reproach the holy light which shines round about us.
To be false to God who is so true to us, is no less than horrible ingratitude
to him, and in the end will prove utter ruin to our souls; it being utterly
impossible for us, while we are false to him, to be true to our selves or our
own happiness. How spiritual should we be in worship! With what holy fear,
faith, zeal, devotion, should we serve him! Our spirits should be consecrated
and offered up to God; our duties should have warmth and life from the inward
parts; the infinite Spirit must not be mocked with a shell, a mere body of
Worship. Jesus Christ the Substance being come, we must not rest in the shadows
and rituals of Religion. God is real in promises, and we should be so in
services. He will give us the best Reward, even Heaven it self; and we should
give him the best we have, even our hearts, that he may dwell there till he
take us up into the blessed Region, to dwell with him in glory; in so doing we
shall at once be true to him, and to our own happiness.

CHAP. VIII.
Epicurus's Objection against Providence answered. Providence over free acts of
men asserted, and yet Liberty not destroyed. The Objections touching the
Afflictions of good men, and the event of Sin, solved. The Entity in sinful
actions distinct from the Anomy: the Order from the Ataxy.

HAVING spoken of the Divine Attributes, I now proceed to speak of Providence,
which in a special manner directed this great Dispensation, God manifest in the
flesh; in which, as we have seen, the Attributes of God do eminently appear.
Providence is more than Previdence; (...) is not nude Prescience; it is, as a
learned man speaks, Praecognitio cum cura, a Precognition with care. It is the
Divine Reason of the Supreme Lord, which disposes of all things; it is that act
of God whereby he does in eternity pre-ordain, and in time direct every thing
to the great end of all, his own glory. The Scripture does very fully set forth
this: Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11.36: Of him as
the Author, through him as the Conservator and Director, and to him as the
ultimate End, are all things. He gives life, and breath, and all things, Acts
17.25. In him we live, and move, and have our being, ver. 28. The original, the
continuance, the guidance of all is from him. As a mighty Monarch he does
whatsoever he pleases in heaven and in earth. Psalm. 135.6, He does according
to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth. None
can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? Dan. 4.35. All places are
within his dominion, all creatures are under his government: Known unto him are
all his works, (...), from eternity, Acts 15.18. He works all things after
the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. That the things in time may answer and
go true to the counsels in eternity, Providence works and watches over every
thing; Angels are not above, nor Worms below the care of it. It reaches to the
great Image of Earthly Monarchy, Dan. 2. It humbles it self to hairs and
sparrows, Mat. 10.29, 30. Natural Agents, though determined ad unum, cannot act
without the concurrence of it. Free Agents, though upon the wings of liberty,
cannot fly out of its dominions. Mere Contingents, as the Lot, are ascertained
by it. In every thing it sits at the stern, and moderates the event.

The Philosophers do, at least in some sort, own a Providence. Thus Theophrast,
(...), There is a Divine Principle, by which all things both are, and continue
to be. Thus Aristotle, What the Governor is in the Ship, the Driver in the
Chariot, the Master in the Dance, the Law in the City, the Leader in the Army,
that is God in the World. Thus Tully argues; God is the most excellent being,
and therefore must needs be Governor of the World. Plato's Idea's existing in
the mind of God, were, as is thought, no other than his Decrees. The Fate of
the Stoics, is by some taken for nothing else but the Providence of God. Hence
the Epicureans, who denied Providence, in contempt called it, Anum fatidicam
Stoicorum, the Stoics foretelling old woman. There was excellent Divinity in
the ancient Fable, That (...), or Providence, was Midwife to Latona, that is,
Nature. The Creature, though never so pregnant with power, brings forth just
nothing without it. Aust. de Civ. l. 10. c. 14.
Plotinus disputes, That the Providence of God reaches to the lowest things.
The Flowers have their beauty from an incommutable form; the sensible World
comes from that intelligible one which is with God.

Reason evinces this Truth. Si est Deus, utique Providens est ut Deus, nec
aliter ei potest divinitas attribui nisi and praeterita teneat, and praesentia
sciat, and futura prospiciat. Lact. de Ird.
A World without a Providence is a very great absurdity: in such a case how
should God be God? May he be an infinite Mind, and without forecast? or a pure
Act, and do nothing at all among his creatures? May he be everywhere present,
and nowhere profitable? Or fill all things, and signify nothing? May he be an
intelligent Agent, and without an End? Or the Great Alpha, and forget that he
is Omega? May he be Creator of all, and yet no Provisor? Or Almighty, and yet
not reign over his own World? May he be infinitely Wise and Good, and yet
neglect himself and his Creatures, his own glory and their good? Is it
imaginable that such an One as he should frame a World out of nothing, and set
it in delicate Order, merely for Fortune to sport it self in, or to shufflle
down into confusion? And how then could the World be a World? Or how could it
stand in order, or its parts hang together by links of amity? Without the hand
and touch of Providence, Nature would jangle and be out of tune: without its
glue and virtue, the whole system would unframe and fall asunder in a moment.
If God, says Bradwardine, De Causa Dei, l. 1. c. 14.
should cease to be, there could be nothing past or future, true or false,
possible or impossible, necessary or contingent: so necessary is He. I may say,
If God should cease to work, there could be nothing in all the world but
perfect nullity. So necessary is his Providence.

There are two great acts of Providence; the one is Conservative, which upholds
all: The other Ordinative, which directs and disposes of all. Both are
eminently set forth in Jesus Christ.

The first act of Providence is Conservative, and upholds all; the Creature
cannot preserve and immortalize it self, for then it would be a
Self-subsistence, and a God to it self: it stands juxta non esse, at the brink
of nullity; and unless that Divine Power which brought it from thence into
being, hold it up there, it naturally returns and falls back into Nothing as
its Center. Preservation is an influx of Being; and none but the Supreme Being,
which is its own original, can afford such a thing. It is a continued Creation,
and none but he who gives esse primo, the first being to a creature, can give
esse porro, the second or protracted being to it. Should he withdraw his
influence, or cease continuo facere, still to go on preserving and new-making,
as it were, his Creature, it would vanish into nothing; no creature could begin
where he left, or carry on the work. Should all the Angels in Heaventry and put
out all their strength, to guard and keep up in being the least particle of
matter, and that but for one moment only, they could do nothing, they could not
be Creators at second hand, I mean in point of Preservation. The Earth, being
the Center of the World, seems to stand fast, and yet without Providence it
would waver into nothing. The Sea is a vast spreading. Element; and yet were it
not in the hand of Providence, it would contract it self into nothing. The
Heavens are strong bodies, and yet all those glorious Arches, unless kept in
repair by Providence, would fall and totter down. The Angels are immortal
Spirits, and yet their immortality is a donative and a continual spiration from
the Father of spirits; the knot of their perpetuity is Providence, and without
it they would break and dissolve into nothing. Providence, we see, contains and
preserves all things: a great truth this is, but it was never so manifested as
in Jesus Christ. If ever any creature might preserve it self, one would think
that the highest, noblest of all should do so; his human nature was lifted
above the top of the Creation, above the highest Angel: It was, which never any
Creature was before, assumed into the Person of God; yet it had no subsistence
of its own, it did not preserve it self; it was held by that Deity which it did
cohabit with in the Person of the Word: still it was a Creature; it could not,
like the Deity, spread it self over the World: it was not a self-subsistent or
independent upon its Creator. Here we plainly see, that no creature, no not the
highest, can support it self in being without Providence. Ellhardus Lubinus, in
his Book De Causa Mali, has drawn a very ingenious Scheme to show the
dependence of the Creature upon God; he sets the summum Ens uppermost, under it
the scale of Creatures in their order, first Angels, then Men, then Beasts,
then Vegetables, then mere being, under all imum nihil. As far as the summum
Ens draws any thing ex imo nihilo, out of mere nothing, so far it ascends the
scale into being, or life, or sense, or reason, or Angelical perfection: As
soon as he leaves it, it sinks down into the imum nihil, into nothing. This
does in a very lively manner set forth the dependence of the creature upon its
Maker; but it was never so fully set forth as in Jesus Christ: His human
nature, though above the whole scale of creatures, is supported by the Deity:
No creature now may presume that it can be a self-subsistent, or stand upon its
own bottom; all must confess a Providence supporting and bearing of them up in
being.

The second act of Providence is Ordinative, it directs and governs all: God
steers the ship of the World, and all the passengers in it: He orders the great
House, and all the Families of creatures in it. Providence turns every wheel in
nature; and when there is a wheel within a wheel, intricacy and seeming
crossness of motion; yet there is an eye in the wheel, a wise Providence which
preserves order in confusions. All things are directed by congruous means to
their proper end. There are millions of creatures which know not what an end
is; but Providence conducts them thither. Millions of Events are casual as to
us; but there is a certainty in Providence. Millions of acts are free as to us,
yet Providence has a sovereignty over them. In all things God is Alpha and
Omega, the first Mover, and the last End; the wise Disposer and sure Moderator
of every thing for his own glory. This great Truth is excellently set forth in
Christ. Three things will make this evident.

1. There was a signal Providence over Christ.

2. There was a great Providence over the fruit of his Satisfaction, in raising
up a Church.

3. All other Providence may be reduced to the other two.

1. There was a signal Providence over Christ. Gods eye and heart were upon the
Temple, which was but a type; how much more intent must they be upon Christ who
is the substance? Providence all-along had an eye upon him: It watched over his
Genealogy; a deluge swept away the corrupt World, but Noah must have an Ark;
the true Noah, the Messiah, who is our rest and comfort, was to come from him.
Abraham's body, and Sarah's womb, were both dead; yet there must be an Isaac,
that the true Isaac, the joy of the Father, may come in the flesh from him.
Isaac was in a sort offered up, that he might be a type of Christ; but not
sacrificed and actually slain, that Christ might come from him. Judah and Tamar
commit incest, yet Providence is not at a stand; no Medium is too hard for it;
even this way come the Holy One into the flesh. Ruth must leave her Country,
and be married to Boaz, that David, and afterward Christ, the true David,
whose Kingdom was to be perpetual, might come from thence. The whole Scripture
aims at Christ; but the Book of Ruth seems to be penned on purpose to show
forth his Genealogy. The Tribe of Judah was carried to Babylon; the Family of
David was brought into a very low mean condition: but Judah must return again,
the withered stem of David must bud and bring forth the Messiah, and that when
it was in the lowest ebb. The Lamp of David was almost quite extinct; but at
the coming of the Messiah it was turned into a glorious Sun, which should reign
for ever. When Christ was to come, Providence took order that it should be in
due circumstances, a long train of types and sacrifices, such as filled many
ages, passed before his appearance. There was Gallicinium Prophetarum, the
Cock-crowing of the Prophets, before the rising of this Sun. John Baptist came
a little before, to prepare the way of the Lord by Sermons of Repentance. At
last he came in the fullness of time, in the prae-appointed hour, when the
Gentiles were desperately corrupted, when the Jews were horribly degenerate,
then he came to heal the world. He was born in the right place. Augustus's Tax
calls up Joseph and Mary to Bethlehem, the House of Bread, that there our
Savior, the true Bread from Heaven, might be born. He being God and Man in one
person, Providence took order, that all along there should be an appearance of
Majesty and Meanness: At his birth there was a Star directing to him, wise men
worshipping him, an Host of Angels congratulating the good tidings; yet himself
an Infant, wrapped in poor clouts, and laid in a Manger. In his life he east
out Devils, yet was tempted; he healed infirmities, yet was weary. The glory of
Mysteries and Miracles brake forth from him, yet he was in the fashion and
frailty of a man. The Officers a little before his death, went backward and
fell to the ground; yet he was apprehended: He was crucified through weakness,
but lives by the power of God. He hung upon a Cross, but even there triumphed
over all the powers of darkness. All which suits to God in the flesh. Nothing
more sublime than God, nothing more vile than Flesh. Accordingly in our Savior
there appeared a mixture of glory and weakness. To add but one thing more;
Providence would have the righteousness of his life, and the sufferings of his
death, to be such as might be a full and ample Satisfaction for the sin of the
world; and so it was. The righteousness of his life highly honored the rule of
the Law; the sufferings of his death were accommodated, as much as could be, to
the curse of the Law. Here the two great things, in which the Law has as high
a completure as could possibly be in a Sponsor on our behalf, that is,
fulfilling the righteousness, and bearing the curse of the Law, were both
eminently comprised. Here the two great Attributes of God which called for a
Satisfaction, that is, his Holiness, which perfectly hates sin; and his
Justice, which punishes it; were both gratified to the full. This
Satisfaction, as obediential, pleased Gods Holiness; as penal, satisfied his
Justice; in both there was (...), a sweet smelling savor unto God. He was, at
least, as highly, if not more, pleased in it, as he was displeased at the sin
of a world. Thus there was, as Providence would have it, a very full and just
compensation for sin, and withal a redundancy of Merit to procure all good
things for us.

2. There was a great Providence over the fruit of his Satisfaction, in raising
up a Church to God. The Son of God assuming our nature, and in it making so
glorious a satisfaction for us, Providence would not, I may say (without
disparagement to its own perfection) could not, suffer so great a thing to be
vain, or to no purpose; no, it therein aimed at a Church: Two things will make
this appear.

The one is the Promises of God. He did not only say, That Christ should be a
light to the Gentiles, and his salvation to the ends of the earth, Isa. 49.6;
but in express terms, That he should see his seed, Isa. 53.10: Which Promise
having no other condition but his death only, did thereby become absolute; it
was as sure as the Truth of God could make it, that there should be a seed, a
progeny of believers: And for the continuance of this seed successively,
remarkable is that promise (...), filiabitur, nomen ejus, His name shall be
sonned, or childed, from generation to generation, Psalm. 72.17: There shall
from time to time be a company of believers coming forth as the genuine
offspring of Christ. Thus run the Promises; and if God take care of any thing,
he will take care to be true. If Providence (which without an aim is not it
self) aim at any thing in all the world, it will aim at the performance of the
Promises; the keeping of Gods word being more precious to him than the
preserving of a World.

The other thing to clear this point, is the End of Christ's death, which is
signally set down in Scripture. Christ loved his church, and gave himself for
it, that he might sauctifie and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purisie unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works,
Tit. 2.14. He died that he might gather together in one the children of God
that were scattered abroad, John 11.52. Here the end of his death is plainly
expressed; and if Providence did not aim at the same thing, how should the
wills of God and Christ stand in harmony, whilst Providence neglects what
Christ desigs? Or how should Christ, after so vast an expense as his own blood,
ever arrive at the intended end? To arrive at that by Providence, which
Providence never aimed at, was impossible: to hit it by chance, was uncertain,
and infinitely below such an Agent as Christ, and such a work as his
Satisfaction. It was therefore the aim of Providence that there should be a
Church.

Further, Providence does not only intentionally aim at it, but actually
procure it. And here two things are to be noted.

1. Providence directs the outward means of grace: These (which are things so
great, that the Kingdom of God is said to come nigh unto men in them) go not
forth by chance, but by the Divine pleasure; they are not hits of Fortune, but
blessings of Providence, and that in a choice special manner: Evangelical light
does not, as the corporeal Sun, shine everywhere: Supernatural dews do not, as
the common rain, fall in every place: Providence directs whither they shall go.
Hence the Apostles did not, at least for some time, let out their light, or
drop their heavenly Doctrine in Asia or Bithynia, Act. 16.6, 7, but pass into
other parts. Their Commission was general, to preach to every creature; but
they followed the duct of Providence in the executing of it. When Paul was at
Corinth, his stay there was proportioned to his work, God had much people in
that city, Act. 18.10. There was a great draught of believers to be made,
therefore the Evangelical Net was long, and after cast in that place, as
Providence would have it: So the holy light was spread abroad in the World.

2. Providence takes order that the Holy Spirit in the use of the means, should
so effectually operate, as might infallibly secure a Church unto God. Hence,
besides the light in the means, there is an in-shining into the heart; besides
the outward hearing, there is an hearing and learning of the Father: Cathedram
in coelo habet, In Epist. Joh. Tract. 3.
qui corda docet: He has a Chair of State in Heaven, who teaches hearts, says
St. Austin. There is not only a proposal of objects, but an infusion of
principles, to assimilate the heart thereunto. The Gospel does not come in word
only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1.5. A Divine power opens
the heart, unlocks every faculty, dissolves the stone which is in it, imprints
the Holy Law there, and frames and new-moulds it into the image of God; and
thus there comes forth a Church of Believers, or as the Apostle speaks, a
church of the firstborn which are written in heaven, Heb. 12.23, and all this
is from the Providence and good pleasure of God. Hence Saint Paul says, That
they are called according to his purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. Saint James
says, That they are begotten of his own will, James 1.18. Saint John says,
That they are born not of the will of man, but of God, John 1.13. all is from
the fo, the good will and pleasure of God. This Providence which watches over
the Church, though it be a very signal one, and next to that over Christ
himself, has not wanted Adversaries. Socinus says, That Christ the Head was
predestined, but believers the Members were not. Caput quidem certum esse
debuit, membra autem non modo incerta esse possunt, sed etiam debent. Praelect.
Theol. cap. 14.
Corvinus says, That notwithstanding the death of Christ, it was possible that
there might be no Church or believer. Grevinchovius asserts, That Redemption
might be impetrated for all, and applied to none because of their incredulity.
This Opinion to me is a very impious one. The Learned Junius observes upon that
of Socinus, Fieri potuisse, ut nemo hominum in Christum crederet, ac nulla
esset Ecclesia. Cor. contr. Mol.
That it is a portentous and monstrous thing, that there should be an Head
without a Body. Omnibus potuit esse impetrata redemptio, and tamen nullis
applicari propter incredulitatem. Grevinch. contr. Ames.
And the Professors of Leyden Censur. fol. 289.
call that of Corvinus Dogma (...), an opprobrious and blasphemous Opinion. The
impiety of it appears in the foul consequences which flow from thence.

1. It puts the lie upon the Promises of God. He said that Christ should have a
seed, Isa. 53.10; and yet according to this opinion, he may be childless, and
have none at all. He said, That he should have the heathen for his inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8; and yet he
may have nothing. He said that he should reign for ever, and of his kingdom
there should be no end, Luke 1.33; and yet by an utter failer of subjects he
might not reign at all, and of his Kingdom there might be not so much as a
beginning. He said, That he should be head over all things to the church, Ephesians.
1.22; and yet he may have no body; nay, nor so much as one poor member of it.
Notwithstanding all the Promises, he may be a Father without Children; an Heir
without an Inheritance; a King without Subjects; an Head without Members: And
how can these things be! Or how can God be true to his word, which is dearer to
him than the whole frame of Heaven and Earth! Neither will it salve the matter
to say, That in the event there was a Church, and so much God foreknew: For if
he foreknew it, it was a certain immutable thing. Mere Casuals, such as may be
or may not be, are not the objects of Prescience. If a Church might be, or
might not be, as this Opinion would have it, it was not the object of
Prescience. If a Church would certainly be, then it is the object of
Prescience: but then this Tenet, that it might be, or not be, falls to the
ground. However if we suppose a Prescience, Prescience is not Providence:
Neither, if there were there only nude Prescience, would the Church in the
event be from Proscience, would the Church in the event be from Providence, but
from Chance; and then the consequence is, Chance, which made no Promise,
performs all; God, who made the Promise, performs nothing. He is so far from
taking care about it, that he commits it to the Lottery of man's Will, whether
there shall be a Church or not. If the event hit right, yet God is never the
truer; he never performed the promise, he took no care about it; that thing, or
rather Nothing, called Fortune, did order all.

2. This Opinion does highly disparage Christ and his precious Blood.
Creatures, nay the highest of them, Angels, may fail and miss the mark; they
have semina nihili, seeds of vanity and defectibility in them: but for Jesus
Christ, who has all the treasures of wisdom and power in himself, to fall
short of his end, and so, as it were, to fall from himself and his happiness.
For him to lay the foundations of a Church in his own blood, and to have
nothing built upon them: For him to make a Laver of his own blood, and to have
never a soul washed in it: For him to procure the Holy Spirit, and to have
never a Temple for it to dwell in, is a wonderful disparagement. The reflection
is in effect, as if he were but a mere man, not wise or powerful enough to
compass his end, or complete his work; as if his blood had no spirit or divine
virtue in it, effectually to procure a Church and people to himself. All which
are below and extremely unworthy of him, and the great work in his hands. Every
little seed in nature has a body given to it; and yet according to this
opinion, the Son of God might sow his own Blood and Righteousness, and have
none at all. A cup of cold water given in charity, has its reward; and yet the
Blood of Christ poured out in a transcendent excess of love, may want it.

3. This casts a foul blot upon Providence, that, such is its accuracy, reaches
to every thing in nature, even to such minute things as hairs and sparrows; yet
according to this opinion it neglects Christ's blood more worth than a World,
and the issue of it. It was the horrible folly of the Emperor Domitian, to
spend his time in catching of Flies, while he neglected the great things of the
Empire. And what just apology can be made for Providence, if it wake and watch
over the Sun, Moon, Stars, Meteors, Beasts, Plants, nay over the very Gnats and
minute creatures, while it slumbers and sleeps over the sufferings of the Son
of God? How much more tolerable were a neglect of all creatures, than of that
one concern, which is a thing of infinite moment! If we believe that Providence
took no care about so great a thing as Christ's death, how can we persuade our
selves that it should respect the creatures, which are infinitely below it? A
greater failure in government there cannot be, than this, to be accurate in
trifles, and neglective in momentous things. Again, Providence reaches to the
end of things; it does not go part of the way only, but conducts them to their
end: yet according to this opinion, it does not do so in a thing of more
consequence than all the world. It watched over the genealogy, birth, life,
death, resurrection of Christ; but then it made a stand, taking no care what
the issue or fruit of all this should be, after all was done: whether Christ
should have a Church, or so much as one believer in all the world, was not
determined by Providence, but left to the Lottery of man's Will. A greater
defect cannot be imagined than this, To do great admirable things, and then not
to regard what shall become of them. I shall say no more to this opinion, but
conclude, That a very great Providence did watch over the issue of Christ's
death, that a Church might be secured unto him. But because it may be said,
That the Providence over Christ and the Church are, though great, yet but
particular ones, I shall proceed to the next thing.

3. All other Providence may be reduced to the other two. As God has a
special eye upon Christ and the Church, so he orders other things to be some
way or other subservient unto them. I shall in brief touch upon the reduction
of other Providence first, to that over Christ, and then to that over the
Church.

First, Other Providence are to be reduced to that over Christ. It was an
ancient saying of the Jews, That the World was made for the Messiah. The
Apostle tells us expressly, That all things were created by him and for him,
Col. 1.16. That Providence which was over him, being the Masterpiece, the
highest Providence that ever the Sun saw, must in all reason be the rule of the
rest, in that we have the noblest prospect of God and the creature, the Divine
Attributes set forth in their glory, and a creature, an human nature, elevated
to the highest pitch: unto that therefore other Providence are to be referred.
To give some instances: God permitted Adam to fall and break his beautiful
image of Holiness all to pieces: and why did he permit it? doubtless he could
have upheld man in his integrity; no man dares deny it: doubtless he permitted
it not irrationally; Quis audeat credere aut dicere, ut neque Angelus neque
homo caderet, in Dei potestate non suisse? Aust. de Civ: Dei, l. 14.27.
his will is ever irradiated with infinite wisdom: What account then may be
given of it? If any at all be given, I suppose a better reason cannot be given
than this, That he permitted it, that way might be made for the coming of his
Son in the flesh: Hence that speech, O foelix culpa, que tantum meruit
redemptorem! In Sent. l. 2. Distinct. 23.
Estius gives other reasons; but this (says he) is ratio omnium potissima, the
chief reason of all, That God might be made man. The Learned Zanchy says,
Comment. in Col. 1. v. 16.
Certum est, It is certain that evil was permitted, that the Son of God might
take our flesh. But to go on: After the fall, the Providence which watched over
Noah, Abraham, Judah, Ruth, David, with others the Ancestors of our Savior,
did look at that excellent one who was to come from thence: nay, that
Providence which keeps the whole world in its being and order, respects him and
his Satisfaction. Justice would, if unsatisfied, have dashed down the World
about the sinners ears; but it is preserved upon the account of Christ: it
stands not now merely by Power, but by Blood. Redemption is a buttress to
Creation, to keep it from sinking into a Chaos. By Christ all things consist,
Col. 1.17, not only subsist in their beings, but consist in their orders. The
blessings and prosperities which Providence dispenses and doles out unto
sinners, are all founded upon him. It is observable in the Old Testament, that
they used this order in praying for blessings, The Lord be with you: Thus Boaz
to the Reapers, Ruth 2.4, The Lord be with you; or, which is all one, The Lord
be with us. Thus Solomon in his famous prayer, The Lord our God be with us, 1
King. 8.57. The form of words falls in with the precious Name of our Savior,
Immanuel, or God with us. Were it not for Christ the true Immanuel, God would
not be with us at all to bestow any blessing upon us; but because he is with us
in the incarnate Word, therefore he is with us to bless us. It may also be
noted, That the Mercies and Deliverances which the Jews, Gods own people, had
under the Old Testament, either had a type of the great Salvation graven upon
them, or else had a type of the great Salvation graven upon them, or else had a
promise of the Messiah interwoven with them. They were delivered out of Egypt,
but that was a type of deliverance by Christ. Joshua brought them into Canaan,
but that was a type of entering into Heaven by Christ. God promised them
deliverance from Rezin and Pekah; but the promise of the Messiah was interwoven
with it. Isa. 7. 14, he comforted them against a dark and troubleous time, but
he ushers in the promise of the Messiah, Isa. 9.6. All their temporal
deliverances pointed to the great Salvation. The Apostle tells us, That God
does gather together in one, or sum up, all things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. In him
the types had their truth, the Promises were Yea and Amen. The Law had its end,
all was summed up in him. In a word; all the Temporals in the World, all the
Spirituals in the Church are founded upon him: He is the great Center, where
all things concur and meet together.

Again, other Providence are to be reduced to that over the Church, as being
next to that over Christ the most excellent Providence of all. The Saints,
which make up the Church, are Gods Jewels. His peculiar ones, his Jedidiahs, or
beloved ones, the Apple of his eye; a special Providence must needs watch over
them: He is called the God of Abraham Isaac and Jacob, Cujus omnes gentes sunt,
quasi trium hominum Deus esset, says St. Austin. He, whose all Nations are,
was the God of three men, a special care was over them; no wonder if other
Providence carry a respect to them, they are graven upon the palms of his
hands, Isa. 49.16. In all the works which he sets his hand unto, he remembers
and bears a respect to them; the whole world fares the better for them. The
Jews say, That the righteous are the foundation of the world, they bear up the
pillars of it, Psalm. 75.3. Sanctum semen statumen terrae, holy men do in a sort
bear up the world. Jacob tells Laban, That the Lord had blessed him since his
coming; in the Original it is (...) at my foot, Genesis 30.30. Good men procure a
blessing, and their Masters are blessed at their feet: remarkable is that in
Moses's Song, When the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, when
he separated the Sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the
number of the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.8. When the world was divided, Genesis
10. Israel was not in being; yet a special respect was had of him, that the
Canaanites should have as much land, as should be sufficient for Israel, who
afterward was to inherit it. The Jews say, that the 70 souls which went into
Egypt were worth as much as the 70 Nations of the world: to be sure in
proportioning out the world, God had a singular respect to his own people; nay,
he respected them not only in setting the outward bounds of the Nations, but in
limiting their inward desires also. Thus God assures them, that when they came
up to appear before him, no man should desire their land, Exodus 34.24. For
their sakes Providence would not only keep off the hands of the Nations round
about them, but stint their wills, and curb their very concupiscences. The
Apostle, to show how great a share Believers have in Providence, tells us in
one place, That all things work together for their good, Romans 8.28. The great
plot of Providence is to make all serve them: and in another, that all things
are theirs, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come: all are yours, and you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23, being joynt-heirs with Christ
the heir of all things, they become in a subordinate sense heirs of all.
Fidelibus totus mundus divitiarum est; the Saints have all the world for their
possession, at least such a proportion of it as most conduces to their
happiness. If it were possible, says Dr. Reynolds, for any Member of Christ to
stand absolutely in need of the use and service of the whole Creation. Van. of
the Creaturt, fol. 28.
All the Creatures in the world should undoubtedly wait upon him, and be
appropriated unto him. The Moon should stand still, the Sun go back, the Lions
should stop their mouths, the fire should give over burning, the Ravens should
bring him meat, the Heavens should rain down bread, the Rocks should gush out
with water, all the Creatures should muster up themselves to defend the body of
Christ. Thus that excellent person. One thing more, as a seal to all the rest,
may be noted, Christ the head of the Church has all the power in heaven and in
earth, Mat. 28.18. He is head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. The
Church is the primary mark and scope of his Government; therefore he rules with
an eye upon it, and orders other things in a way subservient to it.

Having seen the Divine Providence manifested in Christ, I shall now consider
what Objections or Exceptions have been made against Providence, and how and in
what manner they are solved in Christ.

First, Epicurus denied a Providence: God, says he, has no business, at least
not in the lower world. This he said, as Gregory Nyssen observes, because he
would not have God to be Creator of the World; and if he were not Creator, how
should he be a Provisor? The fundamental reason, why Epicurus denied a
Providence, was, that opinion of his; that an infinite number of Atoms dancing
in inanity, did at last by a fortunate chance meet together in a world. To this
opinion a no-Providence best accords, a world made by chance should be ruled
so: Why should God rule in a world not of his own making? But that opinion in
it self is very monstrous and absurd, Atoms did by good fortune make a world.
But, as an ancient has it, Vnde ista corpuscula? whence came these lucky
Atoms? Are they Temporal or Eternal things? If Temporal, they must own a Maker
whom they oppose: If Eternal, they must be invariable, that is, dance on in
their inanity, and never sit down in a world. How should Atoms, if eternal,
produce so imperfect a thing as chance; or chance, so irregular in it self,
produce such an harmonious order as is in the world? May the blind Particles of
matter rally themselves into a world? or which way should they sink into an
Earth, melt into a Sea, spread into a Firmament, inflame themselves into a Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and subtiliate themselves into Life, Sense, and Reason? It is
far easier to believe, that Letters should casually cast themselves into an
accurate Poem; or that Stones and Timber should happily lay their heads
together in a delicate structure, than that Atoms should chance to meet and
settle in a world incomparably transcending all humane Arts and Composures: And
could a world be so made, how should it be secured? Who shall clip the Wings of
those Atoms, or chain them to their seats, that they may not fly away from
their bodies, and dance again in inanity? It being most rational, that a world
made by chance should be so dissolved. Reason tells us, that in this opinion we
have nothing but an heap of absurdities; but Scripture tells us, That the World
was not made by Chance, but by Christ the Eternal Word and Wisdom of the
Father; in whom, as the Schoolmen say, was the Eternal Idea of all things,
according to which, as the grand Exemplar, all were made: The Eternal Wisdom,
which comprised all in it self, produced all in time.

Another objection which Epicurus made against Providence, was this: God, being
blessed in himself, must not trouble or disparage himself by taking care of
these inferior things. But this is as great nonsense as the other: What! can
there be trouble in a pure Act, in one who can do every thing by a word of
power, who needs only to speak, and the thing is done? May there be a
disparagement in ruling over what he has made? Are not these inferior things
the works of his hands? If not, how came they out of nullity? If so, how does
he disparage himself by ruling over his own works? If it be a disparagement to
care for them, was it not so to create them? Nay, Non secisse nulla injustitia,
non curare summa inclementia. Officior. l. 1. c. 13.
as St. Ambrose has observed, not to make them was no injustice; not to care
for them being made, is great inclemency. But the greatest solution of all, we
have in Christ; in him we plainly see the Son of God, very God, not only taking
care about his creatures, but (which is a condescension infinitely lower,
though without disparagement) assuming a creature, an humane nature, into his
own Sacred Person. No man may now dream that Providence does in the least
disparage the Deity.

Leaving Epicurus, I pass unto another exception: There may be a Providence
over some things, but surely not over the free acts of men. Epicurus thought
some things too low for Providence; others think human acts, because free, too
high for it. Thus Cicero thought, Aust. de civ. Dti, l. 5. c. 9.
that if there were a certain order of things and causes, human Liberty would
be subverted; there would be no room for Laws, or Exhortations, or Virtues, or
Vices, or Rewards, or Punishments. This made St. Austin pass that censure upon
him, Dum vult facere liberos, sacit sacrilegos: While he would make men free,
he made them sacrilegious. Thus the Pelagians affirmed, That the will is
destroyed if it want the help of another; That, Jerome ad ctesiphont. c. 3.
there being a freewill, God is no further necessary to us: indeed the posse,
or power, is from God; but the velle, or willing, August. de Great. Christi,
cap. 4.
is only from our selves. Thus Socinus distinguishes between the internal and
external acts of men; Pralect. Theol. cap. 7.
the internal are only in man's power, as not belonging to the administration of
the world: the external may fall under Providence, but not the internal.
Volkelius and others go the very same way.

This Opinion to me is a very impious one; it highly disparages Divine
Providence: it is in effect as much as to say, God has nothing to rule over
but the Brutal World, the Rational is lost out of his dominions. It takes away
the glory and crown of Providence, which rules over free Agents in so rare and
admirable a manner, that they, though moving upon the wings of liberty, do
infallibly hit the mark. It subverts the certainty of Providence, and that in
those things which were positively decreed by God, and of the highest moment to
men. What more positively decreed, or more highly momentous to the Jewish
Church, than those two famous deliverances from Egypt and Babylon? Or what more
positively decreed, or more highly momentous to the whole world, than the
sufferings of our Savior? Yet these things being to come to pass by the free
acts of men, and those free acts not being under Providence, the event must
needs be pendulous and uncertain, as those free acts upon which the event
depends, are. Providence, having no sovereign dominion over those free acts,
does not ascertain the Event, but leave it dubious and fluctuating till the
human Will determines it self: And what is this, but to make Providence
nothing, and man an independent Agent? And whither does this tend, but to the
utter subversion of Piety? We should say in piety, If the Lord will, Ames.
Bell. Ener. de lib. Arb. c. 2.
we will do this or that, Jam. 4.15; but according to this opinion, God himself
may say, If man will, I will do this or that. This made the famous Bradwardine
justly cry out, De Causa Dei, l. 2. c. 30.
Quis enim Theologicus aut Catholicus, imo vel Haereticus, Schismaticus aut
Paganus audeat se praeponere Deo suo, dicere seipsum Dominum, Deum suum servum,
seipsum superiorem, Deum inferiorem, seipsum architectum and principalem
artificem, Deum vero subservientem and suum quodammodo instrumentum? What
Divine or Catholic, yea, what Heretic, Schismatic, or Pagan, dares prefer
himself before his God, to say, that he is Lord, God the servant; he Superior,
God inferior; he the Architect and principal Artificer, God subservient, and a
kind of instrument under him? Moreover, it directly contradicts Scripture. God
touched their hearts, and Saul had a band, 1 Samuel 10.26. God opened the heart
of Lydia, and the Gospel had entrance, Acts 16.14. God turns the Kings heart,
and that whither he will, Prove. 21.1. God draws men, and they come to Christ,
John 6.44. God put it into the Kings heart, and the Temple was beautified, Ezra
7.27. God works to will and to do, of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. None
of these can be true, if Providence rule not over the wills and hearts of men:
but that it does so, is not only clear in these instances, but in an eminent
manner appears in Jesus Christ; his humane Will was free, and yet infallibly
guided by his divine. Hence he tells us, That he did nothing of himself, Joh.
8.28; nay, and that he could do nothing of himself, Joh. 5.19. The divine Will
inclined the whole suppositum, and moved the humane, and that, as the learned
Professor speaks, Dr. wards Deter. fol. 120.
Non suasorie tantum, sed efficienter and physice; that man therefore, who
thinks his humane Will above Providence, presumes his Liberty to be above that
in the humane Nature of our Savior.

But here it is objected, that if Providence rule over the Will, humane Liberty
is destroyed.

I answer, Humane Liberty is so highly magnified by some, that they speak very
strangely, touching the things of God. Hence Penottus dreams, that the divine
Decrees touching humane Acts, are not to be conceived as definitive sentence,
but as a pendent one, till the human Will have determined it self. God must
wait, till he see what Man will do. Nay, hence Schlictingius confidently lays
it down, Contr. Meisn. de Praed. fol. 10.
that the infallible Prescience of God infers a necessity upon humane Acts, as
well as his absolute Decree; that necessity, if granted, takes away all Piety.
It seems, that man may be free, God must not only suspend his Eternal Decrees,
but part with his Prescience also. Thus presumptuous is the pride of Man in
asserting his own Liberty; but for the thing it self, Providence and humane
Liberty do very well consist together. Providence is not destructive, but
salvative of humane Liberty: it imposes upon humane Acts, not a necessity of
Coaction, but of Immutability only, such as no way trenches upon the creatures
Freedom. Some, I suppose, will not admit that distinction; but that it is a
necessary one, appears thus. On the one hand it is impossible, that any act of
man's Will should fall under a necessity of Coaction; for then it should will
nolent: on the other it is impossible, that any act of man's Will should come to
pass in any other way than under a necessity of Immutability. For whatever
comes to pass, before its existence was future; and whatever is future, comes
to pass immutably: if it was not future before, it cannot come to pass at all;
if it was future before, it comes to pass immutably; for a future cannot cease
to be future, till it come into actual existence. But to pass this, I shall lay
down some Considerations touching the consistence of Providence and humane
Liberty.

1. It is to be noted, that God is infinite in all Perfections, incomparably
transcending all creatures; that all creatures are finite, but as a little drop
or dust, a vanity or quasi nothing before him. This Consideration in an humble
heart, is able to solve even seeming contradictions. Gods immensity, though as
indivisible as a point, comprizes the world without crushing the least quantity
together. Gods Eternity, though an instant, environs ages without confounding
the least sand of temporal succession: And why may not Gods Will, De Genesis ad
Liter. l. 6. c. 15.
though in St. Austins phrase it be rerum necessitas, comprehend created Wills
within its Decrees, without any violence or unkind pressure upon their liberty?
God is infinite, the creature finite; infinite cannot but unmeasurably
transcend finite; finite cannot but be every way ruleable by infinite. Let us
remember, that God is God; and if men deifie their own Free Will, that he is a
God above all gods, Psalm. 135.5. And then the next verse will be an easy
consequence, Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that he did in heaven and earth,
Verse. 6. As the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so his thoughts are above
ours, and therefore the one may easily be conceived to encircle the other; to
say, that the humane Will, without a damage to its liberty, is not ruleable by
Providence, is to say, that infinite Wisdom and Power have posed themselves in
making such a creature as they could not govern without destroying its
faculties: and to say, that the humane Will, though ruleable by Providence, is
not so ruled, is to say, that the great King of kings, and Lord of lords has
voluntarily, and without any necessity for it, waved his Principality over his
noblest creatures, over the wills and hearts of men.

2. That Providence and humane Liberty should consist together, is necessary on
all hands. On Gods part, that he may rule like a God over the noblest
creatures; that the great things, which were to be brought forth through the
free acts of men, might come to pass, as became Providence, in a sure and
infallible way: on man's part, that he may act, though as a man rationally, yet
as a creature dependently upon God; that he may humbly acknowledge, that all his
liberty is but a drop or little beam from him who is the fountain of Power, and
therefore must hang upon him in its being and working. Free Will is a principle
to his own operations; yet, as the Schoolmen speak, it is principium sub Deo
and post Deum, Bon. in Sent. l. 2. did. 25.
a principle under God and after God.

3. The suavity and congruity of Providence reconciles the matter. God does not
ruin his creatures in the ruling of them, nor destroy his works that he may
fulfill his will, (...), Providence so applies it self to every thing, as to
preserve its nature. Dion. de Div. Nom. c. 4. De Civ. Dei. l. 7. c. 30.
God so administreth all things, that, as St. Austin speaks, Ipsa proprios
exercere and agere motus sinat, he suffers them to act and use their own proper
motions: he gave the Israelites favor in the eyes of the Egyptians, Exodus
12.36, yet he robbed not the Egyptians of their liberty: he touched the heart
of Saul's followers, 1 Samuel 10.26; yet he cracked never a string in their
rational faculties: he raised up his peoples spirit to build the Temple, Ezra
1. 5, yet he did not depress their freedom. Providence does not operate by
violent impulsions, but sweetly accommodate it self to the wills of men. Hence
it may very well consist with Liberty. It sets down humane events, and a
congruous mode waiting on them; I mean, it orders, that such things shall come
to pass, and come to pass freely; so that it is so far from being compulsive,
that it is completive of humane Liberty. Should such things not come to pass
freely, the event would no less cross Divine Providence than humane Freedom.

4. In Scripture Providence and Liberty stand in sweet conjunction. God opened
the heart of Lydia, Act. 16.14; yet she opened her own heart to attend: he
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, Ezekiel. 1. 1, yet he stirred up his own spirit
also. Titus went to the Corinthians (...) of his own self-choice and option, 2
Cor. 8. 17, yet God put it into his heart, v. 16. The Jews did freely crucify
our Savior, yet Gods hand and Gods Counsel determined it to be done, Act.
4.28. The Chaldees march against Gods People in violence, and in the pomp of
freedom; insomuch that the Prophet says, that their judgment and their dignity
proceeded of themselves; yet they were ordained for judgment, Hab. 1.7, 12. In
these and other Scriptures, Providence and Liberty are clearly, pregnantly
asserted; both are true, both in conjunction. What if we know not how to join
these together, or what is the mode of their conjunction? We are yet humbly and
piously to acknowledge and confess the truth of both. God can do much more than
we are able to search into. Melancton used often to recite that of his Master
Stadian, viz. I know both, Wall. de Pro^ f. 84.
that God foreknows and determines all things, and yet that there is a
contingency; but how to reconcile them, so as to satisfy the contentious, I
see not.

5. This objection is solved in Jesus Christ: His human will was free, or else
his active and passive obedience was not meritorious or satisfactory; and yet
his human will was infallibly guided by his Divine, or else his Merit and
Satisfaction were not certainly determined. It Is true, some have been so hardy
as to say, That Christ might have sinned, or not have obeyed his Fathers will.
Thus Arius said, Filium Dei fuisse (...), that the Son of God was capable of
Vice and Virtue. Thus some others have affirmed, That Christ as man might not
have obeyed. But the Council of Nice pronounced an Anathema against Arius for
that opinion, Socrat. l. 1. c. 6
as being one of his blasphemies. It Is very miserable that men should have no
higher thoughts of Christ than so. To say, That Christ might have sinned, or,
which is all one, to say, That he might not have obeyed, is to say, That there
might have been a discord between the Father and the Son, a repugnancy between
the Divine and Human wills in Christ: That the admirable Hypostatical union of
the two natures in him, might have been broken and dissolved: That his human
nature might have lost and forfeited the rich anointings and over-measures of
the Spirit which were upon it: That the great work of Redemption and Salvation
in his hands, might have failed and come to nothing: Nay, and that our glorious
Redeemer and Savior might by his sin have stood in need of one to save and
redeem him. All which show the black blasphemies which are couched in that
opinion. To say no more of it, I conclude, That Providence rules over the free
acts of men, and that without any violence put upon their liberty: Men act
freely, and yet dependently upon God the primordial Cause.

The next objection made against Providence, is this: If there were a
Providence, How or which way should it come to pass, that the wicked should
prosper, and the good be afflicted?

This objection staggered the Heathens, that many of them denied a Providence
upon this account. If there were a Providence, Minucius Foelix, f. 5.
say they, Why had Phalaris or Dionysius a Kingdom? Why Rutilius or Camillus a
banishment? Why Socrates a Cup of Poison? When they saw bloody impure Tyrants
sitting upon the Throne, when good and just men tossed with miseries, and
exposed to great afflictions, they hence concluded, That there was no such
thing as Providence ruling over the world: Hence that of the Poet,

Cum rapiunt mala fata bonos, ignoscite fasso,
Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos.
Hence when Pompey in a good cause wanted success, a sad complaint was made,
That, (res divinas multum habere caliginis) Providence, if any thing at all,
was very dark. Nay, this objection was a scruple to the Saints under the Old
Testament. Hence those expostulations, Wherefore do the wicked live, become
old, yea are mighty in power? Job 21.7. Behold, these are the ungodly who
prosper in the world, they increase in riches, Psalm. 73.12. Wherefore does the
way of the wicked prosper? Jer. 12.1. Wherefore look thou upon them that
deal treacherously? Hab. 1.13. A scruple they had, yet still they held fast
this conclusion, That God was good to Israel, Psalm. 73.1; and righteous in all
his dispensations, Jer. 12.1. An answer may be made to this objection in many
things; I shall only in brief touch upon them. It is a very good rule, Non est
judicandum de operibus Dei ante quintum actum: This or that particular piece of
Providence may look, apart and by it self, as if it were irregular; but if all
be set together, the result is nothing but order and harmony. The wicked
prosper, but it is only in outward carnal things; within, there are souls
desolate and void of grace: It is but for a moment, a little span of life; in
the end they sink down into the bottomless pit of perdition. The good are
afflicted, but it is in their body or outward lumber; within, there are souls
florid and beautiful in grace: it is but for a short time, in the end they
enter into rest and life eternal. The blessings which the wicked have, are good
in themselves; but to them, who take them, separate and without God the Donor,
they are but a lie, a vanity, a snare to their souls, and fuel to their lusts.
The afflictions which fall upon the good, are evil in themselves; but to them
who bear them in faith and patience, they are antidotes against sin, trials of
grace; nay, precious love tokens from their Father in Heaven. The wicked in
their worshipping of God, give him only the shell and outside; accordingly he
gives them the things of this world, which in comparison to those of a better,
are but toys and trifles. The good serve God in spirit and truth; sutably he
makes them to inherit and substance, Prove. 8.21; that is, those spiritual and
eternal Realities, which transcend all the shadows and pompous apparitions of
the world. The wicked are creatures, and so have a portion in this life; yet in
the midst of all their prosperity, they move to that Hell which is the center
of their iniquity. The good are sinners, and so have some afflictions to purge
out the relics of sin; yet in the midst of their troubles they pass on to
that Heaven which is the center of their fanctity. If the wicked should have
nothing but adversity, it would look as if there were no judgment to come, no
after-reckoning for their iniquity. If the good should have nothing but
prosperity, it would seem to hint, as if their reward were only here; as if
there were no such things as Heaven and Life-eternal reserved for them. The
wicked prosper that we might not set too high a rate or value upon those
outward things, which the vilest and basest of men enjoy. The good are
afflicted, that the Crowns and Recompenses of Holiness might appear to lie, not
in this vale of tears, but in that Region where there is perfect blessedness.
But, pretermitting all these, we have an eminent solution of this scruple in
our Lord Christ; What an excellent one was he? What a pure innocent lamb! how
meek, humble, holy, harmless, merciful, zealous, heavenly, obedient, patient
was he! how fair and lovely in all Graces was he? what a divine light and
luster did his Virtues cast forth into the World! how attractive and ravishing
were the Perfections shining out in him! What Sermons did he preach! What Cures
did he do! What was his life but a continual doing of good! Who, where is the
man that ever was so profitable to Mankind, or so obliged the World as he did!
And yet how was he used! What entertainment did he meet withal here! He was
despised, rejected, a man of sorrows, acquainted with griefs; extreme poor, not
having where to lay his head: at last he was arraigned, falsely accused,
unjustly condemned, spit upon, buffeted, mocked, nailed to a tormenting Cross,
there to breathe out his last. Never did Innocence so suffer as here, and yet
never did Providence show it self in such glory, in and by the sufferings of
this Holy One; the great work of Redemption was accomplished; his Stripes were
healing ones; his Blood a laver to wash sinners; his Cross was a triumphant
conquest over Death and Hell; his Sacrifice made a perfect atonement; his
Sufferings answered for the sin and suffering of a World. His sorrows made way
for good tidings; his shame procured glory for us; his condemnation was in
order to our absolution; his poverty was to enrich us with grace and glory.
This was the very Masterpiece of Providence; never did the Sun see such an
incomparable design as here, out of death comes life; out of the sufferings of
an holy righteous person, rises up an eternal spring of blessings and all good
things.

The last Objection made against Providence is this: If there is a Providence,
(...); whence is that greatest of evils, sin? Providence rightly and wisely
disposes of things, sin is an horrible and monstrous ataxy and confusion, such
as makes the Earth without form and void, Jer. 4.23. as if the old Chaos were
come again; and how comes it to pass that such an inordinate thing should be in
the world? It was the Objection of Marcion, Si Deus bonus, and praescius
suturi, and avertendi mali potens, cur hominem and quidem imaginem suam passus
est labi. T^rt. Advers. Marcion. l.2.
That if God were good, and foreknowing of futures, and able to avert evil, he
would not have suffered man to fall.

In answer to this Objection, it is to be premised, That God is not, nor cannot
be the author of sin: God is light, sin darkness; God purity, sin uncleanness;
God omnipotency, sin imbecility; God a pure act, sin a defect. Sin cannot be
from such an one as he is; nevertheless it is clear that sinful actions do not
fall out altogether without a Providence. The Scripture is very pregnant
herein: Joseph's Brethren sell him into Egypt, but God sent him thither, Genesis
45.5. Shimei cursed David, but God bid him do so, 2 Samuel 16.11. Absalom lies
with his Fathers Concubines, but God said, I will do it, 2 Samuel 12.12. a lying
spirit deceived Ahab, but God said, Go and do so, 1 King. 22.22. Thus and much
more says the holy Book, but neither is Reason silent herein; I shall
therefore offer two things.

1. It was a determinate Verity, and that before the event, that such and such
sinful actions should come to pass; a Verity it could not be without a
Providential purpose, for then it would be an independent, self-originated,
unpreventable truth; the thing must come to pass whether God would or no: That
which is of it self, and a kind of origin to it self, can have no impediment;
it will exist and be a kind of (...), or self-subsistent: to avoid which
absurdities I take it to be necessary to say, that such a verity cannot be
without a Providence.

2. The greater number of humane actions are sinful, and if all these were
exempt from Providence, how could Providence rule the World? If God were the
author of sin, he could not judge the world; because he could not be author and
ultor respectu ejusdem; but if sin fall out without a Providence, he could not
rule the World, because the major part of humane actions are evil.

But seeing it is certain, that Providence is for being and order, and that sin
is an ataxy and confusion, I shall give a more distinct answer to this
Objection; and here the light must be divided from the darkness. In a sinful
action there are three things considerable. I mean the anomy, or ataxy, the
entity, and the order of it.

1. The anomy or ataxy is mere darkness, it is a defect, and only from a
deficient agent; it is (...), as the expression is, Joh. 8.44. of a man's own:
Creatura habet redire ad non esse a se, the creature falls from its
defectibility and pravity; here Providence is only a permissor; on the one hand
it is certain, that no sin can possibly come to pass without a permission. If
God suffer it not, no man can wrong Israel, Psalm. 105.14. And, which is less
than an injurious act, Balaam cannot curse her, Numb. 22.38. And, which is yet
less than a cursing word, the Idolatrous Nations cannot desire her Land, Exodus
34.24. Let a man be in never so great a frenzy of lust, God can hedge and wall
him up that he shall not find his paths. On the other hand it is certain, that
God is only a permissor of the anomy or ataxy, it is not from him as a cause:
the creature being defectible in it self, and under a law distinct from it
self, may fail and fall short of the rule; but God who has no other law but
his perfection, and can no more decline from his rectitude than his being, is a
mere permissor.

2. The entity in a sinful action, though coexistent with the anomy, is to be
distinguished from it; besides the anomy there is aliquid naturae, somewhat of
positive being. This I think is clear: though an act as it respects the law,
and is in linea morali, may be sinful; yet as it is an act, and considered in
linea physica, it cannot be such; for so it is but the mere complement of a
natural faculty, and that complement cannot in it self be sinful, because the
God of nature cannot be the author of sin. The anomy or sinfulness dwells not
alone, but in alieno fundo, in some natural good. Original sinfulness is an
inmate in the natural faculties; actual sinfulness is an inmate in some action
or motion. The action is inordinate, but it is not the inordination; the
inordination is a privation, but the act is not so; the act is a positive
thing, but the inordination is not so; the act is the subject of the
inordination, therefore it is not the very inordination it self. Now there
being such a distinction in sinful actions between the entity and the anomy,
the entity or motion must be from God the first being and mover. Arminius
himself would have it, Vt totus actus rite Providentiae subjiciatur, qua actus
efficienti, qua peccatum permittenti Providentiae. As to the malice Providence
permits, but as to the action or motion it operates; no particle of being can
be produced without it, such persons as are by illegitimate generation, are
doubtless Gods creatures, and that because the generating act, as it is an act,
is from God.

3. The order is considerable: In sinful actions all is not mere ataxy; God
has an holy Line in the midst of the disorder. In Monsters there are
aberrations of particular natures, yet Providence is not mistaken. In sins,
which are moral monstrosities, the sinning-creature is inordinate; yet
Providence is not without an order touching the same. And here we may take
notice of a double order; the one looks backwards, and that is the Order of
Penalty: The other looks forward, and that is the Order of Conducibility. I
shall a little touch upon each of these.

1. The Order of Penalty is considerable, and that under a double notion; the
one is this: A sinful action is poena sibiipsi, a punishment to it self.
Jussisti, Domine, and sic est, Aust. Cons. l. 1. cap. 12. Lib. 2. Did. 37.
ut poena sibi sit omnis inordinatus animus; An inordinate mind is a punishment
to it self. Sin (says the subtle Scotus) as it is fluent from the will, is
sin; but as it is resident in the will, it is punishment. Or thus: As it fights
and wars against the Law, it is sin; but as it debases and deturpates the soul
in its beauty and serenity, it is punishment. A man cannot sin against God, but
he wrongs his soul, Prove. 8.36. Jerusalem cannot make Idols against God, but
she does it against her self too, Ezekiel. 22.3. in respect of this penalty. God
does not suffer dedecus peccati esse sine decore justitiae, no not for a
moment. The other is this; One sin is a punishment to another precedent. In
general, St. Austin tells us, That between the first sin of Apostasy, and the
last punishment of eternal fire, the middle things are sins and punishments.
Sometimes the sin of one person is a punishment to the precedent sin of
another. David's Adultery was punished with Absoloms Incest; Solomon's Idolatry
with Rehoboams Folly. Sometimes the subsequent sin of a person, is a punishment
to his precedent sin. The Gentiles were idolatrous, and God gave them up to
vile affections, Romans 1.26. Men love not the truth, and God sends them strong
delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. In all which instances, Peccatum non Dei est, sed
judicium; The sin is man's, the judgment God's.

2. There is an Order of Conducibility to be observed. Enchir. c. 100.
God permits not a sin irrationally: Non sineret bonus fieri male (says
Austin) nisi Omnipotens etiam de Malo facere posset been; The Good God would
not suffer evil to be done, unless he could by his Omnipotency bring good out
of it. De Causa Dei, c. 34.
Nullum est malnus in mundo (says Bradwardine) quod non est propter aliquod
magnum bonum, and forsitan propter aliquod majus bonum; There is no evil in the
world which is not for some great good, and perhaps for some greater good. Adam
by his fall broke in pieces a beautiful image of Holiness, and the dust of it
made a glass of Creature-defectibility. The stock of Grace laid up in Adam, was
lost; and an unloseable Treasury is laid up in Christ's human nature. Joseph's
brethren sell him, but God sent him into Egypt to preserve life, Genesis 45.5.
Persecutors scatter the Church, and by this means God scatters the Gospel, Acts
8.4. Thus he orders the very sins of men to excellent purposes.

There being, as has been said, such a double Order, it is most apparent, that
both these Orders are from his Providence who is the God of order: The Order of
Penalty is from him who is Justice it self; The Order of Conducibility is from
him who is Wisdom it self. Providence is either justly punishing, or wisely
disposing of things. The sins of men are evil in themselves, but the Order has
a goodness and beauty in it.

These things being laid down in general, I come now to answer this Objection
in that instance which is above all other, The Sufferings of our Savior. The
blackest iniquity that ever the Sun saw, was the crucifying of him who was God
manifested in the flesh; and yet here Providence did not stand off, or at a
distance, but ordered his sufferings to bring forth the great work of
Redemption. On man's part there was malice, blood, and unparalled wickedness;
yet on Gods there was justice, righteousness, and a design of incomparable love
to save the world: Hence it is said, That Herod, and Pilate, and the Gentiles,
and the people of Israel, were gathered together to do whatsoever Gods hand and
Gods counsel determined before to be done, Acts 4.27, 28. Never was there so
horrible a sin, never so signal a Providence as here. Some Divines do here
distinguish thus: The passion of Christ was decreed, but the crucifiers action
was not. Others will not admit this distinction. Beza against Castellio says,
That common sense is against it. Chamier thinks that natural light is against
it. I confess that I cannot satisfy my self with it. Are the Action and
Passion really distinct? May the one be without the other? May Providence be,
as becomes it, perfect, if it determine an Effect without a Cause; or that
Christ should be slain, and not by whom? A scheme of one Decree has been let
down from Heaven to us, whose accuracy is considerable, 1 King. 22. there God
did not only decree that Ahab should be persuaded to go up and fall at
Ramoth-Gilead, but that it should be done by the hardest medium, by a
Lying-spirit commissionated to go and prevail. And may we think Providence more
accurate touching a judgment on one wicked man, than it is touching the
Redemption of the World by Christ? and yet will it not be more accurate, if in
the one the mode and person by whom the thing should be done, be designed, and
not in the other? Suppose the Action and Passion to be distinct, yet is not the
Passion a dependent on the Action? And if the Action be casual, must not the
Passion be so too? And if the Passion only be decreed, must not the Action be
casual? That Action which is altogether undecreed (I mean, there being no
Decree of permission upon which the Action as a consequent does ensue) is
undetermined by God; and (because there is no middle Determinator) that which
is undetermined by God, must remain undetermined, till man determines it, that
is, till it be done, or at least in fieri; and that which is undetermined till
then, is casual to the very moment of its existence; that is, as casual as any
thing can be. And if the Action be casual, the Passion, which is a pendent upon
it, must be so too; and if the Passion be casual, it must be undetermined and
undecreed as well as the Action; and so Providence, while denied in the one, is
subverted in both. But to say no more to that distinction, we see clearly in
the Sufferings of Christ, how admirable Providence is, in and about the very
sins of men. There God was wise while man was foolish; God merciful while man
cruel; God just while man unrighteous; the light was Gods, and the darkness
man's; the order Gods, and the ataxy man's; the throne and sovereign dominion
Gods, the sin and rebellion man's. Wicked projects were turned about to just
ends, vile actions were overruled to excellent purposes; at that very death of
Christ, in which so many impious hands thrust themselves, Providence was not
absent, but put in its holy hand and counsel to bring forth the glorious work
of Redemption and Salvation out of it.

One thing more may be noted; we have a pregnant proof of Providence in the
pious posture of our suffering Savior. When he was under the unjust and bloody
hands of men, he looked above and beyond them to the hand and Providence of
God; when Pilate told him, That he had power to crucify him, he answered, That
Pilate could have no power at all against him, except it were given him from
above, Joh. 19.11. As much as to say, Unless it had been Gods determinate
counsel, a thousand Pilates could have done nothing at all. When the Jews
poured out horrid blasphemies and injuries, he was as a meek Lamb, dumb, he
opened not his mouth. Indeed there were tears and strong-crys to God, but no
murmurs or complaint; of men; he looked above them to the pleasure of his
Father: When he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet.
2.23. O rare Mirror of Faith and Patience! He knew whom he had to do withal,
his eyes were not upon men, but God; not upon their wicked projects, but upon
his Fathers wise counsel. In all his sufferings he fully acquiesced in his
Fathers pleasure, saying, Not my will, but thine be done.

Further, we may observe, That the Saints have ever owned a Providence watching
over the injuries of men. God sent me, says Joseph: The Lord has taken away,
says Job: The Lord bid him curse, says David: Thou have ordained them for
judgment, says Habakkuk of the Chaldees. Still they look up to the hand of
Providence in such events, exercising themselves in holy fear, faith, patience,
prayer toward God. Were there not a Providence, what should the Saints do?
which way could they turn themselves for comfort? in a storm of Persecution
what does their fear do? it terminates not on man but God, and that upon very
good reason; because man is but, as Attila called himself, Flagellum Dei, the
staff or rod in the hand of God the great Moderator: but if there be no such
thing as Providence, the staff is no longer in Gods hand, but in man's; he may
do what he pleases. Hence in such a case it looks like a piece of reasonable
Idolatry to fear man who determines the event; and like a piece of reasonless
piety to fear God, who does just nothing at all: and what does their faith do?
they fly under the Almighty shadow, and fix their faith as a rare engine, upon
that singular Providence, which runs toward them in a more than ordinary
sweetness through the Covenant of Grace: in this posture they stand as secure,
as if by Divine art they could remove the troublous Earth into a quieter ubi,
or at least be untroubled in the troubles of it. But if there be no Providence,
what can they do? their shadow is departed, their faith which may not take so
low a center as earth or man, has no Providence or place in Heaven to fasten
it self upon, it being irrational to stay on the mercy or power of him who does
just nothing in such events; Faith now is no more it self but a dream or fancy
about some Providence or invisible hand which is not: and what shall their
patience do? in such cases they use to lay themselves down at Gods feet, as
Lambs not opening their mouths; or else speaking low, and as it were out of the
dust of creature-vileness, in some such submissive terms as those of Ely, It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good; an excellent posture for a creature
under the great Governor! But if he govern not, patience is no more it self;
neither under man, a mere fellow creature, should it be in so low a posture: it
is a Grace which can live nowhere but under Providence. The taking away of
Providence ruins patience in the very foundation, no less than the taking away
of precepts does obedience. And what can their prayer do? it can unlock Heaven,
and by importuning the Governor of the World do great things: but if God rule
not, it is but a mere insignificant thing; no tolerable account can be given,
why in such cases they should address themselves to him who is no Moderator.
Thus we see that the Doctrine of Providence is of great moment to the Graces of
the Saints. I shall conclude all with the pious words of two Emperors; the one
is Mauritius, who seeing his Wife and Children murdered, said, Justus es,
Domine, justa judicia tua. The other is Maximilian, who in the time of Pope
Julius the second, expressed his thoughts touching Providence thus, Deus
aeterne! nisi vigilares, quam male esset mundo, quom regimus nos? ego miser
venator, and ebriosus ille ac sceleratus Julius?

There being a Divine Providence, such as spreads it self over all things, what
acknowledgments and adorations should be paid to it? it upholds and directs all
things, it stoops down to worms and hairs; it governs the great things of the
Church and the World; it ascertains the most casual events; it rules over the
freest agents; nay, it reduces sin it self, the most horrible of ataxies into
order; it brings light out of darkness, order out of confusion, good out of
evil; it leaves nihil inordinatum in universo, nothing simply totally
inordinate in all the World. O how should we hang and depend upon it! our
purposes should all have that pious condition, If the Lord will, we will do
this or that, Jam. 4.15. Our motto should be, nihil sine Deo, nothing without
Providence. In all our ways we should look up and wait for the good hand of God
to direct and prosper us, without which vanity takes us, and all comes to
nothing. In our converses with men we should look above them to him who sits at
the stern and rules: Do they do us good? let us remember the fountain is above,
man is but the channel; not the least good drops from them, but what was
distilled out of them by Providence. Jacob says, That he saw Esaus face as the
face of God, Gen 33.10. Little of God was to be found in Esau, yet in his
kindness Jacob spied out a beam of the Divine Goodness and favor. Do they deal
ill with us? let us consider no more of their malice or wrath can issue forth
upon us than Providence will suffer, the remainder shall be restrained and
kept: back in their verbal reproaches and obloquies let us say with David, the
Lord has bid him curse. In their real injuries and oppressions, let us say
with Job, the Lord has taken away; still our eyes should be lifted up above
instruments to that wise Providence which orders all. In all the great affairs
of the Church and the World let us still hold to this, the Lord reigns, Psalm.
93.1. Providence governs the World, and all in it: heresies and bloody
persecutions may break out as a flood, yet Truth shall stand, and the Church
built upon it. In a word, seeing God is universal Governor, we should fear him
in every place, eye him in every work, submit to him in every event, depend
upon him in every estate, and glorify him in all his administrations. This is
indeed to confess his Kingdom which rules over all, and practically to own his
Providence, which sweetly and strongly disposes all things to his own Praise
and Glory.

CHAP. IX.
Adam's sin imputed to us. The proof of it from Scripture. Adam's capacity.
Adam's righteousness. Objections answered. Our inherent pravity. The proof of
it from Scripture. The experience of our hearts. The actual sins in the world.
The doctrine of Original sin manifested from Christ's extraordinary Conception.
His Headship opposed to Adam's, from the institution of Baptism. The wickedness
of the Jews in crucifying of Christ. The purchase of Regeneration and Salvation
made by Christ. A short improvement of this Doctrine.

IN the next place I shall proceed to consider Original sin, the Doctrine of
which is very momentous. The Psalmist in the fourteenth Psalm notably sets
forth the corrupt estate of man by nature; and again, he sets it forth in the
53. Psalm. almost in the same words, pointing out to us the great necessity and
utility of this Doctrine, Moll. Com. in Psalm. 53.
which admirably tends to undeceive and deliver us from that fascinating
opinion of our own righteousness and worthiness, which too much charms the
hearts of all men; and withal to prepare and make us ready to accept a cure
from Christ, and his regenerating Grace. This is a most necessary fundamental
Doctrine. De peccat. Or. lib. 2. cap. 24.
St. Austin speaking of Adam and Christ, says, In horum duorum hominum causa
proprie fides Christiana consistit: the Christian faith stands in the knowledge
of those two men; the one the spring of sin and death; the other the spring of
grace and life. And speaking of the Pelagians as denying Original sin, he
charges them, Epist. 90, and 94.
fundamenta Christianae fidei evertere, to overturn the foundations of the
Christian faith. Without the knowledge of this sin, that excellent rule, (...),
know thy self, becomes altogether unpracticable; a man though near to his own
soul, is a stranger to it; though he has a reflecting faculty, yet he cannot
make a true inspection into his heart he sees only his outside: within there is
a deadly wound, yet he feels it not; a sink, a chaos of corruptions, yet he
perceives it not: that holy image which was the beauty and pure rectitude of
his nature, is departed and gone; yet he is not concerned at it. He is, as
Nazianzen speaks, totus lapsus, all fallen, all out of order; yet it seems to
him as if all were well and in a due posture: he is miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked, and yet insensible in all these, according to that false or
rather no-judgment that he has of himself: he is happy in his misery, rich in
his poverty, seeing in his blindness, beautiful in his shame and spiritual
nakedness; in the midst of straits and necessities he finds no need of Christ,
or regenerating grace: the necessity and excellency of these appears in such
proportion as the depth and breadth of that sin is apprehended to be. Hence it
is observable on the one hand, Those who own Adam to be a fountain of sin and
death, do withal own Christ to be a fountain of righteousness and life. Those
who see the horrible ataxy and pravity in our nature, see also the necessity
and excellency of Grace in the repairing of it. On the other hand the Pelagians
and Socinians, who deny Original sin, are enemies to Grace; it is in the power
and will of man; vel nitere flore virtutum, vel sentibus horrere vitiorum;
Aust. de Great. Christ. c. 18.
to make himself beautiful with the flowers of virtue, or horrid with the
brambles of vice. So Pelagius. In nostra potestate situm est, ut Deo
obtemperemus, Cap. 10.
it is in our power to obey God. So the Racovian Catechist. And what room is
there for Grace, Aust. ad Bonis. lib. 1. cap. 21.
when the power and free will of man may do the work? The Pelagians affirmed,
that before the Law men were saved by Nature, afterward by the Law, Socin. de
Serve. pars 3. cap. 2.
afterward by Christ. The Socinians say, that under the Old Testament good men
were saved without any respect to Christ or faith in him, and what need then
was there of Christ, or his satisfactory sufferings for us? the great work
might be done without him. Hence it appears that to deny Original sin is to
cast off Christ and Grace. The Jewish Rabbis, who made the evil figment in
man's heart to be but a light matter, small as a thread, weak as a woman,
ruleable by the good figment of our own reason, were very ignorant of that
great point of Regeneration. Hence Nicodemus a Master in Israel was startled
and stood at a maze at our Saviors Doctrine about it, How can a man be born
when he is old? can he enter the second time into his mothers womb and be born?
says he, Joh. 3.4. Such carnal and gross expostulations could never have dropped
from him if he had had a true sense of Original sin, but for want of that
Regeneration was a strange and unintelligible mystery to him. The Pagan
Philosophers had some glimmerings of Original sin; hence they complained that
the soul had lost her wings, and crept upon these lower things; that it was in
the body as a prison, and there looked out at the grates of sense; that it was
fallen from the happy Region, and inclined to evil. But, because these were but
glimmerings, they did not so much as dream of Grace or Regeneration; because
they did not see the depth and venom of our Original wound, they thought there
was medicamentum in latere, enough in the Power and Free Will of the soul to
heal it self: they reckoned all virtues to be among the (...), the things in
our power; and accounted the will to be such a mistress of it self, that it
might make it self good and excellent at its pleasure. By all these instances
we see plainly, that the Doctrine of Original sin is very useful and momentous.

Original sin is set forth by many names in Scripture. It is called Sin, The
sinning sin, The sin that dwells in us, The sin that does easily beset us,
The Law of sin and death, The Law in the Members, The flesh and the old man,
The root of bitterness, The plague of the heart: in the Fathers it is called
the paternal poison, The first radical sin, The venom and stroke of the old
serpent, The contagion of the ancient death, The weight of the ancient crime,
The injury of our Original. And St. Austin, that he might ascertain that in
which he opposed the Pelagians, called it Original sin, from whence that name
was afterward frequent in the Church: it was so called, partly because we have
it in our Original; it is interwoven with our nature, and may say to every one
of us, As soon as thou were, I am; partly because it is derived to us from
Adam, the head and original of mankind. Non peccat iste qui nascitur, non
peccat ille qui genuit, non peccat iste qui condidit, per quas rima^ inter tot
praesidia innocentiae peccatum fingis ingressum? Aust. de Nup. l. 2.28.
Hence when Julian the Pelagian argued thus against Original sin: He sins not
who is born: he sins not who begets: he sins not who creates. By what chinks or
cranies among so many guards of innocence, Quid quaerit latentem rimam, cum
habeat a pertissimam januam? Per unum hominem, ait Apostolus, quid quaerit
amplius?
do you feign that sin did enter? St. Austin answers him thus: Why does he seek
a chink or a crany, when he has an open gate? By one man, says the Apostle,
what would he have more? It is that one man Adam, the original of mankind, by
whom sin entered into the world; it is by him that it is derived to us. That one
Text, touching the one man, is enough to break and sweep away all the subtle
cobwebs which the Pelagians and Socinians have spun out of their Wit and carnal
Reason to oppose the Doctrine of Original sin.

Original sin consists in two things: 1. In that Adams first sin is
imputatively ours. 2. In that we have an inordination and inherent pravity
derived upon us from him.


The first thing is, Adams first sin imputatively ours: not that God reputes us
to have done it in our own person; not that it is imputed to us in the full
latitude, as it was to Adam. We sinned not as the head and root of mankind, we
murdered not the whole humane nature; we did not usher in sin and death upon
the world: no, as the Apostle says, this was (...), by one Adam; but as soon
as any man becomes proles Adae, in conjunction with him, it is imputed to him,
pro mensura membri, in such sort and proportion as is competent to him, being a
part and piece as it were of Adam. 12. Quest. 81. Art. 1.
Aquinas illustrates this by a notable instance: Murder as a sin is not
imputable to the hand in it self, as distinct or separate from the body; but as
it is a Member in man, and moved by his Will: in like manner the sin of Adam is
imputed to us, not so properly as we are in our selves, but as we are parts and
pieces of him, and derived our nature from him. Adams sin was past before we
were born. It is therefore, as Bellarmine well expresses it, Nobis communicatur
co modo, quo communicari potest id quod transiit, nimirum per imputationem, De
Amiss. Great. l. 5. c. 17.
communicated to us in that manner, as a thing past can be communicated, namely
by imputation; we did not personally commit it. It is therefore imputed to us
in that measure, as is fit and just for it to be imputed to those who are parts
and members of Adam. In that capacity it is constructively and interpretatively
ours, and accordingly God justly reckons and imputes it unto us. That this is
so, I shall offer some Considerations;

1. That of the Apostle is very pregnant; by one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned,
Romans 5.12. In the Original it is, (...), in him, that is, in Adam all have
sinned. Those words (...) are Relative. Three things, as St. Cont. 2. Epist.
Ptl. l. 4. c. 4.
Austin observes, are set down in this verse before; Adam, Sin, and Death:
those words relate not to sin, for Sin in the Greek is a Feminine; nor to
death, for men do not sin in death, but dye in sin; therefore they relate to
Adam, in him all have sinned. It Is true, others take the words, (...) causally,
for that all have sinned. But I think that, as I said before, they are to be
taken Relatively, in him all have sinned. Thus those three things, which the
Apostle conjoined together in this verse, that is, the propagation of sin, the
original of death, and the foundation of both, very well cohere together in
this manner. The first we have in those words, By one man sin entered into the
world. The second in those, Death passed upon all. The third in those, In him
all have sinned. Thus those phrases, sin entered, death passed, have a plain
explication. Sin did not stay in Adam, but it entered into the world: But if
Adams sin be not imputatively ours, how did it enter? It entered by Imitation,
say the Pelagians: but how vain is this? Sin entered upon all, upon whom death
passed, and death passed upon all without exception. But neither infants, who
sin not actually, or after the similitude of Adams transgression; nor those
adult persons, who sin actually, but never so much as heard of Adams sin, could
have sin from Adam by Imitation. We are all sinners, and children of wrath, not
by Imitation, but by nature; Adams sin was not merely his own, but ours by
Imitation. Thus sin entered into the world, and as a penal fruit of it, death
passed upon all; it did not stay at Adam, but passed upon all: and if Adams sin
became not ours, how should that be? The Apostle does not barely set down sin
and death, but sets them down in their order and connection. First sin entered,
and then death passed, and that not as a mere infelicity or misery, but as a
just punishment for sin. Hence it is observable, that the Text says, That
death came by sin, and so passed upon all. The Particles ( by and fo) show that
death passed upon all as a punishment. If Adams sin were not all men's, how
could death pass upon infants, who have no actual sin? God is not, cannot be
unjust; where there is no fault, there is no room for punishment; if infants in
no sense transgressed the Command in Adam, the death in the threatening cannot
fall upon them, De Incar. c. 14.
Qua justitia parvulus subjicitur peccati stipendio, si nulla est in eo peccati
pollutio? says Fulgentius; With what justice can an infant be subject to the
wages of sin, if the pollution of it be not in him? May there be poena sine
causa, a punishment without a why or a wherefore? It cannot be. If therefore,
even Infants in Adam died, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15.22, then in Adam
all sinned, as he tells us in the frequented Text. That this is the genuine
meaning of it, does not only appear by the Text it self, but by that which
follows: By one man's disobedience many were constituted sinners, v. 19. No.
unimputed sin can do this. If therefore Adams sin constitute us sinners, it is
imputed to us. To say, as the Socinians and some others do, to constitute us
sinners, is only to make us obnoxious to death, and so to be treated as
sinners, is a thing vain and repugnant to the Text. To be treated as a sinner,
is not to be constituted such. To be treated as a sinner, when a man is not
such, is very unjust and unequal. To be a sinner, is to be culpable or guilty
of a fault; and the proper signification must be retained. The Apostle in this
Chapter evidently distinguishes between sin and death, transgression and
condemnation, and makes Adam the origin of both, first of sin; and then, by
sin, of death: Therefore Adam first makes us sinners, and then obnoxious to
death. Thus the words being taken relatively, In him all have sinned, the
conclusion is plain, That Adams sin is imputed to us. Nay, if the words be
taken causally, for that all have sinned, the conclusion is the very same; If
death passed upon all men, because all have sinned, then Infants, because death
passes upon them, have sinned: And how have they sinned? Not in their own
persons, they are not capable of sinning actually; but in Adam, the root of
mankind: Not by an Imitation, they are not capable of such a thing; but by a
participation of the first sin, which by a just Imputation becomes theirs.

2. The capacity which Adam was in, is very considerable. He was not considered
as a mere individual person, but as the Principle and Origin of Human nature.
The admirable endowments of righteousness and immortality, were trusted and
deposited in his hands, not merely for himself, but for his posterity. The
command was not given to him as to a singular person, but as the Root and Head
of Mankind. The Covenant made with him, run thus: If he did (as he was able)
obey the command, he should transfer innocence and life to his posterity; If
not, he should transfer sin and death to it. We were in him naturally, as
latent in his Joins; and legally, as comprised within the Covenant. This is
very clear, because the death in the threatening annexed to the command given to
him, falls upon his posterity. Had not the command extended to his children,
the threatening could not have reached them. Had not they sinned in Adam their
Head and Root, death could not have fallen upon them in such sort as it does;
that is, in a state of infancy, void of any actual sin of its own. This being
the true state of things, it is no wonder at all that Adams sin should be
imputed to us as parts and pieces of him. Adam was here considered as the Root
and Origin of mankind: his Person was the fountain of ours; his Will the
representative of ours. Omnes nos unus ille Adam; We were one with him, and
branches of him. Hence we sinned in his sin, and putrified in him as in the
root. These things, if weighed, give an easy solution to all the cavils and
objections which the Pelagians and their followers make against the imputation
of Adams sin to us. First, They say, Deus, qui propria peccata remittit, non
imputat aliena: God, who forgives us our own sins, does not impute to us
another man's. But here is a great mistake, as if Adams sin were just nothing at
all to us. Adam was the Root, and bore all mankind in himself; we were
seminally and legally in him: His sin therefore was not alien altogether to us,
but in a sort our own. We sinned in him as our Head: We fell with him as the
branches fall with the body of the Tree. St. Austin says, Contr. Jul. l. 6:
cap. 4.
Though Adams sin were alien proprietate actionis; yet it was ours contagione
propaginis. Gregory Nazianzen speaking of Adams sin, cries out pathetically, O
infirmitatem meam! O my infirmity! St. Sermon. 1. Dom. 1. Post. 8. Epiph.
Bernard notably expresses it, Culpa aliena est, quia in Adam omnes nescientes
peccavimus, nostra, quia etsi in alio nos tamen peccavimus, and nobis justo Dei
judicio imputabatur, licet occulto: Adams sin was alien to us, because we
ignorantly sinned in him; yet it was ours, because we sinned, though in
another; and it was to us imputed by the just, though secret counsel of God.
Again they say, That which is properly sin in us, is voluntary, and an act of
our will; but Adams was not such. I answer: The foundation of this Objection,
That all proper sin is voluntary, or an act of our will, is not universally
true: Vain thoughts are sin, and such as are the objects of a good man's hatred,
much more of the hatred of the Holy One; yet they are no acts of our will. The
first risings and stirrings of lust, which antecede consent, are sins, and yet
no acts of our will. The mutinies and rebellions of the lower faculties against
Reason, are sins, and yet no acts of our will. But might this rule hold in
actual sin, yet surely it cannot in original; for then there should be no such
thing as original sin, though Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, assert it; though
the Church have been possessed of this truth in all ages; yet it is an error,
there is really no such thing: For neither was Adams transgression the act of
our will, neither is the inherent pravity in us such. If then we confess
original sin, we must acknowledge that the rule extends not to it. Thus when
Julian objects, That there is no sin in Infants, because they have not the
exercise of free will; St. Austin distinguishes thus: Hoc recte dicitur propter
proprium cujusque Contr. Jul. lib. 3. cap. 5.
peccatum, non propter primi peccati originale contagium; Whatever may be said
in actual sin, it is not so in original. Further, Adams sin as to us, may be
said to be voluntary, in two respects; the one is this: It was voluntary,
voluntate primi parentis, in the will of Adam the Head of Mankind, while he
stood in his integrity. He was the moral Head of Mankind, and, as Bellarmine
speaks, Totius humani generis gessit personam, he sustained the person of all
mankind; his will therefore was interpretatively ours; our will was virtually
in his. Murder is imputed to the hand, because the will, though it be not
there, is yet in that person of whom the hand is a part. In like manner Adams
sin is imputed to us, because the will, though it was not personally in us, was
yet in him, of whom we are parts and members. Thus that learned Professor Dr.
De Peccat. Or. 107.
Ward, Ex voluntate primi parentis, ex quo tota posteritas derivatur, peccatum
illud in posteris, velut in membris Adae, voluntarium esse censetur; The will
of the first Parent, from whom all the posterity is derived, renders his sin
voluntary in all men, as being members of him. The other respect is this, it is
voluntary in us, in our own persons habitually; there is in us an evil frame
and disposition to sin and transgress as Adam did; the act was his, yet a seed
of it is found in us. Further, they say, It is against justice and equity, that
Adams sin should be imputed to us; that we, innocent in our selves, should be
guilty by a sin not our own. I answer, Adams capacity considered, there is no
injustice in it; he was the head and root of mankind, he was the common Trustee
of righteousness and immortality for all; the Covenant was made with him for
himslf and for his posterity; his sin therefore was not merely his, but ours;
neither are we born innocent, but guilty: If it were against justice and equity
to impute his sin to us, then it was against justice and equity to punish us
for it with death temporal, spiritual, eternal: But the latter is false; so
therefore is the former. Death falls as a punishment upon Infants void of
actual sin of their own: Thus the Apostle lays it down clearly, Sin entered
into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, Romans 5.12.
Death was not a mere misery or infelicity, but a just punishment. Surely it
consists not with justice and equity, that proper punishment should fall on
persons altogether void of guilt; or that the threatening of death should seize
upon those who no way transgressed that command to which it was annexed;
therefore the imputation of Adams sin to us, is so far from being against
justice and equity, that without it, the equity and justice of God in
inflicting death as a punishment upon all men, cannot be reasonably cleared. I
need add but one thing more, God dealt with Adam the head of mankind, upon
terms of abundant equity: for as Adam sinning, was to transfer sin and death to
us; so Adam obeying, was to transfer righteousness and immortality to us: The
terms were equal on both hands; we were in him as our head, as well for the
obtaining of blessedness upon his obedience, as for the incurring punishment
upon his disobedience. These objections being removed out of the way, I
conclude, That the capacity which Adam stood in at first, is a clear evidence,
that his sin is imputed to us.

3. If Adams sin be not imputed to us, then neither was his righteousness so;
then we never were righteous, we never were esteemed such in Gods account; then
we are not fallen creatures, we are merely simply as God made us: Then what
need of renovation or regeneration? An unfallen creature is incapable of
reparation; Whence then, or by what way could it possibly come to pass, that
there should be an innate inordination or proneness to evil in us? Such things
cannot be found in an unfallen rational creature, yet doubtless they are found
in us. The Scripture tells us, that we are naturally dark; nay, darkness it
self: That the heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked.
Nay, the very Philosophers spied out this. Hence Tully says, That man was
brought forth into life, not by nature as a Mother, but as a Stepmother; with
a body naked, frail, infirm, with a mind anxious in troubles, low in fears,
soft in labors, prone to lusts. Upon which St. Austin glosses thus, Contr.
Jul. l. 4. cap. 12.
Naturam accusavit, rem vidit, causam nescivit, latebat eum cur esset grave
jugum super filios Adam. He accused nature, the thing he saw, the cause he knew
not, the grievous yoke on the sons of Adam was hid from him. Nay, the very
Socinians, though in the point of Original sin they are more blind and void of
sense than Pagans, confess thus much, Homines ad peccandum sunt natura proni:
Volk. de Rel. l. 1. c. 6.
Men are by nature prone to sin: Nay, it is added, sense and appetite draw
them, as it were, with chains to vice. Thus says one of them, Whence then is
this natural inordination and pravity? Is it from the fall? We are not fallen
creatures. Is it from the Creator? It is impossible. Darkness cannot be from
the Father of lights, nor pravity from the fountain of infinite goodness. Adams
sin not being imputed to us, no tolerable account can be given, how it should
ever come to exist among men. But supposing what is most true, That it is
naturally in us; yet, unless Adams sin be imputatively ours, it is not sin in
us: What though we want knowledge and righteousness? It is not Carentia
justitiae debitae inesse, a want of what ought to be in us; it is not a
privative want, a want of what we once had in Adams righteousness, and
afterward lost in his sin; but it is a mere negative want, a want of that we
never had, nor never forfeited. Adams righteousness being not imputed to us, we
never had it; Adams sin being not imputed to us, we never forfeited it; such a
mere negative want, is no sin. What though there be a pravity and propensity to
all manner of sin in us? It is no sin in unfallen creatures, it is no sin to be
made or created, it is no sin to be born or brought forth; it is no sin, if
there be no cause or foundation of it in us; and there can be no cause or
foundation of it in us, if we no way participate of Adams sin; it may be called
misery, but it is no sin: Hence that saying of St. Austin, Nulla foret hominis
culpa, si talis a Deo creatus esset, qualis nunc nascitur; There would be no
fault in man, if he were created such by God, as he is now born; the pure
primordials of nature cannot be culpable. That man, who is merely what his
Creator made him, is as he ought to be. The result of all is this: Adams sin
not being imputed to us, there can be no such thing as original sin; though
this Doctrine has been maintained in the Church in all ages; yet there is no
such thing, neither is Adams sin imputatively ours; nor yet is the natural
pravity in us any sin. If therefore we will acknowledge original sin, we must
acknowledge that Adams sin is ours by a just Imputation. Thus much touching the
first original thing in sin: Adams sin is imputatively ours.

The other is this, We have an inordination, and inherent pravity in us; this
depends upon the former. All habitual sin, has an essential relation to some
actual sin precedent; no man can can be a sinner habitually, who is totally
free from actual sin. If we had not in some sense sinned in Adams sin, we could
not have been habitually vitiated by it. At first man was an excellent
creature, sparkling with a divine image of knowledge and righteousness; all was
in harmony, the rational powers of the Soul were subordinate to God their
Creator; the sensitive powers were subject to the rational; in every part there
was a just decorum: But upon the fall, which was interpretatively ours, the
Crown fell from our head, the Glory of the Divine Image departed, the Soul
became naked, the very shame of the body told it, that the primitive rectitude
was wanting; darkness fell upon the Mind, the once region of light; bondage and
impotency fell upon the Will, the once seat of power and liberty; all was out
of frame: The rational powers turned rebels to God; the sensitive were all in a
mutiny against the rational. There was in us a pravity, an horrible propensity
to all manner of iniquity; a Belial-heart, such as is evil, and only evil, and
that continually. This pravity runs parallel with our being and humanity; it
overspreads the whole Fabric of our nature, and so adheres to it, that even in
the Saints it is not utterly extinct till the last breath; nor totally cleansed
away, till the Clay-walls of the body fall into the grave. This is the (...),
the conceiving-lust; the womb where all iniquity is formed. This is the Grave
or Sheol in man, which in its unreasonable desires never has enough. This is
that Concupiscence, which, as the Rabbis say, does aedificare inferos, make
and build an Hell for men. Now that there is such an inordination and inherent
pravity in us, does easily appear by the following Considerations.

1. The Scripture does abundantly testify it. Adam begat a son in his own
likeness (after his image), and called his name Seth, Genesis 5.3. Adam was
created in the likeness of God, v. 1; but after his fall he begat a son in his
own likeness. When God created man in his likeness, it was sanctus sanctum, an
Holy God created an holy man: But when Adam begat a son in his likeness, it was
corruptus corruptum, polluted Adam begat a polluted son: and in the Text there
are two words ( likeness and image) to set the greater brand upon corrupt
nature. It is remarkable, that the Text does not here speak of Abel, who dyed
without issue; nor of Cain, all whose progeny was drowned in the flood; but of
Seth, by whom all mankind has hitherto been continued in the world: which
shows that none are exempted from it. God saw that every imagination of the
thoughts of man's heart, was only evil continually, Genesis 6.5: and afterward God
says, that it was so from his youth, Genesis 8.21; according to the original it
is, Every formation or figment of the heart; all that was framed or effigiated
there, is only evil, and that from his youth: Where the Hebrew word used,
reaches in other Scriptures even to infancy. Which shows, that we are
transgressors from the womb. Hence one of the Jewish Rabbis being asked when
the evil imagination was put into man? answered, From the hour that he is
formed. Hence that ancient saying, Ipse ortus in vitio est; Our first rise is
iniquity. Job speaking of man's birth, says, Who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean? not one, Job 14.4. Man; who is of unclean Parents, must needs be
unclean. Nothing but supernatural grace can purify such an one; none but the
Holy One can make us clean. David cries out, Behold I was shapen in iniquity,
and in sin did my mother conceive me; in the Hebrew it is, warm me. Psalm. 51.5,
He confesses that there was iniquity even in primo ardore, in the first warmth
of natural conception: before he was born or saw the light, he was polluted and
unclean. Antequam nascimur, Apol. Dav. cap. 11.
maculamur, says St. Ambrose; Before we are born, we are polluted. Our Savior
speaking of Regeneration, says, That which is born of the flesh, is flesh,
Joh. 3.6. In natural generation there is nothing but flesh or corrupt nature;
the Spirit or Divine nature is from Regeneration only. St. Paul styles this
inward pravity, a body of sin, Romans 6.6. It is a loathsome carcass made up of
vile matter. It is not so much one sin, as virtually all; other sins are parts
and branches of it. The weight and pressure of this body made even St. Paul cry
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death! Romans 7.24. Thus, and much more, does the Scripture bear witness to this
truth.

2. No man, who seriously looks into the frame of his own heart, can want a
proof of this truth. Upon a faithful inspection into himself, a sink of sin, a
Chaos of turpitudes and horrible irregularities will appear to be in him.
Reason was lighted up by God; but it is now as a beam prodigiously cut off from
the fountain of light. Leaving the first Truth, it wanders and loses it self in
a wilderness of Errors. Forgetting its great Original, it gropes in the dark
about the Supreme End, and cannot of it self find the door to true happiness.
It does, and that by a singular privilege above other creatures, know its
Maker; and yet in an unreasonable manner it turns away from him, and seeks an
happiness in the lower World, or at best in it self. It should, like the
Celestial bodies, move circularly; and after a survey of all creatures, return
back to the same point from whence it came, which is the bosom of God himself;
and yet it flies away from him, and makes its nest in one Creature-vanity or
other. It has a natural and indelible instinct after happiness, and
perpetually cries out, Who will show us any good? And yet it is not able so
much as by a holy thought to aspire after the great Blessedness set forth
before it in the Gospel. Heavy things descend by a right line to their center:
Brutes hasten to those things which are congruous and convenient to their
natures: Only Man, though endowed far above these with Reason and Liberty,
falls short, and misses the mark. Pure Precepts, excellent Promises, heavenly
Mysteries, are set before him in the Gospel, yet without a supernatural
illumination, he cannot perceive or receive them; at most he sees them only in
the image or picture of the Letter, but not in their liveliness and spiritual
glory: a form or shell of knowledge he may have, but he does not taste or savor
the sweetness of them. And all this because his Reason, though active enough in
naturals, is in spirituals but as an eye without an optic faculty, dark, nay
darkness it self. The Will, though its proper object be good, turns away from
God, who is Goodness it self, and seeks its chief good somewhere else. It opens
it self in a free choice to every vanity that passes by; yet is it shut to God
and all the offers of grace; forsaking God the Fountain of Liberty, it becomes
an arrant Slave and Drudg to sin; and, which is wonderfully prodigious, it is
in love with its chains, and loath to be made free indeed. All the goodness in
God, Christ, Heaven, Blessedness, outwardly proposed, move it not to stir a
foot toward such attracting objects; still it hangs in vanity, and lies upon
the dunghill of the world, and rowls it self in the mire of one lust or other.
It has an enmity against God, who made it free; it would be above his Will who
is Supreme: rather than its inordinate lusts should be restrained, it would
have God cease to be. There is in every man, De Civit. l. 14. cap. 28.
as St. Austin speaks, Amor sui usque ad contemptum Dei, a love of himself,
even to the contempt of God. The Affections are all vain, earthly, carnal,
mutinous against reason; insomuch, that they by an unnatural violence depose
it, and so unman the man: Hence he becomes as the beasts that perish. The
Reason says, this or that is good; but the Affections repugn and resist. The
Soul is paralytick, Reason moves to the right hand, Affection to the left, and
carries all before it: Hence that saying, Video meliora proboque, deteriora
sequor. The Affections, which primitively were servants to Reason, are now upon
the Throne. Reason, though once a Royal Prince, is dethroned and become
servile. That which is the glory of our nature, and proves us to be men, that
is hurried up and down by the rude rabble of lusts and malapert passions. This
being the natural frame and temper of man, let us sit down and consider; Was it
thus from the beginning? Was humane nature such in the first impression? Did
God put his Reason under a Cloud, or his Will into chains and servitude? Was it
from God, that the one turns away from the first truth, and the other from the
chief good? Did God put into man an instinct after happiness in vain, or
inspire into him an immortal spirit, that it might creep upon the earth, and
pour out it self to every vanity? Did God create man at variance with himself,
and at first, set up that unnatural intestine war, which is between the
rational and sensitive powers? Was it his pleasure, that the inferior faculties
in man should contumaciously reluct against the superior; or that the superior
should basely serve the inferior? Without doubt it cannot be. God is light,
purity, Wisdom it self; these things are darkness, corruption, ataxy, and
cannot be from him. No other account can be given of them but this; That they
are the bruises of the fall, the wounds of corrupt nature.

3. No man, who looks abroad into the World, can with any color oppose this
truth. The millions of actual sins, which as a mighty deluge overspread the
world, are as so many pregnant proofs of that original pravity which is in us.
In the old world all flesh had corrupted its way, Genesis 6.12. Afterward, all
nations walked in their own ways, Acts 14.16. That is, in sinful ones: sin is
the course of the world, Ephesians. 2.2. It is the element and proper ubi of it;
the whole world lies in it, 1 John 5.19. And whence is it, that sin is so
universal, that iniquity abounds in all times and places? Our Savior opens the
bloody fountain of it, Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false-witness, blasphemies, Matt. 15.19. All
these black troops of wickedness, issue out from the corrupt heart of man; the
inherent pravity which is there, is seminally all the monsters of vice. The
Apostle Paul proving all under sin, does thus describe the corrupt estate of
men; There is none righteous, no not one. There is none that understands,
none that seeks after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are
together become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Their
throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit, the
poison of asps is under their lips: Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness: Their feet are swift to shed blood: Destruction and misery are in
their ways: The way of peace have they not known: There is no fear of God
before their eyes, Romans 3. Here the Apostle paints out corrupt nature; not that
all men actually do these things, but that there is in every one, even from
their infancy, a (...), an universal seminary of iniquity, a venomous root of
all actual sins. In this respect, the description appertains to all, even to
little infants; and the scope of the Text requires, that it should be so
interpreted: for before this description, the Apostle tells us, that all are
under sin, verse. 9; and after it, that every mouth is stopped, that all the
world is guilty before God; that by the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be
justified in his sight, verse. 19, 20: and afterward, that all have sinned, and
come short of the glory of God, verse. 23. If the description did not reach all
men, his conclusions drawn from thence would not hold; the description might
extend to some, yet others, at least little Infants, might not be sinners or
guilty; and consequently might be justified by the Law, as having nothing
against them. The Apostle therefore here, by the actual sins of some, proves
original sin in all; and upon that account proves all to be guilty, under sin,
and unjustifiable by the Law; because all have that inherent pravity, which is
the root of actual sins. St. James tells us, That every man is tempted, when he
is drawn away of his own lust and enticed, Jam. 1.14. Lust or original
concupiscence, is the great tempter; it does not only entice as an object, but
by a kind of impetus and importunity, it draws us away from God the infinite
goodness, to one creature-vanity or other; by its motions and titillations it
wooes for a consent, and afterward it brings forth the outward act of sin. The
world tempts outwardly, but this is domesticus hostis, a traitor within in our
own bosom; it tempts not objectively only, but effectively, really inclining us
to sin: it is a perpetual tempter, Resist the Devil and he will fly from you,
Jam. 4.7, but make never so great a resistance against this lust, it will not
in this life fly from you, neither can you fly from it. This is that which
conceives and brings forth all the actual sins in the world: Nay, it is that
which distills sinfulness into the best actions of Saints; all the crying
abominations in the world, and all the defects in the Church are the progeny of
it. This is the root of all bitterness, the fomes peccati, the nest and womb of
all actual sins.

It may be thought perhaps that all this discourse is besides the intended
scope, original sin was not exemplified in Christ: But I answer, It was not
indeed exemplified in him, but the Doctrine of it may be undeniably drawn from
him. To this end I shall offer these particulars.

1. The conception of Christ is very considerable. He was conceived in the
Virgins womb, not in the ordinary way of nature; not by the conjunction of man
and woman, but in a Divine and extraordinary manner; in a way above all the
power and law of nature. Hence the Angel tells the Virgin Mary, The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee, Luke
1.35. Hence it is said, that she was found with child of the Holy Ghost, Matt.
1.18. That is, the body of Christ was formed by the infinite power and virtue,
though not out of the substance of the Holy Spirit. The substance of Christ's
flesh was taken out of the Virgin, and like unto ours; but the structure and
manner of framing of it, was infinitely surmounting that of ours. Hence his
flesh is said, to be a tabernacle not made with hands, not of this building,
Heb. 9.11. It was not set up in the natural way of generation, but in a
miraculous supernatural manner; and why was it thus, but that his humane nature
might, as St. Luke speaks, be an holy thing, pure from the least tincture of
sin? All men, who come from Adam in a natural way, contract guilt and pravity
in their original; but his flesh was formed out of the substance of a Virgin in
a miraculous and extraordinary manner, that so he, though like to us in all
things, might not be like to us in sin; that he might partake of our flesh and
blood in a pure and unspotted way: here we see, purity was his prerogative, the
common lot of our nature is corruption. It Is true, the Pelagians are not afraid
to assert, That Christ was free from all contagion of sin; Aust. ad Bon. l. 4.
c. 2.
Non excellentia propria and gratia singulari, sed communione naturae, quae
omnibus inest infantibus; Not by any proper excellency and singular grace; but
by a communion of that nature which is in all Infants. But this is in effect to
say, that the coming of the Holy Ghost upon the Virgin, the overshadowing her
by the power of the Highest, were superfluous and vain; all might have been as
well in an ordinary way: this is to rob Christ of his prerogative, to bring
down the Savior to the common level of the saved, which can never indeed come
to pass. There is a great difference between Christ and us in this point; our
bodies are formed in the ordinary course of nature, but his was formed in an
extraordinary supernatural way. We were in Adam, secundum rationem seminalem;
We descended from the seminal virtue in him. But he was in Adam only secundum
substantiam corporalem; He took the materials of a body from the Virgin; but
the modus conceptionis, the manner of framing of it, was supernatural. We come
forth into the world by that common benediction, Increase and multiply; but he
came into the flesh by that singular promise, The seed of the woman shall break
the Serpents head. We see here a plain difference. Hence it appears, that
purity was a singular privilege in Christ's birth; and pollution is the common
lot of ours.

2. The capacity Christ stood in is to be noted. He was set up to be a common
head of righteousness and life; and that tells us, that before him there was
another, who by his fall was a common head of sin and death. Famous is that
place, Romans 5, If by one man's offense death reigned by one; much more they
which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign
in life by one Jesus Christ. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all
men to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon
all men to justification of life. As by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. We see here
two heads, Adam and Christ, both are set before us, the one cannot be well
known without the other; the Pagans know neither, Christians must confess both.
If they say, Christ is an head communicating righteousness and immortality to
us; they must also say, Adam was an head communicating sin and death to us;
else the Apostles Parallel is vain and frivolous, in that Christ, who obeyed in
a public capacity, is opposed to Adam, who sinned only in a private one. Both
these heads must be admitted, or neither; if both, then there is sin from Adam,
as well as righteousness from Christ. Epist. 190.
Thus St. Bernard says, Alius qui peccatorem constituit, alius qui justificat
a peccato, alter in semine, alter in sanguine; One Adam makes us sinners,
another makes us righteous; the one by his seed, the other by his blood: if
neither, then the obedience of Christ is made fruitless and to no purpose.
Hence St. Austin says, De Not. and Great. c. 6. and 7.
That the Doctrine of Original sin must be defended against the Pelagians, Ne
evacuetur crux Christi, lest the Cross of Christ be made of no effect:
According to the tenor of that place, one head cannot stand without the other.
If Adam derive not sin to us, neither does Christ derive righteousness; both
must be only patterns; neither, communicative heads; which to say, is utterly
to overturn the scope of the place.

3. Our Savior Christ instituted Baptism, and that for Infants; but if there
be no Original pollution in them, What need a washing-ordinance for them? The
washing of their bodies, whose pure, innocent, undefiled Souls are incapable of
spiritual washing, is but a shadow without substance, a Sacrament without
internal grace, a thing too insignificant for Christ the Wisdom of God to
institute. Hence when the Pelagians on the one hand granted the Baptism of
Infants, and on the other denied Original sin; Contr. Jul. l. 3. c. 3.
St. Austin says, that they spoke wonderful things. In Sacramento Salvatoris
baptizantur, sed non salvantur, redimuntur sed non liberantur, lavantur sed non
abluuntur; In our Saviors Sacrament Infants are baptized, but not saved;
redeemed, but not delivered; washed, but not cleansed. And a little after he
asks, If they are saved, what was their sickness? If delivered, what their
servitude? If cleansed, what their pollution? Take away the Doctrine of
Original sin, and the Baptism of Infants seems to be a very ridiculous thing.
To avoid this absurdity, the Pelagians asserted, Aust. de Pecc. Orig. l. 2. c.
5.
That the Baptism of Infants was necessary, not because there was any Original
sin in them; but that they might be capable of the Kingdom of Heaven. But I
answer, Where there is no defect, there is all due perfection. If Infants are
pure and free from all sin, then have they all the righteousness and rectitude
which ought to be in them; and if they have so, they are, without Baptism,
capable of Heaven; or if they were not, the baptismal-washing, which imports
pollution, seems to be a ceremony very unfit and incongruous to be applied to
them who are without spot, or to render them apt for Heaven.

4. In and about the death of Christ, two things are considerable; The one is
the horrible wickedness of the Jews in crucifying him: The other is, The
infinite merit which is in his death and sacrifice. Both will manifest the
Doctrine of Original sin.

First, The horrible wickedness of the Jews in crucifying him will do it. The
rottenness of the root shows it self in the branches; the malignity of Original
sin appears in actual ones, especially in those which are of a deeper stain
than others are. It was the aggravation of Solomon's sin, that his heart was
turned from the Lord, who had appeared to him twice, 1 King. 11.9. The more
eminently God appears to us, the more aggravated are our actual sins against
him; and the more aggravated those are, the more vile and venomous does the
inward root of them appear to be. When God appears to us in Reason, which is a
beam from him more precious than a world, it speaks desperate corruption in
men, that the brutal part should usurp and rule over it; that the vile sensual
lusts should tread down that Divine spark, and, as it were, annihilate it, that
nothing of God might have place in the heart. When God further appeared in the
Law and the Prophets, to raise up a purer knowledge of himself than was to be
found in Reason, as it lay in the dust and rubbish of the fall, it argues a
greater pravity and malignity in men, that they should murder his Prophets, and
trample his Sacred Laws, the images of his holy Will, under their impure feet;
this was in effect, as much as in them lay, to explode God out of his own
world, and practically to say, that he should not reign there. When God yet
more eminently appeared, when he sent his own Son, very God of God, to be
manifest in the flesh; whose glory broke forth most illustriously in excellent
Doctrines and Miracles; whose whole life among men was nothing but innocence,
purity, mercy, meekness, goodness, humility, love, zeal, heavenliness,
holiness, obedience, and all manner of virtue, in spotless perfection; one
might have thought that men would have reverenced the Son; that the
indwelling-corruption, however it had rioted under other manifestations, would
here have made a pause, and stood as one astonished and overawed at so
stupendous an appearance, infinitely transcending all other: For what is the
little spark of Reason, to the brightness of Gods glory? Or the Law in the
letter, to incarnate Sanctity and Holiness? Or what are all the Prophets to him
who came out of the Fathers bosom, and brought down supernatural Mysteries into
the world? Here it might have been expected, that Iniquity should have stopped
her mouth, and held her hands; that the Divine Majesty of this appearance
should have made Corruption to retire, and hide it self in the secret of the
heart. But alas, the event was quite contrary; Original Corruption here did its
utmost, and showed forth all its malignity; the wicked Jews cried out, This is
the heir, come let us kill him: They reviled, raged, blasphemed, persecuted,
apprehended, accused, condemned, buffeted, and at last crucified the Lord of
Glory. Oh matchless wickedness! never did Original sin so fully discover it
self, never did the Hell in the Belial-heart so desperately break forth as
here. We see here our Corruption in its true colors and malignity; it is the
root and fountain of the highest impieties; Antichrist-like, it opposes all
that is called God; it would have nothing of God remain; it would trample down
every appearance of him, not in Reason or Laws only, but in his own Son, in God
incarnate; and, were it possible, it would even crucify and annihilate the
Deity it self: rather than part with its dear lusts, it would have God cease to
be.

The next thing considerable, is the infinite Merit in Christ's death: it
procured two things for us, Regeneration and Salvation. First, It procured
Regeneration for us: This is a most precious thing, it new-frames and
new-moulds us; it produces a new spiritual being; it draws the Divine image and
likeness upon the heart; it sets the soul into an holy order and rectitude; and
whence is it but from the Spirit? Or how is that procured, but by Christ and
his sweet smelling Sacrifice? The Apostle tells us, That the Holy Ghost which
renews us, is shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.5,
6. Through him it is that the Holy Spirit comes down and effects this excellent
work in us. Again, it procured Salvation for us. That we are saved from our
spiritual enemies, that we are at last crowned with lifeeternal, it is from
Jesus Christ alone. Hence the Apostle calls him the author of eternal
salvation, Heb. 5.9; not the Minister, but the Author of it, meritoriously
procuring, and efficaciously giving it to his people. But now if there be no
such thing as Original sin, much of the precious purchase of Christ must be
lost; he purchased Regeneration, but there being no Original sin, where or in
whom will it be necessary? What, in Infants? In those pure innocent souls there
is nothing to be healed, nothing to be mended or newmade; where there is no
ataxy of sin, there all is in order and harmony; where there is no turpitude of
sin, there all is in splendour and glory: here is no need at all of Regeneration.
Hence, as St. Austin observes, Aust. de Pec. Or. l. 2. c. 29.
the Pelagians denying Original sin, were under a necessity to say, That
Infants did not indigere medico, want the Physician Jesus: and upon this that
excellent Father passes this censure, That therein they erred not in some light
matter, but in ipsa regula fidei, in the very Rule of Faith by which we are
Christians. Or what, in the Adult? I answer, They which are without Original
sin, may live without Actual: therefore the Pelagians, who denied Original sin,
held, very consonantly to their Principles, That men might live without sin.
Thus they argued: Jer. Dial. adu. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2.
He that can abstain one day from sin, may abstain two days, three days, thirty
days, three hundred days, nay for ever. And again, Si necessitatis est,
peccatum non est; Aust. de perfect. just.
si^ voluntatis est, vitari potest: If the thing be of necessity, it is no sin;
if of will, it may be avoided. Take away Original sin, their arguments must
hold good: Adam, while totally void of sin, might have kept himself so: Why may
not all others, if void of Original sin, do so? Having no inward corruption to
entice or draw them away unto sin, they may live without it. Here again there
is no need of Regeneration. To go on a little further: Suppose a man do fall
into one act of sin; yet one act of sin, if we believe the Pelagians and
Socinians, Aust. ad Bon. l. 1. c. 1. Cat. Rac. c. 10. Volk. de Ver. Rel. l 5.
c. 18.
cannot corrupt the human nature or Will; the man may rise again by his own
Will, and all will be well again. As yet there is no need of Regeneration. Nay,
suppose a man to fall into an habit or custom of sin, in some degree, yet why
may not the Will, that noble Principle of freedom, extricate it self? The
Corruption is not seated in nature, but in a contracted habit; why may not the
Will by contrary acts unravel that habit, and rid it self of it? And that habit
or inclination being gone, what need would there be of Regeneration? An outward
Reformation may be necessary, but what need of Regeneration? That in Scripture
is the renovation of a man originally corrupted: Hence our Savior pressing the
necessity of Regeneration, does not urge it from the actual sins of men, but
from their natural pravity: That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, Joh.
3.6: that is, those who have only a carnal generation, and so are originally
corrupt, are corrupt; therefore they stand in need of Regeneration, or the
participation of a new spiritual nature. But if there be no such thing as
Original corruption, then according to our Savior's argument, which presses it
from thence, there is no need at all of Regeneration. Accordingly it may be
observed, that those men who deny Original sin, do extremely fumble and slubber
over that great point of Regeneration, for the most part confounding inward
Principles with outward Actions. De Ver. Relig. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Regenerari ad vitae mores and actiones referendum est, says Volkelius:
Regeneration is to be referred to the manner and actions of the life. De
Servat. pars 4. cap. 6.
Ex Christo nasci nihil aliud est quam ejus spiritus participemesse, Christi
autem spiritus voluntatis divinae obedientia est, says Socinus: To be born of
Christ, is nothing else but to be partakers of his Spirit; and his Spirit is
obedience to the Divine Will. All is placed in outward actions; nothing is said
of those internal Principles of Grace which are the proper effect of
Regeneration; and the Reason of this is, because denying Original sin, they
know no other Regeneration, but outward Reformation only. Much after the same
rate speak some other Divines, who, not in express terms denying Original sin,
do yet lessen and diminish it; their discourses of Regeneration proportionable
to their Principles, have but little savor or spiritual relish in them: upon
the whole matter, we see that there is little need of Regeneration. Again,
Christ purchased Salvation, but there being no such thing as Original sin, Who
shall be saved by him? Shall infants be saved by him? Indeed, of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven, but what are they saved from? Is it from sin? There is no
spot in them; Christ came in the likeness of sinful flesh, they do no more;
they have no real flesh of corruption in them. Is it from wrath? There can be
none due to sinless creatures. Is it from Satan? He may come and find nothing
in them, nothing belonging to his black Kingdom. Is it from the world? They are
not yet mentally, morally entered into it, so as as to be capable of falling
into the snares of it; there is therefore nothing at all for infants to be
saved from. Hence the Fathers in the Council of Carthage do in their Epistle to
Pope Non est quod in eis salvetur, vel tanto pretio redimatur, nihil est in eis
vitiatum, nihil sub diaboli potestate captivum, nec pro eis fusus est sanguis
in remissionem peccatorum. Crab. Conc. Tom. 1. fo. 470.
Innocent tell us, That according to the Pelagians, there is nothing in Infants
to be saved or redeemed; nothing vitiated or held under the power of the Devil;
neither was blood shed for their remission. Hence St. Qui dicit, infantilem
aetatem non habere quod salvet Jesus, omnibus fidelibus infantibus Christum
negat esse Jesum, Jesus quid est? interpretatur Jesus salvator, salvator est
Jesus; quos non salvat, non habendo in eis quod salvet, non est illis Jesus.
Aust. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 8.
Austin argues thus, He that says, that Infants have nothing to be saved from,
denies Christ to be a Jesus to them. What is Jesus? Jesus is by interpretation
a Savior, a Savior is Jesus; those whom he does not save, because they have
nothing to be saved from, he is not to them a Jesus. Thus we see, that there
being no Original sin, Infants (which what Christian heart can bear?) are not
saved by Christ. Shall the adult be saved by him? As I noted before, they who
are without Original sin, may live without actual; and so, being void of all
sin, are incapable of being saved, because they have no sin to be saved from.
It was the opinion of Prosper Con^a Collat.
Cassianus, That Christ was, aliorum salvator, aliorum susceptor, the Savior
of some, the Susceptor of others; the first were drawn in by Grace, the second
prevented Grace. This made Prosper say, Huic sententiae is potest praebere
consensum, qui se a Christo non vult esse salvatum. He may consent to this
opinion, who would not be saved by Christ. Cassianus denied Original sin; he
thought, that in the first sin Adam only sinned, that the Will in us is as free
to good, as it was in Adam before the fall; and hence he held, That the Church
was parti-colored, part of it was justified by Grace, part by Freewill. These
latter, whom nature advanced, were more glorious than those whom grace freed:
These latter were incapable of being saved, because they had nothing to be
saved from. Hence it follows, That Christ is not the Savior of all his body,
but of part of it; that he saves not all his people from their sins, but some.
We see clearly by these things, that if Original sin be denied, much of Christ's
purchase will be made fruitless and of no effect. As therefore we would have a
part in Christ and his purchase, we must confess our selves to be pieces of old
Adam, and to have a share in his sin.

It being certain, That there is corruption in us, we should reflect and take
notice of it. This is that which depraves the whole man, and turns him into a
man of sin: every faculty groans under the burden of it, every part has its
wounds and putrefying sores. The Understanding, a spark of immortality, is
dropped out of its orb, fallen from the first truth and fountain of light;
darkness covers it, a black vail holds back its eyes from the glories and
beauties of the spiritual world. The Thoughts, which are the firstborn of the
mind, are vain empty things, like the Fools eyes in the ends of the earth,
garish and running up and down from one thing to another, having no more
dependence than is in the broken words or speeches of distracted men; like
Quicksilver never fixed, unless it be upon trifles or sinful objects. The Will,
the principle of liberty, turns away from the supreme good; as a slave it lies
in the chains of lust, impotent, and in it self unable to lift up a choice or
option toward happiness: its averseness to that good which would ennoble and
beautify it, reproaches it with the fall; its propensity to that evil, which
soils and deturpates it, upbraids it as an apostate from its original. The
Affections have lost their wings, and sink down to the lower world as their
center; there they lie in the mire and turpitude of inordinate lusts, and
without the elevations of Grace they cannot raise up so much as a desire
toward the things above: they are Apostates from Heaven, and Rebels against
that Reason which came down from thence to reign over them. The Members of the
Body, are all instruments of iniquity, ready to execute all the commands of
sin; the whole man is overspread with an universal contagion. This is the root
of bitterness, the seed of all manner of impieties. Every one does not actually
say with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord? Nor with the bloody Jew, Crucify the Son of
God; nor like the proud Antichrist, exalt himself above God: but all these are
seminally in us, there is aliquid intus, somewhat in every ones heart answering
thereunto. There is that in us, which would trample down every appearance of
God in Reason, sacred Laws, holy Motions, offers of Grace; nay, and that which,
if it were possible, would annihilate God himself. This is an abyss of all
evil, this is a black chaos which has all manner of iniquities in it; and upon
the warmth of temptation, will be ready to bring them forth into act. Oh! What
matter of lamentation is here? How should we mourn over this innate corruption?
Is it nothing to us to have immortal spirits void of God and all spiritual
perfections? Nothing, to have a Reason without light, a Will without liberty?
Nothing, to have a troubled sea of inordinate passions, and innumerable lusts
creaking there? Nothing, to carry an Hell in our own bosom, to have an enmity
against that good, which, if received, would perfect and make us happy; and a
proneness to that evil, which, being embraced, will corrupt and make us
miserable for ever? May we here spare our tears? Or can we do less than fill
our selves with shame and self-abhorrency? Paulinus would not let his Picture
be drawn, because of the in-dwelling sin. Erubesco pingere quod sum, said he; I
blush to paint what I am. St. Paul cries out, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death! Romans 7.24. How sadly should we
look upon that forlorn spectacle, I mean our corrupt selves! How should we
loathe our selves, and lie low at Gods feet, if peradventure he may give us a
better nature! Of what vast concern is it to wait upon God in Ordinances, and
by ardent devotions to press into Heaven, that there may be a new creation in
us! And when that great work is wrought in us, How should we lift up
free grace, and sing Hosanna's to it for ever! How often should we have that in
our mouths, What has God wrought! We marred the first Creation, and he has
set up a second. We lay in the ruins of the fall, and he came down thither to
rear up his own image in us again. Graces are now growing there, where sin had
its seat; the Holy Spirit now inhabits there, where Satan dwelt and reigned:
And what an excellent change is this! Let us distinguish our selves according
to the two Adams. Whatever is vicious or defective in us, relates to the first
Adam; whatever is gracious or perfective of our nature, relates to the second.
Never can we be too humble under the sense of Original corruption which adheres
to our nature. Never can we be too thankful for that supernatural grace which
gave us a new nature. Because we have a Divine nature in us, we should live
sutably to it. Had we had but one single creation, we had been eternally bound
to serve and glorify God; but when he sets to his hand the second time, to
create us again in Christ Jesus unto good works, how should our lives answer
thereunto! When in the horrible Earthquake at Antioch the Emperor Trajanus was
drawn out of the ruins, it was a very great obligation upon him to serve and
honor God who so signally delivered him; how much greater obligation lies upon
us, who are drawn by an act of grace out of the ruins of the fall? How should
we live in a just decorum to that Divine nature which we are made partakers of!
We should still be bringing forth the fruits of the Spirit, and showing forth
the praises of him who has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light.
Again, because the relics of corruption are still remaining even in the
regenerate, we should ever be upon our spiritual watch; we should set guards
within and without, that sin may not creep in by the ports of sense, nor rise
up out of the deep of the heart. When a temptation approaches to us, we should
say as an holy man did, Auferte ignem, adhuc enim paleas habeo; Take away the
fire, yet I have chaff within. If a Jonah fall into a pet against God; if a
David wallow in adultery and blood; if a Peter deny his Lord with a curse, What
may not we do! The remnants of Original sin in us, should make us keep a watch
over our hearts, and ponder the path of our feet. Our flesh is an Eve, a
Tempter within us; nay, a kind of Devil, as an Ancient speaks, Nemo sibi de suo
palpet, quisque sibi Satan est.

CHAP. X.


HAVING spoken of Original Sin, I shall next consider of Grace, which heals
that deadly wound. Grace, in the primary notion of it, is the Love and
Good Will of God toward sinners; and in a secondary sense, it is those
saving-gifts which are derived from that Love. These are called Graces, because
they lie in man's heart, as beams of that eternal Grace which is in Gods; and
tend to that Glory in Heaven which is Grace consummate. Gods will goes
foremost, and works those Graces in man's, which make him meet for eternal
happiness. The fountain of Grace is the free-love of God; the streams of it are
supernatural gifts in men; the center of it is the glory of Heaven. These
things show us the true notion of Grace.

1. The Fountain of Grace is Gods free Love, which moves it self, and
gratuitously flows out in spiritual blessings; these issue out of love, and
that is a motive to it self. Emphatical is that of the Apostle, If by grace,
then it is no more of works; otherwise grace is no more grace: but if it be of
works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no more work, Romans 11.6. It
is essential to Grace to be gratuitous; unless it be so, it loses its nature.
Upon this account Pelagius, that Enemy of Grace, but for his counterfeit
Recantation, had had in the Palestine Council a just Anathema for that saying,
Gratiam dari secundum merita, That Grace was given according to merits or
works. Aust. Hyp. l. 3.
When the Pelagians said, Quia ego prior volui, Deus voluit, Because I first
willed, therefore God willed; Saint Austin tells them, That they brought in
Merit, that Grace was then no longer Grace: In omni opere sancto, says he,
prior est voluntas Dei, posterior liberi arbitrii; In every holy work Gods will
is first in order, Si vel tantillum boni a Deo non est, jam non omnis boni
essector est. eoque nec Deus. Bucer.
and then man's. Without this order, Grace cannot be Grace, nor God God. If he
be not the Fountain of all good, if the least good start up and anticipate his
will, he is not, as becomes him, the origin of all good. The Fountain of Grace
must therefore be in his Love.

2. The streams of it are Supernatural Gifts. It Is true, natural benefits are
in some sense grace; but this is not the noted acception of the word in
Scripture. This acception was but Pallium Pelagianorum, the Pelagians cloak
under which they hid their Heresy. Hence, Aust. Epist. 105.
when that question was asked, What that Grace was which Pelagians thought was
given without any precedent merits? Answer was made, That it was the humane
nature, in which we were made; for before we were, we could not merit a being.
Thus they confounded Grace and Nature together; but the gifts of Grace are
above the sphere of Nature, and altogether undue to it. Indeed in Innocence
righteousness was natural to man, not that it was a principle of Nature, or an
emanation from thence; but that it was necessary and due to that Integrity,
which God would set up the human nature in. God would make man very good, and
how that could be without righteousness, I know not. Moral goodness, is that
which is proper to a reasonable creature; neither can it be wanting, but there
will be a maim in the creature. There was in man an Union of rational powers,
in which he had communion with Angels; and sensitive, in which he had communion
with Beasts. This Union could not be made in a perfect orderly manner, unless
the sensitive powers, being the more ignoble, were subjected to the rational,
being the more excellent faculties; that subjection could not be without a
righteousness. This is the rectitude and harmony of humane nature: without it
all the parts and powers of the Soul must needs jangle into confusion. God
would have man to serve and obey him in a perfect manner; And how could this be
without a principle of holy love? Which way should there be actual
righteousness without original? Without an internal rectitude, man could not
love God, as he ought, amore amicitiae, with a love of friendship, for his own
sake; and without such a love, referring all to God and his glory, all man's
acts, a primo ad ultimum, must needs be sin. God would set before a man a most
glorious end, the happiness of the beatifical vision: And how should man ever
arrive at it without righteousness? Or want that righteousness which qualifies
for it? Such a want would set him below the most contemptible creatures; none
of which are destitute of that furniture, which is requisite for the reaching
of their ends. In all these respects, righteousness was natural, and in a sort
due unto man in Innocence. But after man's fall and forfeiture of Original
righteousness, saving gifts are altogether supernatural; not only as being
above the power of nature, but as being totally undue to it. To the state of
Innocence, righteousness was in a sense due; but to the state of Corruption,
there was nothing due but wrath.

3. The center of it is the Glory of Heaven; Grace prepares a Kingdom for
Believers. Hence God bids them, come and inherit the Kingdom prepared for them
from the foundation of the World, Matt. 25.34; it prepares them for the
Kingdom. Hence that of the Apostle, Giving thanks to the father, who has made
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light, Col. 1.12.
The first rise of Grace, is in the bosom of eternal love; the appearance of it
in men, is in supernatural gifts: the period and center of it, is in the Glory
of Heaven.

Two things in this point of Grace offer themselves to our consideration; the
freeness of Grace, and the Divine efficacy of it.

First, The freeness of Grace is to be considered, and that in two or three
particulars.

1. It is of Free Grace, that all mankind does not eternally perish in the
ruins of the fall: That there is a possibility of Salvation for any one Son of
Adam. When the Angels sinned but one sin, God turned them down into chains of
darkness for ever: Might he not in justice have dealt so with fallen men? He
was not bound to repair the Angels, those golden Vessels, once inmates of
Heaven; and who can, who dares conceive such a thought, That he was bound to
repair men who are but Images of clay, dwelling in the lower World? I know many
differences are assigned, Man sinned by seduction, Devils by self-motion; in
the fall of Man, all the human nature fell; in the fall of Angels, all the
Angelical nature fell not. The sin of Angels was more damnable than Man's,
because their nature was more sublime than his. Men are capable of repentance,
but Devils not; because whatever they once choose, they do will immovably. But
alas! all these are but extra-Scriptural conjectures. Man, though tempted, was
voluntary in the transgression; all men were involved in the fall, but that is
no apology for the sin: The sin of Man, if not so high as that of Angels, was
yet a damnable one. It is a vain dream, to suppose, that Almighty Grace could
not have wrought a gracious change in Devils. That which differences us from
them, is, as the Scripture tells us, no other, than the mere Grace and
Philanthropy of God toward us; he might justly have left us under that wrath,
which our apostasy deserved. Two things will make this evident.

1. Original sin, which reaches to all, is properly sin; and, being such,
merits no less than eternal death. We all sinned in Adams sin, by that one man,
sin entered into the world: The disobedience of that one, constituted all
sinners; which unless it had been imputatively theirs, it could never have
done. The want of Original righteousness is properly sin. because it is the
want of that which ought to be in us; it ought to be in us, because the pure
spiritual Law calls for an holy frame of heart: it ought to be in us, or else
we are not fallen creatures, but are as we ought to be: If it ought to be in
us, then the want of it is properly sin. The Apostle proving that all are
sinners, and short of the Glory of God, tells us, That there is none righteous,
no not one; none that understands, none that seeks after God. They are all
gone out of the way. They are together become unprofitable. There is no fear of
God before their eyes, Romans 3. Which words denote a want of that habitual
righteousness which ought to be in all, even in little Infants: That want is
sin, else the Apostle could not from thence conclude, That all, Infants not
excepted, have sinned and come short of the glory of God. To want habitual
righteousness, which ought to be in us, is to be sinners, and short of our
original. That original concupiscence, which is in all, is properly sin; it is
over and over called sin in Scripture, it is the root and black fountain of all
impiety, it is opposite to the Law and Spirit of God, it impels to all sin, it
fights against all graces, and particularly against that of love to God: where
the creature is inordinately loved, there God is not loved with all the heart
and Soul. These things make it appear, That Original sin is properly sin; and
if so, it merits no less than death eternal. The Scripture abundantly
testifies this, The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. In which we have a double
Antithesis, Wages is opposed to Gift; and eternal Death to eternal Life. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, Romans 5.12: Not mere
infelicity, but sin entered; not mere temporal death, but eternal followed upon
it. Hence the Apostle tells us, That there was (...), judgment unto
condemnation, and that upon all men, verse. 16, and 18. We are by nature
children of wrath, even as others, Ephesians. 2.3. He does not say, by practice or
custom; but by nature, we are Children of wrath, that is, worthy of it. Nature,
as corrupted, is here opposed to Grace; which, as the Text after speaks, saves
us: wrath appertains to nature, salvation to grace. This one Text is as a
stroke of Lightning, Hoc uno verbo, quasi fulmine, totus homo, quantus quantus
est, prosternitur: Bez. in Loc.
to lay all men flat and prostrate before God: even little Infants, being
unclean in themselves, cannot, if unregenerate, stand at Gods right hand, and
enter into the holy Heavens; they must therefore stand at his left, and go into
darkness. Hence St. Austin Finge Pelagiane locum, ex officina perversi
dogina^is tui, ubi alieni a Christi gratia vitam requiei and gloriae possidere
parvuli possint. Aust. Hyp. l. 5.
tells the Pelagians, who denied Original sin, That they must forge out of
their Shop of Heresy, a middle place for such Infants, as are Aliens from the
Grace of Christ: If Infants are unregenerate, they cannot enter Heaven the
place of bliss. If, as the Pelagians say, they are free from sin, they cannot
go to Hell the place of misery. Tertium ignoramus, A third place I know not,
nor can find any such in Scripture: They are therefore subject to eternal death
for their Original sin. The sum of this Argument we have in Anselm, Si
originale peccatum sit aliquod peccatum, De conc. Virg. cap. 27.
necesse est omnem in eo natum, in illo non dimisso damnari. If Original sin be
sin, it is necessary, that every one born in it, should be condemned for it,
unless it be pardoned; it being impossible, that any one should be saved, so
much as with one unremitted sin. If Original sin be indeed sin, and do merit
death eternal, then God may justly inflict that death for it, seeing he cannot
be unjust in doing an act of justice, in inflicting that punishment, which is
due to sin.

2. As on Man's part there is a merit of eternal death; so on Gods, the mission
of Christ to save us was an act of mere Grace. This is set forth in Scripture,
God commended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ
died for us, Romans 5.8. In this was manifested the love of God toward us,
because he sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live
through him, 1 John 4.9. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life, Joh. 3.16. We see here, the sending of a Savior was an act of mere
Grace; and Grace, being surely free and self-moving, might have suspended its
own act; and that suspension, had it been, would have left all men in the
ruins of the fall, and that without any color of injustice at all in God.
There is a vast difference between mercy in Man, and mercy in God; Man shows it
ex officio, out of duty, and in every failure he is unmerciful: but God shows
it, ex arbitrio, out of Sovereignty, in such sort as he pleases; and to do more
he is not obliged. Hence Gods Purpose and Grace are joined together, 2 Timothy
1.9. His Mercy, though an infinite Ocean, lets not out a drop toward fallen
creatures, but according to his good pleasure: If God antecedently to his own
decree and promise, was bound to send his Son to seek and to save that which
was lost; then the sending of him, was not an act of grace, but of justice and
necessity: it must, it ought to be so; the Grace and Love revealed in the
Gospel, is a mere nullity, a thing no way free or gratuitous: but if, as the
truth is, God were not bound to send a Savior, then he might have suspended
his own act, and left all mankind in the ruins of the fall.

No man who believes these two things, viz. That Original sin is sin, and
merits wrath; That the Mission of a Savior is Grace and self-moving; can
possiby have hard thoughts of Gods Decree in the point of Reprobation. We being
by Original sin in a state of wrath, what might not God do with us? Might he
not justly leave us in the corrupt Mass? Or might he not justly punish us
there? If not leave us; then, as he would be just, he was bound to give a
Savior, and by consequence the giving of him (which is horrendum dogma) is no
more Grace or Mercy, but Necessity: If not punish us, then as he would be just,
he was bound not to do an act of Justice; I mean, not to inflict that death
which is as due wages to every sin. To me it is clear, That God cannot be cruel
or unjust, either in denying a Redemption purely gratuitous, or in inflicting a
death justly due to a sinful creature. Epist. 105.
St. Austin brings in the Pelagians murmuring thus: Injustum est in una
eademque mala causa, hunc liberari, illum puniri. And then answers, Nempe ergo
justum est utrumque puniri, quis hoc negaverit! If Original sin be sin, and
Grace Grace; if God may be just in punishing, or free in giving, then he might
without any color of injustice, have condemned all men; and if so, he might
have reprobated all men, and then no scruple can be made touching the
reprobating of some. Theodore Coruhert, Integrum Deo est, servare vellet an
reprobare, nil esse quod conqueratur.
who in his life wrote against Calvin and Beza touching Predestination, at his
death confessed, That God might do his pleasure in saving or condemning him;
there was no reason of complaint either way. It is very observable, that those
who deny Reprobation, do either in whole or in part deny Original sin, saying
that it is no sin, or, which is all one, improperly such; or else they have no
true notion of Grace in the freeness and self-motion of it. And to do either,
what is it? To deny Original sin, is to contradict the Letter of Scripture, the
judgment of the Church; nay, and the experience of all men who will but reflect
upon themselves. To deny Grace to be free and self-moving, is to say Grace is
not Grace, and to evacuate the Gospel, and to take away the glory of it.
Neither of them may be done by any who calls himself Christian. The true notion
of Sin is, That it is such a violation of the Law, as merits death eternal. The
true notion of Grace is, That it operates freely and of self-motion. God,
though under no necessity, though he might have left fallen men as well as fallen
Angels, under sin and wrath, was yet pleased out of his mere good pleasure to
give a Savior unto men, and to open a door to them of salvation. This is
Free Grace indeed, and for ever to be adored. Thus much touching the first
thing.

2. It is of Free Grace that God chooses a Church and people to himself; that he
designs some certain individual persons to the infallible attainment of Grace
and Glory. And here I shall consider two things; first, That there is such an
Election. And then, That it issues out of mere Grace.

1. There is such an Election of men unto Grace and Glory. Thus the Apostle, He
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4. He
predestined us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, ver. 5. In the
clearing of this I shall lay down several things.

1. Election is not of all, but some. It Is true, Huberus asserted an universal
election of all men: But this is directly opposite to Scripture. Few, not all,
are chosen, Mat. 22.14. The elect are opposed to the blinded ones, Romans 11.7; a
clear distinction is made between vessels of honor and dishonor, between
vessels of mercy and wrath, between those that are written in the book of Life,
and those that are left out of it. Election is called (...) it separates and
fingles out some to mercy in a way of choice. Were it of all, it could not be
Election, there could be nothing of choice in it. The Elect are said to be
chosen out of the world, Joh. 15.19: but all are not chosen out of all, that is
impossible. Election therefore is of some individual persons only: The Lord
knows those that are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. Their names are all down in the book
of life. Phil. 4.3, (...), this individual person, this very Paul, who but now
was breathing out blood against the Church, this is a vessel of election, Acts
9.15, says God to Ananias. The elect are called a remnant, Romans 11.5, because
it is made up of some individual persons specially singled out of the corrupt
mass unto God. The will of Gods Complacence respects Graces without a
distinction of persons; Every one that fears God, is accepted, Acts 10.35. A
good man draws out favor from the Lord, Prove. 12.2. But the will of Gods
Benevolence, such as Election is, is distinctive of persons; for this decrees
certain blessings to certain persons, and not to all. Election therefore is not
of all, but of some.

2. Election is not Legislation. The secret Counsels of Princes are not their
Edicts; neither is Gods Election a Legislation. Election is an Eternal Decree,
Legislation is in time. Election is but of some, Legislation extends to all.
Election is that Decree, according to which God gives out spiritual blessings
to some as a Benefactor: Legislation sets down that Rule, according to which
God deals with all as a Rector who governs by Law. In the Covenant of Works,
that [do this and live] was not Election; neither was the opposite member
therein [transgress and dye] Reprobation. In the Covenant of Grace, that
[believe and be saved] is not Election; neither is the opposite branch therein
[believe not and be damned] Reprobation; for then all men, because they are
under both parts of the Evangelical Law, should be both elected and reprobated,
which is impossible: nay, because they were in Adam their head under both parts
of the first Covenant, they should be once before both elected and reprobated.
It is one thing to prescribe the terms of salvation, another to choose men to
it: one thing to write down Laws for all, another to write down the names of
some in the book of Life. That general Law, All that believe shall be saved,
predestinates none in particular. It would stand true, if all men were left in
unbelief and perdition; If there were no such thing as a Church in all the
world, but elective; if it secure not a Church to God, is altogether
insignificant. It is an election of none, that is, no election. Our Savior
sets down two wills of God as distinct; This is the will of him that sent me,
That every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life, Joh. 6.40. And in the precedent verse, This is the Fathers will, which
has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing. In the
one we have Gods legislative Will defining the terms of Salvation for all; in
the other, we have Gods elective Will designing some, that is, the elect, the
given ones to it: The first without terms in it, would not be Legislation; the
latter without persons in it, would not be Election.

3. Election, being a choosing, a singling out some to eternal life, must needs
do some singular thing for them; it must confer upon them some distinguishing
Grace, such as may reserve them out of the corrupt Mass unto God: And what
Grace is that but Faith? If all men did believe, there would be no (...), or
difference among them; the righteousness of God would be upon them all, the
rivers of living water would flow in them all, the Glory of Heaven would crown
them all. But Faith is a differencing Grace, proper to Gods peculiar ones; it
is not given to all, but to some; not out of common Providence, but out of
Election: It is a choice, a prime Grace of Secretion, and therefore in all
congruity must needs issue out of the great design of Secretion, that is,
Election. If God give alike to all, then he elects none, he differences none;
however men may make themselves to differ, God does no such thing, nor ever
intended to do so: Thus Election is a mere nullity. But if, as the truth is,
there be any such thing as Election, then it bestows upon the chosen ones,
those special love tokens of Faith and Perseverance, which make them meet for
Heaven and eternal Blessedness.

4. Election is a sure infallible thing, such as never fails: Hence it is
called (...), a Praedestination, or praedefinition, such as never misses the
mark. Thus the Apostle, Whom he did predestinate, them he also called; whom he
called, them he also justified; whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans
8.30. The words ( whom and them) fasten every link to its precedent, and
appropriate all throughout the whole chain to the same persons: every person,
who is predestined and called within this Text, must be justified and
glorified, or the golden chain of Grace is broken. The foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy
2.19. Election is a foundation, not an human one, but a foundation of God, laid
in the Divine Will, standing in eternity, sure in immutability, sealed up with
infallible knowledge and unvariable love toward the elect: Nothing is more
momentous than this, That God have a Church, Christ a Body, and the Spirit a
Temple. This is the highest of designs, the aim of the Sacred Trinity, the very
thing upon which God has set his eyes and his heart more than upon all the
world besides; yet if Election be not sure and infallible, that high and
precious design may be frustrate and of no effect: And what a blot would this
be to Providence? And how unbecoming would it be to the Holy one, who sits at
the Stern and rules all? If so accurate a thing as Providence could, which it
cannot without disparaging it self, stumble or faulter in the things of nature;
yet surely it cannot do so in its masterpiece, in the high and precious
concerns of Grace: Election therefore must be sure and infallible. Volk l. 5.
c. 17. de praedest.
That distinction of the Socinians (that there is a double Election in God, an
infirm one of those, who assent to the Gospel, and a firm one of those, who
live according to the Gospel) is frivolous and blasphemous; it is in effect to
say, that there is infirmity in God, that Gods choice is weak or rather none at
all, and man's choice supplies and strengthens it. The great design of a Church
could not be secured by such a choice as man's, nor by any thing less than Gods;
his Election is a sure foundation, his special call according to purpose, and
his gifts without repentance. Hence it appears, That according to the opinion
of the Remonstrants, there is indeed no such thing as Election. They say, that
the object of Election is a Believer; and, whether there shall be a Believer or
not, after all the operations of Grace, ultimately depends upon the Will of
Man: And if so, How can God elect any one person in the world? The act of his
Election depends upon the object, and the object upon the will of Man; Man's
will must go foremost, and make the object; or else for want of one, Gods Will
must stand still, and not choose at all. It Is true, God has set down this Law
or Rule, That believers should be saved; but nowhere has he said, that
believers should be elected; for that would overthrow his own Election,
supposing such a Law or Rule, That believers should be elected. If a Man did
believe, and so was elected, it would not be Gods first Law or after-choice,
but man's faith which determined the matter: he would be his own elector; God in
the mean time would not be an Elector, but a Legislator only. But a little
further, to consider the opinion of the Remonstrants: They set down the order
of Gods Decrees in this manner; upon Adams fall, there was a merciful affection
in God toward man; but, justice standing in the way, a Mediator was ordained
to offer up a propitiatory Sacrifice to God. Hereupon God makes a general
Decree, That all persevering believers shall be saved; and, because man cannot
believe of himself, God decrees, media ad fidem, means to beget Faith; and as
soon as men believe, there is a particular Decree for their Salvation; or a
kind of incomplete Election, such as rises and falls with their Faith; and when
they arrive at the full point of perseverance, the Election becomes complete
and peremptory. This is their Scheme; here many things are observable, Here Is a
Mediator Decreed, without respect to that Church, which in Scripture is the
choice mark aimed at in the work; here is a general Decree to save all
persevering believers, and in that instant, no Decree of the media ad fidem,
the means to beget Faith; here is a strange imperfection attributed to God, his
Will in its eternal acts must be in succession, and make its gradual progresses
from a general Decree to a particular, and from an incomplete Election (I
tremble at the word) to a complete one; and in its passage to that compleature,
it must all the way vary, and turn about to every point, as the fickle will of
man does; that standing in Faith there is an Election, that falling there is
none; and so, toties quoties, as often as it pleases man to show himself
variable, the Election will be something or nothing as it happens. This does
not indeed ascribe eyes and hands to God, as the gross Anthropomorphites did;
but it assimulates him to the silly turnings and variations of the creature,
which cannot but be very unworthy of him. Here is such a particular Election as
is temporal, and totally superfluous: it is temporal; for if it depend upon
persevering faith as its condition, then it must be suspended, and not in act,
till that faith be in being. It Is condition being temporal, it cannot preexist
or be eternal. It is also totally superfluous, there being a general Decree of
saving all persevering believers once past, every individual man who is a
persevering believer, must needs infallibly arrive at Heaven without any more
ado; and then to what purpose is such a particular Election? Neither do I
think, that the Remonstrants would ever have offered such an insignificant
thing to the world, but that they were under a necessity to say somewhat to
those many and famous expressions which are found in Scripture, touching the
election and predestination of persons, which could not be satisfied with that
general Law, That whosoever believes should be saved: Here Is an election of
persevering believers; but in plain terms that is no election at all. Election
must be to something, but this is to just nothing: not to Faith and Holiness,
these are presupposed in the object; and there can be no election to that which
is presupposed before. There is therefore no election to Grace at all. No, nor
to Glory: That persevering believers had a right unto by the general Decree of
saving such as they are; and there can be no election to that which they had an
antecedent right unto. Thus all the great expressions in Scripture touching
Election, vanish into nothing. In Election God severs and differences one man
from another in a way of choice: but according to the Remonstrants, he gives
all in common. And how can God elect without a severing or differencing act? Or
how can he do such an act, who gives all in common? It Is true, God severs final
believers to life, and final unbelievers to death; but here is no choice of
persons; some go to life, but all, if final believers, should do so: some go to
death, but all, if final unbelievers, should do so. Here is no choice at all,
but a mere judicial act, according to the Evangelical Law. When a Judge
according to Law acquits one as innocent, and condemns another as guilty, it is
not an act of choice, but of righteous judgment. No more is it in God to adjudg
believers to life, and unbelievers to death. But I shall say no more touching
the first thing, That there is an Election.

2. Election is of mere Grace. It has no other cause but the Divine pleasure
only. We are predestined according to the good pleasure of his will, Ephesians.
1.5. To the praise of the glory of his grace, v. 6. God loves his people
because he loves them, Deuteronomy. 7.8. He says, I will be gracious to whom I will
be gracious, Exodus 33.19. In which words we have will and grace doubled as the
only reason of it self. Election is the primum indebitum; if that be not purely
free in God, Cons. ad Pol. cap. 29.
nothing can be so. Iniquus est, says Seneca, qui muneris sui arbitrium danti
non reliquit; He is unjust who leaves not a gift to the pleasure of the giver.
All souls and graces are Gods, and he may dispose of them as he pleases. If he
choose any to himself, he chooses freely, else it is no choice at all: it is not,
as the Apostle calls it, an election of Grace. Election is not built upon
foreseen works, for then it would not be an election of Grace, but of Works;
the elect would not be vessels of Mercy, but of Merit: neither is it founded
upon foreseen faith and perseverance; these are given by God not to all, but to
some; not out of common Providence, but out of the Decree of Election. Hence
the Apostle, when he blesses God for the work of Faith in the Thessalonians,
elevates his praises up to Election, the first fountain of Grace, Knowing,
brethren beloved, your election of God, 1 These. 1.4. And, when he praises God,
for blessing the Ephesians with all spiritual blessings in Christ, he sets down
the eternal rule of dispensing them, According as he has chosen us, Ephesians.
1.3, 4. He does not choose us according to our faith and perseverance, but
blesses us with these blessings according to Election; he chooses us, not
because we are holy, but that we should be such: Does God foresee any good in
men, when he wills to them their first good? Or, Does he foresee good in
them, before he wills it to them? What need then of his purpose to give it? Or
how can he possibly be the Donor of it? If he foresee it, they will infallibly
have it, whether he Decree it or not; they will have it without his gift, which
is impossible. Faith therefore and perseverance do not presuppose Election, but
Election is the eternal spring of those graces. Unless this be granted, God
does but eligere eligentes, choose those that first choose him: Man's faith must
be earlier than Gods Grace, he chooses before he is chosen; loves before he is
loved of God. And to assert this, What is it, but to lift up man above God,
Man's Will above the Sovereign Will of his Maker? A vanity it is, and a
blasphemy against the fountain of Grace, which the Saints bless and adore, as
the origin of all that good which is in them. Gods electing Grace, is pure
Grace; his Love is merely from himself: Hence is that emphatical reduplication,
The elect whom he has chosen, Matt. 13.20. As if our Saviviour had said, in
Election there is nothing but pure Election, nothing on man's part, all is from
the good pleasure of God.

This Truth is notably set forth in our Savior Christ, he was Gods chosen
Servant, Matt. 12.18. The Lamb foreordained, 1 Pet. 1.20. And, as St. Austin
styles him, praeclarissimum lumen praedestinationis and gratiae, the most
famous light of Praedestination and Grace. He was as man, predestined to the
superlative glory of the Hypostatical Union; and that not out of any foreseen
holiness in his human nature, for all that did flow out of that union, but out
of mere grace: the human nature did not do or merit ought to be advanced into
that ineffable excellency; neither may any man say, Cur non and ego? Why were
not I so advanced? Nature is common, but Grace is singular. Here we have the
Prototype and grand Exemplar of Predestination: Christ was predestined to be
the Head, we are predestined to be his members. He as man was predestined,
that by an admirable assumption he should be the natural Son of God: We are
predestined, that we should be adopted ones. He was predestined to be such
without any precedent merits or works: We are predestined to be such without
them. Hence the Apostle says, That we are predestined to be conformed to the
image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren, Romans
8.29. Both Predestinations were free; and in our Predestination there was a
kind of imitation of his. De bono persever. l. 2. c. 24.
Hence St. Austin says, Et illum and nos Praedestinavit, quia in illo, ut
esset caput nostrum, and in nobis, ut ejus corpus essemus, non praecessura
merita nostra, sed opera sua futura praescivit; He predestined him and us:
that he should be our Head, and we his Body, was not from our merit, but the
work of God. It is certain, that the Members cannot be above the Head; they
were not elected to a Beatifical Vision out of foreseen faith and perseverance,
when the Head was elected to the Hypostatical Union out of mere grace.

3. It is of free grace that God calls men. There is a double call, an External
and an Internal one; both are of grace.

1. The External call is of grace. The Gospel is not a debt, but a mere gift
freely given to men. It may be subtracted from a Nation for their sins, but it
is never given to a Nation for their worthiness, for all men are unworthy of
it. When God gives it to some, it is not for their dignity; when he denies it
to others, there is always in them a concomitant indignity of it. No natural
man can be worthy of it. It is merely of Gods good pleasure that the Sun of
Righteousness shines in one part of the world, and not in another; that the
Evangelical dew falls in some places, and not in others. Here the only solution
is that of our Savior, Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight,
Mat. 11.26. I know it is here said by some, That facienti quod in se est Deus
non denegat gratiam; To him who does what he can, God denies not grace. The
promise is, Habenti dabitur, To him that has, that is, rightly uses what he
has, more shall be given. Upon the right use of naturals, the Pagans might
have supernaturals. The Gospel in such a case should be revealed to them. But,
as Bishop Davenant observes, experience confutes this; Proferant ab orb
condito vel unius Pagani exemplum, says he; Determ. f. 236.
Let them bring forth, if they can, the example of one Pagan since the world
began, who by the right use of naturals attained to Evangelical Grace. One
would think that such as Socrates and Plato might, if any, rightly use
naturals; but they had not the Gospel manifested to them, which yet has been
revealed to the poor Americans, who comparatively to the other were brutish and
barbarous. That of the Schools, Facienti quod in se est Deus non denegat
gratiam, Sermon: printed An. Dom. 1632. fol. 286.
is (as Bishop Saunderson in his Sermons calls it) the rotten principle and
foundation of the whole frame of Arminianism: ultimately it resolves all into
nature; Salvation is resolved into Faith, Faith into the Gospel preached, that
into the use of naturals. Nature may now lift up its hand, and touch the Crowns
of Glory above. Grace may fall down to so low a rate, as to be earned at the
fingers ends of Nature. And what is this but pure impure Pelagianism? In the
Palestine Synod Pelagius, but for his counterfeit recantation, had had a just
anathema for that saying, Gratiam dari secundum merita. Secundum merita with
the Fathers, is all one with secundum opera, and secundum opera all one with
facienti quod in se est. The Apostle flatly opposes this opinion; He has
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his own purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. The call is not according to works, or
according to the use of naturals; but merely, purely, totally from Grace.
Rightly to use naturals, is to live up to the light of nature; that tells us,
that God is the Supreme good, and therefore in all reason to be loved with a
supreme love. We should not give him part of the price, but all the mind,
heart, soul, spirit, and that in pure perfection; and who, where is the Saint
on earth that does so? Their purest acts of love come forth ex laeso principio,
out of an heart sanctified but in part; and in their egress from thence cannot
but have a taint or tincture from the indwelling corruption: and may we imagine
that God should offer the Pagans a Gospel on such terms as no Saint on earth
ever arrived at? Or that he would have them go about by the way of perfection
to enjoy a Gospel of Grace? It cannot be. But suppose that they may have it
upon a sincere love of him; Can a Pagan out of natural Principles truly love
God? May true Love be without Faith the Root, or without the Spirit, the
inspirer of all Graces? Or does the Holy Spirit work in a supernatural way,
without a Gospel or Ordinances? Or if it did, does it work, and not effect so
much as the first element in Christianity? I mean a sense of the want of Grace?
May the Spirit converse in those unclean places, where nothing appears but
Error, Pride, Idolatry, Impiety, and Wickedness of all sorts? It is not
reasonable to believe it. If Nature could lift up it self to a sincere love of
God, the Spirit and the Gospel seem to be superfluous thereunto. And as for
habenti dabitur, it speaks not to the point in hand, because it speaks not of
the use of natural talents: not in Mat. 13, for there it is accommodated to the
Parable of the seed, and given as an item to such as heard the Gospel; nor yet
in the 25th chap. for there the use of the talents is remunerated with eternal
life, ver. 21 and 23; which is a Crown too rich to be set upon mere naturals.
There the talents upon abuse are taken away; and by consequence, if it were
meant of naturals, the abusers must lose their reason, and become fools; which
experience denies. But whatever the talents are in that promise, it must be
interpreted in eodem genere: If of talents of Nature, it runs thus; He that
uses naturals, shall have more of them. If of talents of Grace, thus: He that
uses Supernaturals, shall have more of them. But to stretch this promise a
genere ad genus, from naturals to supernaturals, as if Nature might per saltum
be crowned with Grace, is an interpretation very incongruous, and directly
contrary to that of the Apostle, He has called us, not according to our works,
but according to his own grace. The end of this promise is to excite men to the
good use of talents. But after such an unreasonable stretch of it, as makes
Grace the reward of Nature, What can come of it? Where shall the fruit of it
be? Not in the Church, there they have the Gospel Grace already; nor yet out of
it, there it is not revealed: neither is it possible that those who want the
Gospel, should be stirred up by any promise in it, to seek after it in the use
of naturals. Thus we see, that the external call is not a debt to Nature, but a
mere gift of Grace. Such as the great Gift is, such is the Charter. The great
gift of Christ was purely, totally gratuitous; therefore the Charter of the
Gospel, which in the manifestation of it is the external Call, is so also.

2. The Internal call is of Grace: And here, because some oppose this call, I
shall first show, That there is such a call, and then that it is merely of
Grace.

1. There is such a thing as an internal call. Pelagius, at least in the first
draught of his Heresy, placed Grace only, in libero arbitrio and doctrina, in
Free Will and Doctrine; Free Will being Nature not Grace, Doctrine being Grace
but not the all of it, he left no room at all for an Internal call, he allowed
no Grace but that external one of Doctrine: and in this he spoke very
consonantly to his other opinions, denying Original sin as he did, What need
could there be of internal Grace? There being no spot or sinful defect in the
Soul, Grace has nothing to do within, all is well and whole there, and needs
no Physician; all is in order and harmony there, and nothing to be new-made or
new-framed. Therefore St. Austin observes, that though Pelagius would sometimes
talk of a multiform and ineffable Grace; yet it was but to put a blind, and
cover over his heresy: Quid juvat Pelagium, quia diversis verbis eandem rem
dicit, ut non intelligatur in lege atque doctrina gratiam constituere? de Great.
Christi. cap. 9. De. serve. pars 4. c. 12. Dial. de just. fo. 13.
Still he meant no more than mere Doctrine, and external Grace; denying
Original sin, there was nothing within for Grace to do or rectify. Socinus, who
with the Pelagians denies Original sin, makes little or no account of internal
Grace, though in his Praelections he speak of an interius anxilium, an inward
aid; yet he says, That Faith is generated, potissimum per externa, chiefly by
externals; and again, That Faith is rather to be called Gods command than his
gift. But that there is such a thing as an Internal call, and that distinct
from the external, I shall propose three or four things.

1. All in the Church have an external call; but some are not so much as
illuminated, it is not given to them to know the heavenly mysteries. Those by
the way-side heard the word and understood it not; Christ was a stumbling block
to the Jews, and foolishness to the Greeks; and both because he was not, though
outwardly proposed, inwardly understood. Christ the power of God, if
understood, could not have been a stumbling block to the Jews who looked after
signs; Christ the Wisdom of God, if understood, could not have been foolishness
to the Greeks, who sought after Wisdom. Mr. Pemble relates this Story: An Old
Man, of above 60 years of Age, a constant hearer of the Word, was after all so
grossly ignorant, as upon Discourse to say, that God was a good old Man, Christ
a towardly youth, the Soul a great bone in the body; and the happiness of man
after death, was to be put into a pleasant green Meadow. Such poor blind Souls
have indeed an external call, but not so much as the first element of the
internal one; Illumination, which is the initial thing therein, is wanting in
them.

2. All in the Church have an external call; but some are for their iniquity
judicially hardened under the means: the Word of Life is to them the savor of
death; Christ the Cornerstone a stumbling block: the light blinds them, the
melting ordinances harden them. These men have an external call, but nothing of
an internal one; it being impossible that the same persons, under the same
means, should be illuminated and softened, which are the effects of an internal
call, and at the same time should be blinded and hardened under the means,
which cannot but have in them an external one.

3. Some under the Gospel have a wonderful work wrought in them, their eyes are
opened upon the Evangelical Mysteries, their wills are melted into the Divine
Will. Gods Law is engraven in their heart; his image is the beauty and glory of
their souls: A great work is done in them, a new creation appears within; and
how should this be, or which way should it be effected, but by that internal
call which calls things that are not, as though they were, which in a glorious
way calls Faith and other Graces into being? Hence the Apostle says, That the
Gospel came to the Thessalonians not in word only, but in power and in the Holy
Ghost, and in much assurance, 1 These. 1.5. Here Is the true internal call; the
word did not only outwardly sound to them, no, it was inwardly engrafted to the
saving of the soul; it was strongly and sweetly set home upon the heart, so as
to produce Faith and Love. It was not in mere notions, but it sprung up into a
new creature. This is the internal call. If a mere external one might have done
it, Pelagius in the rudest draught of his Heresy had been in the right. He
placed Grace in mere Doctrine and Free Will; but to the framing of the
new creature, an internal operation is requisite. Hence St. Austin says, De
Praedest. l. 1. cap. 8.
That believers have not only, as others, an outward Preacher, but an inward
one: Intus a patre audiunt, they hear and learn of the Father. He speaks to
them inwardly in such words of life and power as produces the new creature.

4. The Ministry of Christ was a very excellent one: He spoke, did, lived, as
never man did; there were Oracles in his mouth, Miracles in his hands, Sanctity
in his life. Never was there such an external call as here; yet would this do
the work? Would this secure a Church or people to God? No; He tells them
plainly, That except they were born of the Spirit, they could not enter Heaven.
That no man can come to him except the Father draw him. There must be an
internal traction, or else there would be never a believer in the world.
Trahitur miris modis ut velit ab illo, Aust. ad Bon. lib. 1. cap. 19.
qui novit intus in ipsis hominum cordibus operari; In this Traction there is a
secret and admirable touch upon the heart to make it believe and receive
Christ: This is an internal call indeed. Yet, as pregnant as the words are, the
Socinians have an art to turn Gods. Traction into Man's Disposition; and the
Divine energy, into human probity; Vis praecipua in audientium probitate
consistebat, the chief force consists in the probity of the auditors. Prael.
Theol. cap. 12.
Thus Socinus touching that Traction. Those who have probity of mind, who will
do Gods Will; those honest Souls will embrace the Gospel. When God is said to
touch the heart, 1 Samuel 10.26, the meaning is, they had tangible hearts, such
as were inclinable to the Divine Will; De Vera Rel. l. 4. cap. 1.
so Volkelius, And again, when God draws men, he proposes his Will; and the
probi, the honest hearts are persuaded: De Ver. Rel. lib. 5. cap. 18.
so the same Author. Thus by an odd perverse interpretation of Scripture, the
choicest operations of Grace are at last resolved into nature and freewill.
This more plainly appears by that explication which Volkelius in the place
first quoted, gives us of probity. There are (says he) in Man three things,
Reason, Will, and Appetite; if the Will, the middle faculty, apply it self to
Reason, there is probity; if to the Appetite, there is improbity. We see here
what probity is, the mere product of the Will; Faith is resolved into probity,
and probity into the Will of man: There is no need of Grace, at least not of an
internal one. The probity requisite to Faith, is according to these men much
the same, as Aristotle requires from the auditors of morality, that is, that
they act (...), according to Reason: Eth. l. 1. c. 3.
Thus according to them there is nothing of Mystery or Grace in this Traction,
but only a following the common principles of nature; out of this temper Faith
will spring up. But do these men believe Scripture? There the natural
unregenerate man is thus described: He is dead in sin, A corrupt tree which
cannot bring forth good fruit, He perceives not spiritual things; His carnal
mind is not subject to the Law, nor indeed can be; Without grace he cannot do
good, no, nor so much as spend a thought about it; He is a stranger from the
life of God, and blindness is upon his heart: and can there be any true probity
in such an one? The Corinthians, at least some of them, were before their
conversion, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners,
1 Cor. 6.9, and 10. And what probity was in them? True probity, such as is
toward God, is no other than sincerity; and sincerity is not one Grace, but
the rectitude of all. And may such a thing go before Faith? Where true probity
is, there is a pure intention to do Gods Will, and may it antecede that Faith,
which is the single eye, and works by love? Probity is not an offspring of
nature but of Grace; could Free Will elevate it self to it, there would need no
traction, no influence of Grace at all. Qui humilitati and obedientiae humanae
subjungunt gratiae adjutorium, nec, ut obedientes and humiles simus, ipsius
gratiae donum esse consentiunt, resistunt Apostolo diceenti, quid habes, quod
non accepisti? Gratia Dei sum quod sum. Conc. Araus. 2. can. 6.
The Fathers in the Arausican Council, condemn those, who subordinate Grace to
man's humility or obedience, as if humility and obedience were not gifts of
Grace: To conclude, the Fathers Traction does not stand in man's probity, but in
a Divine energy, such as produces faith in the heart.

2. The internal call is merely of Grace. The Spirit breathes where it lists.
God calls as he pleases: some are called according to purpose; all are not so.
Every heart under the Evangelical means, is not opened as Lydia's was. God
works in us to will and to do of his good pleasure. If God be God, an infinite
Mind, he must needs be free; if free in any thing, he must be so in acts of
Grace, in his calling men home unto himself. It is true, that according to
some, the Spirit is annexed to the Gospel, and works equally on all the
Auditors. But this opinion labors under prodigious consequences; I mean, some
such as these following are. The Holy Spirit, whose prerogative it is to
breathe where he list, and divide to every one as he will, is here affixed to
his own organ the Gospel, and must part out his Grace equally to all: The
Ordinance of Preaching, as if it were no longer a mere Ordinance, or pendant on
the Spirit, must confer Grace, if not ex opere operato, yet in a certain
promiscuous way to all. The Minister, who uses to look up for the spirit and
excellency of power to succeed his labors, may rest secure, all is ready and
at hand. The peoples eyes, which ought to wait on the Lord, if peradventure he
will give faith and repentance to them, will soon fall down and center on the
Ordinance, where they are sure without a peradventure to have their share of
Grace. Those emphatical Scriptures, which speak of singular Grace to some, must
now run in a much lower strain. The opening of Lydia's heart, how remarkable
soever, must be no singular Grace, but common to the rest. The tractions and
inward teachings of the Father, which make some to come to Christ, must be
general favors, and extendible to those who come not to him. When the Apostle
says, That Christ is to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness; but to them that are called, the power and wisdom of God, 1 Cor.
1. 23, 24, How signal soever the difference in the Text be, the internal call
must be all one; in those to whom Christ was a stumbling block and foolishness,
as in those to whom he was the power and wisdom of God. The called according to
purpose, are called but as other men: Gods purpose is to call all a-like, man's
only makes the difference. These are the consequences of that opinion, and too
heavy, I confess, for me to stand under. I rest therefore in that of the
Apostle, He has called us, not according to our works, but according to his
own purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. Here purpose and grace are joined together;
if his purpose be free, if his grace be gratuitous, then he calls as he
pleases. In calling men home to himself, he acts purely, totally from Grace. I
conclude with that of Bonaventure, Hoc piarum mentium est, ut nihil sibi
tribuant, sed totum Dei Gratiae; The genius of pious minds, is to attribute
nothing to themselves, but all to Grace. Thus far touching the first thing, The
freeness of Grace.

The next thing proposed, is the power and efficacy of Grace. The Apostle
speaks of an exceeding greatness of power toward those that believe, Ephesians.
1.19. So emphatical are the words there, came. oper sol. 343.
that Camero is bold to say, Nemo, cui non periit frons, negare potest
significare vim and potentiam; None, who has not lost his modesty, can there
deny a force and power signified. Now touching the efficacy of Grace, I shall
consider three things.

1. Its efficacy as to the Principle of Faith and other Graces.

2. Its efficacy as to actual believing and willing.

3. Its efficacy as to perseverance in the faith.

The first thing is its efficacy as to the Principle of Faith, and other
Graces. By the Principle of Faith, I mean not the natural power of believing.
God does not command us to take down the Sun, for which we have no faculties;
but to believe, for which we have an understanding and a will; no natural
faculty is wanting. De Praed. c. 5.
Hence St. Austin says, the posse of believing, is of nature. This power in
fallen man, because in conjunction with natural impotency, never arrives at the
effect. The natural faculties are by the fall so vitiated, that though in a
sense he can, yet he will not believe. Trahit sua quemque voluptas, one lust or
other so attracts him, that he cannot a se impetrare ut velit, he cannot find
in his heart to do it. He has a kind of can in his natural faculties, but the
corruption blasts the effect. Neither do I mean that power, which, as some
Divines say, is supernatural, yet not an habit or vital principle of faith.
Nature being fallen, Grace (say they) gives a second power to set the will in
aequilibrio; but that power does not, as an habit, incline or dispose a man to
actual believving. This power, as I take it, is nothing but Nature and
Free Will. I see not how it should be distinct from it. There are (as the
Learned Doctor Twiss has observed) three things in the soul; that is, Powers,
Habits, and Passions. Powers may be the subjects of Habits and Passions; but
may a Power be the subject of a Power? A natural power of a supernatural one?
This looks like a Monster. By the same reason Habits may be the subjects of
Habits, and Passions of Passions. And is this power of believing, free or not?
If free, then it is not supernatural; it may be a principle of not believing,
and that nothing supernatural can be. If not free, then it determines the
event, but to what? To not believing? then it is not supernatural. To
believing? then all men (having, as these men say, the power) must infallibly
believe, which Scripture and experience deny. I mean therefore such a Principle
of Faith, as is an habit and vital Principle; such as is seminally and
virtually faith; such as has the nature and essence of faith; such as inclines
and disposes to actual believing, and before the act, denominates a man a
believer. When the act of faith comes forth into being, is it from a believer,
or from an unbeliever? If from a believer, then there was an habit of faith
before. If from an unbeliever, how unnatural is it, and how cross to the
suavity of Providence? There must then be an act of faith, before a principle;
a fruit, before a tree or seed. What shall we say of such an one? He is a
believer in act, but in principle none; as soon as the act ceases, he is not at
all a believer. There must therefore be an habit, a vital principle of faith:
This in the use of means is infused or created, and that by the power of grace.
To clear this, I shall lay down two or three things.

1. The Principle of Faith and other Graces, is not produced by mere suasion,
by a mere proposal of the Evangelical object. In conversion there is a great
work wrought within; the deadly wound of Original corruption must be healed,
the new creature must be set up in us; and can suasion do this? Such a glorious
work must be done by an efficient cause, not by a mere allicient one, such as
suasion is. A natural man is blind, nay dead in spiritual things; and what
suasion can make the blind to see, or the dead to rise? Suasion is so far from
giving a faculty, that it presupposes it. The use of it is not to confer a
power, but to excite and stir it up into act. Satan uses suasion to subvert the
souls of men; and does God do no more to convert them unto himself? How then
should he ever gather a Church to himself? Satan's suasions run with the tide
and stream of corrupt nature; but Gods are against it; and in all reason the
balance will be cast rather on that side which has Natures vote and free
concurrence, than on that which has Natures repugnancy and contradiction. In
this work there is more than mere suasion. God is not a mere Orator, but an
admirable Operator; his word is not significative only, but factive, commanding
those Divine Principles into being, vox imperativa abit in operativam; he calls
for a new heart, and it is so.

2. This holy Principle is not produced by assistent Grace, as if a natural man
did by Divine assistance work it in himself. The Principle or power of
believing, is either natural or supernatural; if natural, it is by creation; if
supernatural, it is by infusion or inspiration; neither way is it produced in a
way of assistance. An assistance is not accommodated to a thing to produce a
new power, but to bring forth an act from thence. The light is assistent to the
eye in the act of vision, but it gives not the visive power to it; assisting
grace concurs to the act of believing, but it confers not a believing
principle. The greatest Saint in the world stands in need of assisting grace,
that his gracious principles may come into actual exercise; he must have help
from the holy one, a supply of the Spirit of Christ; the Heavenly roots do not
cast forth themselves unless God be as dew to them; the sweet spices do not
flow out actually, unless God breath upon them by auxiliary grace; still he
wants assistance to the doing of good as he ought; the greatest Saint, though a
man full of divine principles, stands in need of assistance. And does a natural
man, one void of good, fraught with evil, need no more? Is regenerating
quickening, renewing, new-creating grace, nothing but an assistance only? May
any one believe that the holy Spirit in Scripture should give such high stately
titles to an assistance only? May a man be a co-operator, or co-partner with
God in the raising up faith and a new creature in himself? It Is true, a natural
man may by a common grace enter upon preparatories; he may attend upon the
means, but what can he contribute to the work it self? he is merely natural,
the new creature is totally supernatural, and what can he do toward it? could
he contribute ought, what would the new creature be? must it not be part
natural as from man, part supernatural as from God; part old as from nature,
part new as from grace? Thus it must be if this great work be divided between
God and man. Notable is that of Lactantius, De fall. Rel. Lib. 1. Cap. 11.
Jovem Junonemque a juvando esse dictos Cicero interpretatur, and Jupiter quasi
Juvans Pater dictus, quod nomen in Deum minime congruit, quia juvare hominis
est, opis aliquid conferentis in eum qui sit egens alicujus beneficii: nemo sic
Deum precatur, ut se adjuvet, sed ut servet, ut vitam salutemque tribuat;
nullns pater dicitur filios juvare cum eos generat aut educat, illud enim
levius est quam ut eo verbo magnitudo paterni beneficii exprimatur, quanto id
magis est inconveniens Deo, qui verus est Pater, per quem sumits, cujus toti
sumus, a quo fingimier, animamur, and illuminamur? And at last he concludes,
Non intelligit beneficia divina, qui se juvari modo a Deo putat, He understands
not divine benefits, who thinks himself only helped by God. Jehovah must not be
transformed into a Jupiter, or a mere helper; man must not share with him in
this great work, it is God who makes us new creatures, and not we our selves.
We are his workmanship, not our own, Ephesians. 2.10. Born not of the will of man,
but of God, Joh. 1.13. As soon as a man is regenerate, it may be truly said of
him, Hic homo jam na^ns est ex Deo, this man is now born of God; but to say,
that he is in part born of man's will, is to blaspheme the Author of our
spiritual being, and to crown Nature instead of Grace.

3. The holy principles of Grace are produced by an act of Divine power: God
lays the foundations of faith and the new creature, as it were in mighty
waters, in the very same heart in which there is a fountain and torrent of
corruption; and no power less than the Divine can put back the stream of
nature, and set up the Heavenly structure of Grace in such an heart. The
production of gracious principles is in Scripture set forth in glorious titles,
such as do import power; it is called a Transtation, Col. 1.13. it transplants
and carries us away out of a state of sin into a state of grace. It Is a
Generation, Jam. 1.18. it begets us to a participation of the Divine Nature.
It Is a Resurrection, Ephesians. 2.5. It quickens us and inspires into us a
Supernatural life, of which the fall had left no spark or relick at all. It Is a
Creation, Ephesians. 2.10. it raises up a new creature out of nothing, and gives us a
spiritual being, which before we had not; and if these things do not speak
power, nothing can. Hence the Apostle speaks of the Gospel coming in power, 1
These. 1.5. Nay, that in the success of it there is an excellency of power, 2
Cor. 4.7. and an exceeding greatness of power toward Believers, Ephesians. 1.19. The
work of faith is said to be fulfilled with power, 2 These. 1.11. How much more
must it be an act of power to lay the Primordials and first principles of faith
in a fallen unbelieving creature? When there was nothing appearing in our
lapsed nature, but a vacuum, a chaos of sin, a spiritual death and nullity,
only the Divine power was able to repair the ruins of the fall, and rear up the
Heavenly life and nature in us. This great truth was notably set forth in the
conception of our Savior Christ; it was not in the course of nature, his
Mother knew not a man, but the Holy Ghost came upon her; the power of the
highest overshadowed her, that the holy thing might be born of her, Luke 1.35.
In like manner when Christ is formed in the heart, when the new creature is set
up in us, it is not in the way of nature; we know not the humane power in this
work, here is no less than dextra excelsi, the right hand of the most High to
effect it; here are vestigia spiritus sancti, the footsteps of the holy Spirit
to bring it to pass: the same power and spirit which formed Christ in the womb,
forms him in the heart: as in his participation of the humane nature there was
a Supernatural operation, so is there in our participation of the Divine. This
is the first efficacy of Grace, it new creates the heart, and imprints the
Divine image there; it inspires holy Principles, and so lays a foundation for
obedience.

2. There is an efficacy of Grace as to actual believing and willing. St.
Bernard asks the question, Quid agit liberum arbitrium? What does Free Will do?
and then answers, De Lib. Arbit. and Great.
Salvatur, it is saved. And Agatho in his Epistle lays down this as a rule,
Quod a Christo non susceptum est, 6. Genesis Conc. Act. 4.
nec salvatum est, si ab eo humana voluntas suscepta est, and salvata est; That
which was not assumed by Christ, is not saved by him. If an humane will was
assumed, then it is saved; and it is saved, first in that principles of holy
rectitude are instilled into it, and then in that those principles are drawn
forth in actual willing: both these are necessary, the first implants the vital
principles of Grace in the heart, the second makes them blossom and bring forth
precious fruit; without those vital principles the will, however assisted ab
extra, is internally in it self but a faculty merely natural and void of
spiritual life; it has no proportion to the vital supernatural acts of Faith
and Love. Neither is it possible, that any such should issue out from thence,
no, not by any extrinsecal assistance whatsoever: an act if vital and
supernatural, must be from an internal principle that is such. Again, unless
those vital principles bring forth actual believing and willing, they must
needs lie dead, and come to nothing. And yet if we estimate things according to
their worth and excellency, we cannot but think it much more easy and eligible
for the wise and good God to suffer an abortion in all the seeds and principles
of nature, than in those precious and admirable ones of Grace, which do not, as
the other do, carry the mere footsteps, but the very image and resemblance of
his holy nature.

Pelagius would at least in some sense own, that the posse, the mere power of
believing, is from God; but he would not have the velle, the actual willing and
believing, to be so. He says, that God works all things; that is, he gives
to them the operative power. He distinguishes three things, Posse, Velle, Esse;
Posse in natura, Velle in arbitrio, Esse in effectu: Power, Aust. de Great.
Christ. cap. 4.
Willing, Being: Power is in nature, Willing in the free faculty, Being in the
effect. The Power, says he, is properly from God; but the other two are from
our selves, as descending de arbitrii font, from the fountain of Free Will.
Hence St. Austin tells him, That according to his opinion, which attributed to
Grace not willing or believing, but a power only, he could not be a true
Christian. A power of believing (whether it be as Pelagius would have it, De
Great. Christi, c. 10.
a mere naked power, and no more; or whether it be such a power as is an habit
or vital principle of Grace,) is not all that Grace operates; a mere naked
power is not all. To entertain such a thought, is highly to disparage Grace. A
power of believing is from God; and is not a power of sinning, so too? If
Free Will, which includes in it a power of sinning, be a creature, it must be
so. If a power of sinning be from God, and no more but a mere power of
believing be from him, then how is God the author of actual believing, more
than of actual sinning? Pelagius saying, That God is said to operate all
things, because he gives the operative power; Bellarmine from thence infers
this just consequence, That then God operates all sin, De Great. and Lib. Ar.
lib. 4. cap. 4.
because he gave a Free Will, by which all sin is wrought: Therefore if God be
not the author of actual sin, as he is not, nor cannot be; then neither is he
author of actual believing, by giving a power to believe. Both powers are from
God; and how hard a thing, and how contumelious to Grace is it to say, That he
produces as much toward sinning, as toward believing? And yet we must say so,
if there be no more than a mere power to both. Neither is such a power, as is a
habit or vital principle of Grace, all that Grace operates; those precious
Seeds and Principles, were never let down from Heaven to sleep and lie hid in
the root, but to spring up in actual Graces suitable and congruous thereunto.
There is a Divine vigor in those Principles; and when auxiliary Grace stirs
them up, and becomes an heavenly dew unto them, they will spring up as a well
of living water, and shoot forth as the seed of God. There is a special
Providence watching over these; to make them come up in a crop of holy fruits.

Some Divines express themselves thus: Grace gives a supernatural power, and so
puts the will in aequilibrio, in an even balance, that it may believe or not
believe, as it pleases. But what a thing is this? An (...), or indifferency
toward such a precious object as Christ is, looks very ill, and like a sin;
and how should. it come from Grace? If Grace work only a kind of indifferency,
it does far less than mere Moral virtue does: Moral virtue is, as the
Philosopher speaks, (...), an habit of acting according to right reason; it
earries in it a promptitude and inclination to virtuous actions; it renders
them easy, and in a sort natural: and may we, can we, suppose that Grace, a
Principle much more sublime, and of far higher extraction, should only put the
soul into an aequilibrious state, no more propending to good than evil? If
Grace operate only a kind of indifferency, then the comfort of Christians is
departed; they are afraid of nothing more than of themselves; the vanity and
corruption in their own hearts is terrible to them: yet in this case the
greatest of fears, I mean, to be left to themselves, falls upon them. They are
not to look up to God to fix their hearts upon himself; no, nor so much as to
incline them that way; their life must not be a life of faith or dependence
upon God the fountain of Grace; there is no warrant for such a thing; Grace
only works a state of indifferency, and then leaves the Will to do the rest: if
they will depend upon any thing, it must be upon their own Will, that is, upon
Vanity; nothing else determines the great concern of their salvation.

Now here I shall first prove, That Grace works the actual willing and
believing; and then, That it does it in a way of power.

1. Grace works the actual willing and believing: And here I shall lay down
several things.

1. The Scripture is very pregnant. God works to will and to do of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.13, (...), he works efficaciously, not a mere power of
willing, but the very willing: Neither does he work the willing conditionally,
if we will; for then the willing should be a condition to it self, which is
impossible, and should be before he work^ it, which is directly opposite to the
Text; but he works it absolutely of his own good pleasure. His work does not
depend on man's consent, but it causes it; neither does he work it so, as that
man in whom he works the willing, might actually not will: for a man who
wills, must needs will; and a man in whom he works the willing, must needs do
so. If a man do not will, then God does not work the willing; for a willing
which is not, is not wrought: in this case nothing is wrought but the power of
willing, which satisfies not the Text. If the man in whom he works, do will,
the thing is infallible; for a man cannot will and nill both at once: but he
works the willing so, as that man's willing does certainly follow upon it.
Neither does he work the willing as a partial concause, for then he should be a
cause only ex part, and do but something toward it, the rest must be not from
him, but only from man's will as the author of it; which is to ascribe to man's
will, not a merit only, but a kind of Deity, as if it were the sole author of
some supernatural good. But he works the willing as a total supreme cause; he
causes man to will: Man's will does not cooperate, but suboperate under the
sweet power of Grace, moving it to will. It is true, man wills, but it is
causally from Grace that he does so. Man's will is the principium quod which
produces the willing; but Gods Grace is the principium quo which causes it.
Hence St. Austin, Nos nolumus, De dono persever. cap. 13.
sed Deus in nobis operatur and velle; nos operamur, sed Deus in nobis operatur
and ipsum operari pro bona voluntate: We will and work, but God works both in
us. And afterward the same Father adds, Hoc est pium, hoc verum, ut sit
humilis confessio ut detur totum Deo: This is pious and true, that there may be
an humble confession, and the whole may be ascribed to God. Again, the
Scripture tells us, that Faith is not of our selves, but the gift of God,
Ephesians. 2.8; that the very actual believing is freely given to us, Phil. 1.29.
We see here, Faith is a mere gift, it is not from our selves, but from God; And
what can be more emphatical? It is not said that Faith is offered, but given;
external things, which exist before they are given and received, may be said to
be offered; but Faith which exists not before it be given and received, cannot
properly be said to be offered. A Faith, which is not given and received, is a
nonentity; and a nonentity is not a gift. Faith is Gods gift, not where it is
not, but where it is. That cannot be properly said to be given, which is not
received. Giving and receiving relate mutually each to other; therefore when
Grace gives Faith, it gives the very reception, it causes a man to believe; and
when it causes a man to believe, he does infallibly do so; and if he do not do
so, the gift is not a gift of Faith which the Apostle speaks of; but of a power
only to believe, which answers not to the Text. Hence it appears, That actual
believing is merely from Grace.

2. If God only give a power of believing, and that in common to all, the
actual believer makes himself to differ from others. God gave him only the
common Grace, but the improvement of it is from himself; God gave him only a
power, but the act (which has more of actuality, and so of likeness to God,
and indeed is the very end and center of the power) is from himself. Man may
now glory in himself, as contributing of his own, that which is perfective of
that power, which is from God. After Grace has done its utmost, Man's Will is
made the umpire, whether the operations of Grace, shall be something or
nothing: God made the heart, and the wheels therein; but the motion is man's
own, he only must determine this great concern. Grace begins to build the new
creature, but man must finish the work, or else it can never be done. Grace
fets the Will in aequilibrio, and that is all it; must move no further, but
leave the event to the lottery of man's Will. Thus God is debased, and man
exalted; Free Grace is dethroned, and Free Will is crowned: But if we, as we
ought, must glory in the Lord; if we have nothing but what we have received,
then we must confess, that the actual willing and believing is from Grace:
acknowledging with St. Cyprian, In nullo gloriandum, quando nostrum nihil est.

3. It is a good Rule of Celestine Bishop of Rome, Lex supplicandi facit legem
credendi, Epist. ad Epise. Gall. c. 10, 11.
Our Prayers teach us what we are to believe about Grace. For what do we pray
to God? Is it not to have our hearts inclined to his commands, and united to
his fear? Is it not to have our Wills bowed to obedience and swallowed up in
the Divine Will? What can be more congruous for man, more pious toward God
than this? Yet, if the willing and believing be not from Grace, it is but
Irrisoria petitio est, cum id ^ Deo petitur, quod scitur ipsum non dare, sed,
ipso non donante, esse in hominis potestate. Aust. de don. persev. cap. 2.
irriseria petitie, a kind of mock-devotion: There can hardly be a more
unaccountable vanity than this, To beg of God, that which is not within the
line of Grace to bestow; which is wholly turned over to the power and will of
man to effect. We may here say with Seneca, Quid votis opus est? What need any
prayers for that which we may have from our selves? If the thing be not from
God but from our selves, we do not indeed pray, but dissemble a prayer; we make
as if the thing were a gift of God, when there is no such matter. The
Philosopher (says Epictetus) expects all (...), from himself, and so may the
Christian too in the point of willing and believing; if these be not Grace, he
need not look up to God for them. Again, for what do the Saints praise God? Is
it not for touching and opening their hearts to Christ, for making them willing
in the day of his power? Is it not for putting his spirit within them, and
causing them to walk in his statutes? What can be more due to God, more proper
for a Saint than this? Hence they glorified God in the repenting Gentiles, Acts
11.18. And again, they glorified God in converting Paul, Gal. 1.24. When David
and his people offered willingly to God, he falls into an holy ecstasy, Who am
I, and what is my people, 1 Chr. 29.14? All things, says he, are of thee, not
only our gold and our silver, not only our hearts and wills, but our very
actual willingness also; yet if the willing and believing be not of Grace, all
these are but mockeries and false Hallelujahs: They who glorify God in
Converts, offer but a blind sacrifice, and glorify but an Idol of their own
fancy. If God do not do the thing, Why should we praise him for it? How can we
do so in truth, when the matter will not bear it? Indeed we do but dissemble a
praise, making as if he were the author of that which is not from him. Thus we
see, that willing and believing must be from Grace, or else we utterly evacuate
those prayers and praises which are offered up to God touching the same. Thus
much touching the first thing, That Grace works the willing and believing.

2. Grace works it in a way of power. St. Paul speaking of the success of the
Gospel, says, That the excellency of the power is of God, 2 Cor. 4.7. And
again, he prays for the Thessalonians, That God would fulfill the work of faith
with power, 2 These. 1.11. If faith be fulfilled, as it is, by the acts of it,
then those acts are produced by the power of Grace: Gods people are willing in
the day of his power, Psalm. 110.3. When the Disciples wondered how a Camel
should go through a Needles eye, how a rich man should be saved; our Savior
solves the knot by the power of God, With him all things are possible, Luke
18.27. The power of Grace can fetch off the World, the Camelsbunch, from the
heart, and make it pass (as it were) through the Needles eye into Heaven. It Is
true, man wills, man believes, but it is from the strong and sweet gales of
Grace that he does so. The willing and believing are voluntary acts in regard
of man's will, but acts of power in regard of Gods Spirit, which touches and
moves the heart thereunto. It may be thought by some, that there needs no
expense of power toward willing and believing; that a power of willing and
believing is enough for us. But should God give us only a power to will and
believe, and leave the rest to our will, we have great reason to think that we
should all do, as innocent Adam did, fall from God, and never reduce that power
into act. The Divine Principles in Adam were pure and without mixture; but the
power of believing and willing in us, has in the same heart where it dwells,
an Inmate of corruption, which continually counterworks it. In innocence the
temptation stood without, a-courting the senses; but after the fall it makes
nearer approaches, as having a party within ready to open and betray every
faculty. To me it looks like a proud thought for any to imagine, that under
such a disparity he could act his part better than Adam did. If then the
foundation of God must stand, if the election must obtain, if Christ must have
a seed, if the Spirit must have a temple, it is no less than necessary, that
the power of Grace should secure that willing and believing, without which
those high and great designs of Heaven cannot take effect.

3. There is an efficacy of Grace as to perseverance in Faith and Holiness.
Perseverance, wherever it is, is from Grace. The inherent Graces in the Saints
are but creatures; no creature, no, not the most spiritual, does or can
preserve it self. All depend upon their Original in their being and duration;
hence, as St. Jerome observes, God is always a-working, Ad Ctesiph. cap. 3.
always a-giving; Non mihi sufficit, says he, quod semel donavit, nisi semper
donaverit: It is not enough for me, that he once give, unless he always do so.
Hence that of St. Austin, Non ita se debet homo ad Dominum convertere, ut, cum
ab eo fact us fuerit justus, De Genesis ad. Lit. lib. 8.12.
abscedat, sed it a ut ab illo semper siat: Man ought not to convert to God,
that being made just he might depart from him; but that he might be always made
just by him. The Physician heals and departs, but God does not do so; he is
still a-healing and newmaking us by the continual spirations of his Spirit and
Grace, that we may persevere unto the end. Were not perseverance from Grace,
there could be no such thing as a life of Faith; it would be utterly needless
to hang upon Promises, or to look up for influences of Grace, or with David to
pray that God would keep the good frame in the heart, or hold up our goings in
his paths. Perseverance being from our selves, we may center and safely lie
down there. We may say as Laodicea, We are rich, and have need of nothing, no,
not of God the Fountain of Grace. We may do what St. Jerome charges on the
Pelagians, that is, Ad Ctes. cap. 3.
bid God depart, he is no more necessary to us. It Is true, he gave us a stock
of power and freewill; but now we can stand upon our own bottom, all is in our
own hand, there is no room for a life of faith, no, nor for any true gratitude
for our standing in Grace. De Civ. lib. 12. cap. 9.
It is St. Austins observation, That the Angels who stood, were amplius adjuti,
more helped than those who fell; therefore they cast down their Crowns before
God, ascribing their standing, not to themselves, but to Grace. Should they do,
what they cannot do, ascribe it to themselves, they could not be thankful. In
like manner holy men who persevere, attribute nothing to themselves, but all to
Grace; Ad Ctes. cap. 3
Quodcunque in suo rivulo fluit, as St. Jerome speaks, ad fontem refert,
Whatever flows in his rivulet, he refers to the great fountain; that he
faulters and lapses, is of his own; that he stands and perseveres, is of Grace.
Were it not so, the praise and glory should be ascribed not to God, but to our
selves, which would be to turn Gratitude into Presumption.

The Graces of the Saints may be considered in the act, or in the habit. The
acts have their too frequent pauses and interruptions; but the habit, the vital
principle, is a seed of immortality, and never dies. In the saddest falls of a
Saint, it may be said of him as it was of Eutychus, His life is in him. He that
is born of God, does not commit sin; nay, he cannot sin, 1 John 3.9. Doubtless
he can sin sins of infirmity; nay, and gross sins too, as appears in the falls
of David and Peter; but he cannot sin so as totally to unframe the
new creature, and lay himself in an unregenerate state. This is clear by the
reasons in the Text, For his seed remains in him, and he is born of God.
Could he by sin extinguish the very principles of Grace, he might sin to all
intents and purposes, contrary to the express letter of the text; nay, and his
seed might not remain, and he might ceafe to be born of God, contrary to the
reasons in the text. If the Divine seed and birth do not preserve him from
regnant sin, such as would overthrow him, it preserves him from no sin at all;
the text and reason are altogether insignificant. But if, as the text and truth
is, it preserves him from regnant sin, then the Divine Principles are not
extinguished when he falls into sin.

The habits of Grace may be considered merely in themselves, or in their
dependence. In themselves they are but defectible creatures, and might totally
fail; their being is not from themselves, no more is their duration; in their
dependence they cannot possibly fail, because they are supported by somewhat
greater than themselves. Remarkable is the difference between the case of Adam
and that of believers; in Adam, one act of sin expelled perfect holiness; so
that upon the fall, there was not left in him so much as the least relick of
sanctity, or spark of spiritual life: he, and after him, all his posterity
became spiritually dead in sin, not in part only; for then the new creature
should be new but in part; but totally, every thing in fallen man wants
quickening. But in believers, not one, not many sins are able to drive out the
principles of Grace, though those principles are imperfect in themselves, and
dwell together with much inherent corruption, yet are they not driven out: and
the reason of this difference is, Adam had the stock of holiness in his own
hands; but the graces of the believers depend upon somewhat greater than
themselves. Now touching this Dependence, I shall lay down three or four things:

1. The Graces of Saints depend upon Election; though Election be in it self
from all eternity, yet it buds and blossoms in time. He has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: According as he has
chosen us in him, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Divine Graces, which are choice spiritual
blessings, issue not out of common providence; but, as St. Bernard speaks, ex
abysso aeternitatis, out of the great fountain of Election: The eternal Love,
which lay in Gods bosom, comes forth in the production of those Graces: Nay,
and in the duration of them, God fulfills all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of Faith with power, 2 These. 1.11. Whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; whom he called, them he also justified; whom
he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8.30. We see clearly, Predestination
carries them through the other links unto glory. It is observable, that when
God expresses his fresh mercies to his people, he does it thus, I will yet
choose Israel, Isa. 14.1. God gives such supplies of Grace to his Saints, to
make them persevere, That it is, as if he chose them again; When the Saints are
drooping and dying, as it were, away, electing love gives them another visit,
and makes them live; when their love cools and slacks, his love is ever the
same, and inflames theirs afresh; And how should their Graces fail? The purpose
of God according to election does stand, Romans 9.11. The foundation of God
stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. And how should the rivulets or superstructures of
Grace fail? They can no more do it than the great design of a Church can; their
lamp never goes out, their seed never dies, the false Christ's and false
Prophets cannot seduce them, Mark. 13.22. The Canker of Hymeneus and Philetus,
cannot eat into them, 2 Timothy 2.19. Election, which is the fontal love, still
gives a fresh supply of Grace.

2. Their Graces depend upon Christ's merit and intercession. Christ prays for
Peter, that his Faith may not fail, Luke 22.32; neither does it concern Peter
only. In his solemn prayer on earth, which was the Canon and pattern of his
intercession in Heaven, he prays to his Father for all believers thus, keep
them from evil, Joh. 17.15. If they are kept from evil, they do not fall away,
which is the greatest of evils; if they are not kept from evil, Christ's
intercession ceases, or becomes powerless, neither of which can be; cease it
cannot, because he ever lives to make intercession; become powerless it cannot,
because he is a Priest after the power of an endless life: what he intercedes
for must be done. And this is yet the stronger, if we consider for whom he thus
intercedes, It is for believers, parts and pieces of his Mystical body, such as
he cannot tell how to part from. Notable is that of the Apostle, The God of
peace, who brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, make you perfect, Heb.
13.20, 21. That God who would lose nothing of Christ's human nature, no, not in
the Grave, will perfect believers as mystical parts of him, not suffering their
Graces to see corruption in an utter decay; nor leaving their souls in the hell
of Apostasy: This is another foundation of perseverance. Hence Bishop Davenant
says; De just. hab. 226.
Amor Dei in renatos non fundatur in illorum perfectione aut omnimoda puritate,
sed in Chrisio Mediatore: The love of God toward the regenerate, is not
founded in their perfection or absolute purity, but in Christ the Mediator: As
long as he intercedes, their Graces fail not.

3. Their Graces depend upon the holy Spirit, and that upon a double account:
the one is this, The Spirit dwells in believers, it is an abiding Unction, such
as abides with them for ever, Joh. 14.16. It is as a Well of water springing up
to everlasting life, Joh. 4.14. Continual irrigations of Grace issue from it to
cherish the heavenly nature in them: The Holy Spirit will enliven them, as
being parts of Christ. Hence our Savior says, Because I live, ye shall live
also, Joh. 14.19. As long as the Spirit of life is upon the head, it will flow
down upon the members; and whilst it is there, there can be no such thing as
Apostasy, but on the contrary a sweet liberty to all the holy ways of God. The
other is this, The Spirit witnesses to believers, at least to some of them,
That they are the Children of God, and by consequence heirs of him, Romans 8.16,
17. And how high an evidence is this? May such a Testimony fail or be reversed?
Or may believers cease to be children, and fall short of the inheritance? Far
be it from that holy Spirit. The Apostle calls the Spirit, the earnest of our
inheritance, not for a time, but till the redemption of the Church be
completed, Ephesians. 1.14. till the whole sum be paid in glory: the earnest goes
along with the believer to Heaven, his Graces therefore cannot fail by the way:
This is another ground of perseverance.

4. Their Graces depend upon the promises: In the Covenant of works there was
no promise of perseverance; but in the Covenant of Grace there are many such:
God shall confirm you unto the end, 1 Cor. 1.8. He will put his fear in your
hearts, that ye shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. He which did begin the
good work in them, will perform it till the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6. He will
put his spirit into them, and canse them to walk in his statutes, Ezekiel. 36.27.
In such promises as these, the believers state of Grace is secured: Shall we
now say, that all these promises are conditional, If we will persevere, or,
which is all one, do our duty? Is not this to turn the Covenant of Grace into
that of Works? Is it not to evacuate all these promises touching perseverance,
as if God spoke in such contradictory terms as these, If you persevere, I will
make you persevere; as if perseverance could be the condition of it self? After
these promises, the believers are but where they were before. Without these
promises it would have been true, That if they persevere, they do so; and with
them so interpreted, what have they more? What do they contribute to believers,
when the main stress of perseverance is laid on man's will, and not on Gods
grace. These promises were penned to be great comforts to believers, that God
would establish them by his grace: but what comfort can they take in them, if
the matter be left to their own lubricous will? It is in effect as if God
should say, I will preserve you from all evils and dangers, only for that
greatest evil of all which is in your own hearts and wills, I will not
undertake. What is this but to take away the spirit and life of the promises,
to leave the Saints in a dead and comfortless condition? Our Savior tells us
to our comfort, That his sheep shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of his hand, Joh. 10.28: not unless they themselves will, Prael. Theol.
cap. 12.
says Socinus: but what is this but to nullify the promise? They cannot
possibly be plucked out of Christ's hand without their own voluntary consent. So
the promise runs thus: They shall not be plucked out of his hand but only in
such a way as the same is possible to be done: that is, the words are absurd,
and signify just nothing. But if the promises made to Saints, were thus
conditional, what are those made to Christ? Has not God said, That Christ
should have a seed, nay, and be satisfied in it, Isa. 53.10, 11? Has he not
said, nay, sworn to Christ, That his seed (such as believers are) should endure
for ever; that his throne (a chief part of which is in their hearts) should be
as the Sun, Psalm. 89.35, 36? And are these promises conditional also? It Is
true, that there was a condition on Christ's part, That he should obey and
suffer for us: but was there any on ours? Must these promises run thus, Christ
shall have a seed and a throne if man will? No, the promises are absolute; no
mention at all is made of man's will. But if the Graces of the Saints may fail,
so may these promises also. Christ might have no seed, at least no enduring
one, such as may satisfy him. His throne, at least that choice part of it
which is in the hearts of the Saints, may utterly fail and come to nothing. If
the matter be left to the Lottery of man's will, How is God true to his Son
Christ? Possibly there might be no feed of new-creatures at all; or if there
were, they might fly away from the birth in an utter apostasy. Nay, what if
the event did hit right, and answer the promise, yet God is never the truer for
that; neither can we say, that he fulfilled his promise in that event, which
was never secured by his grace, but came to pass as it happened by the lucky
hit of man's will. To conclude, Upon the whole matter it appears God has taken
believers into his own hand; their Graces shall not fail, because his Truth and
Faithfulness cannot; their standing is sure, because his promises cannot fall
to the ground.

To add no more: We see here how we ought in all humility to give Grace its
due; and this we cannot do, unless we give it all. Non est devotionis dedisse
prope totum Deo, sed frandis retinuisse vel minimum, says Prosper: To give
Nine hundred ninety nine parts to Grace, and reserve one only to man's will, is
more than true devotion will bear: it is just to give the whole unto God. The
Jewish Rabbis say, That he who receives any good thing in this world without a
benediction, is a robber of God: but the greatest sacriledg of all is, when we
own not the Grace of God in supernatural blessings which relate to the world to
come; Vere humiles totum Deo reddunt, True humble souls render all to God. Let
us then acknowledge with Jacob, We are less than the least of all his mercies.
We were naturally undone, unclean creatures, proper objects of wrath. Why did
God send his Son in the flesh to seek that which was lost, wash us in a laver
of his own blood, and bring us into favor with him? We might have been born in
the dark places of the earth where Christ is not named, where the Sun of
Righteousness shines not in Pardons and Graces. Why did God place us in a
Region of Evangelical light, and set Jesus Christ with all his beauties and
treasures evidently before us? Under the Gospel there are many blind eyes and
hard hearts, many poor souls dead and buried in a grave of sin. Why did he open
our eyes upon heavenly mysteries, and melt our hearts into the Divine will? Why
did he raise us up out of our spiritual graves, and quicken us unto a Divine
life? There is still corruption within, and temptation without us. Our Graces
are weak, and in themselves defectible creatures. Why does he supply us with
fresh influences of grace, and maintain the new creature in us? Why are we not
swallowed up in temptations and corruptions, but kept and preserved to the
heavenly Kingdom? Here we must glory in our God, and cry out, Grace, Grace. All
the good we have, is from that Fountain. Thus St. Paul ascribes all to Grace; I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. I labor, yet not I, but the grace of
God which was with me. He acknowledges no I-ness, but ascribes all his
spiritual being and working to Grace. I will shut up all with that of
Bonaventure, Furti reus est, qui sibi aliquid retinet, cum Deus dicat, gloriam
meam alteri non dabo; He is guilty of Theft, who retains any thing to himself,
when God has said, My glory I will not give to another. All glory therefore be
to him alone.

CHAP. XI.
Christ's Righteousness constitutes us Righteous. A double imputation: One to
the proper Agent, another to those in Conjunction; the Conjunctions between
Christ and us; how Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us; that it is not only
the Meritorious, but Material cause of our Justification; this is proved from
that phrase, The Righteousness of God; from the nature of Justification; from
the parallel of the two Adams; from other phrases in Scripture; from a pardon
as not being the same with Justification; from Christ's suffering in our stead;
the Objections against imputed Righteousness answered; what justifies us as to
the Gospel terms; the Necessity and connection of a twofold Righteousness; how
we are justified by Faith; how Good Works are necessary. A short Conclusion.

THERE remains yet behind one Eminent piece of Grace; I mean Justification;
this in Luther is, Articulus stantis and cadentis Ecclesiae, and in Chemnitius,
Arx and propugnaculum Religionis Christianae; a Sacred thing it is, and
difficult to explain; the true measures of it cannot be taken from any thing
but the holy Scripture, where this Mystery is revealed. Touching Justification
there are three things considerable, viz. First we are constituted righteous;
then esteemed or pronounced such; and at last treated as such. The first
conferrs a righteousness upon us; the second ownes and declares it; the third
gives us the consequent reward thereof. The first we have in that phrase of
Justifying the Ungodly, Romans 4.5. for that, unless it were collative of a
Righteousness, would be the same abomination with the Justifying the Wicked,
Prove. 17.15. The second in that phrase of Justifying the Righteous, Deuteronomy. 25.1.
where the word (Justifying) is not effectionis, sed aestimationis and
declarationis significativum: the third is not so much a part of Justification,
as a consequent of it; neither do I remember that it is called Justification in
Scripture: The first is the foundation of the other two; unless a Man be
constituted righteous, God, who is Truth it self, cannot esteem or pronounce
him such: for that were for him to err, which is impossible; neither can he,
who is Sanctity it self, treat him as such; for an unrighteous Person cannot
possibly enter into the holy Heaven, where Eternal Life is given to the
Righteous.

The main Quaere in Justification is, What it is that constitutes us righteous
before God: Righteousness relates to some Law: we are under a double Law; the
one the Law of Nature or Creation, which calls for perfect Obedience in every
point. The other the Law of Grace, which accepts of sincerity; we must, if
justified, be made righteous to both these, accordingly I shall discourse of
both.

We are under the Moral Law of Nature; this is immortalized by its own
intrinsecal rectitude; it so naturally results out of the Relation which Man
stands in toward God, that as long as God is God, the Supreme Truth and
Goodness, and Man Man, a Creature endued with Reason and Will, it cannot cease
to be, or to oblige: it is not imaginable, that such a thing as Reason should
be unbound to look up to the original Truth, from whence it came, or that such
a thing as Free Will, should be unbound to embrace that infinite Good which
made it; this Law stands faster than the pillars of Heaven and Earth: it has a
double Sanction; a promise of Eternal Life upon perfect obedience, and a
threatening of eternal Death upon the least Transgression. The promise though
never abrogated by God, could not of it self bud or bring forth Life; a Sinner,
because a Sinner, not being capable of perfect obedience, could not have Life
from that promise, cessat materia. There could be no person capable of the
promised Life; the Law was weak, though not in it self, yet through the Flesh,
the sin of Man. Man sinned away the Promise, but the Threatening he could not
sin away; nay, by his sin he put himself under the Curse and Wrath of it. Sin
made him a fit object and fuel for these; the case standing thus, how or which
way should a Sinner be justified as to the Law? In a Sinner there was matter
enough for the Treatning, but more for the Promise. Death might justly seize
him, but Life he was not payable of by virtue of that Law; here infinite Wisdom
found out that which no created Eye could spy out, a way of Justification
without abrogating the Law: thus therefore it was contrived, the Law, being
under the power of the Legislator, was relaxed, though not abrogated; there may
be a double notion of the Law; either it may be taken as it is in it self, in
summo apice, in its primordial rigor, requiring perfect personal obedience from
us; and thus it does not, cannot justify us; there is a (...), an utter
impossibility upon it. Romans 8.3. Righteousness could not come by the Law, nay,
in this sense it works wrath, it condemns and curses the Sinner; or else it
may be taken as it is by the great Legislator relaxed, to admit of a
satisfaction in our Sponsor Jesus Christ; and thus it has its end, its (...),
a Righteousness which satisfied it in him; thus it cannot condemn Believers: a
satisfied Law, so far as it is satisfied, has nothing to say against them who
partake of that satisfaction: That of Learned Mr. Gataker is remarkable,
Justificatio nostri tum ab Evangelio, tum a Lege pendet; a Lege quatenus eidem
satisfit pro delictis adversus eam admissis; ab Evangelio, quatenus
satisfactio, non a nobis, sed a Christo Vicaria opera pro nobis exhibetur; The
Gospel reveals such a Sponsor as has satisfied the Law for us; the Law being
satisfied cannot condemn those who partake of that satisfaction.

It appears by this, That Christ's Righteousness is that which constitutes us
righteous as to the Law; only here many worthy learned Divines are at a
difference, how it does so: doubtless it does it in a way of Imputation, but
the mode of that Imputation is not agreed on. Some say, that Christ's
Righteousness is the meritorious cause of our Justification, and so imputed to
us in the effects, in that pardon which discharges us from the Law: Others,
That it is it self in some sort imputed to us, and so becomes the material
cause of our Justification; I take it, our former Divines, who disputed with
the Papists about Imputed Righteousness, are of the latter opinion. Hence
Bishop Davenant says, De Just. hab. fol. 364, 373.
that, Ipsissima Christi obedientia nobis imputatur, quasi esset nostra
personalis; The very obedience of Christ is imputed to us, as if it were our
personal Righteousness. And again he says, that In se, it is causa meritoria
Justificationis; but as it is applied to Believers, Subit vicem causae
formalis, it is in the room of a formal cause. It Is true, he says, That it is
imputed to us ad aliquem effectum; not that it is imputed only in the effect,
but that it is imputed in a measure, and to some intents, though not in the
full latitude, or as it is in Christ. The Learned Professors of Leyden
determine thus: Mirum hic videri non debet Christi Justitiam non meritoriae
solum, sed and materialis, imo and formalis causae rationem habere, cum id
diversimode fiat, nempe, qua illud est, propter quod, in quo, sive ex quo, and
per quod justificamur: To quote no more, If Christ's Righteousness be only a
meritorious cause of Justification, then our former Divines have striven in the
dark, the Controversies between them and the Papists in this point have been
but a vain jangling; no Papist ever denied, that Christ merited Justification
for us, no Protestant should ask any more. The Council of Trent, laying down
the causes of Justification, says, Chistus sua sanctissima Passione in ligno
Crucis nobis Justificationem meruit, and pro nobis Deo Patri satisfecit. Here
our Divines should have acquiesced in silence, but surely they thought there
was somewhat more in it: For my own part, I conceive Christ's Righteousness is
so far imputed to us, as to be the matter of our Justification; before I come
to offer my Reasons, I shall lay down several things tending to explain my
meaning in this point.

First, There is a double Imputation. The one, when a thing inherent or
transient is imputed to the very Subject or Agent of it. The other, when it is
imputed to those in conjunction with the Subject or Agent, as being parts and
portions of him. The first Imputation is according to the course of Nature, the
second is according to some just constitution made touching the same: the
former is unquestionable, the latter is that which is to be cleared, that such
an Imputation is possible; and when it is done, truth may appear by these
Instances. The primitive Righteousness of our Nature was only inherent in Adam:
Yet was it imputed to us; we were by God esteemed as righteous in him, else we
are not fallen Creatures, neither do we need any such thing as Regeneration.
Adam's sin was an act done by him, yet is it imputed to us; it is derived down
upon us as Members of him, else the want of Righteousness in us is not a
privative want of what we once had in Adam, and afterward lost in him, but a
mere negative want, as being only of that we never had or forfeited: Adam's
Righteousness being not imputed to us, we never had it; Adam's sin being not
imputed to us, we never forfeited it; such a mere negative want is no sin. Nay,
if Adam's sin be not imputed to us, our inherent pravity is no sin; it cannot
be sin in unfallen Creatures; it is no sin to be born into the World; there is
no foundation in us to make it sin; and the consequence of this is, that there
is no such thing as original sin at all in us, which to say, is to oppose the
Doctrine of the Church in all Ages: We see here, that such an imputation to
those in conjunction is possible, because it is actually done; and it must
needs be true, because it is done by God, who is Truth it self, and cannot err.
You will say, It cannot be true, primitive Righteousness was never in us, we
never committed Adam's sin: I answer, This is one thing which over-turns
Religion; we are apt to reject that as false, which our weak Reason cannot
comprehend. Is not an internal sin in the Will imputed to the Members of the
Body? if not, why must the Body rise and suffer for it? if so, sin may be
imputed to that which it never resided in; in this case the conjunction salves
the matter; and by a parity of Reason, Adam's Righteousness and Sin may be
imputed to us, as being parts and Members of him; and the Imputation is true,
because it is to those in conjunction, and according to a just constitution.
God set Adam to be a Head of Mankind; we are propagated from him as Branches
from the Root; his fin therefore may be justly imputed to us: the Imputation of
it is according to the Divine Constitution: But the reason of that Imputation
is, because Adam, the Head of Mankind, sinned, and all in him: It is a pretty
question which is started in Anselm, De Concept. Virg. cap. 4.
how the Senses and Members in Man should be guilty of sin, when God himself
subjected them to Man's Will? I answer, God's order was meet and congruous in
so subjecting them; yet the act of the Will renders them guilty, as being in
conjunction with it: in like manner, God's Constitution that Adam should be the
Head of Mankind, was just and equitable, but this transgression of Adam derives
a guilt upon us, as being parts and Members of him.

2ly. The Conjunction between Christ and us must be considered, and that is
double.

The one is that Conjunction which is between Christ and Mankind in common; the
Titles given to Christ will manifest it; he is a Mediator, not only an
internuntial one, but a satisfying and atoning one, a Mediator above all Peer
or Parallel, and that in all his Offices, in which he acted not as a private
Person, or in his own name only, But, as the Office was in Gods or ours; in his
Prophetical and Kingly Offices he acted in God's Name toward us; in his
Priestly Office, he acted in our Name toward God; hence the Apostle says,
that every Priest is ordained (...), for Men, Heb. 5.1. to act in their behalf
toward God: he was our Sponsor or Surety, he undertook to satisfy Justice for
us. Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, says he, Heb. 10.7. Burnt-offerings and
Sacrifices could not pay our Debts, but he would do it; and for that purpose he
took an Humane Nature to do it in: never was there such a Surety as he; he
undertook to satisfy for us, not as common Sureties do, upon a mere
contingency, but upon a certain determinate Counsel; not when we were solvents
or able to reimburse him again, but when we were known utter bankrupts, under a
perfect impossibility to expiate the least sin. So plenary was that
satisfaction, that if we receive him by Faith, we are Debtors no longer, all
our debts are blotted out of God's Book, no more to be charged upon us; a
second payment cannot be demanded of us; he was the representative of Mankind.
He did sustinere nostram personam, he stood in our room; he suffered in our
stead, not only nostro bono, but nostro loco: it may be thought perhaps that
Christ was not a proper substitute; but it was well said by the Learned Rivet
in another case, Regulis and Legibus humanis Deum alligare vult pulvis and
cinis: We are apt to limit the Holy one to our Rules and measures: But if the
Mysteries of Christ may be put into the straights of humane Laws and Reason, he
can scarce be properly any thing of that which the Scripture ascribes to him,
he cannot properly be a Surety and a Mediator too, much less a Priest and a
Sacrifice too; least of all these, and a Redeemer too in the same sufferings: A
Mediator does not pay as a Surety does; nor a Surety offer as a Priest does;
nor a Priest die as a Sacrifice does; neither is a Redeemer the very same with
these, but distinct from them all; may there be a proper Priest and Redeemer, a
proper Offering and Paying, a proper Sacrifice and Price in the same
sufferings: these conjunctions seem to carry difficulty in them. Nevertheless,
I verily believe, that he was properly all these, yet in a way of transcendency
above humane Law and Reason; it is observable in Scripture, that one notion of
Christ runs into another, the notion of a Mediator into that of a Redeemer; he
is a Mediator, who gave himself a ransom, 1 Timothy 2.5, and 6. the notion of a
Mediator into that of a Priest, he is a Mediator for the Redemption of
Transgressions, Heb. 9.15. that is, for the expiation of them by offering up
himself to God, as it is in the precedent verse; the notion of a Priest into
that of a Surety: hence in the midst of a Divine Discourse touching his
Priesthood, comes in (...), the surety of the Covenant, Heb. 7.22. nay, it is
observable, that these notions of Christ are interwoven with that of a
Substitute, as the mode of performing them. Thus as a Priest he gave himself an
Offering and a Sacrifice for us, Ephesians. 5.2. as a Redeemer he was made a Curse
for us, Gal. 3.13. as a Mediator and Redeemer he gave himself a ransom for all,
1 Timothy 2.5, and 6. in each of which the substitution comes in: hence it
appears, that Christ is properly all these; or else, as Socinus would have it,
all seems to be but a Metaphor. To add no more, these Conjunctions tell us,
that Christ was so far one with us, that those things fell upon him, which
otherwise he was utterly incapable of. The Holy One was made sin, the Blessed
One a curse; his sufferings were properly penal, such as were not inflicted by
Sovereignty, but Justice, such as were not the Curse causless, but merited by
sin; unless they were merited by sin, they were mere suffering, not punishment;
punishment for nothing, is no punishment: if there was no punishment in his
sufferings, how were they satisfactory? If there was no merit of sin to procure
them, how were they penal? If Justice inflicted them not, how were they a
punishment? or, if they were penal, how could Justice inflict them upon an
Innocent? Here we have nothing to say, but this, Christ was so far made one
with us, as to render his sufferings penal and satisfactory.

The other is that special conjunction, which is between Christ and Believers;
Christ is the Head, they are the Members: the Ligatures of this Mystical Union
are the Holy Spirit and Faith, the quickening Spirit (says the reverend Usher)
descends downwards from the head to be in us a fountain of supernatural life; a
lively Faith, wrought by the same Spirit, ascends from us upward to lay fast
hold upon him. The Scripture notably sets forth this Union, We dwell in Christ,
and he in us, John 6.56. We abide in him, and he in us, John 15.4. We are
Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones, Ephesians. 5.30, 32. And he is
in us the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. This the Apostle calls a great Mystery, and
the Riches of the Glory of the Mystery; we are ingrasted into him as Branches
into a Root; cemented to him as the building is to the foundation; incorporated
with him as the food is with our Bodies; united to him as Members are to the
Head. We eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, and become one Spirit with him;
nothing can be more emphatical, the Holy Spirit, which resides in him the Head,
falls down upon us his Members, and so makes a kind of continuity between him
and us, too Spiritual and Divine to be interrupted by any local distance: Hence
St. Chrysostom says, that there is, (...), Com. 1 Cor. 3.11.
no medium or middle between Christ and us; hence St. Austin says, that,
Fideles siunt cum homine Christo unus Christus, Believers are made one Christ
with the Man Christ, the Head and the Body make up one Christ: Hence that of
Aquinas, that Christ and his Members are but, una persona mystica, one mystical
person; the consequence of this admirable Union is the communication of Divine
Blessings from him to us, tota verae justitiae, salutis, vitae participatio ex
hac pernecessaria cum Christo (...) pendet: says the learned Zanchy, All our
good things depends on this most necessary Union.

Thirdly, The righteousness of Christ may be taken under a double notion,
either as it was the very idem to all the Laws he was under, or else as it was
the tantundem, a plenary satisfaction to the moral Law by us violated; in the
first notion it was a righteousness ex natura sua, being a perfect conformity
to those Laws; in the second it was a satisfaction ex divina ordinatione, being
by God ordained so to be; in the first notion it was not for us; who, being
once sinners, were incapable of it. But for himself to justify and sanctify
him in that state, which he undertook to be in: In the second it was not for
himself; who, as being pure from all sin, was incapable of it; but for us, to
justify us sinners against the Law: Here I shall only add, that, under the
notion of satisfaction, I take in all Christ's righteousness, Active as well as
Passive; though I think the Active in it self alone could not have amounted to
a satisfaction, because without shedding of blood there was no remission to be;
yet the Active being in Conjunction with the Passive, is a part of the
satisfaction, and makes it the more complete; for a satisfaction made up of
both together, answers the threatening, and honors the precept of the Law; it
satisfies God's Justice in it self by penal sufferings, and in its foundation,
that is, God's holiness, by perfect obedience.

Fourthly, The Active and Passive Righteousness of Christ are not imputed to
us, as they are the Idem, a perfect conformity to the Laws he was under; for we
were not under the Mediatorial Law: nor, being once sinners, are we capable of
a perfect conformity to the moral: but they are imputed to us, as they are the
tantundem, a plenary satisfaction to the moral Law by us broken; for so they
are very apt and proper to justify sinners against the Law: Neither is
Christ's satisfaction imputed to all actually to justify them against the Law,
for all are not justified against it, but it is imputed to Believers, as being
mystical parts and portions of him: hence that Learned Bishop says, Dav. de
Just. hab. 369.
Quia insiti sumus in corpus ejus, and coalescimus cum illo in unam personam,
ideo ejus justitia nostra reputatur, because we are ingrafted into his body,
and grow as it were, into one Person with him, therefore his Righteousness is
reputed ours; neither is Christ's satisfaction imputed to his belleving Members
according to its fullness and latitude as it is in Christ the Head, but in such
sort and measure as is meet for it to be communicated to Members: this is
notably illustrated in the parallel of the two Adams, who are two such
communicative Heads, as never were the like, who communicate to theirs in such
proportion as is congruous between Head and Members. Adam's sin is derived to
each of us, not in its full latitude, but pro mensura membri; and in like
manner, Christ's satisfaction is derived to each Believer, not in its full
latitude, but pro mensura membri; so much of Ada's sin comes upon each one of
us, as soon as he is proles Adae, as makes him a sinner; so much of Christ's
satisfaction comes upon each one of us, as soon as he is proles Christi, as
makes him Righteous against the Law; in both there is a communication to
Members, yet in such a way, as that the difference between Head and Members is
observed.

Fifthly, There was a Divine Constitution, that Jesus Christ should be our
Sponsor, and standing in our room, should satisfy for us, that he should be an
Head to Believers, and his satisfaction should so far become theirs, as to
justify them against the Law: accordingly that satisfaction is truly imputed
to them. Some Persons have been pleased to speak of Imputed Righteousness, as
if it were a fancy, a mere putative imaginary thing; but we see here upon what
grounds it stands: the first Foundation of it, is the Divine constitution made
touching Christ; the intermediate Foundation is this, that Christ was our
Sponfor and satisfied for us: the immediate Foundation is this, that Christ is
a communicating Head to his believing Members, and they as Members participate
in his satisfaction; these things are sufficient to make us conclude as Bishop
Davenant does, Imputatio non nititur fictitia aliqua suppositione, sed vera
participatione rei imputatae: Imputation does not stand upon any fictitious
supposition, but upon a true participation of the thing imputed. These things
being thus laid down, I shall come directly to the point, my Opinion is, That
the Righteousness of Christ is not merely the meritorious cause of
Justification, but somewhat more; neither is it merely imputed to us in the
Effects, but it self, as a satisfaction, is so far imputed to us, as to be the
material cause of Justification, as to the Law, I think nothing can be more
proper to justify us as the Law than that which satisfied it. I cannot tell
how to suppose that one thing should satisfy the Law, and another justify
against it: And here I shall first lay down my Reasons, and then answer the
Objections made against my Opinion: For Reasons I shall offer several things.

First, I shall begin with that memorable phrase, The Righteousness of God,
which cannot but be of great moment in this point: some take it for the mercy
of God, and so it is sometimes taken in the Old Testament, The Mercy of the
Lord is upon them that fear him, and his Righteousness unto Childrens Children,
Psalm. 103.17. where Mercy and Righteousness are one and the same; but in the
New Testament, where this phrase often occurs, it is never so taken; the
Righteousness of God is revealed in the Gospel, Romans 1.17. Revealed, that,
which before was only obscurely hinted, was in the Gospel clearly opened; but
the Mercy of God was not only darkly hinted, but openly proclaimed in very high
and stately terms in the Old Testament. An Instance we have of it, Exodus 34.6,
and 7. where the Titles of Mercy carry as much of Glory and Magnificence as any
thing can do. We are said to be made the Righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5.21. but
never to be made his Mercy; neither would be at all proper to say so. Others
take it for our Inherent Graces, which are our Evangelical Righteousness; but
these, though they come down from Heaven, are never called the Righteousness;
nay, on the contrary they are called our own, as being inherent in us: Hence we
find Your Faith, Romans 1.8. your Love, 2 Cor. 8.8. your Patience, Luke 21.19.
your Hope, 1 Pet. 1.21. your Righteousness, Matthew. 5.20. that, which in
Scripture is called the Righteousness of God, is not the same with that which
is called our own there; were our Inherent Graces imported in that phrase.
Faith, which is a prime excellent Grace, must have its share therein; but the
Righteousness of God is by Faith, Romans 3.22. Therefore it is not Faith, the
Righteousness of God is upon the Believer, therefore it is not in him: Others
take it for Pardon; but neither can this Interpretation stand. The Jews were
ignorant of God's Righteousness, Romans 10.3. but surely they were not ignorant,
that God was a God pardoning iniquity, that Pardon which in the Old Testament
is elegantly decyphered by Covering, Blotting out, Remembering no more, Casting
away sin, is not in the New veiled in an Expreslion, so obscure and improper
for it, as that of the Righteousness of God seems to be to that intent; leaving
these, I take it, that the Righteousness of God imports that of Christ; and in
this sense the phrase is as Glorious and Illustrious, as it would be obscure
and improper to denote Pardon: The Righteousness of Christ is indeed the
Righteousness of God; it is the Righteousness of him who is God, of him, whose
Blood is called the Blood of God; it is a pure perfect Righteousness which can
consist before the Tribunal of God, which was by God ordained to make us
Righteous: This is it which, being before but darkly hinted, was in the Gospel
manifestly revealed; this is that which is upon the Believer as a rich Covering
to hide his imperfections, this is it which the Jews were ignorant of, and
submitted not unto: the Apostle tells us, That they submitted not to the
Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. and what that Righteousness is, the next Verse
expresses; for Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that
believes; the Law has its end in nothing but in his Righteousness, which
satisfied it. But besides there is one place, which in terminis calls the
Righteousness of God the Righteousness of Christ, to them who have obtained
like precious Faith with us through the Righteousness of God and our Savior
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.1. Observe, it is not through the Righteousness (...),
of God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, as noting two Persons, but (...), of
God and our Savior, as betokening one, as Bishop Downham has observed; like
that Tit. 2.13. The glorious Appearance of the great God and our Savior, where
one Person is intended: Thus far it appears, that the Righteousness of God
denotes the Righteousness of Christ. That which remains is to enquire, Whether
the Righteousness of God never import any more than a mere meritorious cause:
It Is true in that place 2 Pet. 1.1. it imports no more; but in others it speaks
further: We are made the Righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5.21. The Righteousness
of God is upon us, Romans 3.22. and, as a paraphrase upon the Righteousness of
God, the Apostle tells us, that Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness
to the Believer, Romans 10.4. Here I take it, the Righteousness of Christ is set
forth not only as a meritorious antecedent cause of Justification, but as an
Ingredient, a material cause in it: he that has only the effect, cannot be
said to be made the Impetrating cause, no more can we be said to be made the
Righteousness of Christ, if we only have the fruit of it, not the thing it
self: That Righteousness, as a meritorious cause, may be said to be for us; but
not to be upon us, unless by Imputation it be made ours: Christ in respect of
Merit only is no more for Righteousness (which yet is the Emphasis of the Text)
than for sanctifying Graces, these being as much merited as the other; Christ
is so far Righteousness as he is the end of the Law, and that he is in the
satisfaction it self, not in Remission, which is the effect of it; the
Satisfaction it self therefore is made ours in Justification. It seems to me a
great departure from the Text to say, Christ is the end of the Law for
Righteousness, that is for Pardon, which is the Effect, or for Impunity, which
is the Effect of the Effect.

Secondly, It is utterly impossible that there should be a Justification
without a Righteousness. Constitutive Justification makes us Righteous,
Estimative or sentential Justification esteems or pronounces us such; a
Justification cannot be without a Righteousness; nor can any thing be a
Righteousness, unless it answer the Law. What then is our Righteousness as to
the Law? Faith, answers the Gospel terms: But what answers the Law? Surely
nothing under Heaven can do it but Christ's Satisfaction. The Quaere therefore
is, Whether that Satisfaction be our Righteousness in it self, or only in its
effects: if in the effects only, then something less than Christ's
satisfaction, viz. an effect, is our Righteousness as to the Law, and by
consequence something less than that satisfies the Law: I cannot imagine that
one thing should satisfy the Law, and another justify against it; one and the
same satisfaction of Christ does both. There are but two sorts of Righteousness
as to the Law; the one a Righteousness in the idem, a direct conformity to it;
the other a Righteousness in valor, a full compensation or satissaction for the
breaches of it, a third cannot be found, where there is neither such a
conformity to the Law, that all is done as it ought to be, nor such a
satisfaction to it, that all that is done amiss, is compensated, there is no
such thing as Righteousness, a pardon or freedom from punishment there may be,
but a Righteousness there is not. Because there is nothing done to the Law;
either by way of obedience or recompense; and where nothing is done to the Law,
there cannot be a Righteousness: Now a Sinner not being capable of a
Righteousness of consormity, his Righteousness must be that of a satisfaction
or compensation; not an effect of it, but the thing it self, no other thing can
be a Sinners Righteousness. It is observable in Scripture, That Justification
is so set forth, that the Law is established in it, Romans 3.31. that its
Righteousness is fulfilled, Romans 8.4. that it has its end, Romans 10.4. And all
this because in Christ's Satisfaction there is a full compensution made for
sin, such as comes in the room of a perfect conformity, and supplies that
defect of it which rises out of the suult committed: This is done by the
Satisfaction it self, not by an effect of it. Nothing less than it self could
give the Law its end or establishment: If that Satisfaction be our
Righteousness, not in it self but in its effects, what is that effect? Is it a
Pardon? that is God's act; God's act may make or esteem us righteous, but it is
not the Righteousness it self; it is a jus impunitatis that is not the
Righteousness it self; a Righteousness as to the Law must be either a perfect
conformity or a satisfaction, but a Jus impunitatis is neither of these; as in
Condemnation the Obligatio ad paenam is not the very culpa, but a consequent of
it. So in Justification the Jus impunitatis is not the very Righteousness, but
a consequent of it. A Jus impunitatis is opposite to the reatus paenae; but a
Satisfaction, which is our true Righteousness, is opposite to the reatus
culpae, as compensating the fault committed. It remains therefore that Christ's
Satisfaction is not in its effects, but in it self our Righteousness, which
also further appears: In that, when we are to answer for our breaches of the
Law, our great Plea is to that no other than his Satisfaction; Ostendo fide
jussorem meum, De Just. hab. 370.
says Bishop Davenant, When the Law makes its demands against me, I show my
Sponsor Christ, who satisfied it. Now, if his Satisfaction be it self our
Righteousness, it must be made ours by Imputation, for that which is not ours,
cannot be our Righteousness; neither does God, who judges according to Truth,
esteem it such: You will say, Though it self be not ours, yet it is that for
which God does justify us: To which I answer, Though God justify us for it,
yet, unless it be ours, it is no more our Righteousness than it is our
Holiness; when God sanctifies us for it, no Man (I think) will call it our
Holiness, no more, unless it be ours, may we call it our Righteousness. If it
be ours by Imputation, then it is more than a meritorious cause. It is the very
matter of our Justification; neither can I tell how to think it less, seeing a
Sinner is capable of no other Righteousness, as to the Law, but a Satisfaction,
seeing so glorious a Satisfaction, as that of Christ is, is ushered into the
World for that very end; it is to me unimaginable, that that Satisfaction
should yet not be our Righteousness as to the Law, but something less than it
self should have the honor of it.

Thirdly, Very momentous in this point, is the collation of the two Adams, Romans
5. the first Adam was the Origin of Sin; Christ the second Adam, was the Origin
of Righteousness and Life: never were there in the World two such Heads as
these, uterque quod suumest cum suis communicate, as the Learned Beza has it,
Adam communicates Sin and Death to his Posterity; Christ's Righteousness and
Life to his believing Seed, in the parallel it is observable, that Christ is as
strong; nay, a stronger Head than Adam, Adam was (...) a Type of him that was
to come; and less then the Antitype, who was more potent to rebuild the ruins
of the fall, than Adam was to make them, Righteousness came as full from
Christ, as sin did from Adam; nay, more fully, as the Apostle hints in the
(...), verse. 15. and in the abundance and superabundance of Grace, verse. 17.
and 20. hence it appears, that so far as Adam's sin was ours, so far is
Christ's Righteousness ours also. Adam's sin was not ours in the full latitude,
as it was in him, we did not eat the Fruit in our own persons, we were not
heads of Mankind, we did not usher in Sin and Death upon the World, no, this
was, (...), by that one Adam, neither was it ours in the effect only, for then
our innate pravity would be no sin, as merely proceeding from that first sin of
Adam, in which we participated not: that in the Schools must needs be true,
peccatum habituale dicit essentialem ordinem ad praecedens actuale; Its
impossible, that one should be a sinner habitually, who in no sense was a
sinner before: hence that of St. Austin, quoted by Dr. Ward, Nulla foret
hominis culpa, st talis a Deo Creatus esset, qualis nunc nascitur, it remains
therefore that Adam's sin it self is derived to each one of us, pro ratione
membri, proportionably: Christ's satisfaction is not ours in the full latitude,
as it was in him; we satissied not God's Justice in our own Persons, we were
not Heads of the Church, neither did we usher in Life and Righteousness into
the World; no, it was (...), by that one Christ, neither is it ours in the
effect only; for then the effect a thing less than the satisfaction it self,
should justify or make us righteous against the Law, which cannot be: It
remains therefore that it is it self derived upon each one of us, pro mensura
membri: Again, Adam's sin did first in order of Nature, make us sinners by it
self imputed, and then by the inherent pravity consequent; in like manner
Christ's satisfaction does first in order of Nature make us righteous by it
self imputed, and then by the sanctifying Graces communicated by virtue of it:
Now if Christ's satisfaction be not it self communicated to us as Members of
him; then the Glory of his Headship seems to fail, he is not so strong an Head
as Adam, Righteousness is not so amply communicated from Christ, as sin is from
Adam, Adam communicates the sin it self to us, but Christ communicates his
Righteousness in the effects only; if Christ only merited Justification, the
Glory of his Headship seems not to stand in it; in Sanctification he as our
Head communicates sanctifying Graces to us, to be the matter of our
Sanctification, but in Justification he does not communicate his satisfaction
to us, to be the matter of our Justification; he merited Justification upon
Gospel-terms before our Union with him, What does he after, or more, as our
head in Justification? his satisfaction not being communicated to us, he seems
not to be so complete an Head in Justification, as in Sanctification; to make
this Argument from Christ's Headship more clear, it will not be amiss to
consider some passages in that fifth Chapter to the Romans; Wherefore as by one
Man sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all
Men, for that all have sinned, verse 12. in this and the two following verses
one part of the collation, viz. That of Adam being laid down, where is the
(...) collationis? or how is it to be supplied? some Divines think, that it is
quite omitted by the Apostle, others conceive it to be couched in those words,
Who is the figure of him that was to come, verse 14. but whether it be the one
or the other, surely there must be somewhat understood on Christ's part as
correspondent to that of Adam, who was a Type of him, Piscator supplies it
thus, Plena comparatio sic habet quemadmodum per Adam peccatum introiit in
omnes homines, and per peccatum mors, eo quod in Adamo omnes peccarunt, sic per
Christum Justitia introiit in omnes credentes, and per Justitiam vita, eo quod
in Christo omnes credentes pro peccatis satisfecerunt; he says, that all
Believers satisfied in Christ, I intend somewhat more in this point then I
suppose he did. Yet I would speak less in words then so, I think the
expression, that we satisfied in him, is not an expedient one, though in
Scripture nothing to me seems to sound more like an answer to that, (...),
verse 12. then that Text (...), 2 Cor. 5.15. though the Learned Camero says,
De Eccles. fol. 224.
in Christi morte Ecclesiae est veluti satisfaciens Deo: Yet I wave that
expression, for it seems to import, as if Christ's satisfaction were in its
full latitude imputed to us: It is as much as I intend, that we as Members of
him do in a measure participate of his satisfaction, so far, that it is the
matter of our Justification against the Law: Adam's sin is is not communicated
to us in the full latitude, but so far as to make us sinners; Christ's
Satisfaction is not communicated to us in the full latitude, but so far as to
make us righteous. But to go on to another passage in that Chapter, As by one
Man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous, Verse. 19. In this famous Text those words ((...) and
(...), as and so also) are to be noted; it is as much as to say, as it was in
the one case, so it is in the other, as Adam's sin was derived upon us, so also
is Christ's Righteousness, if Adam's sin were in some measure communicated to
us to make us sinners; then Christ's Righteousness is in some measure
comunicated to us to make us righteous; we see, what is the best way to judge
how far Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, not by comparing the
Imputation of our Sin to Christ, and the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness
to us, but by comparing the Imputation of Adam's sin to us, and the Imputation
of Christ's Righteousness to us, in that Text ( He was made Sin for us, that we
might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.) there is no (as
and so also) as there is in the parallel of the two Adams: though I think it
hard to say, that sin was Imputed to Christ only in the effects, for unless our
sin, as it was fundamentum paenae, was Imputed to him, unless it was so far
Imputed, as to render his sufferings punishments, his sufferings were not
penal, and if not penal, sin was not at all imputed to him; no, not in the
effect: yet if sin was Imputed to him only in the effect, it follows not, that
his Righteousness should be so only Imputed to us, the Apostle says not, as he
was made sin, so we are made Righteousness, there is no (as and so) in that
Text as there is in the parallel of the Adam's: there is a great disparity in
the cases; Sin was not imputed to Christ to constitute him a sinner, but
Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us to constitute us righteous; Sin was
imputed to Christ, that it might be absorpt and swallowed up in his
sweet smelling Sacrifice; but Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, that it
may abide upon us as the matter of our Justification: We see here, in the point
of Imputed Righteousness, we must take our measures; not from our sin imputed
to Christ, but from Adam's sin imputed to us: Further, The word ((...)) in the
19. Verse emphatically points out the material cause of Justification. Christ's
Righteousness, as a meritorious cause, is an impulsive to God to constitute us
righteous, but to be an impulsive to constitute is not properly to constitute,
as a meritorious cause it impetrates, that we shall be made righteous; but by
that Impetration it does no more make us righteous, than by the Impetration of
sanctifying Graces it makes us holy: notwithstanding these Impetrations, we are
not indeed holy without those Graces, nor are we righteous without a
Righteousness: as a meritorious cause it was before Faith, nay, before the
Covenant of Promise, but then it constituted none righteous. It was for all,
but it constitutes not all: You will say, As soon as a Man by Faith has a
capacity, it constitutes him righteous; How so? It was a meritorious cause
before Faith, now it is no more; at the first it procured that Men should be
justified upon Gospel-terms, and now what new or fresh act or energy has it?
Indeed there is somewhat more on Man's part, viz. Faith; somewhat more on God's
viz. Justifying the Believer. But what is there more on Christ's? the merit is
as before, one and the same, and impetrates Justification on Gospel-terms for
all; on our part there is a difference, one believes, not another; on God's a
difference, he justifies one, not another; but Christ stands only as a common
cause, his Satisfaction is in communi, and constitutes no one righteous more
than another: He is no more, as it seems, the end of the Law for Righteousness
to the Believer, than to the Unbeliever. Now if this be, as it is durus sermo,
then it remains that Christ's Righteousness is by particular imputation made
over to Believers, and so becomes the matter of their Justification;
accordingly the Apostle in Romans the fifth speaks of it, not as a common cause,
but as peculiarized to Believers, such as receive Grace: He does not speak of
what Christ merited for all, but of what Christ as an Head communicates to his
Members: The scope of the parallel between the two Adams evinces this; it being
no other than this, That both of them communicate to those, who are in them.
The sum of all is, Adam and Christ are set forth by the Apostle as two
communicative Heads; if Adam's sin be imputatively ours, so is Christ's
Righteousness also.

I should now pass on to another Reason: But possibly some may object, That
there is a great difference between the two Heads. We were seminally in Adam,
we receive an Humane Nature from him; but we were not seminally in Christ, we
receive not a Nature from him: therefore, though Adam's sin be imputatively
ours, yet so is not Christ's Righteousness. In answer to this I shall offer
several things.

First, We receive an Humane Nature from Adam; but is this the only foundation
of the Imputation of his sin to us? No, surely: Then all the sins of our
Progenitors should be as much imputed to us, as the first sin of Adam was.
Which I cannot at all believe; Adam was a moral Head of Holiness and
Righteousness to all Mankind, but since the fall, no Man, no, not Adam himself,
was such; the sin of Adam is universally imputed to all, even to the most holy,
but so are not the sins of other Progenitors; we were not therefore one with
Adam only by a Natural union, but by a Divine Constitution.

Secondly, We receive an Human Nature from Adam; and have we not a Divine
Nature from Christ? are we not called his Seed? are we not begotten by his
Spirit and Word? were we not in a Spiritual sense seminally in his Blood and
Merits? how else should any such thing as the New Creature, be produced in a
lapsed Nature? These things are as proper to make us Parts and Members of
Christ, as an Humane Nature is to make us Parts and Members of Adam; therefore
the communication of Righteousness from Christ must be as full and great, as
the communication of sin is from Adam. Bishop Usher tells us, That we have a
more strict conjunction in the Spirit with Christ, then ever we had in Nature
with Adam, one and the same Spirit is in Christ and Believers, but there is not
one Soul in Adam and his Posterity: the communication from Christ therefore, if
answerable to the Union, must be as great, nay greater than that from Adam.

Thirdly, Adam was a Head both by Nature, and by Constitution; Sin, unless in
Conjunction with Nature, could not pass from him to us, neither could we,
without a Nature conveyed from him, have been members of him: It di^ therefore
appertain to his Headship to convey a Nature to us; but Christ was an Head not
by Nature, But above it by Divine Constitution; he was not to convey Naturals
to us, but super-naturals; since the Fall, Righteousness was not to pass to us,
in Conjunction with Nature; Nature was to be from one Head, and Righteousness
from another; we were to be made Members of Christ, not by communication of
Nature, but of Grace; it therefore did not appertain to his Headship to
communicate Nature to us, yet was his Headship as potent to convey
Righteousness to us, as Adam's was to convey sin; the Divine Constitution made
him such an Head, that his Satisfaction might become ours for our
Justification: thus much touching this Argument drawn from the Headship of
Christ.

Fourthly, Those Scripture phrases of being purged, sprinkled, cleansed,
washed, justified in the Blood of Christ, notably import two things, the one,
that Justification is in a signal manner attributed to Christ's Blood, as
Sanctification is to the Spirit; the other, that Christ's Blood justifies by
way of Application: but neither of these can stand, if that Blood be only a
meritorious cause, not the first, how can Justification, be signally attributed
to it; when as a meritorious cause, it no less impetrates Sanctification than
Justification? nothing singular is done by it in the one more than in the
other; not the second, how can it justify by Application, when as a
meritorious cause, it operates only by impetration? You will say, Christ's
Blood is applied in the effect, in a pardon: I answer, those Scripture phrases
before quoted, show, that the Blood it self is applied to us; how else is it
said, that we are purged, cleansed, sprinkled, washed in it? unless it be
applied to us, the phrases, how emphatical soever, seem to be improper: surely
a satisfaction must in its own nature be a justifying matter against the Law,
next to an absolute conformity to the Law. Nothing is or can be more justifying
against it then a satisfaction; when God has provided a plenary satisfaction
to justify us, how may we think, that it is not it self applied to us actually
to justify us, or that something less than it self should do it? the Scripture
sets forth this Application on both hands, on our part it is applied by Faith,
We receiving the Atonement, Romans 5.11. and Christ, being a propitiation through
Faith in his Blood, Romans 3.25. and on God's part by Imputation, we being made
the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. and the Righteousness of God
being upon us, Romans 3.22. I cannot tell how to think, that such an excellent
justifying matter, as Christ's Satisfaction is, should be provided for us, and
yet not applied to us, according to the terms of the Gospel: a pardon is, as I
take it, upon the satisfaction not merely made but applied; for it is given to
Believers only: if the satisfaction be it self applied, then that is our
Righteousness against the Law; if it be applied in the effect, that is, in a
pardon, then the pardon is the very application, and not a pardon upon a
satisfaction applied; or if there be a pardon upon a satisfaction applied,
there will be a pardon before a pardon; a pardon in the application, and a
pardon upon it; if the satisfaction be it self applied, then it may precede a
pardon, and a pardon may be upon it; but if it be applied only in the effect,
in a pardon, then it cannot precede a pardon, no more then a pardon can precede
it self: You will say, a pardon is not upon a satisfaction applied, but is the
very application. To this I answer, the Learned Mr. Gataker says, remissio est
Justificationis efficacis consequens necessarium; and the worthy Mr. Bradshaw
says, culpae remissio accurate considerata neque totum neque pars
Justificationis existit, sed contingens tantum Justificationis effectus: I
conceive, the application of Christ's Justifying Blood, is in order of Nature
antecedent to remission; under the Law, first the Atonement was made, and Blood
sprinkled, and then there was forgiveness; under the Gospel, first Christ's
Blood is applied and sprinkled upon us, and then there is remission; Christ is
a propitiation through Faith in his Blood, says the Apostle, Romans 3.25. and
then he adds, To declare his Righteousness for the Remission of sins: Christ's
Blood is first applied, and then remission follows upon it; I say, it follows
upon it, but it is no more the same with it under the Gospel, then forgiveness
under the Law was the same with the sprinklings and purifyings by the Blood of
the Sacrifices; when in Scripture there is attributed to Christ's Blood,
purging, washing, sprinkling, cleansing from Sin, and to a pardon, covering,
blotting out, taking away, and casting away of Sin, I cannot imagine that both
these are the same, as if Christ's Blood did not by it self do away Sin, but
only impetrate that it might be done away in a pardon; I take it, these are
distinct, first that Blood in the sense herein after declared, frees us a
culpa, and then the consequent pardon frees us a Baena.

Fifthly, If Christ's Righteousness be Imputed to us, not in it seif, but in
its effect only, that is, a pardon, then Justification, as to the Law, wholly
consists in a pardon; on the other hand, if Justification do not stand in a
pardon, then it stands in the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to us: in
this great point I shall offer several things.

First, The Scripture must be the great Rule to judge of Justification by,
there I find that we are justified by Christ's Blood, that we are made
rightcous by his Obedience; but that we are justified by a Pardon, I find not.
There I read that Christ is made to us Righteousness, that we are made the
Righteousness of God in him; but, not that an Immunity from punishment is a
Righteousness. I know many Learned Divines take Justification and Pardon to be
one and the same, but I shall consider the chief Scriptures which look that
way; The first is Romans 4. There the Imputation of Righteousness, Ver. 6. and
the remission of sin, Verse. 7. and 8. seem to be the very same; the quotation
of the 32. Psalm seems to make it clear to answer to this. I shall consider the
scope of the Apostle: He does in the third Chapter lay down this Conclusion,
That we are justified by Faith, Ver. 28. and in the fourth Chapter he lays down
this, That we are not justified by Works, Ver. 4. that is, perfect Works, such
as Man may glory in, such as might make the reward of debt. Abraham himself
could not reach such a Justification: this is proved by two things; the one is
this, Abraham's Faith was counted to him for Righteousness, therefore he was
not justified by Works: For Faith is not Works. The other is this, A justified
Man is a pardoned one, therefore he is not justified by Works; for perfect
Obedience leaves no room at all for a Pardon. Touching the first, I shall first
consider what was the object of Abraham's Faith, and then how Faith is counted
for Righteousness: The primary object of Abraham's Faith was Chrrist; for the
Apostle in the third Chapter speaks of the Faith of Christ; and in the fourth,
where the same Discourse of Justification is continued, the object cannot in
any reason be varied. Abraham is set forth as a great pattern of believing, and
he can hardly be so to Christians, if his Faith had not for substance the same
object with theirs. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the
Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham; saying, In thee
shall all Nations be blessed, Gal. 3.8. That Abraham's Faith and ours might
have the same object, God took care, that a Gospel, (...), Evangelizandi verbum
peculiariter conservatum est Doctrinae de Gratuita per Christum
reconciliatione, Bez. in loc.
a Blessing, Christ should be set before him: his Eyes were so far opened, that
he could see Christ's day, and in a kind of Triumph of Faith, rejoice at it, 1 John 8.56. It Is true, our Faith, as having more of Evangelical light in it, is
more explicit than Abraham's was; Abraham's was in the Messiah in universali,
in more general terms; ours is in him in particulari, in propria forma, in a
satisfying atoning Messiah, in his Blood and Righteousness; nevertheless (this
being but a gradual difference according to gradual Light) our Faith and
Abraham's are for substance the same and center in one object; and Christ's
Righteousness and Satisfaction, though not so clearly known to Abraham, as to
us, was no less imputed to him than to us, there being the same way of
Justification by Imputed righteousness for him as for us. Christ being the
object of Abraham's Faith, the next thing is, how Faith is imputed for
Righteousness. Here I answer, Faith is counted for Righteousness, not as taken
in abstracto, merely in it self, but as taken in concreto, in its conjunction
with its object: that is, Christ and his Righteousness, and then we have the
full Righteousness of Justification, Faith in it self answering to the
Gospel-terms, and in its object Christ's Righteousness answering to the Law.
Here I crave leave to set down the words of an Excellent Person, though
different from my self in this point; the words are these: Sir Charles Wols.
Justif. Evang. 42.
Faith looks both ways, respects both the Law and the Gospel, and comprizeth
all that is requisite to our Justification with reference to both; all the
charge of the Law it answers ratione objecti, in respect of its object, which
is Christ, and all that is required by the Gospel, ratione sui, as being it
self the performance of the condition annexed thereunto. Thus he; I quote not
these words, as if in this point he were of my opinion, but because they are
full and expressive of my thoughts: Now, that Faith is in this place to be
taken in conjunction with its object, appears thus; the Apostle in the third
Chapter proves, That as to the Law every Mouth must be stopped, that all the
world must become guilty before God, verse 19, and then concludes, that by the
deeds of the Law, no Flesh can be justified, verse 20. And in his
After-discourse (as the following words (but now) do import) he shows what it
is that justifies us against the Law, viz. The Righteousness of God; that is
of Christ, which is not Faith it self, but by Faith, Verse. 21, and 22. And at
last he concludes, That we are justified by Faith, Verse. 28. but Faith in it
self cannot justify us against the Law; for Faith was not crucified for us,
neither did it satisfy Justice on our behalf: it is therefore Faith in its
object, that is Christ's Righteousness which justifies us against the Law; that
Faith which is counted for Righteousness, is that which establishes the Law,
Verse. 31. and that Establishment Faith makes, not in it self, but in its
object, Christ's Righteousness, which established the Law by satisfying of it;
Faith therefore and its object must be taken together: Hence the Apostle, who
mentions the Imputation of Faith. Ver. 5. in the 4. Chapter, mentions also the
Imputation of Righteousness, Ver. 6. It Is true, both are but one in sense, but
in words the latter expresses the object of Faith, as the former does the Act:
Thus, as I said before, Faith in Conjunction with its object takes in the whole
of Justification, and then the after-words, quoted out of the Psalm, touching
Remission, do not describe the Imputation of Righteousness in its proper
Nature, but in its blessed Fruit, viz. Pardon of sin, which is not properly our
Righteousness, but a consequent upon it. Another place is this; -- Through this
Man is preached unto you the Forgiveness of sin; and by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the Law
of Moses, Acts 13.38, and 39. Here it seems, that what is called Remission in
the first verse, is called Justification in the next: but I take it, they are
not the same in the 38. Ver. We have Remission in the offer or tender of the
Gospel, in the 39. we have Justification actual as it is in the Believer. So
they are not the same; Justification here is not Remission, but Justification
by Sacrifice; Justification by Christ's Sacrifice is opposed to Justification
by the Legal ones: Justification by these was typical, and but in some cases,
the Law not allowing a Sacrifice in all, but Justification by that is real, and
in all cases where Faith is not wanting; here therefore Justification and
Remission are not the same. Another place is Luke 18. when the Publican
penitentially prayed for Pardon, God be merciful to me a Sinner, he went home
justified, Verse. 13, and 14. Justified is the same with Pardoned. I answer,
This place shows that Justification follows upon true Repentance, but not that
Justification and Pardon are the same; the Satisfaction of Christ justifies a
Sinner, a Pardon only frees him from punishment. To name but one place more;
The Free-gift is of many offenses to justification, Rom, 5.16. (...), the
Free-gift, seems here to import Pardon, as if Pardon and Justification were all
one. To this I answer; The Apostle in this famous place sets down a Parallel
between the two Heads, Adam and Christ; Adam's Sin and Christ's Righteousness;
Adam's Sin making us Sinners unto death, and Christ's Righteousness making us
righteous unto Life. But the word (Pardon or Remission) is not so much as once
named in all the Parallel; by the Free-gift Verse. 16. is not meant Remission,
but Christ's Righteousness. This is clear upon a double account: the one is
this; The Free-gift is opposed to Adam's sin, and that which in this Parallel
is opposed to Adam's sin, must needs be Christ's Righteousness; this appears
throughout the whole Parallel, in the 15, and 16. Verse. Adam's Sin and the
Free-gift are opposed; in the 18. Verse. Adam's Offense and Christ's
Righteousness are opposed; in the 19. Verse. Adam's Disobedience and Christ's
Obedience are opposed: Hence it appears, that what is the Free-gift in the 15,
and 16. Verse. is the Righteousness or Obedience of Christ in the 18. and 19.
Verse. neither indeed can the Parallel stand, if any other thing than Christ's
Righteousness should be opposed to Adam's sin. The other is this; these words,
The Free-gift, are put instead of Christ's Righteousness or Obedience; this
appears in that, where the one is mentioned, the other is omitted, in the 15,
16, 17. Verse. The Free-gift is mentioned, but the Righteousness or Obedience of
Christ is omitted; in the 18, and 19. Verse. the Righteousness and Obedience of
Christ is mentioned, but the Freegift is omitted. Indeed in our Translation we
have the Free-gift Verse. 18. but not in the Original. Hence it appears that
they are the same; I suppose that in the 18. Verse. should be otherwise
supplied: Thus it appears that the Free-gift is not Pardon. Having seen the
most material Texts; I shall observe one thing more: Justification is set forth
in such a way in Scripture, that it must needs be distinct from Pardon: It is
set forth so, that the Law is established by it, Romans 3.31. but the Law is not
established by a Pardon, but by a Satisfaction. You will say, Our Pardon is
upon a Satisfaction; but if that Satisfaction do not justify us, if it be no
Ingredient in our Justification; then in our Justification the Law is not
established as the Apostle speaks; Justification is set forth so, that the
Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us, Romans 8.4. But the Righteousness of
the Law is not fulfilled in a Pardon; neither is it fulfilled in our imperfect,
though sincere Obedience: The Greek word (...), is, as Aristotle says, (...),
Eth. l. 5. cap. 7.
Correctio injuriae, Satisfaction for the injured Law, but nothing is such but
Christ's Righteousness. The Apostle in the precedent Verse says, That sin was
condemned in the Flesh of Christ; and of this, there is a double Fruit; first
Justification: The Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in us; that is,
Christ's Satisfaction becomes imputatively ours, and then Sanctification; we
walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: This Interpretation harmonizes
with the first Verse; there first we have Justification, There is no
Condemnation to them who are in Christ; and then Sanctification, We walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; as therefore Christ's Righteousness is
the only thing which satisfies the Law, so it is the only justifying matter
against it: Justification is so set forth, that the Law has its end: Thus the
Apostle, Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to the Believer, Romans
10.4. as he is the end of the Law, so he is for Righteousness; he is not the
end of the Law in a procured pardon, but in a Satisfaction made and applied;
Justification therefore consists not in a Pardon, but in a Satisfaction applied
and made ours by Imputation. Thus far out of Scripture.

Secondly, Justification cannot be without a Righteousness; that God (who
judges according to truth, who is Just, and a Justifyer) does not esteem or
pronounce us righteous unless we are so; a pardon is not our Righteousness; for
that is God's Act, and God's Act, though it may make or esteem us righteous, is
not it self our Righteousness, neither is that, which a pardon gives, viz. an
immunity from punishment; such an immunity from punishment, which is, ex mera
indulgentia, as in the case of a pardoned Malefactor, is not such; the
Malefactor in that case is treated in point of punishment as a righteous Man,
but he is not such indeed, his plea is only a pardon, he is free only a paena,
not a culpa, the Judge does not esteem him as righteous, but as one exempt from
punishment; nay, an immunity, which is ex Justitia, as in the case of an
innocent person, though it suppose a Righteousness in him, yet it is no more it
self a righteousness than in the other case; it is distinct from his
Righteousness as a consequent is from its antecedent: Now if a pardon or
immunity from punishment be not our Righteousness, then Christ's Righteousness
(which was penal and obediential to an infinite value, and did compensate the
very culpa, and free us from it) is, as soon as it is made ours by Imputation,
our Righteousness against the Law.

Thirdly, If a pardon might be called Justification, it is but improperly such;
there are then as (I will suppose for Discourse sake) three sorts of
Justification to be distinguished, one by the idem, the very same perfect
Righteousness, which the Law calls for, another by the tantundem, a
Righteousness which is a plenary satisfaction to the broken Law; a third by
Remission only: the first is more strictly Justification than the second,
because the very Letter of the Law is fulfilled in it, which it is not in the
other; the second is more properly Justification than the third, because there
is a plenary compensation to the Law in it; when in the other there is nothing
but a mere condonation: the third is the most improper Justification of all the
rest, because it communicates not Righteousness, but an Indulgence: Now in our
case, had there been no satisfaction at all, Justification, if possible, must
have stood in remission only; but a great and glorious satisfaction being made,
it seems very strange, that Justification should consist only in the less
proper, in remission, which frees us a paena, whilst the proper, Christ's
Satisfaction, which in a way of compensation, frees us a culpa, is waved: It is
true, it is not totally waved; it is allowed to be an antecedent meritorious
cause of Justification, but being no Ingredient in it, Justification still
consists in the less proper, while the more proper in that respect is waved.

Before I pass on, I must consider one objection; pardon takes away reatum
penae, the obligation to punishment, and what more can be done to a sinner?
still the reatus culpae abides, the fault will be a fault; the Sinner a Sinner;
that is, one who sinned; and if no more can be done to a sinner, why is not
immunity from punishment, his Righteousness, or what can be Righteousness if
that be not so?

In answer to this great Objection, I shall offer two or three things.

First, It is indeed a rule of reason, that, factum infectum fieri non potest;
yet it is worthy the consideration of the Learned, whether the culpa, which
ever continues in facto, in it self may not yet cease in jure, so far as not to
redound upon the Person to make him culpable? I shall only mention one
instance, and so leave it; the Blessed Virgin, not being, as her Son was,
conceived of the Holy Ghost, was no doubt fubject to Original Sin, that put a
culpa upon every part of her, and factum infectum fieri non potest.
Nevertheless, when the Word was made Flesh; when his Body was framed out of the
Substance of the Virgin, no culpa did remain, or redound upon his Humane
Nature, much less upon his Sacred Person which assumed it: in Sacred Mysteries
we must not be too peremptory upon our reason, but speak with all caution and
reverence.

Secondly, Beatus culpae, or guilt of fault, may be considered under a double
notion, either in it self, in its intrinsecal desert of punishment, or else in
its redundancy upon the sinner, which consists in three things. First, it so
redounds upon him as to denominate him a sinner, that is, one who has sinned;
then it so redounds as to make him continue worthy of punishment; and again it
so redounds, as actually to oblige him to punishment: Now the reatus in its
self, in its intrinsecal desert, must needs be perpetual, because sin cannot
cease to be sin, the denominating him a sinner, one who has sinned, must be
perpetual too, because factum infectum fieri non potest: but, as I take it,
that redundancy which makes him worthy of punishment, is removed in
Justification, and that which actually obliges him to punishment, is removed in
remission; it is usually said in the Schools, transit actus, manet reatus,
after the Act of Sin is passed and gone, the guilt abides; we may say of the
sinner, that he has sinned in praeterito, nay, and in praesenti, that he is
filius mortis, worthy to die, and suffer punishment; but after he has received
the great atonement, after Christ's satisfaction (which is more than an
aequipondium to his unworthiness) is Imputed and made over to him, he continues
no longer worthy of punishment; the sin it self is worthy of it, but he is not;
he was once worthy of it, but now he is no longer so. I cannot imagine, that
Christ's (...), or worthy ones, Rev. 3.1. should remain (...), worthy of Death,
Romans 1.32. Or that the pure Heavens should be inhabited by such as still
continue worthy of Hell: Christ's Righteousness so much outweighs and
counterpoises the meritum paenae that is in sin, that though the worthiness of
punishment cannot be separated from the sin it self, yet it ceases to redound
upon the sinner, as soon as he believes and has an interest in that
Righteousness: Its true, the sinner as he is in himself, is worthy of
punishment, but as he is in Christ, a part or Member of him, a participant of
his Satisfaction, he is not worthy thereof.

Thirdly, If we look distinctly upon a satisfaction, or plenary compensation
for sin of the one hand, and upon a pardon, or immunity from punishment of the
other, it will be easily seen where our Righteousness lies, and what is our
justifying Plea and matter against the Law; a pardon frees from punishment, but
a Satisfaction salves the honor of the broken Law, repairs the damage done to
it, compensates for the violations of it, and comes in the Room of that perfect
conformity which the Law did primarily aim at: in this therefore, not in the
other stands our Righteousness as to the Law. Thus much touching my fifth
Reason, that Justification consists not in a pardon.

Sixthly, Christ suffered nostro loco, in our place and stead; those pregnant
Scriptures (that he gave his Life a ransom (...), in the stead of many, Matthew.
20.28. that he gave himself (...) a counterprize for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. that he
suffered the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18.) are no cold improprieties, but
full proofs of it; he did sustinere nostram personam, sustein our person in his
sufferings; there was a double commutaton, his person was put in the room of
our persons, and his sufferings in the room of our sufferings; he that
satisfies for another, must do it nomine debitoris, he that pays in his own
name, cannot satisfy for another. When our Savior said to Peter, That give
(...) for me and thee, Matthew. 17.27. if Peter had paid it only in his own name,
he could not have satisfied for his Master. In like manner, if Christ had
suffered only in his own Name, he could not have satisfied for Peter or any
other: The Debt which he satisfied for was ours, not his; he stood as our
Representative, and satisfied for us; he did not only suffer nostro bono, that
the profit might be ours, but nostro loco, that the Satisfaction it self might
be ours; nevertheless, according to Divine Constitution; that is, that it might
be ours; not immediately, but as soon as we become Members of him; not
according to the full latitude, but according to the capacity of Members; not
to all intents, but that it might be the matter of our Justification as to the
Law.

Having laid down my Reasons, I shall now proceed to answer the Objections made
against Imputed Righteousness; only here I must remember the Reader of one
thing. Let him not think that there are no Mysteries in our Religion, as if all
there were within the line of Humane Reason: There are Super-rational Mysteries
in Christ's person; mortal and immortal, temporal and eternal, the Creature and
the Creator; do in an ineffable manner meet together in one Person; and why may
there not be such in Christ Mystical too? The union between Christ and
Believers is a great Mystery, Ephesians. 5.32. and the communication of his
Righteousness to them, which ensues upon that union, has too much of Mystery
in it to be measured by Humane Reason. Proclus said well, (...), Why do thou
reproach Divine things with Humane Reasonings? Reason is no competent Judge of
such matters.

Object. 1. An Accident cannot be removed from its ject: Christ's Righteousness
is an accident.

Ans. An Accident cannot be removed from its Subject, so as to have a novel
inhesion; but it may be transferred by a just Imputation. I shall give two
instances of this: Adam's sin was imputed unto us; if not, then, as I have
before proved, there can be no such thing as original sin, the Doctrine of
which has been owned by the Church in all Ages: Again, our sin was imputed
unto Christ, else his sufferings could not be penal; the Scripture is
emphatical, he was made Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. The Lord has laid on him the
iniquities of us all, Esa. 53.6. St. Austin says, that he was delictorum
susceptor, non commissor. St. Jerome says, non de coelis attulit, sed de nobis
assumpsit: if our sin was not at all imputed to him, his sufferings could not
be penal: To clear this, I shall first prove that Christ's sufferings were penal
in a proper sense, and then, that they could not be such without sin imputed:
First, Christ's sufferings were penal; in Scripture we find, that our sins were
born in his body, and condemned in his flesh, that he was wounded and bruised
for them, that he was made a curse for us; all which speak penal sufferings: If
his sufferings were not penal, how were they satisfactory? a proper
satisfaction can hardly be proved from an improper punishment. How did he
suffer in our stead; If he did, it was in a no-punishment, which is all one, as
if Archelaus had reigned in the room of his Father in a No-kingdom: what (...),
or example was there in his sufferings to deterr us from sin? There is no such
thing in sufferings not penal: what demonstration of Justice was there in them?
in sufferings not penal power may appear, but justice cannot: We see here his
sufferings were penal, but without sin imputed how could they be so? Socinus
(who would not have them penal, lest they should be satisfactory too says,
that Christ died, quia ita and Deo and ipsi visum est, Deserv. l. 3. cap. 9.
because so it seemed good to God and him: but would this make his sufferings
penal? no, he intended no such thing, neither will this do it; God's mere Will
may inflict sufferings, but nothing but Justice can inflict punishment.
Justice, unless moved, inflicts it not; neither is there any other mover, but
that of sin imputed. Where no sin is imputed, there it is, as to punishment,
all one as if there were no sin; and where there is no sin at all, there can be
no such thing as punishment: We are therefore under a necessity to say, that
sin was in tantum, so far imputed to Christ as to render his sufferings penal,
and withal we see an accident passing to another by imputation; only here it
will be objected, that sin was only imputed to Christ in the effects; but, I
take it, this suffices not; for the effect of sin is punishment; and punishment
cannot be, where no sin is imputed; a punishment without a why or a wherefore,
is a punishment for nothing; that is, it is no punishment; and where there is
no punishment, sin is not so much as imputed in the effect. So that if it be
imputed in the effect, it self must be so far imputed, as to render the
sufferings penal, which makes good the instance.

Object. 2. If Christ's Righteousness be indeed imputed to us, then it is
imputed in the full latitude; we are reputed by God to have satisfied Divine
Justice, we are then imputatively our own Saviors and Redeemers; Nay, as
Bellarmine says, Redemptores and Salvatores Mundi, Redeemers and Saviors of
the World.

Ans. If this Principle, That all Imputation is in the full latitude, be true,
I yield up the cause for ever. I am sure I am not my own Savior or Redeemer; I
never satisfied Divine Justice for my sins; but that this Principle is not
true, I shll endeavor to manifest. Non-imputation and Imputation must needs
have the same Rules to be governed by: this, I suppose, must not be denied by
those who say, That the Non-imputation of sin, is the Imputation of
Rightousness, Romans 4.1. Sin is not imputed to Believers: But how what, totally
and in every respect? No, surely; still the culpa abides, the sin will be a
sin, the Sinner a Sinner; that is, one who sinned; but it is not imputed as to
punishment: If Sin may be Non-imputed in some respects, then Righteousness may
be imputed in a limited sense also; if all Imputation be in the full latitude,
then there is no Imputation of a thing at all (save only to the proper doer of
it) neither according to Principles of mere Nature, nor according to Principles
of Justice, nor yet according to a Divine Constitution: Not according to
Principles of mere Nature; according to these sin internal in the Will is
imputed to the Members of the Body, as being in conjunction with the Soul; else
the Body should not rise and suffer for it: But how is it imputed? what, in the
full latitude? Does God account that the sin properly did issue from the
Members, and reside there? It is not true, or possible, yet in a lower and
diminutive manner is it to them imputed; nor according to Principles of
Justice; our sin (and that, as but now was proved) not in the effect only, but
in some sense in it self, was imputed to Christ; and that upon Principles of
Justice, upon his Sponsion to satisfy for us, our sin was imputed to him; but
what in the full latitude? what to make as if there were a spot or turpitude in
the Holy one? as if he by his own sinful commissions had deserved penal
sufferings? No, by no means; but in the least respect that could possibly be,
in no other respect than this, viz. So far as to render his sufferings penal.
Nor yet according to the Divine Constitution; this is most proper to the
present case. And for this I must bring forth the Parallel of the two Adams,
because there never were any two such Heads as these: Adam's sin, as I have
before proved, was imputed to us; but what, in its full latitude? Were we the
Head of Mankind? did we usher in Sin and Death upon the World, as Adam did? No:
This was by one Adam; but in a lower measure, and according to the capacity of
Members; it came upon us, as Bellarmine well expresses it, Eo modo, quo
communicari potest id quod transit, nimirum per imputationem; it came upon us
ex post facto, after the action done; Interpretative and by way of reception,
it only so far redounded upon us, as by that sin to make us sinners, Romans 5.19.
In like manner, Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us; but what, in its full
latitude? were we the Saviors or Redeemers of the World? did we usher in Life
and Righteousness upon the Church? No; This was by one Christ; but in a lower
measure, and according to the capacity of Members; it comes upon us only by
Imputation, and Interpretative, it only so far redounds upon us, as by that
Righteousness to make us righteous against the Law, Romans 5.19. These things
being laid down, it appears, that the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
us does not imply that we are our own Saviors or Redeemers, much less that we
are such to the World; we did not satisfy Divine Justice: No: This is, as
Bishop Davenant tells Bellarmine, Ridicula illatio, a thing which cannot be
inferred from imputed Righteousness; we do only as Members of Christ so far
participate of his Satisfaction, as to be thereby justified against the Law. To
say, that his Satisfaction, if imputed to us, must become ours as amply as it
is his, is to say things impossible, as if Imputation were as much as Action;
or the derivative could equalize the Primitive; as if Head and Members, because
there is a communication between them, must be confounded and become the same,
as if the Believer, if once called into Communion with Christ, as the Apostle
speaks 1 Cor. 1.9. must become a Christ, a Savior or Mediator; all which is
mere confusion: But in Imputation, the proportion between Head and Members is
kept inviolate. Christ the Head communicates to Believers, yet Salva
praerogativa capitis; Believers receive from him, but it is only in the measure
of Members.

Object. 3. If Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us, then God reputes us to
have made satisfaction, and so errs in his Judgment, which cannot be.

Ans. God with out error imputes Adam's sin to us; yet does not repute us to be
the very doers of it: he without error imputes the internal sin of the Will to
the Members of the Body, yet does not repute the Members to have done it;
Christ's Satisfaction is not imputed to us as to Agents, but as to Participant
Members; and that truly, because according to that Divine Constitution, which
made Christ an Head as strong to communicate Righteousness, as Adam was to
convey sin.

Object. 4. If Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us, then we are as
righteous as Christ is.

Ans. The Consequence is absurd, and the Learned Chamier gives this Reason,
Fieri non posse, ut tam justus sit, qui inhaerenter injustus; imputative justus
est, quam qui inhaerenter justus; nam iste a se and per se justus est, ille
tantum precario, id est, aliunde and in alio; Christ's Righteousness has
distinct respects; as to himself it was the idem, as to us the tantundem; as it
was inherent in him, it was Justifying and Sanctifying too; as it is imputed to
us, it is Justifying only; it was Christ's in the Agency; the glory of it is
ours only by Participation; Christ is the Author of the Satisfaction; we are
but the Receivers in the quality of Members; it was his in the capacity of a
Sponsor, Savior, Redeemer, Mediator, Head; it is ours only derivatively, and
as participant Members of him.

Object. 5. Imputed Righteousness is the root of Antitinomianism, this
dissolves the Law, as if it did no longer oblige us to Obedience.

Ans. Christ's Righteousness is not imputed to us as it is the idem of the Law,
but as it is a Satisfaction made thereunto neither was that satisfaction meant:
to dissolve the Law-obligation, so as that it should cease to be a Rule of
Holiness in point of Sanctification; but to dissolve it so, as that the Law
should demand from Believers no other matter but it self in point of
Justification. Did it cease to be a Rule of Holiness in Sanctification; we must
all be Antinomians. Did it not cease to demand no more than it self in
Justification, we must all be undone: its further demand, viz. Perfect
Obedience from us in our Persons being impossible, Justification and Salvation
must be so also. Christ's Satisfaction was made, that we might be justifiable
against the Law; it is imputed, that we may be actually justified against it.
If the Satisfaction imputed run into Antinomianism, so does the Satisfaction
made, which is indeed the Socinian outcry; Contr. Meisn. 208.
Quis nexus, quae copula inter sidem, qua creditur Christum pro nobis Deo
plenissime satisfecisse, and inter bonorum operum studium? So Schlictingius;
Quid causae est, De Ver. Rel. l. 5. c. 22.
cur is, qui satisfactionem istam persuasam habens, aliquid, in repellenda a se
impietate, justitiaque colenda, laboris sibi ponendum existimet? So Volkelius:
Now what is answered on the behalf of Satisfaction made, viz. That the Law is
still a Rule of Holiness; that Christ's Satisfaction is an inflammative to it,
that the just odium of sin is seen in the atoning Blood; that that Blood is
sprinkled only upon Believers, with the like; the same may be as truly answered
on the behalf of Satisfaction imputed.

Object. 6. If Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us, then God sees no sin is
in us.

Ans. God sees not sin in us with a vindictive Eye, but with an intuitive one
he does; nay, he cannot but do so, as long as there is omniscience in him, and
sin in us; Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us as it is a Satisfaction; and
that supposes us to have been Sinners; else what need could there be of a
Satisfaction? though the Law were satisfied in point of Justification, yet
still it demands duty in point of Sanctification; though that Satisfaction take
away the imperfection of our duties and Graces as to the guilt, yet not as to
the very being.

Object. 7. If Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us, there needs no new
Obedience in order to Salvation.

Ans. The Socinians object this against Christ's Satisfaction; in which notion
I take it, that Christ's righteousness is imputed to us. Cont. Meis. Fol. 138.
Si jam Deo plene persolutum est, quod ei a nobis plene debebatur, quid adhuc
nos pietate and bonis operibus maceremus? jam nec Deus nos jure punire, not ab
aeterna vita jure excludere potest; so Schlictingius. But Christ's
Satisfafaction may very well stand with our obedience; Christ satisfied the Law
so far, as that his righteousness imputed justifies us against the Law, but not
so far, as that it should be our very sanctity and holiness: for then, of
imputed, it should become such as they are, inherent; which is impossible: in
this respect therefore the Law asks obedience from us, every Believer is (...).
Under the Law to Christ, as far under it as it is a rule to our life. Nay,
Christ's righteousness is far from evacuating our obedience, that it is the
great foundation upon which the Holy Spirit, the fountain of Holiness, is
communicated to us, as it was under the Law in cleansing the Leper; the holy
Oil was put upon the Atoning Blood, Levit. 14.17. So it is under the Gospel in
purifying us. First, the Blood of Christ is sprinkled on us by imputation, and
then the holy Unction, the Divine spirit, is poured out upon us: were there no
Atoning blood shed, the Holy Spirit would not so much as touch upon fallen man:
were that Blood not applied to us, the Holy Spirit would never dwell in us as a
principle of obedience.

Object. 8. Christ's righteousness cannot be both the meritorious and material
cause of Justification, for then it should be both an external and internal
cause thereof: Which cannot be.

Ans. We must not here take our measures from reason; it was well said by one,
In Logicis ratio facit fidem, in Theologicis fides facit rationem, Evangelical
mysteries, though above the line of humane reason, must be owned in Faith,
though the mode of them be inexplicable by us; Christ's righteousness may be
considered under a double respect, either as it is offered up to God, or as it
is applied to men. In the first respect it is common for all, so far as to
render them justifiable on Gospel terms: In the second it is peculiarized to
Believers; In the first it founds the promises of justification by Christ's
blood, in the second it executes them, and (which is as easily conceiveable as
the other) in the first it is a meritorious cause of justification; in the
second a material.

Having answered these Objections, which I look upon as most material; I shall
conclude as I began, that Christ's righteousness, as it is a Satisfaction, is
so far imputed to his believing members, as to be the matter of their
justification: The Law in that point can ask no more of them than that
satisfaction; there is enough in that to answer for all their sins.

Thus far I have treated touching our righteousness as to the Law. I now come
to speak of our righteousness as to the Gospel; Christ's righteousness answers
as to the Law of works: Faith answers as to the terms of the Gospel. Do this,
or die, was satisfied by Christ's righteousness: Believe and live; is answered
by Faith. Christus est impletio Legis, Spirious est impletio Evangelii: Now
here I shall first show the necessity of this twofold righteousness; and then
the connection which is between them.

1. There is a necessity of this twofold righteousness. God at first made man
a holy, righteous creature; and upon the fall, he set to his hand a second time
to lift up man out of the Chains of Sin and wrath, into a state of Grace and
Life eternal. God as Creator gave man a Law of perfect obedience suited to his
primitive nature, and as it were interwoven with the principles of it. God as
Redeemer gave us a Law of Grace; in which there is as much abatement and
condescension to our fallen estate, as could comport with his own Holiness and
Majesty: In the former God stood upon the highest terms of perfect sinless
obedience; in the latter he comes down to the lowest terms imaginable: He will
justify and save every one who by true Faith yields and resigns himself up to
the conditions of the Gospel; where there are distinct Laws, there must be
distinct righteousnesses to answer them: That which comes up to the
condescending terms of the Gospel: falls much short of the high terms of the
Law; That which satisfies the Law, is a thing of incomparably greater
excellency than that which answers to the terms of the Gospel: There are two
distinct charges, or accusations to be supposed; the one, that we are Sinners,
such as have broken the Law: The other, that we are Unbelievers, such as have
rejected the Gospel: Here therefore must be distinct Plea's; To the First, the
Plea is Christ's Satisfaction to discharge us from the Law: To the Second, the
Plea is Faith, which is the condition of the Gospel. To the charge of final
unbelief it is no Plea to say, that Christ has satisfied; to the charge of
being a sinner, the Plea does not consist in Faith it self; but in its object,
viz. Christ's Satisfaction: The righteousnesses themselves are of different
natures, as to the Law our righteousness is without us, in the glorious
Satisfaction of Christ made ours by a gracious imputation; as to the Gospel,
our righteousness is within us, in that Faith which complies with the
Evangelical terms; as to the Law, our righteousness is not the idem, but a
satisfaction made for the breaches of it; as to the Gospel, our Faith is the
very idem which the Gospel condition calls for. It is of great concern in
Justification, to place these two righteousnesses in their proper Orbs; if
either of them be carried out of their own Sphere, Religion is subverted. As to
the Law, Christ's Satisfaction is our only righteousness, it is true; Faith
receives the Atonement, but neither Faith, nor any other inherent Grace can
here be our righteousness. All these have their spots of imperfection; how
faltring is our Faith? how cold our charity? how much is there wanting in all
our graces? all are but in part, not in their full measure; but in their first
lineaments: Neither do they dwell alone, but there is a sad inmate of
corruption under the same Roof: All these must pass sub venia, under a pardon,
and under the Wings of Christ; these are not able to cover their own blots and
imperfections; these therefore are not our Saviors or Redeemers; these do not
satisfy the Law; these do not compensate for sin; these do not come in the
room of perfect obedience; neither can the true God, though one of infinite
mercy, accept them as such: No, nothing but Christ's Satisfaction can here be
our righteousness. Hence the Apostle having proved, that all the world is
guilty before God. Romans 3.19. Immediately after adds, but now the righteousness
of God is manifested, v. 21. Where by the righteousness of God; that of Christ
must needs be meant; for that, and that only is proper and apposite to answer
that charge of the Law, which makes us guilty before God; that was a Salvo to
the honor of the Law; that was a plenary compensation for the breaches of it;
that came in the room of perfect Obedience; that therefore is the only, thing
which could answer that charge: if we bring in Faith. or any other Grace into
this Orb, we set them up as Christ's or Saviors; and in effect we say, that
Christ died in vain.

As to the Gospel, Faith answers to the terms of it; here Christ's Satisfaction
does not supply the room: It Is true, he satisfied for us, but he did not repent
or believe for us; for then he should have left nothing for us to do; no, not
so much as to accept of that glorious Satisfaction made for us. His
Satisfaction was not to spare, but by its superexcellent fullness to draw out
our Faith to it self; his atoning. Blood was not to excuse, but upon a view of
his Wounds to provoke our repentant Tears; he died not for our sins, that we
might live in them; his pure Flesh was not crucified, that our corrupt Flesh
might be spared. The Son of God came not down from Heaven to open a door to
wickedness, but to promote a design of Holiness: it is therefore we who must,
though not without Grace, repent and believe: Faith must keep its Station, or
else Holiness, which is the great Design of the Gospel, must be over-turned.

Secondly, The connection between these two Righteousnesses is to be considered;
in this connection lies the total sum of Justification. Christ's Satisfaction
answers to the Law; Faith answers to the terms of the Gospel; Believers, who
are righteous to both, cannot but be in a very blessed condition; nevertheless
it is to be noted (as Learned Mr. Baxter has observed) Faith is but a
particular Righteousness, a Righteousness secundum quid, only as to the
performance of the Evangelical condition; but Christ's Satisfaction is an
Universal Righteousness as to all other things, save only that performance, for
the final neglect of which he never died: Faith is a Righteousness as to the
Evangelical condition; yet it is but a Righteousness propter aliud, a
Righteousness subordinate and subservient to that great Righteousness of
Christ's Satisfaction, to make us capable to participate thereof. In this
connection we have an heap of Mysteries set before us; Justice is satisfied by a
plenary compensation for sin; Mercy is exalted, in that we, though Sinners, are
justified upon terms on our part as low as the Holy one could possibly
condescend unto; the great thing, the Satisfaction, which no Man, no Angel
could accomplish, was from Jesus Christ; who being God in the Flesh, was able
to perform it; the comparatively little thing, I mean Faith, which our fallen
Nature through Grace might arrive at, was that which was required at our hands;
Satisfaction, which we could not have in our selves, we have in another, even
in Christ our Sponsor: Faith, which we have in our selves, is that capacity
whereby we are made meet to have that Satisfaction communicated to us; the
Satisfaction which I think is the Righteousness of God in Scripture mentioned,
is communicated to us; yet, as infinite Wisdom ordered it, it is communicated
to us in the lowest posture of the Creature; I mean when we are by
Self-emptying and Self-annihilating, Faith yielding and resigning up our selves
to the terms of the Gospel; Faith, which is subjectively ours, is that capacity
wherein we receive Christ's Satisfaction; that Satisfaction in the Glory and
Plenitude is only his; yet, as the Sun hangs down his Beams to the lower World,
it derives it self upon each Believer, pro ratione membri: I mention the Sun,
because the Prophet tells us, That upon those that fear God's Name, The Sun of
Righteousness arises with Healing in his Wings; a choice part of which Healing
I take to be in the communication of his Satisfaction to us, that only heals
the deadly Wound of Guilt which is upon us. In Christ's Righteousness there is
a Merit to procure Faith; in Faith there is a capacity to have that
Righteousness made ours; in that Righteousness there is that which covers the
imperfections of Faith. Thus there is an admirable connection between these two
Righteousnesses: Further touching our Justification as to the terms of the
Gospel, we must first consider, what that Faith, by which we are justified, is;
and then how we are justified by it.

First, That Faith whereby we are justified, is not Reason in its own Sphere
conversing about God and his Goodness, but it is totally supernatural;
supernatural in its Principle; it is the Gift of God: and, as the second
Aransican Council tells us, It is per inspirationem Spiritus sancti, Can. 6.
Supernatural in its object, it is fixed in a God in Covenant, and in his Grace.
It hangs upon Christ and his Sweet Smelling Sacrifice. It falls in with
supernatural promises of Grace and Glory: neither is this Faith a mere naked
assent, which may be in wicked Men; nay, and in Devils; but it is that which
receives Christ, and feeds upon him, eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood
unto Life Eternal: Vitam a Vitae Font haurimus, and in ipsum quasi totos. nos
immergimus, says Bishop Davenant; We draw Life from the Fountain of Life, and
wholly drown our selves in him: True Faith takes the Divine objects proposed,
not by piecemeal, but in their entireness; it is not merely for God's Grace,
that Honeycomb of infinite sweetness; but for his Holiness too, that the Soul
may be more and more transformed and assimilated to the Divine Image and
likeness. Faith very well knows, That no Man, who by his rebellions strikes at
his Holiness, can possibly lean on his Grace: so to do, is not to believe, but
to presume and trust in a lie: Faith is for all Christ; not only for a meriting
and atoning Christ, but for a teaching and ruling one: it knows that Christ
must not be mangled or torn in pieces; the Merit must not be divided from the
Spirit; nor the Water from the Blood; these must ever be in conjunction; an
half Christ is not the Christ of God, but a Christ of his own fancy, such as
cannot profit us; Faith is not merely for Promises, which are cordials, and
Pots of Manna, but for Precepts too; it is Meat and Drink to do the Will of
God; Promises and Precepts run together in Scripture; Promises are the effluxes
of Grace, and Faith takes them into the heart by recumbency; Precepts are
effluxes of Holiness, and Faith takes them in by an Obediential Subjection;
both are owned by Faith, and must be so as long as there is Grace and Holiness
in God; Faith cannot stand without repentance; it trusts in Infinite Mercy: and
an impenitent one, who still holds up his Arms of Rebellion, cannot do so; it
rests upon the Merits and Righteousness of Christ; and an impenitent one, who
tramples under foot the atoning Blood, cannot do so. It has a respect for the
holy Commands; and the impenitent, who by willful sinning casts them away, and
as much as in him lies, makes them void, can have no respect for them; there
can no such thing as an impenitent Faith: We see by these things what a Faith
that is, by which we are justified.

Secondly, The next thing is, How we are justified by Faith. Faith may be
considered under a double notion; either as it respects Christ, or as it
respects the condition of the Gospel: As it respects Christ, it unites us to
him; it makes us Members of his Mystical Body; thus it is a Sacred Medium to
have Christ's Righteousness imputatively become ours, that we may be justified
against the Law; nothing can justify us against it but Christ's Satisfaction;
that cannot do it unless it become ours; ours it cannot be, unless we are
Believers. Hence the Apostle says, That the Righteousness of God is upon the
Believer, Romans 3.22. That Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to the
Believer, Romans 10.4. Here Faith does not justify us in it self, but in its
object, Christ; to whom it so unites us, that his Righteousness so far becomes
ours, as to justify us against the Law. As it respects the Condition of the
Gospel, it is the very thing which that Condition calls for; in the Law of
Works the Condition and the Precept were coextensive; the one was as large as
the other; no Man could live by that Law, but he who had the perfect Obedience
commanded in the Precept; but in the Law of Grace it is otherwise. The Precept
has more in it than the Condition; the Precept calls for Faith, not in its
Truth only, but in its Statures and gradual Perfections; it would have us
aspire after a (...), a fiducial Liberty, a (...), a persuasion with full sails
toward the great things in the Promise, as if they were sensibly present with
us; but the Condition calls only for a true Faith, and no more; the least
Faith, if true, though it be but as a little smoke or wick in the socket;
though it be but a little spark or seed of Faith latent in a Desire or Willing
Mind; is performance of the Condition. Hence the poor in Spirit, who seem to
themselves to have nothing of Grace at all in them, have a Blessedness entailed
on them; which could not be, unless they had performed the Condition; woe would
it be to Christians, if all that is in the Precept were in the Condition also;
if their Justification were suspended till they had reached the top and highest
altitude of the Precept; in reference to the Precept, Faith has its Degrees
and Statures; it comes up more or less to the Precept; but in reference to the
Condition, Faith has no Degrees, but stands in puncto indivisibili; it has no
magis or minus in it; the least true Faith does as much perform the Condition
as the strongest. Cruciger who prayed thus, Invoco te, Domine, languida and
imbecilla Fide, sed Fide tamen, did as much perform the Condition, as he who
has the strongest confidence in God's Mercy. The verity of Faith is all that
the Condition calls for; these things, as I have learned from Mr. Baxter, being
so, I conclude thus; as to the Precept, true Faith falls short; it is not as it
ought to be, it justifies not; nay, in respect of defects and imperfections, it
self wants to be justified and covered with the Righteousness of Christ; but as
to the Condition, it fully comes up; it is as it ought to be; it is in it self
the very thing required; it is in this point a particular Righteousness,
answering for us, That we have performed the Condition: Yet still we must
remember, that this particular Righteousness is subordinate to Christ's
Satisfaction, which is our universal Righteousness.

There is yet one thing behind, viz. To consider how or in what Respect
Obedience or Good Works are necessary unto Justification: I shall set down my
thoughts in the following particulars.

First, Our good Works do not come in the room of Christ's Righteousness to
justify us as to the Law; to secure this, the Apostle often concludes, That we
are not justified by the Works of the Law; our good Works are full of
imperfection; the purest of them come forth ex laeso principio, out of an Heart
sanctified but in part; and in their egress from thence gather a taint and
tincture from the in-dwelling sin; never any Saint durst stand before God in
his own Righteousness. Job, though perfect, would not know his own Soul, Job
9.21. David, though a Man after God's Heart, would not have him mark
iniquities, Psalm. 130.3. Anselm upon this account cries out, Terret me Vita
mea, My own Life makes me afraid; all of it was in his Eyes sin or barrenness;
our Good Works did not, could not satisfy the Law; no, this was that which
nothing but Christ's Righteousness could accomplish: We find not the Saints in
Scripture standing upon their own bottom, but flying to a Mercy seat; and, as
the expression is, Hebr. 12, 2. (...), looking off from themselves unto Jesus
the Author and Finisher of their Faith, in whom alone perfect Righteousness is
to be found.

Secondly, Our Good Works have not the same station with Faith; this appears
upon a double account; the one is this, Faith unites us to Christ. And so it is
a Divine Medium to have his Righteousness made ours; but Good Works follow
after Union; we are by Faith married to Christ, that we might bring forth fruit
to God, Romans 7.4. Before Faith, which is our Espousal of Christ; we bring forth
no genuine Obedience; Good Works are the progeny of a Man in Christ; one who by
Union with him is rightly spirited to do the Will of God: not of a Man in Adam,
one who stands in the power of Nature: the other is this, In the very instant
or first entrance into Justification, Faith is there, but so is not Obedience;
a Believer, in the very instant of believing, before any Good Works spring up
in his Life, has a true title to the promises of the Gospel; the Righteousness
of Christ is upon him; the Spirit of Grace is communicated to him; Obedience is
a blessed fruit, which ensues upon these.

Thirdly, Obedience is necessary, though not to the first entrance into
Justification, yet to the continuance of it. Not indeed as a Cause, but as a
Condition: De Just. Actual. fol. 404.
Thus Bishop Davenant, Bona opera sunt necessaria ad Justificationis statum
retinendum and conservandum; non ut causae, quae per se efficiant aut mereantur
hanc conservationem; sed ut media seu conditiones, fine quibus Deus non vult
Justificationis Gratiam in hominibus conservare. If a Believer, who is
instantly justified upon believing, would continue justified, he must sincerely
obey God. Though his Obedience in measure and degree reach not fully to the
Precept of the Gospel; yet in truth and substance it comes up to the Condition
of it; else he cannot continue justified; this to me is very evident; we are at
first justified by a living Faith, such as virtually is Obedience; and cannot
continue justified by a dead one, such as operates not at all. We are at first
justified by a Faith which accepts Christ as a Savior and Lord; and cannot
continue justified by such a Faith as would divide Christ, taking his Salvation
from guilt, and by disobedience casting off his Lordship; could we suppose that
which never comes to pass, that a Believer should not sincerely obey: How
should he continue justified? if he continue justified, he must, as all
justified persons have, needs have a right to life eternal; and if he have such
a right, how can he be judged according to his works? no good works being found
in him after his believing, how can he be adjudged to life? or how to death, if
he continue justified? These things evince, that obedience is a condition
necessary as to our continuance in a state of Justification: Nevertheless it is
not necessary, that obedience should be perfect as to the Evangelical precept;
but that it should be such, that the truth of Grace, which the Evangelical
condition calls for, may not fail for want of it: Blessed are they that do his
Commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life; and may enter in
through the gates into the City, Rev. 22.14. The first fundamental right to
Heaven they have by the Faith of Christ only; but sincere obedience is
necessary that that right may be continued to them: In this sense we may fairly
construe that conclusion of St. James, Te see then how that by works a man is
justified, and not by Faith only. Jam. 2.24. Faith brings a man into a
justified estate: But may he rest here? No; his good works must be a proof of
his Faith, and give a kind of experiment of the life of it: Nay, they are the
Evangelical condition, upon which his blessed estate of justification is
continued to him; in foro legis, Christ and his Righteousness is all; neither
our Faith nor our Works can supply the room of his Satisfaction to justify us
against the Law: But in foro gratiae, our obedience answers to the Evangelical
condition, and is a means to continue our justified estate: It Is true, St. Paul
asserts that we are justified by Faith, not by Works, Romans 4. Which seems
directly contrary to that of St. James, that a man is justified by Works, not
by Faith only; but the difference is reconciled very fairly; if we do but
consider what the Works are in St. Paul, and what they are in St. James: In St.
Paul the Works are perfect Works, such as correspond to the Law, such as make
the reward to be of Debt, verse. 4. Hence Calvin says, operantem vocat, qui
suis meritis aliquid promeretur, non operantem, cui nihil debetur operum
merito: In St. James the Works are sincere only, such as answer not to the Law,
but to the Evangelical condition; such as merit not, but are rewarded out of
mere Grace: Works in St. Paul, are such as stand in competition or coordination
with Christ and his Righteousness, which satisfied the Law for us: Works in St.
James, are such as stand in due subordination to Christ and his Righteousness,
and are required only as fruits of Faith, and conditions upon which we are to
continue in a justified estate. Works in St. Paul, are such as no man can do;
Nay, as no man must so much as imagine that he can do, unless he will cast away
Christ and Grace. Works in St. James are such as must be done, or else we prove
our selves hypocrites, and our Faith dead and vain; in both Apostles Abraham is
brought in as an instance. In St. Paul the question was, whether Abraham was a
Sinner? and here the Righteousness of Christ did justify him. In St. James the
question was, whether Abraham was a true Believer? and here his obedience did
prove him to be so, and did answer to the Evangelical condition: these
differences considered, it is easy to understand how we cannot be justified by
good works in St. Paul's sense; and yet how according to St. James good works
are necessary to prove our Faith a living one; and to answer the condition of
the Gospel, that the state of Justification, into which we entered by Faith, may
be continued.

To shut up this Discourse touching Justification, we must here stand and adore
the infinite Wisdom and mercy of God in this great Work; what poor fallen
Creatures were we? into what an horrible gulf of sin and misery were we sunk?
whither could we turn? or how could we think ever to stand before the holy God?
storms of wrath hung over our heads, and might justly have fallen upon us; but
how should we be justified, or ever escape? Might the pure perfect Law be
abrogated, that we might be acquitted? No, it could not be; it was immortalized
by its own intrinsecal rectitude and equity: might God wave his holiness and
justice, that his mercy might be manifested upon us? would the great Rector
pardon the Sin of a world without any recompense or Satisfaction? No, his Law
is sacred and honorable? Sin is no light or indifferent thing in his eyes:
Where then shall a satisfaction be found; no Creature could possibly undertake
it; no Man, no Angel could or durst start such a thought, as that one of the
Sacred Trinity should do it: See then and admire this incomparable work; the
Son of God, very God, leaves his Fathers bosom, assumes our frail flesh; in it
fulfills all righteousness; and at last is made Sin and a Curse for us, that we
might be justified and pardoned: No sooner are we by Faith in Union with him,
but his righteousness is upon us, his blood washes away all our guilt; through
him we (but vile worms in our selves) become no less than Sons of God, and
Heirs of Heaven: What are we, that such things as these should be made known to
us? that Heaven should open and let down such mysteries before our eyes? What
manner of persons ought we to be, who live in the shining days of the Gospel;
who have so much of the Divine glory breaking out upon us? let us a little sit
down and consider how infinite is the malignity of Sin, how deep the stain of
it; when God, who cannot nugas agere, made such ado about the expiation of it;
when nothing less than the Blood of his own Son could wash it out? Now to have
slight thoughts of it, is to Blaspheme the great Atonement; now to indulge it,
is to rake in the wounds of Christ, and Crucify him afresh to our selves: How
precious should Christ be to us? how altogether lovely? what a Person is the
Eternal Word? what an Union is Immanuel, God and Man in one? what a Laver is
his Blood? what a sweet smelling Sacrifice is his Death? who can tell over the
unsearchable riches of his merit, or set a rate high enough upon that
righteousness of his, which refreshes the heart of God and Man? what a Sponsor
was he, who satisfied infinite Justice for the Sin of a World? and what an
excellent head, who makes his Righteousness reach down to every Believer in the
World? who would not now say, that he is totus desideria, altogether loves and
desires? what little things are Worlds and Creatures? what Dross and Dung in
comparison? what a wretched thing is a dead and frozen heart, which will not
warm and take fire at so ravishing an Object? Who would now live in the old
Adam, the head of Sin and Death, any longer? or content himself in any state
short of an Union with Christ, in whom Righteousness and Life are to be had? O
how should we act our Faith upon him, and give him the glory of his
Righteousness and Satisfaction by believing? How should we venture our Souls,
what ever our Debts are, upon the great Surety? Who paid the utmost Farthing,
and had a total discharge in his Resurrection: How we should hide our selves in
the Clefts of the Rock, in the precious wounds of Christ as in a City of
refuge; where the avenging Law, satisfied therein, can never pursue and
overtake us? How willing should we now be, to have Christ reign over us? What!
has he come from Heaven, and in our flesh fulfilled all Righteousness; and by
his obedience unto Death, even the death of the Cross, satisfied for our sins,
and turned away the dreadful wrath due to the same, and shall he not Reign over
us? Has he bore the heavy end of the Law; the sinless obedience which we could
not perform, and the curse; which, if we had been under, would have sunk us
down into Hell for ever, and shall he not Reign over us? when by a
condescending Law of Grace suited to our frailty, he calls for nothing from us
but sincerity: Oh! prodigious ingratitude! who would be guilty of it, or can be
so, that is a Believer indeed? Let us therefore by Faith join our selves to
Christ, that we may be justified by his Righteousness; and as a real proof of
it, let us resign up our selves in sincere obedience to him; that having our
fruit unto holiness, we may have the end everlasting Life.

CHAP. XII.
Salvo or exception; it stands in an exercise of all Graces; it makes a man
holy in Ordinances, alms, prosperity, adversity, contracts, calling; there is
such an exercise of graces as causes them to grow: The conclusion of the
Chapter.

HAving treated of Justification, I come in the Last place to speak of an Holy
Life; which is an inseparable companion of the other: Where Grace justifies and
pardons, there it heals; where Christ is made Righteousness, there he is made
Sanctification: these Twins of Grace can never be parted; but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.11. Justification
and Sanctification are ever in conjunction, as in God Justice and Holiness: In
Christ the Priestly and Kingly Offices; in the Gospel the Promises and the
Precepts; and in the Sinner the Guilt and the Power of Sin are in Conjunction;
so in Believers Justification and Sanctification are in Conjunction: Were this
Conjunction dissolved, the other could not well together consist; the person
being Justified and yet not Sanctified: Gods Justice must spare him, yet his
Holiness must hate him; Christ must satisfy and save him as a Priest, yet not
command him as a King: The Promises must speak comfort to him, yet are the
Precepts broken by him; the guilt of Sin must be done away, yet the power and
love of it must remain; but none of these can stand together, neither can
Justification stand without Sanctification.

An Holy life is a life separate and consecrated unto God; the life of Sense is
common to bruits; a life of Reason is common to Men; but a life of Holiness is
separate and consecrated unto God; the Epicurean would frui carne, enjoy the
Flesh; the Stoic would frui mente, enjoy his Mind and Reason; but the Holy Man
would frui Deo, enjoy his God: The Jewish Doctors call God, (...), place, and
the holy Man makes him such; he would not go out from God, or seek any other
Being but in him; he would not dwell in the barren Region of Self or Creatures,
but in God the Fountain and Ocean of all goodness; his works are all wrought in
God; his rest and center are only in his Will and Glory; he is not his own any
longer. The great Titles of Creator and Redeemer proper to his God, will not
suffer him to be so; it is no less than Sacrilege in his eyes to be his own,
or so much as in a thought to steal away ought from God, to whom his Spirit,
Soul, Body, all is due; his Reason is not his own, as one who knows it to be a
borrowed light; he resigns it up to God the Father of lights, to be illuminated
by him, and to the holy mysteries, to be ruled by them, without asking any
why's or wherefores; Those two words, Deus Dixit, God says, is Satisfaction
enough to him; his Will is not his own, it is not a Rule or Law to it self. God
is indeed such to himself; but the Holy man will not perversely imitate God; or
like the Prince of Tyrus, Cum homo vult aliquid per propriam voluntatem, Deo
aufert quasi suam Coronam. Ansel. de simil. cap. 8.
set his Heart as the Heart of God, Ezekiel. 28.2. He will not snatch at God's
Crown, or assume his Glory; he knows that his Will was made to be subject to
Gods, and in that subjection stands his Liberty and true Freedom: His will does
not stand upon its own bottom; but resignes up it self to his Grace to be made
free indeed, and to his commands as the supreme Law; his affections are not his
own; he suffers them not to wander up and down among the Creatures; there to
gather Hay and Stubble, a false happiness to himself; but he dispatches them
away into the other World, and makes them ascend up to God the true Center of
Souls, and Fountain of Goodness; he surrenders up his Soul and all to God; the
Image of Heaven, which is upon him, plainly tells him, that all is due to him
who is above; to keep back part of the price or substract ought from him, is to
lie to that Holy Spirit, who has set his stamp upon every part of the new
Creature, and by an Universal Sanctification sealed up the whole Man for his
own: The life of an Holy Man is a life (...), according to God. 1 Pet. 4.6. It
aspires after an Imitation of the holy one; it complies with his holy commands,
and in all aims at his glory as the supreme end of all. The Apostle notably
sets forth this Consecration of Man to God, they gave themselves to the Lord, 2
Cor. 8.5. They would be their own no longer. They surrendered up themselves to
God; they dedicated themselves to his Will and Glory: All Christians, nay,
almost all Men will at least seem to cry up an holy Life; but that we may see
wherein it does consist, I shall set down several things.

First, An holy Life is not the product of our Natural Reason and Will; Aug. in
Job. Tract. 81.
that of Pelagius ( A Deo habemus quod Homines sumus, a nobis ipsis quod justi
sumus; That we are Men is from God, that we are just Men is from our selves) is
impium effatum, a very wicked Saying, such as justly grates upon the Ears of
good Men; because it utterly evacuates the Grace of Christ: Its true, Reason is
a very excellent thing; it can dive into Nature, and bring up some of the
secrets of it. It can teem out many Arts and Sciences; it can measure out Rules
and Moral Virtues to Men; but it cannot make a Man holy; it can of it self tell
us, That God is an Infinite, Wise, Just, Good, Superexcellent Being; but after
all is done, it cannot raise up that Love to him, which is the Spring of an
holy Life; that Love is from God, and a fruit of the Holy Spirit. Bellarmine
lays down this very fairly and roundly, Non posse Deum sine open ipsius diligi,
De Great. and Lib. Ar. l. 6. c. 7.
neque ut Authorem Naturae, neque ut Largitorem Gratiae, neque perfect, neque
imperfecte ullo modo; That without the help of Grace we cannot love God,
neither as the Author of Nature, nor as the Giver of Grace, neither perfectly
nor imperfectly any way: If Reason cannot elevate our Love to God, then it
cannot produce an holy Life, which is a fruit of that Love. Further, it may,
having the Gospel set before it, gather up a great stock of Notions touching
God, and Christ, and the holy Commands in the Word, and the incomparable
Rewards in Heaven; but it cannot raise up holy Principles and Actions in us; if
it could, then the very first and rudest draught of Pelagius, which made all
Grace to consist in Doctrina and Libero Arbitrio, must be a very Truth; then
internal Grace, which renews the Soul, and rectifies the Faculties thereof,
must be a fancy needless and altogether superfluous; its true, the Will in Man
is a free Principle; but to Divine objects it is not at all free till it be
made so by Grace: There is such a gravedo Liberi Arbitrii, such a pressure of
innate corruption in it, that it cannot ascend above it self to love God above
all; and dedicate the Life to him: Thus we see, that an Holy Life is too high a
thing to issue forth from mere Principles of Nature, when the Apostle tells us,
That Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance, are Fruits of the Spirit, Gal 5.22. It is no less than profane to
put our Spirit in the room of God's; and to say, these are the fruits of our
Reason and Will; when again he tells us, that We are his Workmanship created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works, Ephesians. 2.10. It is horrible presumption in us to
put by the New Creation, and think that the Old may serve the turn for an holy
Life; I can as easily believe that Jewish Fable, That there is in the Body a
Luz, a little Bone never putrefying, from whence the Resurrection begins, as
that there is any thing left in fallen Man which in it self may become a
Principle of Regeneration and holy Living; could there be any such thing found
in us, there would be no necessity of Grace, but of Nature only; a Creator we
might praise, but a Redeemer we need not; our own Spirit may serve the turn,
God's may be spared.

Secondly, An holy Life is the fruit of a renewed and regenerated Heart; it is
the budding and blossoming of a Divine Nature in us; in it a Man shows himself
to be a Man off from the old stock of Adam, and to be ingraffed into Christ;
and as a branch in him, to have Life and Spirit from him to dedicate and
consecrate himself unto a God. Without this New state there can be no such
thing as an holy Life: upon this account St. Austin tells the Pelagians, Contr.
Jul. lib. 5. c. 4.
those enemies of Grace, That they were in their Doctrine Ruina morum, the ruin
of good Life: For if you take away that Grace which makes the New Creatures,
there can be no such thing as an holy Life; that must stand upon some
foundation, and in lapsed Nature there is, there can be no other but a New
Creature. To show this more fully, I shall lay dawn two things distinctly: The
one is this, An unregenerate Man cannot lead an holy Life: The other is this,
An holy Life issues out of a Principle of Regeneration. These two will fully
clear the Point.

The first thing is, An unregenerate Man cannot lead an holy Life; I say not,
That an unregenerate Man cannot become regenerate; but that an unregenerate
Man, whilst such, cannot live holily; not that there is a natural impotency, a
want of the Faculties of Understanding and Will; but that there is a Moral one,
and in-dwelling corruption which renders him incapable to attain to it. That of
our Savior, A corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit, Matthew. 7.18. carries
a great evidence of Reason in it; the Fruit cannot exceed the Tree; the effect
will not be better than the procreant cause is; if an unregenerate Man be a
corrupt Tree; if an holy Life be good Fruit, the one cannot proceed from the
other. It is vanity and folly to expect Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from
Thistles; and to look for an holy Life from an unregenerate Heart is no less:
It is the Apostle's Conclusion, They that are in the Flesh cannot please God,
Romans 8.8. By those in the Flesh is not meant the Regenerate, who, if any on
Earth, do surely please him; but the Unregenerate: accordingly the Apostle
opposes those in the Flesh, verse. 8. to those in the Spirit, in whom the Holy
Spirit dwells, verse. 9. That is, the Unregenerate to the Regenerate. Hence we
may conclude thus, The Unregenerate are in the Flesh, in their corrupt Nature;
and because such, they cannot please God; they cannot live that holy Life which
is grateful to him: Therefore the Apostle in this Chapter does not only
distinguish between the Regenerate and Unregenerate; the one being in the
Spirit, and the other in the Flesh; but between the acting of the one and of
the other. The Regenerate or those in the Spirit, are after the Spirit, and
mind the things of the Spirit; the Unregenerate or those in the Flesh, are
after the Flesh, and mind the things of the Flesh, verse. 5. We have here two
distinct Principles and Actings; the Regenerate Nature acts in a way of
Holiness and Obedience; but the Old corrupt Nature acts in a way of sin and
wickedness; and unless a Man be new made by Grace, it will continue to do so:
neither need we wonder at it; the Proverb is no less rational than ancient,
Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, 1 Samuel 24.13. A Sinner studies sin, and
has it in the very frame of his Heart; he thirsts after it, and drinks it as
water; he rejoices in it, and makes a sport at it; he is never so much in his
Element as when he is committing it: But in an holy Life there is nothing
congruous or connatural to him; his carnal Mind is enmity against God; it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7. His Will is
contrary to God's; the way of Holiness is a burden to him, too grievous to be
born: and how can we expect that in this unregenerate state he should in the
least enter upon an holy Life? In all reason first there must be a Power or
Divine Principle, and then an Act: it is unnatural and cross to the Method of
Wisdom, that the beam should preceed the Sun, or the Fruit the Root; that acts
of Sense or Reason should go before their Faculties; or that an holy Life
should be imagined to take place before that Divine Nature which is the vital
Root of it. De Concord. cap. 13.
The Eye (says Anselm) must be acute, before it can see acutely. The Wheel
(says St. Austin Ad Simpl. L. 1.
) must be round, before it can move regularly: The Will must be first
illuminated and rectified in Regeneration, before it can rightly will and move.
Repairing Grace, says Hugo, first aspires, that there may be a good Will, and
then inspires, that it may move rightly. Charity, says the Apostle, is out of
a pure Heart, a good Conscience and Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. But alas! in
the Unregenerate what Principles are there? can ought be found there which may
tend to an holy Life? His Heart is impure through the many vile lusts which
dwell there; his Conscience is defiled through the many guilts which he has
contracted; his Faith is a vain Fancy or Presumption, and not a Faith; and how
can he live holily, or what Principles has he for it? There must be a
proportion between the Power and the Act: And so there is in the Regenerate,
between the Seed of God and the crop of Holiness; between the holy Unction and
the Odours of Good Works; But what proportion can be imagined between an
unregenerate Heart, and an holy Life? An unregenerate Man, as he is described
in Scripture, is weak and without strength; and what can he do toward it? He
is unclean and polluted, and how can such a thing as an holy Life proceed from
him? He is dark, nay, darkness it self, and how can he walk in the Light? He is
dead in sins and trespasses, and how can he live a Divine Life? He is a
Stranger, nay, and an Enemy to God and his Law, and how can he walk with God,
or comply with his Law? In an holy Life we walk in the Spirit, and show forth
the Virtues of God; and how can he walk in that, or show forth that which he
has not? An holy Life points directly to Heaven as its center, but the
Principles in a Carnal man tend to Hell and Death: Instead of bearing a
Proportion to Holiness and Life eternal, they carry in them a black contrariety
and opposition to both; I will only add one thing more; to say, That there may
be an holy Life in one unregenerate, is a contradiction. The very light of
Nature tells us, That God must be consecrated in the Heart, and worshipped pura
mente. In the Heathen Sacrifices the Priest first looked on the Heart, to see
that it was right. The Persians thought, that God regarded nothing but the Soul
in the Sacrifice; God loves Spiritualiter immolantes, those that offer up the
Spirit to him in every Duty; an holy Life, if it be such in substance, and not
in shadow only, must be from a pure Heart; and who can find such an one in an
unregenerate Man? Or if if it could be found there, what need could there be of
Regenerating Grace? If an holy Life must be from a pure Heart, and such an
Heart cannot be in a Man unregenerate, then it is not at all possible that an
holy Life should be in him, till Regenerating Grace has made his heart Right.
It is said of Amaziah, That He did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, but not with a perfect Heart, 2 Chr. 25.2. In the first part of the Verse
his Obedience looks very fair and amiable; but in the latter part of it there
is a black mark set upon it, to show that it was not right: the like mark must
be set upon all that seeming Sanctity which is in unregenerate Men.

The next thing proposed is this, An holy Life issues out of a Principle of
Regeneration: The Socinians (who deny original sin, and therefore cannot speak
cordially of Regeneration) do sometimes speak so blindly and perversely of the
Holy Spirit; as if they meant to confound an holy Life, and its Principle
together. Thus Socinus, Christi Spiritus obedientia est, The Spirit of Christ
is Obedience; De Servat. par. 4. c. 6.
as if the cause and effect were all one. Thus Volkelius will understand by the
Spirit, De Ver Rel. l. 4. c. 23.
either the mind of Man informed with Christ's Doctrine, or else the Doctrine
it self; as being loath to own the Regenerating Spirit. But it is evident in
Scripture, that an holy Life is distinct from Regeneration, and issues from it
as a Blessed Fruit thereof: First God creates us in Christ, and then there is a
Progeny of good Works; first he quickens and gives us a Spiritual Being, and
then we walk, and live an holy Life; first there is a good Treasure of Grace in
the Heart, and then the good things are brought forth out of it, Matthew. 12.35.
Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine, whereto, or into which,
you were delivered, says St. Paul Romans 6.17. Here we see whence an holy Life
springs; the Gospel was not only delivered to them, but by the Regenerating
Spirit they were delivered into it, and cast into the holy Mould of it; and
this was the true Reason of their Obedience in an holy Life: Of his own Will
begat he us with the Word of Truth, that we should be a kind of First Fruits of
his Creatures, Jam. 1.18. The Apostle in the precedent verse shows us the
infinite Sun or Fountain of all good things, and in this Verse he gives us a
famous instance in Regeneration, opposing it to that concupiscence which is
immediately before spoken of; conpiscence is the Fountain of sin, and so is
Regeneratition of holy Obedience; the very end of Regeneration is, that we
might be a kind of First Fruits of his Creatures, separate from the World, and
consecrated unto God in an holy Life, living as those who by Regenerating Grace
are made a choice portion and peculiar People to him. It is observed by some
Divines, That the Holy Patriarchs had barren Wives, that their Posterity might
shadow out the Church, which is not produced by the power of Nature, but of
Grace; the end of which production is, that Fruit might be brought forth unto
God in an Holy Life. The Hebrew Doctors say, That God out of his great Name
Jehovah, added the Letter He to the Names of Abraham and Sarah. Hence that of
the Cabalists, Abram non gignit, sed Abraham; Sarai non parit, sed Sarah: In
allusion to this, I may say, It is not the Humane Principles, but the Divine
Nature (which Believers the Children of Abraham partake of) that makes them
bring forth the Fruits of an holy Life: We have this exemplified in a greater
than Abraham, even in Jesus Christ; he was first conceived of the Holy Ghost,
and then gave us that incomparable Pattern of Holiness in his excellent Life.
Sutably, we are first supernaturally begotten to a Spiritual Being, and then we
live an Holy life: He that Sanctifies, and they who are Sanctified are all of
one. Hebr. 2.11. Hence Camero observes, De Eccles. 223.
that between Christ and Believers there is a wonderful Communion of Nature:
Both have an humane Nature Sanctified by the Holy Spirit; he was conceived by
the Holy Spirit; they are regenerated by it, that they may live unto God: but
to make this point the clearer, I shall consider the two parts of the new
Creature; that is, Faith, and Love: I call them so, because the Apostle, who
says, Neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
Creature, Gal. 6.15. says also, Neither Circumcision avails, nor
uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love, Gal. 5.6. intimating, that
Faith and Love are two great parts of the new Creature: an holy Life flows from
both these; Hence some Learned Divines observe, that the good Acts of Heathens
have an essential defect in them, the good Acts of Believers have only a
gradual defect; but the good Acts of Heathens have an essential one; in that
they do not flow from Faith and Love, and so cannot Center in the Glory of God;
Therefore St. Austin retracts that Speech, wherein he said, Retr. lib. 1. cap.
3.
Philosophos virtutis luce fulcisse, that the Philosophers did shine with the
light of virtue: But to speak distinctly of these two Graces.

First, An Holy Life-issues out of Faith; an holy Life is virtually in Faith,
and proceeds actually from it; Faith sees the commands of God to be, as they
are, richly Engraven with the Stamps and Signatures of Divine purity and
equity; such as Proclaim that God is in them of a truth, and that they are the
very Counterpains of his Heart; and from hence it presses the Believer unto
obedience, and secretly dictates, that these are the very Will of God, and must
be done; Thy word is very pure, therefore thy Servant loves it: Says David,
Psalm. 119.140. The Emphatical [therefore] in the Text cannot be practically
understood by any thing but Faith; the Carnal Mind, which is enmity to God,
would argue from the purity of the command to the hatred of it; but Faith, such
is its Divine Genius, argues from thence to Love and Obedience. It does not
only point out the Divine Authority which is stamped upon the command, but show
the purity and rectitude which is there to attract us into our duty; and that
we may do it in a free filial manner. Faith derives a free Spirit from Christ
to make obedience easy and natural to us; a Man with his old Heart drudges in
the ways of God, and brings forth duties as the Bondwoman did her Son, in a
dead Servile manner; but when Faith comes, the commands are easy; and the Will
is upon the Wheel, ready to move sweetly and strongly in compliance thereunto:
The Believer is Spirited and new Natured for Obedience; his Heart is in a
posture to do the Will of God; every where Faith finds Arguments and Impulsives
for it: Does it look upon the Life of Christ? it immediately concludes, these
are the steps of our dear Lord, and shall we not follow him? After whom shall
we walk if not after him? It Is true he walked in pure sinless perfection, such
as we cannot reach; but the gracious Covenant has stooped to our frailty, and
made us sure that sincerity will be aceepted, and how can we deny it, or refuse
to comply with such condescending Grace? Does it look upon Christ's wounds and
bloody Death? these will cast shame and confusion upon an unholy life: May any
one imagine that our Savior bore the Curse and Wrath of God, that we might
provoke it; or expiated our sins at so dear a rate, as his own Blood and Life,
that we might indulge them? who sees not now that Sin is bloody, and holiness
amiable? and what easy terms are proposed to us, when the Death and Curse was
only Christ's, and the sincere Obedience is all that is required to be ours?
Does it look up for the Spirit, the purchase of Christ's death? We well know
where that is to be found: the more we walk in the holy Commands and ways of
God, the more are we like to have of the gales and Divine comforts of it; while
we are obeying and doing the Will of God, that Spirit will usher in assistances
and Heavenly consolations upon us; to give us an experimental proof of that
Promise, That the Holy Spirit is given to them that obey him: does it look
within the vail, to the Rivers of pleasures and plenitudes of joy in Heaven,
where pious Souls see Truth in the original, and drink good at the Fountain
head? Nothing is more obvious than this, that an holy Life is the true way
thither; who can rationally think that he can carry the blots and turpitudes of
an impure Life into such a place, or that any thing less than sincere Obedience
can make him meet to enjoy God and holy Angels there? nothing can be more vain
than such an imagination; as sure as Heaven is Heaven, an holy Life must be the
way thither: Thus we see what a mighty influence Faith has into Holiness;
hence Ignatius says, (...), Faith is the beginning of Life; Epist. ad Ephesians.
without Faith a Man cannot live an holy Life: And St. Austin calls Faith,
Omnium Bonorum Fundamentum, De Fide ad Petr. Proli.
The Foundation of all good things. So good a thing as an holy Life cannot
stand without it. A Fide (says another) venitur ad bona opera; Unless we begin
at Faith, we shall never come to an holy Life. To conclude this with that of
the Apostle, Without Faith it is impossible to please God, Hebr. 11.6.
Therefore without Faith it is impossible to lead an holy Life, which is very
acceptable to him.

The next thing is, An holy Life issues out of Divine Love; without this
neither Heart nor Life can be right; not the Heart; the Will without Divine
Love in it, is tota cupiditas, all concupiscence, pouring out it self to every
vanity that passes by; not the Life; whatever good is done without that Love,
is done serviliter, non liberaliter: whate ever is in the hand, it is not done
out of choice; in animo non facit, his Will concurres not as it ought; in God's
account it is as if it were not done at all: Love is the root of an holy Life,
the summary of the Law; though the Precepts of the Law are many in diversitate
operis, in the diversity of the Work, yet they are but one in radice
Charitatis, in the root of Charity. True Love is Donum amantis in amatum; the
Soul, being drawn and called out of it self by the object loved, yields and
surrenders up it self thereunto; if thus we love God, there must needs be an
holy Life: the Heart, when given up and consecrated unto him, cannot choose but
carry the Life with it. It would be a prodigy in Nature if the Heart should go
one way, and the Life another: True Love sets a great price upon its object;
and if the object be, as God is, supreme, it rates it above all things; if we
set the highest estimate upon God's Will and Glory, nothing can divert us from
an holy Life, which complies with his Will, and promotes his Glory; it is
irrational to neglect that which we value above all other things: True Love
seeks more and more Union with God, to be one Spirit with him; to have idem
velle, and idem nolle; to love as he loves, that is, Holiness; to hate as he
hates, that is Sin. It aspires after a further transformation into the Divine
Image and likeness: it never thinks the Soul like enough or near enough to him;
where it is thus, there an holy Life cannot be wanting; the Heart being
assimilated to God, the Life must needs answer the Heart, and shine with the
rays of the Divine Image which is there. True Love desires to have a
complacential rest and delight in God; it flies to him like Noah's Dove to the
Ark, there to repose it self; what weight is in a Body, that Love is in the
Soul; Amor meus Pondus meum, Aust.
weight makes the Body move toward its center: Love makes the Soul tend, by an
holy Life, to center in God the Supreme goodness, leaving all other things as
the Woman of Samaria did her Pitcher. It hastens in a way of Obedience to enjoy
him: Thus we see how an holy Life issues out of a Regenerate Heart, and
particularly out of Faith and Love; the Doctrine of it is not to be slubbered
over, as if it did merely consist in external Actions or Moralities. But we
must search and see, Whether there be a new Creature, a Work of Regeneration at
the bottom of it. Job, being by his Friends charged as an hypocrite, tells
them, That the root of the matter was found in him, Job 19.28. He was not a Man
of leaves, and outward appearances only, but the root of true Piety was in him;
without this all good actions, how specious soever, are but like the Apples of
Sodom, which, though fair to the Eye, upon a touch fall into ashes and smoke.

Thirdly, An holy Life proceeds out of a pure Intention; Bonum opus Intentio
facit, Intentionem Fides dirigit, says St. Austin In Psalm. 31.
; The Intention makes the Work good, and Faith directs the Intention. This is
the single Eye mentioned by our Savior; If thine Eye be single, thy whole Body
shall be full of light; If thine Eye be evil, thy whole Body shall be full of
darkness, Matthew. 6.22, and 23. A pure Intention casts a Spiritual Light and
Luster upon the Body of our good Works; but that being wanting, the whole Body
of our Works is dead and dark, like a carcass void of all Beauty and
Excellency. Let thine Eyes look right on, says the Wiseman Prove. 4.25. That
is, Have a pure Intention to the Will and Glory of God: This is one thing in
the Church, which ravishes the Heart of Christ; Thou have ravished my Heart
with one of thine Eyes, with one chain of thy Neck, Cant. 4.9. The first thing
which excordiated Christ, and took away his Heart, was the One, the single Eye;
and then the Chain of Obedience ravished him also: without a pure intention a
Man, in his fairest Actions, squints and looks awry; by a tacit blasphemy he
makes as if there were something more excellent than the Will and Glory of God
for him to look unto; and when Man squints, God looks off, and will have none
of his Obedience. Israel is an empty Vine, he brings forth fruit to himself,
Hos. 10.1. Fruit, and yet empty, is a seeming contradiction, but the words
reconcile themselves. He brings forth to himself, (...), he weighs out his
Fruit to himself; he proportions his Religion to himself; all being for
himself, God accepts it not, but esteems it as nothing at all: such Fruit, and
mere emptiness are much one before God. He tells them Levit. 26.27. That they
did walk with him (...) in accidente, at all adventures, when they chanced to
light upon him, by the by; and besides their intention, quasi aliud agentes, as
if the Service of God were a (...), a business only by the by; but would God
accept them, or take it well at their hands! No, he will walk with them (...)
too, by chance, at all adventures; his Blessings shall come upon them, as it
were per accidens; his Mind is not toward them, as it is toward those which
serve him spiritually: A Man's Life cannot be holy praeterintentionally, or by
accident: it is a pure Intention which spiritualizes and sanctifies the Life
before God. To clear this, it is to be considered, That the Life must be
dedicated to God in a double respect; it must be dedicated to him by a
conformity to his Will. And again, It must be dedicated to him by a tendency to
his Glory. In both these there must be a pure intention to direct the same.

The first thing is, There must be a pure Intention in our conformity to the
Will of God. Socinus says, That there is a Verbum quoddam interius, a kind of
internal word in Man; that is, a Reason to discern between that which is just,
and that which is unjust: Praelect. Theol. c. 2.
And then he Adds, He that obeys this internal word, obeys God himself, Etiamsi
ipsum Deum non esse quidem aut sciat aut cogitet; although he do not know or
think that there be a God. And after concludes, That such an Obedience is
grateful to God: But as great an Admirer of Holiness as this Heretic would
seem to be, it was no less than a profane Assertion, to say, That there might
be a grateful Obedience without any respect at all had to God, or his Will.
Does not St. Paul condemn in the Athenians the worship of an unknown God? Does
not Christ charge the Samaritans, that they did worship they knew not what? Yet
these are the portenta opinionum, which this Master of Reason vents to the
World: But to pass over this; It is not enough for an holy Life, that the thing
done be materially good; but it must be therefore done, because God commands it
so to be; an holy Man follows after Holiness, because this is the Will of God.
Now that the material goodness of a thing is not enough, may appear by these
Instances. Jehu in destroying the House of Ahab did do that which God commanded
him to do; yet God says, That he will avenge that Blood upon the House of
Jehu, Hos. 1.4. And why so? Jehu did that which God commanded, but he did not
obey in it; he did it not in compliance with God's command, but in pursuance of
his own design; as it is with the hand of a rusty Dial which stands still
(suppose) at ten of the Clock, to a Traveller passing at that hour it seems
to go right, but it is but by accident; so was it with Jehu. He seemed to obey
in that which hit with his own Will; but he did it not upon the account of
God's; for then he would have done other things. But though he destroyed Ahab's
House, yet he did not destroy the Calves at Dan and Bethel. For there God's
Will did not fall in with his. Another Instance we have in the acts of Moral
Virtue in the Heathen; those acts were materially good, yet they did not in
them serve God, but their own Reason: It Is true, right Reason signifies the
very Will of God; but they did them not in compliance with Reason, as
significative of God's Will; but in compliance with it as a chief part of
themselves. This is evident upon a double account; the one is this, That they
were animals of Glory. They did what they did, not in an humble subjection to
the Will of God, but in a proud self-glorying way; they arrogated all the
praise and honor to themselves; in all they did but sacrifice to the pride of
their own Reason. The other is this, They did not only follow right Reason in
their Moral Virtues, but corrupt Reason in their Idolatries: The Apostle says,
Their foolish Heart was darkened, Romans 1.21. Here they followed Reason as a part
of their corrupt self; which those, who follow it as significative of God's
Will, cannot be supposed to do: Right Reason, which imports God's Will, was
against their Idolatries; yet they continued in them. Hence it appears, that in
their Moral Virtues they did not serve God, but their own Reason. Hence St.
Austin contends, Contr. Jul. l. 4. c. 3.
that their Virtues were not true Virtues. They might be just, sober, merciful;
but they did all infideliter, without respect to the Will and Glory of God;
Male bonum facit, qui infideliter facit. Hence, as Camero observes, Came. fol.
356.
Lucretia hated Immodesty, and Cato Perfidiousness; not out of love to God, but
because those things were incongruous to Reason. Another Instance we have in
Carnal Professors under the Gospel; they hear, read, pray, give Alms; but they
do not do these spiritually, in compliance with the Will of God; the Duties are
high, but the aims in them are low and carnal: Vast is the difference between
an Holy and a Carnal Man: An Holy Man is holy even in Natural and Civil
Actions; the Kingdom of Heaven is by a pure Intention brought down into his
Trade: Nay, into his very Meat and Drink. His deeds are by a Prerogative
wrought in God: when he toils as a Servant in servile Employment, yet he serves
the Lord Christ; all is spiritualized by a pure Intention: But on the other
hand, a Carnal Man is carnal even in spiritual Actions. There is indeed the
Opus operatum; the Flesh, the outward body of a Duty; but there is no Soul or
Spirit in it. No pure Intention to carry it up to the Will and Glory of God, to
which it is consecrated. Thus we see, that it is not enough for an holy Life
that the thing done be materially good: No; it must be done in compliance to
the Divine Will: I will keep the Commandments of my God, says David, Psalm.
119.115. He would keep them, not upon any by-account, but because they were
God's, to whose Will he dedicated himself. Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God,
says our Savior, Hebr. 10.7. And again, I seek not my own Will, but the Will
of the Father, which has sent me, Joh. 5.30. Here we have the great Pattern of
Holiness; his Will was devoted and swallowed up in God's: all that he did and
suffered was in conformity to the Divine Will. We must not dream of any true
Holiness, till we do what good we do, out of compliance with the Divine Will;
as in matters of Faith we must believe, quia Deus dixit; so in matters of
Practice we must obey, quia Deus voluit: His Command must sway and cast the
Balance in Heart and Life; the Nature of holy Obedience is this, to do what God
wills, intuitu voluntatis, because he wills it: And hence an holy Man does
not pick and choose among the commands of God, but carry a respect to all of
them.

The next thing is this: There must be a pure Intention to direct our good
Actions to the Glory of God: seeing God is Alpha, he must be Omega; seeing he is
the Supreme good, he must be the Ultimate end of all things. Nothing can be
more rational than this, That a Creature should be referred to its Creator;
that a finite good should run and do homage to an Infinite one; nothing can be
more absurd and inordinate than this, That a Creature should be a center to it
self, or should be loved or enjoyed for it self; or that God, the most
excellent Being, should be made but a Medium, or should be loved or used for
some other thing. This is practically to blaspheme, and say, God is not God,
there is something better than he to be loved and enjoyed for it self. When the
Angels would stay at home, and frui seipsis, enjoy themselves, they became
Devils, and lost all their glory in a moment. All things therefore must be
referred unto God; his Glory must be the supreme End; to this Angels fly with
Eagles wings; to this holy Men walk; to this irrational Creatures by a secret
Instinct are carried; to this Devils, Will they, nill they, must be drawn; this
is the great End of all things; for a rational Creature not to aim at this, is
against Nature and Reason; the want of this made an essential defect in the
Moral Virtues of the Pagans; here they fall short; They did not in them aim at
the glory of God. This appears in diverse things: they at the best made Virtue
but pretium sui, the Reward of it self for the honesty which was in it. But
they looked no further to the glory of God, as they ought; they looked on
themselves as the chief object of their Love; and so this Love never ascended
to God; they boasted and gloried in their Virtues, as merely their own, and
never saw any center but themselves; they did not therefore aim at the glory of
God in them. Hence St. Austin, who pronounces them no true Virtues, says, That
true Virtues are to be discerned, Contr. Jul. l. 4.
non officiis, sed finibus; not by the Work it self, but by the end; and that
their Virtues were good only in officio, in the work done; not in fine, in a
right end: And that not only the Epicureans, who would taste of Carnal
Pleasures; Aug. de Verb. Apost. Sermon. 13.
But the Stoics, who would set up Right Reason, did live after the Flesh;
their Virtues were referred to themselves, and that was corrupt Flesh; they
were no longer Virtues, but pieces of Pride and Presumption. Virtutes, says
the same Author, De Civ. Dei l. 19. c. 25.
cum ad seipsas referuntur, inflatae and superbae sunt, Virtues if referred to
themselves, are proud and blown up with their own excellency. Julianus the
Pelagian, Aust. contr. Jul. l. 4. c. 3.
was so far convinced of this, that he said, They were steriliter boni, because
they acted not for God: their Virtues would do them no good in another World;
in all reason, those Virtues which are not referred to God as the ultimate End,
cannot possibly have any thing of Holiness in them. They cannot be holy without
a consecration to God; and that cannot be without a pure Intention toward his
glory. It is not therefore enough for an holy Life to have Moral Virtues, but
we must search our Hearts, and see what our end is; what forms are in Naturals,
that the end is in Morals, As the Man thinks, so is he. Prove. 23.7. Men's
cujusque id est quisque, The Man is as his Mind is, and his Mind is as his End
is; though the End be extrinsecal to the Act in genere entis, yet it is
essential to it in genere moris; the Act cannot be holy, unless the end be so:
Hence the Apostle tells us, That whatsoever we do, all must be done to the
Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. The Jewish Rabbis say the same, That whatever we
do, must be done in Nomine Dei, in the Name of God: an Act not dedicated to
that great End, is cut off and separate from its center. And upon that account
it is not holy, but common and profane; no less a nullity in Spirituals than a
Creature, if cut off from God the Fountain of Being, would be in Naturals:
Hence St. Austin tells us, That which is good in officio, may yet be sin in
fine; For, Quicquid boni fit, and non propter hoc fit propter quod fieri debet,
etsi officio videtur bonum, ipso non recto fine peccatum est, Contra Jul. l. 4.
c. 3.
as the Schools speak, Finis dat speciem in Moralibus. Those Acts which are
good in the matter of them, may be utterly marred by perverse Intention: It
becomes us than to look to the scope of our Actions. Our Savior Christ, the
great Exemplar of Sanctity, tells us, That he sought not his own Glory, but his
Father's, Joh. 8.50. compared with Joh. 7.18. He was Deus de Deo, God of God;
the Eternal Greator; yet as he was in forma servi, in the form of a Servant, a
Man in time, he sought not his own Glory, but his Father's. We see here what is
the Design of an holy Life; it is that God may be glorified: our Holiness
should shine as a little Beam or Spark from the Holy one; the drops and
measures of Mercy in us should point out that infinite Ocean of Mercy which is
in him: We should by our Obedience tell the World, that God is Supreme, and by
our sincerity testify, that he is omniscient, and present every where; we
should study how to serve the Interest of the Blessed God, how to show forth
his Praise, how to unfold his Glory in an holy righteous, humble, heavenly
Conversation; still there should be Oculus in metam, a pure Intention at the
Glory of God: If we are by a pure Intention joined to that great End, then our
Works will be spiritualized; our Holiness will never see corruption; there will
be be a kind of Immortality in every good Action: but if we are off from that
great End, our Holiness perishes, or rather is none at all. There is a worm at
the Root; one base, low, inferior End or other putrifies the good Work, and
makes it moulder into nothing. When the Woman in the Revelations was ready to
be delivered, the Dragon stood before her to devour her Child, but it was
caught up to God and his Throne. A devout Papist glosses it thus; Nerimb. de
Vit. Div.
When we bring forth our good Works, Satan stands before us to devour them by
one false Intention or other, and will certainly do it, unless by a pure one
they be caught up to God and his Glory. Another expostulates thus, Quid juvat
bonorum operum prolem gignere, and eam per Intention is depravationem necare?
What profits it to beget a progeny of Good Works, and to kill it by a depraved
Intention? A Man, who wants a right Intention, murders his best progeny. The
Church therefore tells us, That all her fruits were laid up for Christ, Cant.
7.13. Propter te, Domine, propter te, is the holy Man's Motto; all his good
Works are by a pure Intention consecrated unto God: When an Hypocrite does
good Works, the center and compass of all is himself only; and upon that
account, those Works are not good in the Eyes of God: But when a Saint does
good Works, they fall into God's Bosom, and center in his Glory. To conclude;
Where pure Love adheres to God as the Supreme Good, there a pure Intention will
dedicate the Life to his Glory, as the ultimate End; then and not before may we
call the Life holy.

Fourthly, An holy Life is humble and dependant upon the influences of God's
Spirit and Grace. Hence the Apostle bids us, Work out our Salvation with fear
and trembling, Phil. 2.12. That is, with all humility: And the Reason is added,
For God works to will, and to do of his good pleasure, verse. 13. which would
be no Reason at all, if we could stand upon our own bottom, and work out our
Salvation without any dependence upon that Grace, which works the Will and
the Deed: But if, as the reason tells us, God works the Will and the deed of
his good pleasure, then we have all the reason in the World to work it out with
fear and trembling; as knowing our dependence upon God and his Grace. Again;
The Apostle says of himself, I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not
I, but the Grace of God, which was with me, 1 Cor. 15.10. Observe his great
caution; he ascribes nothing to himself, but all to Grace. He said indeed, I
labored; yet he piouslly retracts it, saying, yet not I, but the Grace of God.
He ascribes all to Grace, because in all his labors he was in an humble
dependence upon it, as being that without which he could do nothing. This note
of an holy Life does also show, that the Moral Virtues of the Heathens were not
right: they were indeed wise, sober, just, merciful; but what was their posture
in their doing these things? how did they crow, and reflect upon themselves,
and cry up their own Reason and Will, as the only Fountains of Virtue? The
Philosopher, says Epictetus, expects all (...) from himself. Ench. c. 17.
Deorum immortalium munus est, quod vivimus, Philosophiae, quod been vivimus,
Epist. 90.
Our Life is from the Gods; but, which is greater than Life, our Virtue is from
Philosophy. Thus Seneca, their Virtuoso, could vie perfection with God himself:
Epist. 48.
Hoc est quod Philosophia mihi promittit, ut me parem Deo faciat, says Seneca:
Philosophy was to make him equal to God. Nay, there is a strain higher; Epist.
53.
Est aliquid, quo Sapiens antecedet Deum, ille Naturae beneficio, non suo,
sapiens est, says he; There is something wherein a wise Man has the
precedence of God: God is God by Nature, but the wise Man is so by his Reason
and Will. They scorned that Virtue should be Res beneficiaria, a thing
precarious or dependant upon the Grace of God; they would have it to be merely
and entirely their own. De Natura Deor.
Virtutem nemo unquam acceptam Deo retulit, nimirum recte propter virtutem jure
laudamur; in virtute recte gloriamur; quod non contingeret, si id donum a Deo,
non a nobis haberemus, thus Cicero; No Man ever thank't God for being virtuous;
for Virtue we are justly praised, in Virtue we rightly glory; which we could
not do if it were from God, and not from our selves: And may we call this
Holiness? No surely; it is horrible Impiety, and desperate Pride, for them thus
to lift up themselves, and dethrone God the great Donor. The Angels by
reflecting on their own excellencies in a thought, were turned into Devils:
And, I confidently say it, Virtues, which by a proud reflex are turned back
upon themselves, lose their Nature; being altogether independent upon God, the
Fountain of goodness, they are no longer Virtues, but Fancies and Nullities. A
proud Self-subsister is a Man in a posture as cross to the Gospel as possibly
can be: the tumor in his Heart makes him incapable of that Grace which is given
to the humble; the Self-sufficiency there makes it impossible for him to live
by Faith, as the Just do; he depends not on God's Grace, and how can he live to
his Glory? he is all to himself, and what can God be to him? Praef. in Psalm. 31.
Some Pagans, says St. Austin, would not be Christians, quia sufficient sibi
de bona vita sua, because they could live well of themselves: If a Man can
stand upon his own bottom, and work out of his own stock, to what purpose are
Christ and Grace? if he may be a Principle and End to himself, what need he go
out of his own Circle? Such a Man as this, is an Idol to himself, fraught with
Vanity and horrible Presumption; but utterly void of God and an holy Life. I
shall say no more to this: An holy Life is a Life of dependence; the Just or
holy Man lives by Faith; he looks to God, and is saved; he waits till Mercy
come; he commits himself to God and his Grace; he leans and rolls upon him, as
not bearing up his own weight; he casts his burden on him, as being too much
for himself. He gives himself to the Lord, resigning up all his property in
himself, that God may be all in all; still he is in dependence upon him: He
moves but under the First Mover; he acts but under the great Agent; when he
sails toward Heaven, he looks for the holy gales; when he sows precious Seed,
he waits for the Heavenly dews and Sunbeams: Still he depends upon Grace. In
the 119. Psalm. where we have the breathings of Vital Religion, David admirably
sets forth, how in all his holy actings he did depend upon God: Thou have
commanded us to keep thy Precepts; but O that my ways were directed to do so,
verse. 4, and 5. I will keep thy Statutes; but O forsake me not utterly; verse.
8. With my whole Heart have I sought thee, but O let me not wander from thy
Commandments, verse. 10. I will run the way of thy Commandments, but do thou
enlarge my Heart, verse. 32. I love thy Precepts; but quicken me, O Lord,
according to thy loving kindness, verse. 159. I have chosen thy Precepts; O let
thine Hand help me, verse. 173. We see here the true Picture of an holy Life: It
is working and depending; it is Obedience and Influence in Conjunction. The
holy Man very well knows, that the new Creature, though it be in it self an
excellent thing, and more worth than the Soul it self, is defectible, and
cannot stand alone, or subsist without a Divine concourse: it was breathed out
from God; and, without his continual spirations to support it, it will vanish
into nothing; should God tell him, That he should stand alone, and upon his own
bottom; he would, though richly furnished with divine Graces, fall into an
Agony, and be ready to sink into despair; his Heart would immediately suggest
to him, that he might, with David, roll in Adultery and Blood; or, with Peter,
deny the Lord Christ; or, with Julian, turn total, final Apostate, were he left
in the hand of his own counsel; he knows he might do any thing which has been
done by others. St. Austin brings in one speaking thus; Non multa peccavi, I
have sinned little, yet love much: And then answers thus; Hom. 23. Tom. 10.
Tu dicis te non multa commississe: Quare? quo regente? Hoc tibi dicit Deus
tuus, Regebam te mihi, servabam te mihi, agnosce gratiam ejus, cui debes and
quod non admisisti? Thou say, That thou have not sinned much: Why? who ruled
thee? Thy God says to thee, I ruled thee, I preserved thee; acknowledge then
his Grace, to which thou owe even this, That thou have not sinned as others.
The holy Man is very sensible, that unless God bear him up with his Grace, he
shall soon sink into all manner of fin. Hence that of Luther, Vita hominis
nihil aliud est nisi oration, gemitus, desiderium, suspirium ad misericordiam
Dei: Our Life should be a perpetual breathing after that Grace of God, upon
which we depend: Were we full of divine Light, yet if we should shut the
windows, and go about to possess it in a Self-subsistence, we should soon be in
the dark, and find by experience that every Beam hangs upon that Grace which is
above: were we never so rich in inherent Graces, unless there were influences
from Heaven also, we should soon spend our stock, and become bankrupts. The
holy Man is a Part or Member of Christ, and lives in dependence upon him as the
Head. There is, as St. Chrysostom says, (...), a Spirit descending from Christ
above, which touches all his Members, and makes a kind of Spiritual continuity
between him and them: Hence they are said in Scripture to live in the Spirit,
pray in the Spirit, walk in the Spirit, do all in the Influence of that Spirit,
which comes down from the Head to actuate their Graces: Hence St. Paul says, I
live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. His Graces as they had
their Being from Christ the true Immanuel, so were they continued and actuated
by the Influences of his Spirit; which in a sober sense are a kind of Immanuel,
God with us, to uphold and quicken us to all holy Obedience. As the humane
Nature of Christ acted not in a separate way, but in union with the Divine; so
the Believers Graces do nothing apart, but all in union with Christ. Still
there must be, as the Milevitan Council tells us, an Adjutorium Gratiae, a
supernatural Aid to work in us to will and to do. When we do good, then, as the
Arausican Council has it, Deus in nobis atque nobiscum, ut operemur, operatur;
God works in and with us, to make us work: The Holy Man's Powers and Graces
cannot go alone. He is therefore depending upon that Spirit which acts the Sons
of God in pure ways toward Heaven: To deny this dependence, is, like the
worshippers of Angels, Not to hold the Head, from which all the Body by joints
and bands, having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the
increase of God, Col. 2.19. Were the holy Man off from the Head, what would
become of him? what illapses of the Spirit or Influences of Grace could he look
for in a state separate from him? how could he remain holy, or continue in the
Divine Life any longer? In such a case he would be no longer a living Branch,
but (...), a quasi Branch, dead and withered, and fit for the Fire, as the
Exposition is, Joh. 15.6. He could no more walk in Holiness, than the old
Dionysius, (as the Fable runs) could walk a great way with his Head off. We see
then what manner of thing a true holy Life is; it is that which stands in doing
the Will of God in a way of humble dependence upon his Grace; it is not enough
to do that which is good, but we must do it waiting, and looking up to the God
of Grace, that he would strengthen our inner Man, order our steps, hold up our
goings in his paths, incline our Hearts, and work all our works in us; that he
would by the continual supplies of his Spirit enlighten us when dark, quicken
us when dead, draw us when backward, hold us when falling, enlarge us when in
straits, and actuate our Graces in the midst of our infirmities: How excellent
is the Life, when God's Arm joins it self to ours to set it a working; when the
Spirit breaths on our Graces, and the Spices flow out; when the Influences of
Auxiliary Grace are as Dew; and the Roots of Habitual Graces cast forth
themselves in holy works suitable thereunto; when there is Grace with our
Spirit: and, in a sense, a kind of Immanuel, God with us, to incline our Hearts
to do all the Will of God; and in the power of his Grace we set our selves
seriously to the doing of it? This is indeed an holy Life; not only good in the
matter, but pious in the manner of it; a vein of Faith and dependence runs
through every Good Work: God, the Fountain and Original of Holiness, is
sanctified in every step we take: there is an holy Life in us; but the Fountain
of Life is above; we do Good Works, but God is the Great Operator, he works all
our Works in us. I shall conclude with that of the Arausican Council,
Adjutorium Dei etiam renatis ac sanctis semper est implorandum, ut ad finem
bonum pervenire, vel in bono opere perdurare possint, Can. 10. Help from the
Holy One must be ever implored, even by the Saints themselves, that they may
arrive at the good End, and abide in the Good Work.

Fifthly, In an holy Life there must be a sincere mortification of sin, without
any salvo or exception; no known sin may be indulged or spared: It Is true, in
an holy Man there are relics of in-dwelling sin adhering to him; there are
quotidian Infirmities, Effluvium's of Humane Frailty, breathing forth from him;
but neither of these are indulged; both are inevitable in this Life: Original
Corruption is a very great burden to him; it is the grief of his Heart, to have
such an evil in his Bosom; to be a clog upon his Faculties, a damp upon his
Prayers, a cooler upon his Zeal and Charity, and a stain upon all his Duties
and Good Works. This makes him groan, and cry out, Oh! wretched Man that I am!
who shall deliver me from this Body of Death? This is an Evil always present;
the holy Man shakes himself, and yet it adheres; he flies, and yet it
encompasses; he mortifies, and yet he must mortify on; it is not, it will not
be extinct till Death dissolves him into dust: He prays, weeps, sweats, fights,
runs, labors, and yet he cannot make a total riddance of it. However, he
indulges it not; in like manner is it with his daily Infirmities; these are not
indulged, but they lie as an heavy burden upon him: he wishes for, he breaths
after Perfection: Oh! that there were no remaining Sin, no moats of Infirmity:
But alas! it will not be here; Aust. de Temp. Sermon. 45.
Concupiscere nolo; and concupisco, says the Father; Innate corruption will be
stirring and bubling up in us; all that can be done on Earth; is to war and
fight against it; the Triumph, the Crown of sinless Perfection can be found no
where but in Heaven: But to clear this Particular, I shall set down two things.

The one is this: A Man, who indulges or allows sin in himself, cannot, while
he does so, lead an holy Life: he has no Principles for it; no Principle of
Repentance; he cannot mourn over sin, while he joys in it; he cannot hate sin,
while he loves it; he cannot forsake sin, while he follows after it. No
Principle of Faith; he cannot trust in God's Mercy, when he rebels, and is in
Arms against him; he cannot receive the Lord Christ, when he has another
Master to rule over him; he cannot close in with the precious Promises of the
Gospel, when he embraces the lying Promises of Sin. No Principle of Holy Love;
he cannot truly love God, with an Idol in his Heart; he cannot love him, and
close in with sin his great Enemy; he cannot love him, and habitually,
willingly violate his Commands: Such an one can have no pure Intention toward
God's Will or Glory: not toward God's Will; he obeys with a salvo or
exception; he picks and chooses among the Divine Commands; he complies only with
those Commands which cross not his darling Lust. The Jewish Rabbis say; He
that says, I receive the whole Law, except one word only, despises the Command
of God. The same Divine Authority is upon all the Commands; and that Obedience,
which is with the exception of one Command which crosses the indulged Lust, is
as none at all: Nor yet toward God's Glory: How can he glorify God, who by
willful sinning dishonours him? or how can he aim at that Glory, who aims at
the satisfaction of his own Lust? or which way can one promote two such
contrary ends, as that Glory, and his own Satisfaction? Heaven and Hell, Light
and Darkness, Holiness and Impurity may as soon be reconciled, as two such
contrary ends can meet together. Every indulged Lust is one Idol or other;
either it is Baal, Pride and Lorliness, or Ashtaroth, Wealth and Riches, or
Venus, carnal and sensual pleasure, or Mauzzim, Force and earthly Power; unless
the Idol be put away, we cannot serve God in in an holy Life.

The other thing is this: It is of high concern to an holy Life to mortify Sin.
An holy Man is one in Covenant with God; therefore he must maintain war against
Sin, the Enemy of God; Sin is an opposite to God, a rebellion against his
Sovereignty, a contradiction to his Holiness, an abuse to his Grace, a
provocation to his Justice, a disparagement to his Glory; and how can an holy
Man, a Friend of God do less than set himself against it, that he may kill and
utterly destroy it? Ye that love the Lord, hate evil, says the Psalmist, Psalm.
97.10. The Exhortation is pregnant with excellent Reason: If you do indeed love
God, who is Purity, Power, Wisdom, Excellency it self; ye can do no less than
hate Sin, which is Pollution, Weakness, Folly, and Vileness; and if you do hate
it, you will seek the utter ruin and extirpation of it: an holy Man is one in
union with Christ, and upon that account he must mortify Sin: in Christ
crucified he has a pattern of Mortification; what was done to his pure Flesh
in a way of Expiation, must be done to our corrupt Flesh in a way of
Mortification. The Nails which fastened him to the Cross, tell us, that our
corruption must have such a restraint upon it, that it may, like one on a
Cross, be disabled to go forth into those acts of sin which it is propense
unto; the piercing and letting out his Heart-blood, shows us that the Old Man
must not only be restrained, but pierced; that the vital Blood, the internal
love of sin may be let out of the Heart; he was active in his Passion; he
freely laid down his Life, yet violence was done to him; in like manner we must
freely sacrifice our Lusts; we must willingly die to sin, yet sin must not die
a Natural Death, but a violent one; it must be stabbed at the heart, and die of
its wounds: And, because it will not die all at once, it must by little and
little languish away till it give up the Ghost; there must be Mortification
upon Mortification, because sin is long a dying. But further we have from
Christ not an Examplar of mortification only, but a Spirit and Divine Power for
the Work, while by Faith we converse about the wounds of Christ; We have that
Spirit from him, which mortifies the deeds of the Body, Romans 8.13. That mind of
Christ which makes us suffer in the Flesh, ceasing from sin, That we may no
longer live to the Lusts of Men, but to the Will of God, 1 Pet. 4.1, and 2. If
then the holy Man will live like himself, and as becomes a Member of Christ, he
must by that Virtue and Spirit, which he has from him, crucify his Lusts and
Corruptions: Thus the Apostle, They that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh
with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. They ought to crucify them; they do
crucify them so far, that sin can reign no longer; they go on crucifying every
day more and more, that the body of sin may be destroyed.

Moreover, An holy Man has such a Divine Faith, as blasts all the World in
comparison of Heavenly things; in the Eyes of Faith, Earthly Riches are not the
true ones: those Treasures which glitter so much to Sense, are but poor
moth-eaten things; the World's substance is but a shadow, an apparition, a
thing that is not; too low for an immortal Soul to aim at; too mean to enrich
the inward Man; the sensual pleasures which ravish Flesh and Blood, are but the
vain titillations of the outward Man; Momentary things; such as perish in the
using, and die in the embraces, leaving nothing behind them but a sting and
worm in the Conscience of the poor voluptuary. Mundane Glories, which take
carnal Men so much, appear to be but a blast; a little popular Air: to a Man up
among the Stars, the whole Earth would be but a small thing; and to a Man who
by Faith converses in Heaven, Earthly Crowns and Scepters are no better. Now
when Sin, which uses to wrap up it self in one piece of the World or other, is
blasted in its Covers and Dresses of apparent Good; when those Pomps and
Fancies of the World, which usually paint and cover Sin, to render it eligible
unto Men, are discovered by Faith to be but vanities and empty Nothings, Sin
will be loved no longer: nay, it will look according to its own hue like a
vile, base, deformed thing, fit for nothing but to be hung upon a Cross; there
to die and expire. Hence it appears, that an holy Man as long as his Faith
discovers a vanity and nothingness in the fairest prospects of the World, must
needs overcome the World, and the lusts of it. Again, An holy Man, according to
that supernatural Consecration which is upon him, surrenders up his Love, and
Joy, and Delight to God and Christ and Heavenly things; the stream of his
Heart, which before run out upon the lying vanities here below, is now turned
to the excellent things above; his Conversation is in Heaven; his Treasure and
his Heart are both there; and then what must become of Sin? must it not needs
die away, and become as a Body without a Spirit in it? It is the Love, and the
Joy, and the Delight of Man which animate Sin; but if these are not here any
longer, but risen and gone away into the upper World, to place and center
themselves upon the excellent objects which are there, then Sin must needs
languish and die away; it has nothing to animate or enliven it any more: were
this Divine surrender in perfection, Sin could not so much as be; and
proportionably where it is but in truth only, Sin must needs grow heartless and
powerless. Notable is that of the Apostle, Walk in the Spirit, i.e. in the
Elevations of holy Faith and Love, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of Flesh,
Gal. 5.16. Sin shall grow weak, and by little and little give up the Ghost.

To conclude this Character; An holy Man, which way soever he looks, sees just
reason to mortify Sin; the rectitude of the Law says, It must die for its
crookedness and ataxy: the threatening of Death says, It must die, or the Soul
must die in the room of it. The bleeding Wounds of our dying Lord say, That the
Crucifier must not be spared, but die after that manner. That excellent Guest,
the holy Spirit, says, It is too vile a thing to live under the same roof with
it self. The precious immortal Soul says, The wounds and turpitudes of it are
too intolerable to be endured any longer. Heaven, that blessed Region, says,
It is not to be tolerated by any who mean to enter into that place: We must
then mortify the deeds of the Body, that we may live, Romans 8.13. that we may
live a Life of Holiness here, and a Life of Glory in another World.

Sixthly, An holy Life is not made up of the Exercise of this or that Grace in
particular; but of the Exercise of all Graces, pro hic and nunc, as occasion
serves. St. Peter says, That we must add to our Faith Virtue, to Virtue
Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance Patience, to Patience
Godliness, to Godliness Brotherly kindness, and to Brotherly kindness Charity,
2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. Holy Men, who are partakers of the Divine Nature, spoken of
immediately before, have Grace upon Grace; and must, as occasion serves,
exercise one after another, that there may be a Constellation of Graces
appearing in their Lives, to give the more full resemblance of the Perfections
which are in their Father in Heaven; our Savior Christ (in whom all Graces are
set forth in lively and Orient colors, and are really and practically
exemplified to our view) had this character justly given him, he went up and
down down doing good; every step one odor of Grace or other brake forth from
him: Subjection to Parents or Magistrates, or Zeal toward God, or Humility in
washing his Disciples feet, or Meekness under false Accusations, or melting
Compassions letting out cures on the Bodies and Heavenly truths on the Souls of
Men, or admirable Patience under great sorrows and sufferings; one glorious way
of Holiness or other was always coming from him: Proportionably, an holy Man,
Who is a living Member of Christ, must be in his measure holy in all manner of
Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. In the Original it is, (...), which way soever he
turn himself, he must be holy in it: he must have a respect to God at every
turn; this will best appear by the particular parts of his Life.

Take an holy Man in Divine Ordinances, there he is holy: He would first be
sure that he is in a right Church, and in a right Ordinance; in a right Church;
for there the Lord commands the Blessing, even Life for evermore; in a right
Ordinance, for unless the Institution be from God, the Benediction cannot be
expected from him: and then he would serve God in a right manner, and sanctify
his Name in his approaches; when he comes to an Ordinance, he has high
thoughts of God, as being the Infinite Majesty of Heaven, the Excellency of all
Perfections; one whom Angels adore, and Devils tremble at: accordingly he lies
low before God; he serves him with Reverence and godly Fear; he draws nigh to
him, yet forgets not the infinite distance between them; he blushes to think
that he must go before so pure a Majesty, with the dust of Mortality about him:
and again he blushes to think, that he must do so in the spots and rags of many
Infirmities, which being in the Soul are much more abasive than those in the
Body. The Beams of the Divine Glory strike an holy awe into him, and make him
conclude, That a Soul, though entirely given up, is to God but a little, very
little thing; but as a Beam to the Sun, or a drop to the Ocean; and, which is
matter of more shame and abasement; the Soul is much less, in that the innate
corruption holds back, and the bewitching World steals away a great deal of it
from God: very little or rather nothing it is, that we can give to him; however
the holy Man, such is his Divine temper, would not abate any thing, but
endeavor in Ordinances to give God his Spirit and highest Intention; he knows
that God is a Spirit, and mere bodily worship is as nothing to him: what is the
bowing of the Knee, when there is an Iron Sinew of Rebellion within? or the
lifting up of the Hands or Eyes, when there is an earthly depression upon the
affections? towhat purpose is an open Ear, when the Heart is deaf and shut up
against holy Truths? And what a shadow, a mere lie in worship is the Body, when
the Mind is stole away and gone after Vanity? He therefore sets himself to
serve God in spirit and truth; while God is speaking to him in his Sacred Word,
he would have no converse at all with worldly objects; he bids these stand by,
and not interrupt his attention, while he is speaking to God in prayer; he
would not only pour out words to God, but his very Heart and Spirit, if it were
possible, all of it, without reserving so much as a glance or a piece of a
broken thought toward carnal things; a Duty to the Great God is a thing of
vast import and consequence; therefore he would do it with the greatest
strength of intention and affection. David like he calls upon his Soul, and all
that is within him to intend the thing in hand; but because when he has done
his utmost, there will yet be many failures and infirmities; the holy Man looks
up to Mercy for a Pardon, and offers up all his Duties in and through Jesus
Christ the great Mediator. In the Old Testament the holy Man prayed thus,
Remember, O my God, and spare me, Neh. 13.22. Enter not into judgment with thy
Servant, Psalm. 143.2. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, who shall
stand? Psalm. 130.3. The sense of their many imperfections made them fly to a
Mercy-seat: In the New Testament we are expressly directed, To do all in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, Col. 3.17. To make our approaches to God in and through
him, Ephesians. 2.18. To offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by him, 1
Pet. 2.5. Every Duty must be tendered unto God in and through the Mediator:
therefore the holy Man does not stand upon the Perfection of his Services, but
implore a Pardon of his Infirmities; neither does he tender his Services
immediately unto God, but he puts them into the hand of Christ, that being
perfumed, and as it were, glorified by his merits, they might from thence
ascend up before God, and be graciously accepted by him. Moreover, because
Ordinances are but Medium's and Channels of Grace, the Holy Man in the use of
them lifts up his Eyes to God, to have them filled with the Divine Spirit and
Blessing; a mere outward Sanctuary of Ordinances will not serve his turn; he
would see the Power and the Glory, the goings of God in it: He cannot live by
Bread only; not the Life of Nature by the Bread of Creatures only; not the Life
of Grace by the Bread of Ordinances only: in both he waits for that word of
Blessing, which proceeds out of God's Mouth; this is that which makes the
Ordinance communicate Grace and Comfort to us: When the Word is preached, it is
not enough to the holy Man to have the Sacred Truths outwardly proposed, or to
hear the voice of a Man teaching the same; but his Heart and his Flesh cry out
for the Living God. Oh! that God would speak inwardly in words of Life and
Power! that deep and Divine impressions might be made upon the Heart, to
sanctify it by the Truth, and to cast it more and more into the mould of the
Divine Will! Oh! that God would come and shine into the Heart, that he would
uncover the holy things, and bring forth Evangelical Mysteries to the view,
that the Heart might be ravished in the sweet odours of Christ; that the
Promises might flow out as a Conduit of Celestial Wine, and make the Soul taste
some drops of the pure Rivers of pleasure which are above! This is the desire
and expectation of the holy Man in hearing; in like manner in Prayer it is not
enough to him to pour out words before God, but he looks for the holy Spirit,
to help his Infirmities, and breath upon his Devotions; that as Christ pleads
above by his Merits and Sweet Smelling Sacrifice, so the Holy Spirit may plead
in the Heart with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered; being conscious to
himself, what a thing his Heart is; how much coldness, hardness, straitness is
yet remaining there; he waits for the Spirit to be as fire from Heaven to
inflame the Heart, and make it ascend up unto God; to melt it, and make it open
and expand toward Heaven, to set it a running in Spiritual fluency and
enlargements toward God. The holy Man esteems all to be lost and to no
purpose, unless he can have some converse and communion with God in every
ordinance: his Heart and the Ordinance have both the same scope and tendency,
that there may be a Divine intercourse between God and him; God draws, and he
runs, Cant. 1.4. God says, Seek ye my Face; And the Soul answers, Thy Face,
Lord, will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. There are Divine Influences and Spirations on
God's part, and there are compliances and responses in the holy Heart; in
Prayer it burns and aspires after him who set it a fire by the communications
of his Grace and Love; in Praise it carries back the received Blessings, and
lays them down at the feet of the great Donor; in the hearing of the Word, it
has something or other to answer to every part; it trembles at the threatening;
it leaps up, and in triumphs of Faith embraces the Promise; it complies with
the pure Command in holy Love and Obedience: without this Communion, in which
God and Man spiritually meet together, the holy Man looks on Ordinances, but as
dry empty things, void of Life; and separate from their chief end; but if the
holy Spirit breath upon the Heart, and that breath out it self to God; if the
Soul set it self to seek God's Face, and that irradiate the Duty; then the
Ordinance is full of Life, and reaches its end. The holy Man then perceives
that God is in it of a truth: hence one, as Bellarmine relates, used to rise
from Duty with these words, Claudimini oculi mei, claudimini, nihil enim
pulchrius jam videbitis; Be shut, O my Eyes, be shut, for I shall never behold
a fairer object than God's Face, which I have now beheld.

Take him in Alms and Charity, he is holy there; he knows that he was born,
nay, and by a Divine Generation born again, that he might do good: It was a
notable Speech of the Philosoper, The Beasts, Plants, Sun, Stars were designed
for some work or other, (...); and what are you for? When he thinks that he is
a Man, a rational Creature, and, which is more, a new Creature, and by Adoption
one of the Seed Royal of Heaven; he sees a necessity laid upon him to be
fruitful in Charity and Good Works: If he who has a first and a second Birth,
who has the good things of Nature and Grace, do not do good, who shall do it?
or where may it be expected? The holy Man therefore sets himself to do good; he
does not only do the outward work of Charity, but he does it readily and
freely; when an object of Charity meets him, he does not say, Go and come
again, when he himself goes to the Mercy-seat, he would not have God delay or
turn him off after that manner: Neither will he do so to his poor Brother, not
only the command of God, but the taste; that he has, of the Divine Grace, make
him ready and free in good Works; his Good Works have not only a Body, but
there is a free Spirit in them; and as the thing given supplies the Receiver's
want, so the manner of giving revives his Spirit: The holy Man does not only
give Alms, but he does it out of Love and Compassion; Beneficentia ex
Benevolentia manare debet; he does good out of good will; he opens his heart as
well as his hand; he does not only draw out his Alms, but his Soul to the
hungry; he does not only give outward things, but himself in real compassions
to the afflicted: he knows that Sacrifice is not acceptable to God without
Mercy; no more is the outward Almsdeed without inward Pity; he therefore as the
Elect of God, puts on Bowels of Mercy, that when his hand is distributing, his
Bowels may be moved toward those in misery; that he may not give a mere
external thing, but aliquid sui ipsius, something of himself; I mean, his
Compassion; Si nihil habes, da lacrymulam; magnum enim solatium afflicto est
misericordia, Naz. Orat. 16.
it doubles the Alms to give it with Pity; mere Mercy in it self is a comfort
to the afflicted, but when it comes with a supply of necessaries in its hand;
it is then a comfort in matter and manner. Moreover, the holy Man has not only
humane Bowels, but Christian; in all his acts of Charity he moves from an high
Principle, and unto an high end: and upon that account the Apostle calls those
acts Pure Religion, Jam. 1.27. And St. Ipsa misericordia, si propter Deum non
fit, non est Sacrificium: Sacrificium res divina est. Aust. de Civ. Dei l. 10.
c. 6.
Austin call them a Sacrifice, a Divine thing. First, I say, He acts from an
high Principle; he does not extend Mercy to Men in misery, only out of
humanity, but out of love to God; he does not respect them, merely because they
are his own Flesh, such as are in conjunction of Nature with him; but chiefly
because they are rational Creatures, such as stand in Relation to God, and are
capable of union with him; the love of God, (who alone is to be loved for
himself) is the great Wheel which moves our Love and Mercy toward our
Neighbor. St. John argues thus, Whosoever sees his Brother have need, and
shuts up his Bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in
him? 1 John 3. 17. It is all one, as if he had said, There is no Love of God at
all in him; for if there were any that would open his Bowels toward his
Brother, Piety toward God is the right Fountain of Charity toward Men. Again,
De Doctr. Christ. l. 3. c. 10.
He acts unto an high end; Charitas est motus animi ad fruendum Deo propter
ipsum, and se and proximo propter Deum, says St. Austin, Charity is the motion
of the Soul to enjoy God for himself, and it self and its Neighbor for God.
The holy Man in his acts of Charity has a Supreme respect unto God; he would
resemble and glorify God in them; there is nothing wherein he can show himself
more like unto God than in Mercy and Love: God, when he proclaims his Name,
Exodus 34.6. insists very much upon Mercy. He is good, and does good, Psalm.
119.68. Therefore the holy Man would be still a doing of good, that he might in
his Sphere, though but a little one, resemble that God; who does good in the
great Sphere of Nature; God makes his Sun to shine and rain to fall every
where: and the holy Man, who would be like him, endeavors to shine in good
works, and drop in Charities upon all occasions; in all he would have no other
center than God and his Glory; his aim is, that those drops and models of Mercy
which are in him may bear witness to the infinite Fountain and Ocean of Mercy
which is above; still he desires that God in all things may be glorified.

Take him in prosperity, he is holy there. I may say of him what the Historian
says of Mauritius the Emperor, His Prosperity does not make him leave his
Piety. He esteems himself less than the least of God's Mercies; he holds all
that he has in capite of God the great Donor; he desires to see free Grace in
every crum of Bread, drop of drink, and moments patitience; when there is a
Table spread, and a Cup running over, and an affluence of all good things; he
suffers nothing to be lost; but returns all in a thankful acknowledgment unto
the giver: Thus holy David, All things are of thee, 1 Chr. 29.14. Life, Health,
Peace, Prosperity, the whole Catalogue of Blessings are from God; the holy Man
looks on it as no less than Sacrilege to substract the least fragment from
him. He looks upon Blessings in dependence upon their Original; he sees the
sense and meaning of them to be this, that our hearts may be guided and
directed by them to the infinite Fountain of Goodness. He possesses them, but
he will not be possessed by them; they may flow round about him, but they must
keep their distance, and not enter into the heart, which is reserved as an holy
place for God; while they stand without and minister to the outward Man, they
are Blessings, and Glasses of the Divine Goodness; but if once they lean their
station, and are taken into the Heart, they are Idols and Vanities; there is a
blast and a curse upon them, because they turn away the Heart from God the
Fountain of Living Waters: In the midst of all outward Blessings, the holy Man
is but a Pilgrim in this World; here is not his Happiness his happiness or
center of rest; he looks after far greater and nobler things tha^ those which
grow here below; Corn, and Wine, and Oil are in his Eyes but poor things in
comparison of God's favor: Heaven is his Country, and by a Divine touch, from
thence, his Heart, though courted by the World, will point thither; he resolves
with himself, he will be happy only in God, and in nothing else: whilst he is
here, he uses his outward good things in the fear of God. He knows that The
Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof: God is the absolute Proprietor,
and Man but a Steward only. The poor Man in his necessities has a right to
have supply out of the superfluities of the Rich; the Charity of the Rich is
but Fidelitas in alieno, Faithfulness in that which is another Man's, Luke
16.12. Riches are a Talent and must be accounted for; if oppression make the
beam cry out of the wall, or if outward things become the fuel of of lust, or
if the non-user bring a rust upon them, it will be a very ill reckoning at the
last day; therefore the holy Man endeavors to perform his trust; he is, what
his Riches call for, rich in good Works; the Goodness of God to him makes him
good to others; the open hand of the great Donor makes him ashamed to shut his
own: his great interest lies in the other World; and upon that account the
exchanges his outward things thither, by such acts of Charity as follow him,
and live for ever.

Take him in adversity, he is holy there; as in prosperity his answer is (what
was so much in the mouth of the ancient Christians) Deo gratias, Aust. in Psalm.
132.
God be thanked for this Mercy and that Mercy; so in adversity, his answer is
an holy Silence under God's hand: or if he open his mouth, it is in some such
Language as that, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: who should
sit at the Stern, and rule all, but he? his Will is supreme, and a law to it
self; his actions are all just and wise; the holy Man will not murmur or charge
him foolishly; he will not interpose in the Government, or so much as start a
thought that things might be better ordered than they are; what ever his
sufferings be, still he would have God govern; still he concludes, nothing can
be better than that which God does. When he is tossed on Earth, he casts his
Anchor in Heaven; his Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; in an admirable
manner he hangs upon him who smites him; he adheres to him who seems to cast
him off; he looks for a secret support from him, who presses him down; he
expects that the very hand which wounded, should heal him; though all outward
things take wing, and fly away; he will not part with God; though God wrap up
himself in a cloud of black Providence, yet he will wait at the door of one
Promise or other, till he have a smile or glimpse of the Divine favor; and, if
that be suspended, yet he will wait on, and comfort himself, the affliction is
not Hell; all the troubles of this Life are but the ashes of the furnace, a
little time will blow them away; and then comes an Heaven, an Eternity of joy
and comfort which pays for all: The holy Man will wait, but that is not all, he
sets himself seriously to read the meaning of the Cross; and by comparing his
Heart and this affliction, he picks out the sense thus, Here, says he,
pointing to his Heart, is the vanity, and there is the Fan which drives away the
Chaff; here is the dross of earthly affections, and there is the Fire which melts
it away; here are the ill humors, and there the bitters Pills which purge them
out; and while he is humbling himself in such considerations as these, at last
he comes to read Love in the Cross; and to have a sweet experience, that even
that works for his good; God does it in faithfulness to wean him from the
Breasts of Creatures; and to endear Heaven to him; to make him learn that great
Lesson, To be subject to the Father of Spirits, and live for ever; to make his
Faith and Patience come forth as gold does out of the Furnace, in their pure
luster and glory: and, as soon as he perceives this, all is well; he can now
sit down, and sing Deo gratias; not to Blessings only, but also to Afflictions;
upon the whole account he finds, That it was good for him that he was
afflicted. Thus he sanctifies God under the Cross.

Take him in his Contracts and Dealings in the World, he is holy there; he
does, according to that golden Rule, Do to others as he would have them do to
him. In his Contracts he deals Bona fide, truly and honestly: so he makes, and
so he performs them. In Selling, he will have no more gain than what is
reasonable, and in a just proportion: In Buying, he will allow as much; he
imposes not upon an unskillful Person, but uses him as one would a Child, in a
fair manner; he will not (...), go beyond his Brother; he will not have Lucrum
in Arca, damnum in Conscientia, gain in the Purse, with loss in the Conscience.
No; he loves plainness, he speaks the truth, he does that which is just and
right; he carries himself like a true honest Man; and this he does with a
respect to God. Three great things God calls for in the Prophet, To do justly,
and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with God, Micah 6.8. If there be no
Righteousness, there will be no Mercy; if there be no Mercy, there will be no
humble Walking with God. Three great things the Gospel Grace calls for in the
Apostle, To live soberly, righteously, and godly in the World, Tit. 2.12. Here
is Summa Vitae Christianae, the total of Christianity, to live soberly, as to
our selves; righteously as to others; and godly as to God. Still Righteousness
is one of the three; the holy Man deals justly, not merely because it is
congruous to his own Reason, but because it is congruous to the will of God:
the fear of God urges him to it; If he did oppress, Destruction from God would
be a terror to him, Job 31.23. A Divine Nemesis would pursue and overtake him:
the love of God constrains him to it; God is true to him, and he will not be
false to others. God is merciful to him, and he will not be unjust to others.
The honor of Religion calls for it from him; He that is pious in the first
Table, must not be wicked in the second: A Christian must not in Honesty be
below a Pagan; the Child of Grace must not live against Principles of Nature;
Grace is not to take away Morality, but to refine and spiritualize it. An
horrible shame and blot it would be upon Christianity, if Pagans should live as
Men in just and fair dealing among themselves; and yet Christians should live
as Wolves or Beasts of prey, tearing and devouring one another. In nobis
Christus patitur opprobrium, De Gub. Dei lib. 4.
says Salvian, As often as we do wrong, the Holy JESUS suffers a Reproach in
us: The Holy Man therefore will deal justly, that Religion may not suffer by
him.

Lastly, Take him in a Calling, he is holy there; he knows he must not be idle.
That of Cato has been received as an Oracle, Nihil agendo, male agere discis;
Idleness teaches to do evil; it opens an ear to every extravagant motion; it
entertains every sinful fancy; it tempts the Devil, the great Tempter, to tempt
us. St. Jerome advises his Friends thus, Semper aliquid boni operis facito, ut
Diabolus te semper inveniat occupatum, Be always a doing of some good thing,
that the Devil may not find thee at leisure: the Holy Man therefore will have a
Calling, and therein he will abide with God, 1 Cor. 7.24. and his Works, by a
Divine Prerogative, are wrought in God, Joh. 3.21. The Ordinance of God, which
says, That he must eat in sudore vultus, in the sweat of his brow, presses him
to diligence, that he may do what the idle Man cannot, eat his own Bread. The
Allseeing Eye of God, which is upon all his ways, makes him faithful in his
station: A mean Servant, if holy, serves in singleness of Heart, fearing God,
Col. 3.22. The Eye of God which is upon him, causes him to be upright in the
service; the Holy Man in the Works of his Calling so carries himself, Davenant
in Col. c. 3.
ac si nihil aliud in hoc mundo esset praeter illum and Deum, as if there were
none in all the World besides himself and God; still his Eye is upon God; what
ever he does he does it heartily, as unto the Lord, and not unto Men, Col.
3.23. The great end and center of his actions is God's Glory, and under that he
designs to do good to Men; he would confer aliquid in publicum, casts in
something into the common good of Mankind: An Holy Magistrate has the fear of
God upon him; he judges not for Man, but for the Lord; he judges righteous
Judgment; and that, as the Rabbis say, is a sure sign that the Shecinah, the
Divine Presence is with him in the judgment: An Holy Minister carries with him
an Vrim and Thummim, Light in his Doctrine, and Integrity in his Life. He burns
in zeal for God and Christ; he melts in labors and compassions for the Souls
of Men. His Motto is the same with that of Mr. Perkins, Verbi Minister es, hoc
age. In a word, whatever the Calling be, the Holy Man is active, faithful, bent
for the Glory of God; still he remembers that he is a Christian; Religion has
an influence upon his Calling. His particular Calling, which is Vocatio ad
munus, to a course of Life, is made subordinate to his general Calling, which
is Vocatio ad Faedus, to the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel.

Thus we see, An Holy Man is like himself at every turn, as occasion is; one
odor of Grace or other is still a breaking forth from him.

Seventhly, In an Holy Life there is not only an exercise of Graces, but in
that Exercise a growth of them; the Holy Man of a Plant comes to be a Tree of
Righteousness; of a Babe he comes to be a Man in Christ; he goes from strength
to strength; his path is as the shining Light, which shines more and more unto
the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. He travels on from Virtue to Virtue, to meet the
everlasting day: He grows in every part of the New Creature, till he come to
Heaven, where Grace is perfected in Glory. His Knowledge grows; by following on
to know the Lord, he comes to know more of him; by doing of God's Will, he
comes to understand it better than ever he did; the Eye is more open, the Heart
is more unvailed, the Truth is more sealed to the Mind, the Understanding is
more quick in the Fear of the Lord, the Taste and Savor of Divine things is
higher than it was before: he had at his first Conversion a spiritual Knowledge
and Understanding, but exercising himself to Godliness, he comes by degrees to
all Knowledge, 1 Cor. 1.5. and to Riches of Understanding, Col. 2.2. Notions are
enlarged, and withal Heavenly things are known per gustum spiritualem, by a
Spiritual taste of them: his Faith grows; at first there was but contactus; but
upon the Exercise of Graces there comes to be complexus fidei; the touch of
Christ by Faith is advanced into an embrace; the recumbency on his Blood and
Righteousness is stronger; the subjection to his Royal Scepter is more full
than it was; the reliance on Promises and compliance with Commands are both
raised up to an higher pitch than they were before; at last Adherence comes to
be Assurance. His Love grows; there comes to be an higher estimate set upon
God, a closer union with him, a greater complacence in him than there was
before. At last Love becomes a vehement flame, Cant. 8.6. Flamma Dei, the Flame
of God, which burns up the earthly Affections, and aspires after the full
fruition of God in the Holy Heavens. Also, his Obedience and Patience are upon
the increase: by much obeying, the Intention becomes more pure, the Will more
free, the Obedience more easy and abundant; he does not only do the Work of the
Lord, but he abounds in it; he does not only bring forth Fruit, but much Fruit,
Joh. 15.8. By patient bearing of Afflictions, the Art or Divine Mystery of
suffering comes to be understood; the Heart is yielded and resigned up to the
Divine pleasure; he would be what God would have him be; he has not only
patience, but all patience, Col. 1.11. Patience has not only a Work, but a
perfect Work, Jam. 1.4. Thus in the Holy Man Grace is still a growing.

Further, The Holy Man grows every way; he grows inward; by exercising himself
to Godliness his Vital Principles become more strong, his Supernatural Heat is
increased; his inner Man is strengthened more than ever it was before: he has
a Divine vigor to overcome corruptions, to repel temptations, to live above
earthly things, to perform Heavenly duties, and to endure sufferings. He is
strengthened in the inner Man, Ephesians. 3.16. and that (...), in all Power, Col.
1.11. to do what is decorous to his spiritual Nature: he grows outward; he has
not only the fruits of Righteousness, but he is filled with them, Phil. 1.11.
The influences of Grace, and supplies of the Spirit make him to bring forth
much fruit, and that with great variety; as occasion serves, all the fruits of
the Spirit, Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance, (which the Apostle mentions, Gal. 5.22, and 23.) break
forth from him in their spiritual Glory: He is like the Tree planted by the
Rivers of Waters, Ps. 1.3. which has a fruit for every Season; or like
Joseph's Fruitful bough by a Well, whose Branches run over the Wall, Genesis
49.22. There is a redundance and exuberancy of Holy Fruits, which show that he
has a Divine Spirit, a Well of living Water in him springing, up into all
Obedience and good Works. He grows upward; by conversing in holy things, he is
unearthed and unselved; he converses more than ever in Heaven; the Glory of God
is more precious to him; his Intention toward it is more pure than it has
been; he waits and longs to be in that Blessed Region where God is all in all:
Every Duty and Good Work looks up more directly than was usual to God the great
Center and End of all things: He grows downwards, I mean in Humility; by
conversing with God he comes to have a greater Light than ever; which discovers
the Majesty and purity of God, the rectitude and Holiness of the Law, the
infirmity and relics of Corruption in the lapsed Nature of Man; and this
Discovery makes him very humble and vile in his own Eyes, even his very lapses
and falls serve occasionally to this growth: De Corr. and Great. c. 9.
Hence St. Austin, treating on those words, All things work together for good
to them that love God, Romans 8. adds, Etiam si deviant and exorbitant, hoc ipsum
eis faciat proficere in bonum, quia humiliores redeunt and doctiores;
Experience tells him, that he is nothing, and Grace is all.

Morever, the Holy Man never thinks that he has Grace enough; never says, I
am perfect, or, I have attained; Inceptio bonae vitae in quovis gradu sine
desiderio ascendendi ad altiorem, non potest esse sine fundamento
praesumptionis, nec sine inclusione tepiditatis, nec sine periculo vivendi in
vitiis spiritualibus. Niremb.
this would show him to be no Holy Man, to have no Grace at all. He is still a
breathing and pressing after more Grace; the Divine touch, which in Conversion
was made upon his Heart, causes it ever after to point toward God the Fountain
of Grace: The sweet taste of Grace, which he has had, makes him earnestly
thirst after more; it is true, he has not a thirst of total indigence; in this
respect he shall never thirst, John 4.14. but he has a thirst of Holy desires
after more Grace; his Soul pants after more of the Divine Image: Oh! that he
were more like unto God! that his Will were swallowed up in the Divine Will!
Nothing can satisfy him, unless he be made more Holy. He avoids those things
which hinder Spiritual growth; he will not lie in a sink of sensual Pleasures,
he will not clog himself with a burden of earthly things, he will not fret away
himself in Envy; he will not puff up himself with Pride and Presumption; he
will not wither away in an empty fruitless Profession; he will not grieve the
Holy Spirit of Grace, or wilfully make any wounds in Conscience. All these
will be impediments to growth in Grace: therefore he puts them away from him;
he busies himself in those things which may make him grow: he is much in
prayer, that God would give the increase; that the showers of Holy Ordinances
may not drop and come down in vain; that the Gales of the Holy Spirit may fill
every Ordinance, that the Sunshine of God's Favor may make every thing
prosper: He knows that none can bless but he who institutes; nothing can make
rich in Grace but the Blessing; for that he waits in all his Devotions. He is
much in the Holy Word; he hears, reads, meditates, digests it, lays it up as a
Treasure; keeps it as his Life; feeds on it as his Meat; has his Being in it;
and all that he may grow in Grace, that beholding as in a Glass the Glory of
the Lord, he may be changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory as by the
Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. That the Face of his Heart and Life may shine
with a Divine Luster and Beauty: He acts his Faith upon Christ, he adheres and
cleaves to him: He aspires after more close Union and Communion with him, that
by a Divine Spirit and Life from him he may increase with the increase of God,
Col. 2.19. that he may live like one in Union and Conjunction with Christ; that
he may honor that Glorious Head, in whom the Spirit is above all measure, and
from whom it flows down upon all his Members: He exercises himself unto
Godliness; he stirs or blows up his Holy Graces: He repents, believes, loves,
obeys, runs, strives, labors to do the Will of God; and all that he may hold
on his way, and grow stronger and stronger, Job 17.9. In a word, he esteems it
an horrible shame and disparagement to be barren and unfruitful under the
Gospel. What? Is the Divine Nature, which he partakes of, for nothing? every
little living Creature propagates and brings forth its Image, and shall the
Divine Nature have no progeny of good Works to resemble its Father in Heaven?
Are Ordinances given in vain? the outward Rain has its return in Herbs and
Flowers, and excellent Fruits of the Earth; and shall the Showers of
Ordinances, which come from an higher Heaven than the visible one, have no
return at all? to what purpose is Christ an Head to Believers? An Head is to
communicate life and motion to the Members; and can the Members of so glorious
an Head as he is, be dry and wither away in an empty unfruitfulness? Why is the
Spirit communicated, but to profit withal? when it moved upon the Waters at
first, it brought forth abundance of excellent Creatures in the Material World;
and shall it it do nothing in the Spiritual one? or shall it produce Heavenly
Principles in Men, and not bring them into act or exercise? Nothing can be more
incongruous than such things as these. The Holy Man therefore makes it his
great business in the World, to grow in Grace and in the Knowledge of of Christ;
to abound more and more in Obedience and Holy Walking, till he come to the
Crown of Life and Righteousness in Heaven.

We see what an Holy Life is; nothing remains but that we labor after it;
lapsed Nature lies too low to elevate it self into Holy Principles and Actions;
how should we cast down our selves at God's feet for Regenerating Grace? How
much does it concern us to wait upon him in the use of means? to have our Minds
enlightened to see Spiritual things? to have our Hearts new made and molded
into the Divine Will? to have a precious Faith to receive Christ in all his
Offices? to have an Holy Love to inflame the Heart toward God? It is God's
Prerogative to work supernatural Principles in us; let us then look up to him
to have them wrought in us. We have lost the Crown and Glory of our Creation;
we are sunk into an horrible gulf of sin and misery: but, Oh! let our Eyes be
upon God; he can set to his Hand a second time, and create us again unto Good
Works; he can let down an Arm of Power, and lift us up out of the pit of
Corruption; nothing is too hard for him, he can turn our stony Heart into
Flesh; he can by an omnipotent Suavity make our unwilling Will to be a willing
one. Oh! wait for this day of Power; and when it comes, give all the Glory to
Free Grace, and live as becomes the Sons of God, who are born not of the Will
of Man, but of God; it is too too much time we have spent in doing the Will of
the Flesh; let us now consecrate and dedicate our selves to the Will of God. In
the doing of it let us live a Life of Faith and dependence upon the influences
of Grace: let us get a single Eye, a pure Intention toward the Will and Glory
of God. What good we do, let us do it in an holy Compliance with his Will, in a
sincere subserviency to his Glory. This is right genuine Obedience, in which
God is owned as the first Principle, and the last End; if we depend not on him
the Fountain of Grace, how shall we stand or walk in Holiness? If we direct not
all our good Works to his Will and Glory, how are our Works Holy or Consecrated
unto God? Let Us put away our high thoughts and proud reflexes upon self, that
we may wholly depend upon his Grace. Let Us cast away all our Squints and
corrupt aims from us, that we may directly look to his Will and Glory. Still
let us remember, that the work of Mortification must be carried on; if we
indulge sin, we rent off our selves from God the chief Good and Ultimate End:
if we consecrate our selves to God, we must needs cast away sin from us; the
Spirit and Flesh are contrary Principles, and cannot rule together; the Works
of the one and of the other cannot be compounded; the great Centers Heaven and
Hell are at a vast distance, and cannot meet: We must therefore die to Sin, or
else we cannot live to God; let us labor to be Holy in all manner of
Conversation; let us go forth and meet God in every dispensation; in Ordinances
let us meet him with Devotion and holy Affection; in Alms with Love and a free
Spirit: in Prosperity with Praises and Good Works; in Adversity with Patience
and Silence; in our Dealings with Justice and Righteousness; in our Callings
with Faithfulness and Diligence: In every thing let us walk (...), worthy of
God; as becomes those who are consecrated unto him. Let us so exercise our
selves unto Piety, that we may grow in all Graces; that our Faith may be more
lively, our Love more ardent, our Humility more low, our Heavenliness more
high, our Obedience more full, our Patience more perfect; that we may have our
fruit unto Holiness, and the End Everlasting Life. Let us be ever making our
selves ready for that Blessed Region; where there are plenitudes of Joy, Crowns
of Immortality, Rivers of Pleasures; where God is the Light, Life, Love, All in
all to the Saints.

FINIS.
ERRATA'S.
PAge 57. Line 10. read burned, p. 72. l. 27. formally, p. 75. l. 4. Vajored,
p. 90. l. 19. ears, p. 138. l. 14. Sun, p. 141. l. 6. Vos p. 148. l. 14.
plenal, p. 150. l. 17. Carnal Ordinances, p. 167. l. 6. often cast, p. 203. l.
10. heart, p. 247. l. 7. possibly, p. 327. l. 20. none for the Promise, Ib. l.
21. capable of, p. 330. l. 2. true, p. 339. l. 3. Righteousness of God, p. 343.
l. 1. is it a Jus Impunitatis, p. 355. in the marg. Note, r. consecratum est,
p. 366. l. 4. its subject, p. 371. l. 12. the Glory of it, it is ours, p. 420.
l. 10. expression, p. 428. l. 2. ray.

Reader, the misplaced Points or Stops do sometimes very much alter or obscure
the Sense; let such places be read without any respect to them, and then the
Sense will appear.

Books sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultry, over against
the Stocks-Market.
Books published by the same Author.
PRecious Faith considered in its Nature, Working, and Growth, in 80.

The Divine Will considered in its Eternal Decrees and holy Execution of them,
in 80.

An Answer to a Discourse of Mr. William Sherlock, touching the Knowledge of
Christ and our Union and Communion with him, in 80.

Morning Exercise at Cripple-Gate, or several Cases of Conscience practically
resolved by sundry Ministers, in 40.

A Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripple-Gate; Or several more Cases of
Conscience, practically resolved by sundry Ministers, in 40.

The Court of the Gentiles, in 4 Parts, by Theophilus Gale, in 40.

Pseudodoxia Epidemica: Or, Enquiries into very many Received Tenets, and
commonly presumed Truths: Together with the Religio Medici, by Tho. Brown
Knight, M. D. 40.

A Discourse of Patronage: Being a modest Enquiry into the Original of it, and
a further prosecution of the History of it; by Zachariah Cowdry, in 40.

The Poor Man's Family-Book, by Rich. Baxter, in 80.

The Faithfulness of God considered and cleared, in the great Events of his
Works; or a Second Part of the fulfilling of the Scriptures, by the same
Author, in 80.

The English School: or, The readiest way for teaching Children or Elder
Persons to spell and read rightly, pronounce and write true English; containing
also a Catalogue of all the words in the Bible, etc. by Tobias Else, in 80.

A New Book of Spelling with Syllables, or an Alphabet and plain Pathway to
the Faculty of Reading the English, Roman, Italian and Secretary Hands; with
several Copies of the same, divised chiefly for Children, that thereby with the
less loss of their time they may be able to pass from Reading to the Latin
Tongue: Also this Book is very necessary for the Ignorant, to teach them to
write true Orthography in short time.

A Week of Soliloquies and Prayers, with a Preparation to the holy Communion,
and other Devotions added to this Edition, in two Parts, by Peter Du Moulin D.
D. in 12.

De Causa Dei: Or, A Vindication of the common Doctrine of the Protestant
Divines, concerning Predetermination ( i. e. The Interest of God as the first
Cause, in all Actions as such of all Rational Creatures) from the invidious
consequence with which it is burdened, by Mr. John How, in a late Letter and
Postscript of God's Prescience, in 80.

A Dialogue between a Popish Priest and an English Protestant; wherein the
principal Points and Arguments of both Religions are truly proposed, and fully
examined, by Matthew Poole, Author of the Synopsis Criticorum, in 12.

The Spiritual Remembrancer: Or, A Brief Discourse of the Duty of those who
attend upon the preaching of the Gospel, by Samuel Welley, in 80.

God a Christian's Choice, completed by particular Covenanting with God,
wherein the Lawfulness and Expediency is cleared, by Samuel Winney, in 12.

The Reuniting of Christianity: Or, The manner how to rejoyn all Christians
under one sole Confession of Faith, in 80.


