

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Popish Priest AND An English Protestant. WHEREIN The
Principal Points and Arguments of both RELIGIONS are truly Proposed and fully
Examined.

By MATTHEW POOLE Minister of the Gospel.

The Last Edition corrected and amended.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes, and are to be sold by S. Tompson at the
Bishops-Head in Duck Lane, 1667.

TO THE READER.
THE variety and differences of Religion, between Protestant and Papist,
distract the minds and trouble the hearts of all that have any sense of
Religious Concernments. In this distraction every serious man that has any
care of his Souls health, cannot choose but heartily desire and seek for
resolution: To obtain this, there can be no better way than to understand and
examine the Pretensions and Grounds of both Religions: In order to this, I have
endeavored faithfully to represent, and duly to weigh them in the following
Discourse.

Wherein though I have not discussed all the Points in Controversy between us
and them, yet I have selected the most material, and have discoursed of most,
if not all, their weighty and plausible Arguments against the Protestant
Religion. And this, I may say, and no knowing Papist, I think, will deny it;
all the other Points will follow the fate of those which are here examined, and
live or die with them. I know it will be pretended, that I have managed the
Work with partiality and deceit, and that I make the Papist speak what I
please, not what they think. This must be said of course, else the Romanists,
lose their old wont: Nor shall I, at all think it strange, if in stead of solid
Answers, they return Calumnies: their cause requires it; and no wonder if they
that want Truth in their Religion, make lies their Refuge.

To silence all clamours, and satisfy all jealousies will be impossible, I
shall never attempt it.

But for satisfaction of such as are rational and ingenuous, I shall give this
following account.

1. God is my witness, that I did diligently endeavor to pick out the
strongest Arguments I could find in their best Authors in each Point; nor have
I willingly declined any thing of moment in the Questions here debated: If any
Papist think otherwise, let him produce their greater strength, and I hope he
shall find it fairly examined.

2. The several Discourses, Arguments and Answers which I put into the Papists
mouth; are such as were first taken out of their mouths, and so it is but a
piece of Justice and Restitution to return them thither. They are generally
such as are either known to be their opinions, and by themselves owned, or else
delivered in the sense, and very often in the words, of their most approved
Authors, whom I have quoted in the margent: But here I expect the old clamor
of false Quotations, wherein they have been so often taken tardy, that they
must now look for the common infelicity of -- not to be believed if they should
chance to stumble upon Truth. All the relief I desire in that case is, that the
Reader who is able to do it, would examine them with his own eyes, and that
will be my best justification. I shall detain thee no longer, but commend thee
to the good Spirit of Truth to enable thee to discern between good and evil.

TO THE PEOPLE OF THE Romish Church.
THE Controversies between your Church and ours, are by Gods blessing upon the
endeavors of his Ministers, brought to this pass, that I am persuaded there is
nothing wanting to the Conviction of diverse of you, but a free and diligent
perusal of theri Books, without prejudice and partiality: This your Priests
knowing, it is their great design to keep you from looking into them; and to
that end, to possess you with this Principle, That you need not trouble your
selves to inquire into Books, you are safe enough, so long you believe as the
Church believes, and follow the Guidance of your Priests and Fathers: if this
be an Error, it is a dangerous one, and may prove Damnable; That it is so, and
that it will prove but a broken reed, when you lean upon it, I hope you will
see there is reason to believe, if you will but do your souls that justice, not
prodigally to cast them away upon blind and wilful mistakes, and take the pains
to read these ensuing lines.

1. If your Church be not infallible, then this Principle is rotten; howsoever,
you cannot with safety or discretion venture your souls on it, till you have
examined at least this one point of the Churches Infallibility: do but examine
that, and if you do not stifle both Reason and Conscience, you will see it is a
mere cheat.

2. If the Church ( that is, a Pope with a Council) were infallible (which is
all that your great Champions plead for) yet all confess, that your particular
Priests (upon whose conduct you hazard your eternal welfare) are fallible and
subject to mistakes. It is most certain that diverse of your Priests and
Confessors lead you into many (and some ^f them damnable) Errors. Thousands of
^our Priests and learned Doctors do charge the Jesuits with poisoning the souls
of the people with diverse pestilent and damnable errors, such as these: That a
man may venture his soul upon any probable opinion, and that is probable, which
but one of their learned Doctors affirm. That a private man may kill his enemy
to maintain his honor, though not by way of revenge. That a Priest may absolve
even old and inveterate sinners, and such as he believes incorrigible. That
affliction or sorrow for sin, arising merely from fear of punishments, is
sufficient for salvation: and, that the affection of loving God is not
absolutely necessary to salvation. All these and many more are clearly proved
out of their own words and writings in the Provincial letters, otherwise
called, the Mystery of Iesuitisme: See the Latin Edition set forth and
defended by Wendrockius. Now if the Jesuits may, and do, so damnably deceive
those thousands of you that depend upon their counsel and conduct, why may not
other Orders deceive you in other things? Or what is there that can give you
any reasonable security? Is it their learning, prudence, pretended devotion, or
honesty, or any other such like quality? Why, diverse of the Jesuits have given
as plausible testimony of those things (so far as men can judge) as most of the
other Orders; or will you say, all other Orders are infallible, the Jesuits
only excepted?

3. Nothing can be more evident (if the Bible be the word of God) than that the
error or misguidance of the Priest, will not excuse the sin of the people. To
satisfy you in this, I beseech you consider these few reasons.

1. The Scripture condemns, and God severely punished those people, which did
follow the errors of their Priests. This did not excuse the Jews in Aarons
time, that they were misled by Aaron, Exodus 32. nor those in the times of the
wicked Kings of Israel and Judah, that their Priests did universally deceive
them, and poor Elijah, and so Michaiah, were left alone; nor those in Malachy's
days, that the Priests caused them to stumble at the Law, Malac, 2. 8. nor the
Crucifiers of Christ, that they obeyed the decrees of their Priests and Rulers.

I list not to repeat what I have said elsewhere: therefore read Nullity of
Romish Faith chapter 2. sect. 12. And will you yet stumble at the same stone!

2. The people will not be excused by their Priests misguidance, because they
neglect their duty. If indeed there were no duty incumbent upon the people but
to believe what your Priests say, and do what they require, then your Church
speaks reason. But that none but a mad man will say.

There are several duties required of the People, no less than of the Priests;
the Law of God was not given only to the Priests, but to all the People; God
publishes this law in the hearing of all the people, and speaks in the
singular number to every one of the people, thou shall do or forbear this or
that; and the curse is threatened to the people, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed be he that
confirms not all the words of this law to do them, and all the people shall
say Amen. Which the Apostle repeats, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one, not
Priests only, but the People too, that continues not in all things which are
written in this book of the law to do them. If the Priests then should have
taught the Israelites (as your Priests now teach you) thou shall worship a
graven image, when God says, thou shall not worship a graven image: can any
serious man think this would have freed them from that curse; and that it was
safer for them to obey the Command of men than of God? O the impudence of your
Priests that dare say so! O the blockishness of those people that will believe
them when they say so! your Pope may well contend with us, for it seems your
Priests will contest with God for Supremacy: When the Priests and Prophets in
Isaiahs days were generally corrupt, the people are not advised to believe all
that they taught, and to obey all that they decreed (which is the strain of
your Church) but are commanded immediately to go to the law and to the
testimony, and if any speak not according to them, they are to be rejected,
because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. Even people are required not to
believe every spirit, but to try the spirits, 1 John 4. 1. Nor did the Apostles
exempt themselves and their doctrines from this Trial, but allowed, commended,
and required it in the people.

The Beraeans are not reproved and censured (as they would certainly be, that
should tread in their steps at Rome) but commended for examining the Doctrine
of S. Paul by the Scripture, Acts 17. 11. And the same Apostle allows the
Galatians, not only to try his Doctrines, whether they were agreeable to what
they had received; but in case they find them contrary, he gives them
Commission to censure and anathemize him, Gal. 1. 8, 9. And he bespeaks the
Corinthians in this language, I speak to wise men, judge you what I say, 1 Cor.
10. 15. And he commands the Thessalonians to prove all things (without
exception) as well as to hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Consider
these things, I beseech you, and do not wilfully cast away your precious souls
upon trifles. God has given the Scripture as a rule to try things by (and this
was written for the Ignorant, and the people, as well as the learned, and the
Priests, John 20. 31.) he has given people reason to try things with, if you
will hide these Talents in a Napkin, at your peril be it. The Prince was
commanded to read and meditate in the Book of the Law, that he might observe to
do all that is written therein, Josh. 1. 8. Can you seriously think that if the
corrupt Priests had agreed to teach him to do contrary to all that was written
therein, that this would have excused him before God? then that Precept was
both superfluous and dangerous; and if you do not think so, (as you must needs
if you have any Conscience) then neither will it excuse your people; for
according to the Doctrine of your Church, Prince and People are alike in this,
both tied to believe as your Church believes. God commands every Christian to
prove his own work; and tells us, that every man shall bear his own burden,
Gal. 6. 4, 5. and, that every man shall give an account of himself to God, Romans
14. 12. (Do not think your Priests account shall serve turn) and all the
Christian people of Corinth are commanded to examine themselves whether they be
in the faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. And dare you still live in the wilful breach of all
these Commands, and blindly give up your Souls* and Consciences by an implicit
faith, to the conduct of your Priests to lead them whether they please?

3. The Scripture has given you full warning of your danger. Read but two
places, Ezekiel, 33. 8. (where God assures us, that the wicked shall die in his
iniquity, though he perished through the Watchmans fault) and Matthew. 15. 14.
(where Christ confutes this very opinion of yours, which was also the opinion
of the Jews, that they were safe enough while they followed their Priests
Decrees and Counsels: and tells them. If the blind lead the blind, both shall
fall into the Ditch) and doubt of this, if you can or dare.

In a word, if this senceless Doctrine were true, not only Men would have
dominion over our Faith, contrary to express Scripture; ( Be not ye called
Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ, Matthew. 23. 10. Not that we have
dominion over your faith, said the great Apostle) but also Christ should lose
his dominion, and have no authority in his Church, but as your Priests please;
and it seems he shall not have this favor from you, to continue in his Office
quamdiu been se gesserit, but quamdiu vobis placuerit; and Christ's power is
apparently limited to your Interpretation; but the power of your Church is
absolute and unlimited, and the People obliged to believe them, quamcunque
sententiam tulerint, whatsoever they shall decree, as Gretser expresses it. If
this be not to make the word and Authority of God and Christ void, through your
Traditions, I know not what is. I will trouble you no further. If you be
capable of Counsel, take warning, and suffer not your selves to be lead
hoodwinckt to Hell, to serve a Carnal Interest of some among you; but quit your
selves like men, and by the grossness of this delusion, learn to suspect the
rest; and with humble and honest hearts, read what is here proposed to you for
your Souls good, and God give you light. Let my Soul prosper no otherwise than
I heartily wish the good and salvation of you all; but if you will still
persist in your blindness, and add further obstinacy to your Errors, I shall
comfort my self in this, that I have delivered my own soul, your blood be upon
your own head, for there it will assuredly fall, and not upon the Priests only.

Mr. POOLE'S Dialogue.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Popish Priest AND An English Protestant.
Pop. DEar Friend I am glad to meet with you after so long a separation; for I
remember we were brought up at the same School, and I rejoice in the
opportunity of renewing our acquaintance, I desire a little discourse with you,
to understand how it is with you in point of Religion.


Prot. I am of the Protestant reformed Religion.


Pop. I am heartily sorry for it in regard of our old intimacy; but if you will
give me leave, I do not question, but in a very little time to give you such
reasons as will force you to leave those damnable Errors, and to return to your
ancient Mother the Church of Rome.


Prot. With a very good will shall I yield my self to your Instruction, I
desire nothing more than true Information; I know I have a Soul to save, which
is of infinite worth, and I am not fond of damnation; therefore if you give me
better grounds than I have, you shall not find me obstinate: but this I must
tell you, you must not put me off with fancies and bare affirmations; but I
shall expect solid proof of what you say from Scripture or Reason, and now
speak what you please.


Pop. First, my dear Friend, I must entreat you to consider that which your own
Ministers teach you, to wit, That there is no Salvation to be had out of the
true Catholic Church, which is the Church of Rome.


Prot. That none is saved out of the true Catholic Church, I grant, (for the
Catholic Church includes all Believers in the world) but a man may be saved
that is no Member of the Roman, nor of any particular Church; for although you
ingross to your selves the name of the Catholic Church, nothing is more clear,
than that the Church of Rome is at best but a part of the Catholic Church, and
that a very unsound one too; and there is a false Church (in which salvation
cannot ordinarily be had) as well as a true Church (out of which it cannot
ordinarily be had) and I have heard more to prove yours to be this false
Church, than I am able to answer, or you either, as I suppose: therefore this
being only a general (and so an unconcluding) Argument, I desire you to come
closer to the point.


Pop. Then I entreat you to consider the danger of your way, and the safety of
ours; since all your Ministers confess, That a Roman Catholic may be saved in
his Religion; but all our Church unanimously declare, That you are damned if
you live and dye in your Religion.


Prot. You call us Schismatics; but by this Argument you prove your selves to
be so: For I have often heard it, that in the very same manner those infamous
Schismatics, the Donatists, argued against St. Austin and the Catholic
Church, that he confessed Salvation was to be had in their Churches, which they
affirmed was not to be had in the Catholic Church; and this very thing was by
St. Austin, and the Church of that age, condemned as their great Schismatical
Principle. But let that pass. To come to your Argument: Remember the condition
I made with you, that you do not put me off with Fancies and bare Affirmations,
for I expect you shall make good every word you say. Now here I find you under
a great Mistake, and though I have heard it most confidently delivered by
diverse of your Brethren, yet you must give me leave to believe my own eyes and
ears: I read it in diverse Books of our Learned English Divines, and I have
heard it from diverse very able Scholars and Ministers, That Popery in these
times and places of light, is to those that may see that light and will not,
not only dangerous, but damnable; nor do I pin my Faith upon their sleeves, but
they have given me not mere Affirmations as you do, but such Arguments as I
confess I cannot answer: yet if you can, I shall be ready to hearken to you.


Pop. It is easy to say in general, that our Religion is dangerous or
damnable, but I beseech you show me wherein; which are those Doctrines and
Practices of ours wherein the danger lies?


Prot. I will instance in few of many particulars.


First, That Idolatry is a damnable sin, your own Authors grant, and Scripture
expressly affirms, Idolaters shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10. and Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 15. And that your Church is guilty of Idolatry,
especially in the Worship of Images, and of the Host, or Consecrated Bread in
the Sacrament, is the Doctrine of all Protestant Churches, and I shall prove it
before you and I have done.

Secondly, That the Worshippers of the Babylonish Beast, Rev. 13. and 14. are
in a damnable condition, you all grant, and it is affirmed by God himself, Rev.
14. 8, 9, 10, 11. And that Rome is that Babylon, the most and Learnedest of
your Doctors agree, only some of them pretend it is Rome Heathen as it was; and
others, that it is Rome Jewish, as it shall be in the end of the world; both
which conceits are fully refuted by diverse of our Authors.

Thirdly, that it is highly dangerous to trust in Man, and to trust in our own
Righteousness, sufficiently appears from Ier. 17. 5. Cursed is he that trusts
in Man; and from that dreadful example of the Jews, who going about to
establish their own righteousness, did not submit to (and therefore lost the
benefit of) the righteousness of Faith, Romans 10. 3. and that you are guilty of
this sin, in trusting to Saints and to your own Merits, shall appear in the
following Discourse.

Fourthly, It is dangerous to add to the Word of God; and this your Church is
not only deeply guilty of, in adding their Traditions ( Council. Trident.
to be received with equal reverence to the holy Scriptures) but obliges all
its Members to justify those additions, and thereby entitle them to the same
plagues with themselves.

Fifthly, (to name no more) it is highly dangerous to break any of Gods
commands, and to teach men so, and to make the word of God of none effect by
humane Traditions, we know what woes Christ pronounces against the Pharisees
for these things. And this your Church is deeply guilty of, as in many other
particulars, so most eminently in this, that you profess no men are obliged to
receive the Scriptures as the word of God, nor to believe any thing in it, but
for the testimony of your Church See my Nullity of Romish Faith, Chap. 2. Sect.
4.
By this it apears, that you have no reason to boast of the safeness of your
way. And as for your threats of Damnation to all that do not submit themselves
to your Church and Pope, however they may terrify silly people; yet took it
from me, to prudent men it is rather an argument of the falseness of your
Religion. For such will be apt to conclude, that your Faith is not right,
because your uncharitableness is so notorious, and monstrous, in condemning all
the world besides your selves, and that too upon such frivolous pretenses. This
argument therefore of yours has little weight.

Let me hear what further you have to say against our Religion.

Pop. Then consider seriously of this, that your Church confesses, that she is
Fallible, and that you have no Infallible Judge among you, whereby
Controversies may be ended; but our Church is Infallible.


Prot. I confess now you speak home; make this good, That it is necessary the
Church should be Infallible, and that yours is so, and I shall ease you of the
trouble of further Arguments: But I must ask you two Questions: 1. What is the
meaning of this Proposition? and, 2. How you will prove it? For the first, I
ask you how you understand it? What is this Church which you tell me is
Infallible? Are you agreed among your selves in that point? To tell me of an
Infallible Judge, and not to give me infallible assurance who this Judge is, is
to deceive me with vain words, and will no more end Controversies than to tell
me there is an Infallible Judge in Heaven: For where I pray you shall I find
your Infallible Judge? Now I am in quest of him, I entreat your counsel and
direction. Tell me then, Is it the body of your Church, and multitude of
Catholics that is your Infalible Judge? Do you make your people the Judge of
Controversies?


Pop. No, For we all agreed the Government of the Church is Monarchical.


Prot. Are you then agreed that the Pope alone is the Infallible Judge? speak
the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.


Pop. I will deal truly with you, we are not all agreed in that point, the
French Catholics generally deny it, and diverse of our eminent Doctors and
Writers, as ( Bellarmin confesses De Pontifice, l. 4. c. 2.
) and among the rest a Pope, Adrian by name, denies it, and even they that seem
to be better minded toward the Pope, acknowledge that it is no heresy to deny
this, and that diverse good Catholics deny it, and that it is but a disputable
point Cressy in Exomolog. In the Appendix, Chap. 4. number. 7. Holden de
Resolutione fidei, l. 2. c. 1.
.


Prot. Is it then a General Council that is infallible? Are you agreed in that?
deal truly and clearly with me.


Pop. Then I must confess we are not all agreed in that neither: For the Pope
will deny this, and all the Jesuits and Italian Catholics, and others, who
ascribe this Infallibility to the Pope only.


Prot. Who then is this Infallible Judge?


Pop. The Pope and a General Council agreeing together.


Prot. Is there then at this time any General Council at Rome, or elsewhere,
which does agree with the Pope?


Pop. No, but though there be no Council now in their persons, yet there is in
their writings, and the Pope agreeing with them is infallible.


Prot. But I have been told that all your Doctors agree in this, that no
Writing can be a judge of Controversies: If you deny this, I should think the
writing of God (which you all acknowledge the Scripture to be) might challenge
this privilege as well as the writings of any Council or men. You all plead
for the absolute necessity of a living Infallible Judge.


Pop. Though Catholics are divided in the manner of expression, yet all are
agreed in this general Proposition, That our Church is Infallible.


Prot. Call you this only a difference in manner of expression, for one to say
the Pope is Infallible, another to say he is fallible? for some of you to
affirm the infallibility of Councils, others utterly to deny it? I beseech you
remember, I am inquiring after Particulars (and therefore do not put me off
with deceitful Generals) who, and where is the man or men, to whom I must go to
be infallibly resolved in all Controversies? For if the King should tell his
people he has appointed a Judge to end all their civil Controversies, this
would be to no purpose, unless he should tell who that Judge is, So that till I
hear you are agreed in this particular, my doubts and perplexities must needs
remain. And then for the next point: I ask you, how you prove this
Infallibility which you pretend to, I must tell you since it is the very
foundation of your Faith, I expect very clear and undeniable Proofs, I pray you
bring me two or three of your strongest Arguments.


Pop. In this you speak reason, and I shall comply with your desires, I shall
give you two or three plain and evident Scriptures to prove it. 1. That of Mat.
16. 18. Hence I thus argue, The Church is said to be built upon St. Peter, he
is the Rock spoken of; and this Rock does together with S. Peter include his
Successors, and the Church built upon this Rock, (that is united to, and built
upon the Pope) is infallible, for it is said, The Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.


Prot. Not one of all these things is true.


1. It is more probable that not Peter's Person, but his Doctrine or his
Confession concerning Christ, (which now he made) is the Rock upon which the
Church is built; Scripture is its own best Interpreter: It is not Peter, but
Christ which is the foundation of the Church, as he is called, Isa. 28. 16.
compared with 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8. It is expressly, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation
can no man lay but that that is laid, which is Jesus Christ; and this is the
more considerable, because, he speaks against those that made the Apostles
foundations, one saying, I am of Paul, another, I of Apollos, I of Cephas. And
if this were spoken of Peter, no more is said of him here, than is said of all
the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2. 20. Ye are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets -- And besides, if by this Text Peter had been made
supreme and Infallible Head of the Church, and Judge of all Controversies, no
Man in his wits can believe that St. Paul would have treated him so
irreverently (to speak the least) as he does Galat. 2. (which is more
considerable, because then Christ was dead, and Peter in the actual exercise of
his Headship and Government, and if we may believe you, publicly and
universally owned for such) that he would have equalled himself with him as he
does, Verse 7. The Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed to me, as the
Gospel of the Circumcision to Peter: And that he would have spoken
promiscuously of James, Cephas and John, that they all seemed to be pillars,
Ver. 9. and not a word of Peter's being the rock and foundation; and that he
would have withstood St. Peter to his face, as he did, Verse 11.

2. If this were meant of Peter; yet this is nothing to his Successors. You
must first prove that St. Peter had a Successor in that supposed universal
Headship, which will be very hard to persuade any understanding Man, for, 1.
That authority which the Apostles had over all Churches, was peculiar to them,
and died with them: we see God did not think it necessary to leave a successor
to Moses, (in his full and absolute Authority) no more was it necessary to
leave any after Peter and the Apostles: and the reason is the same, because the
work of Lawgiving was finished, and those that came after were tied to the
execution of their Laws. 2. Besides, if Peter did leave a Successor, what
prudent man can believe, that he would not have left some notice, thereof to
the world in one of his Epistles? I find he says, I will endeavor that you
may be able after my decease, to have these things in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.
15. How easy had it been to have added, to that end I leave a Successor, whom
you must hear in all things? I find Moses was very careful to leave a
Successor, and so was Elias, and David, and Christ ( as my Father sent me, so
send I you): Was Peter the only careless person, that would not be at the
expense of a word to prevent all those Heresies, Schisms, and Contentions which
were even then broached, and most likely to increase after the death of the
Apostles in the Christian world?

3. If any did succeed St. Peter in his Head-ship, one would think it should
have been one of the surviving Apostles, especially St. John, who lived above
20 years after him; for who can believe (that regards what he believes) that
Linus or Clemens who is said to be St. Peter's successor, should be superior
to St. John; yet the foundation of all your Religion is built upon this
nonsensical opinion: And if this privilege did belong not only to Peter, but
some of his successors; yet to say, it belongs to all following Popes (diverse
of which are acknowledged to be Apostatical and most wicked wretches) and that
such Monsters as were the true slaves of the Devil, and brands of Hell, should
be the foundations of the Church, by whom the Church was to be secured from the
gates of Hell, will not find belief with serious Men till East and West meet
together: and besides, when our Divines say, The Pope is Antichrist, and the
Man of sin; you use to answer, that these expressions, the Antichrist, and the
Man of sin, must needs point at a particular Man, and not a whole Order of Men;
which if it be true, the expression there used of this Rock (especially being
so particularly levelled at Peter, as you will needs have it) cannot with any
color be thought to mean a succession of many hundreds of persons. And sure I
am, whatever the Text speaks of Peter, it speaks not one word of Peter's
Successors, and therefore it is as easy for me to deny it, as you to affirm
it.

3. Whatever this promise or privilege is, it belongs no more to the Church of
Rome, than to the Church of England, the name of one is here as clear as the
other; It is a general promise extending to the Church at all times and places,
signifying, that God will have and maintain a Church to the end of the World:
And if this place concerns only those that are built upon St. Peter, you grant
the Church of England once was, as the Church of Rome now is, built upon him
too, when it was subject to the Pope. And if their being built upon St. Peter
did not secure them from Fallibility and Apostasy (as you say it did not) then
consequently the building of the Church of Rome upon St. Peter did not make
them infallible, but they might (as we say and prove they did) fall away. And
certainly one of these two things must be granted, either that every Church
which did once adhere to Peter, or the Pope, are secured by this Text from
falling away; or else, that notwithstanding this Promise, every Church that now
is subject to the Pope may fall away from him, and so the Pope may be a head
without a Body, a Shepherd without so much as one sheep: For if this Text did
prove what they desire, that all that do adhere to the Pope, whilst they do so,
are Infallible; yet it does not prove, that they all shall constantly adhere to
him (which is quite another thing.)

4. If this Promise and Privilege did belong to any particular Church, and to
yours (in a special manner) yet it does not prove your Infallibility: This
place concerns Doctrines no more than Manners, and secures your Church no more
against damnable Heresies, than against damnable Practices, since the gates of
Hell prevail by one as well as by the other, and since you acknowledge that
Peter's successors have lived and died in damnable sins, they might as well die
in damnable Heresies: Besides, if this Text did prove the Popes Supremacy, yet
here is not one word concerning his Infallibility, which is quite another thing.

5. If this Text did prove any Infallibility, it does not prove the Popes
Infallibility (which you allege this Text for) but the Infallibility of the
Church which is built upon it.

Pop. But that Church is Infallible because they adhere to the Rock, viz. the
Pope who therefore must needs be more Infallible.


Prot. Then it seems the foundation of all your Infallibility is in the Pope,
as Peter's Successor, whom multitudes of your own Learned and approved Doctors
acknowledge to be Fallible. I have heard you all confess, That your Popes may
err in Manners and Practice. Is it so?


Pop. Yes.


Prot. Then whatsoever he thinks, he may speak lies, and deceive the World, in
telling them he is Infallible; and surely if a Man will deceive for any thing,
he will do it for such an Empire as the Pope holds: but I have heard also your
Popes may err in matters of Fact.


Pop. That we do all agree in.


Prot. Then he may mistake and err in these Questions, whether Peter left a
Successor? and, whether the Bishop of Rome be the person? and, whether there
has been that uninterrupted succession in the Papal Chair, which you pretend
to be necessary, which must be Infallibly certain, or else the Pope holds his
Authority only upon courtesy; so this place will not stand you in much stead.
Let me hear if you have any better Argument.


Pop. There is another place, which if you were not an obstinate sort of Men,
would satisfy you all, and that is, 1 Timothy 3. 15. where the Church is called,
The pillar and ground of truth, and therefore is Infallible.


Prot. Let me first ask you, What Church is there spoken of, which you say is
Infallible? Is it the Church of Rome? Was Timothy Bishop of Rome or no?


Pop. No, he was Bishop of Ephesus: But why do you ask that Question?


Prot. This place apparently speaks of that Church, in, and over which Timothy
was set: so if it speak of any particular Church, it must be that of Ephesus
(which you confess was Fallible) not that of Rome; or if it speak of the
Universal Church, that might be Infallible, though the Pope and all the Church
of Rome (truly so called) should fail and perish. Tell me, I beseech you, in
particular, What is that Church, which from this and other places, you conclude
to be Infallible?


Pop. It is the Pope with the General Council, as I have told you.


Prot. Then I pray you make sense of the verse; for to me it is mere nonsense
-- Timothy is here advised to behave himself rightly in the house of God, which
is the Church of God, and the Pillar and Ground of Truth: According to your
opinion, this is the sense of it, That thou might know how to behave thy
self in the Pope and a General Council. I pray you tell me truly, Was there a
General Council then sitting.


Pop. No: there was no General Council from that time, till two or three
hundred years after, when the Council of Nice was assembled.


Prot. Then it seems to me a most unreasonable thing to say, that Paul directs
Timothy how to behave himself in a General Council (which was not then in
being, nor like to be) and that he does not direct him how to behave himself in
that body, the Church in which he then resided and ruled.

Besides, I pray you, where is the Pope or a Council called the House of God?
If they have any thing to do there, they are the Governors, the Stewards, the
Officers of the House, but are never called the House of God, but this name is
always ascribed to the multitude of Believers and Professors, as Heb. 2. 5, 6.
where Moses (whose place in the Church the Pope pretends to) is not the House,
but the Servant, the Officer of it; so Heb. 10. 21. Having an High Priest over
the house of God; so 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye as lively stones are built up as a
spiritual house: And if you know any one place where it is otherwise used, I
pray speak; if not (as by your silence I see you do not) all understanding men
will conclude that neither Pope nor Council are concerned in this privilege.
But besides, let me further ask you, Can you give me assurance that these words
which is the ground and pillar of Truth, imply Infallibility?


Pop. It is true, the words are figurative and metaphorical, but that is the
meaning of them.


Prot. My old Friend, can you advise me to venture my salvation upon a
metaphor? or that that is the true and only sense of the words? Prove it, and I
am your Prisoner; but it seems to me far otherwise: God says to Jeremy, I
have made thee an Iron Pillar, Jer. 1. 18. Was Jeremy therefore Infallible?
Peradventure, that was too mean a metal to amount to Infallibility; but your
Church is a brazen Pillar, and so it seems by the impudence of your assertions.
I read in Eusebius, Lib. 5. Cap. 1.
That the Saints of Vienna and Lions, called Attalus the Martyr, a pillar and
ground of the Truth, yet you will not allow him to be Infallible; by which and
diverse other passages it is sufficiently evident, that a Pillar in the Church
is no more than a man that is well rooted and grounded and strong in the faith,
as he is a reed that is tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine; let me
therefore hear if you have any better arguments.


Pop. Then John 16. 3. is an express promise, When the Spirit of truth is come,
he will guide you into all truth, and therefore our Chuch is infallible.


Prot. Tell me I pray you, Is not this promise made to the Apostles only? If
so, What is that to you? If you say otherwise, How do you make it appear that
it concerns their Successors?


Pop. That appears by comparing another place with it, John 14. 16. The
Comforter shall abide with you for ever, not surely in their persons; for, they
were to die in a little time, but in their Successors.


Prot. I expected a place which had said at the least, that the Spirit Should
lead them into all truth for ever; but this is quite another thing; you dare
not say, that every one with whom the Comforter abides is infallible; but to
forgive you this great mistake: Tell me truly, Is it then your opinion, That
all the Successors of each of the Apostles, viz. all Bishops, or all Ministers
are infallible?


Pop. No, in no wise, for it is only S. Peter's Successors, or the Pope, who
is infallible, and others only so far as they depend upon him and cleave to him.


Prot. Then this Text is not for your turn; for if it do extend to the Apostles
Successors, it extends either to all or none; for sure I am, this Text makes no
difference: Besides, how do you prove that these words of the Spirits leading
into all truth, if they do reach further than the Apostles, do imply
Infallibility. Then all Believers are infallible, for they are all led by the
Spirit, Romans 8. 14.


Pop. True, but here they are said to be led into all truth.


Prot. You know the words all and every are often taken in a limited sense, as
when the Gospel is to be preached to every creature, Mark 16. 15. And you may
as well conclude the omnisciency of all Believers, from 1 John 2. 20. You know
all things; and v. 27. The anointing teaches you all things, as the
Infallibility of your Popes or Councils from that phrase: and one Answer serves
for both places, viz. that they speak of all necessary truths. But why do I
hear nothing of Luke 22. 31. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to winnow you,
but I have prayed that thy faith fail not. I have heard that Bellarmine uses
this Argnment, but I confess, I thought they abused him.


Pop. It is true, he does use it, and it is a solid one, though you scorn it.


Prot. How do you know that it is meant of all Peter's Successors? for there
is not one word of them here. But if I grant these were meant, Do you then all
believe that Peter's Successors are infallible?


Pop. I did before acknowledge that we are divided in that point.


Prot. Can you think to convince me with that argument that does not satisfy
your own Brethren? Moreover, tell me, I pray you, What was the Faith of Peter
which was struck at by the Devil, and prayed for by Christ?


Pop. The event shows that; for the Devil tempted him, and prevailed with him
to deny his Master.


Prot. Did Peter deny Christ doctrinally, and fall into the damnable error of
disbelieving Christ to be the Messiah, or was it only an error or miscarriage
of his tongue, which spoke against his Conscience and Judgment?


Pop. Far be it from me, to say that Peter did so damnably err in his
judgment, I know no Catholic who says so; all do all agree that it was only
an error of his tongue and conversation, and practical denial of Christ.


Prot. Very well: Hence then I gather, that Christ prayed for his practical,
not for his doctrinal Faith, and that his grace of faith might not be utterly
lost by his fall: so that, if this Text and Prayer reach to your Popes, it
should rather secure them from damnable Apostacies in practice (which you
confess many of them fell into and died in) then from Heresies (of which this
Text speaks not at all.) But have you no other Arguments?


Pop. Yes, there is one more, which were sufficient if there were no other, and
that is from Gods Providence; It is unbecoming the wisdom of God to leave his
Church without a guide, or infallible Judge, by which means there would be no
end of Controversies: and since you do not pretend to have any such in your
Church, it must be in ours, or else there is none in the world.


Prot. I had thought you would have only taught me, but now it seems you will
teach God how to govern the World. It should seem to me, that God was not of
your mind; he did not think fit to end all Controversies, but to permit that
there should be Heresies, 1 Cor. 11. 19. And if God in his wisdom thought an
Infallible Judge necessary, certainly that same Wisdom would have named the
place, person, or persons, where people should have found this Infallibility.
Was it ever known, since the beginning of the world, that any Prince
constituted Judges in his Kingdom, not so much as giving notice to his people
who they were, to whom they must resort for Justice? this God has not done;
for you do not pretend a particular place which settles this infallible Judge
at Rome, but only some general and fallacious Arguments, as I have proved; and
besides, it is so far from being evident, that your selves are not agreed about
it: but some seek for this infallible judgment in the Pope, others in a
General Council; and these do as fiercely dispute one against another in this
point, as you do against us in many others; and therefore it is much more
rational for me to conclude thus; God has not nominated and appointed such an
infallible Judge in the Church; therefore there is none, and it is not fit
there should be one, than sawcily to undertake to be the Counselor of the
Almighty, and to tell him what is fit to be done, and then conclude that it is
done. In short, For Controversies about Fundamental and necessary things, God
has provided sufficient means for the ending of them, having clearly enough
determined them in his Word for the satisfaction of all that are diligent and
humble, and teachable: And for Controversies of lesser moment there is no
necessity of having them ended, nor would they be much prejudicial to the peace
of the world and the Church if men would learn to give any allowance for the
infirmities of humane nature, and exercise that great and necessary duty of
Charity and mutual forbearance. But since this is all you can say upon this
particular, I pray you, let me hear what other Arguments you have against our
Church and Doctrine.


Pop. Then another Argument against your Church and way, is taken from the
Novelty of it; As for our Religion, it has had possession in the world ever
since the Apostles days; but you are of Yesterday, and know nothing; your
Religion is an upstart Religion, never heard of in the world till Luthers days.


Prot. First, let me ask you this Question, If you had lived in the days of
Christ, or of the Apostles, or of the Primitive Fathers, what would you have
Answered for your self? you know better than I, that this was the very
Argument, which Jews and Heathens urged against the Christians then; they
charged Christ with not walking after the Traditions of the Elders, Matthew. 7.
5. And the Athenians said to Paul, May we know what this new Doctrine is? Act.
17. 19. And the Pharisees had Antiquity on their side, being zealous for the
Traditions of the Fathers, Gal. 1. 14. And though it be true, that the Apostles
had the first Antiquity for them, delivering nothing but what for substance was
in Moses and the Prophets, Act. 26. 22. (which also is our case) yet the
immediate and latter antiquity was against them, and for diverse ages together
these Doctrines had been in great measure obscured and unknown. What then would
you have Answered to a Jew or a Heathen, objecting this Novelty to you? Learn
from Christ, who when the Jews pleaded for the continuance of their old
practice in the matter of Divorces; he accounted it sufficient confutation,
that from the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19. 7. And to all the pretenses of
the Pharisees from antiquity, he opposes this one thing, Search the
Scriptures, John 5. 39. So you dispute against us with the arguments which the
Pharisees used against Christ, and we answer you as He answered them: Besides
let me ask you this Question, If I could clearly prove to you all the points of
our Faith, and disprove the points of yours, from the Holy Scriptures, tell me,
Would you then acknowledge the truth of the Protestant Religion,
notwithstanding all this pretended Novelty?


Pop. Yes certainly, for we all confess the truth of all that is contained in
the holy Scriptures.


Prot. Hence then it follows undeniably, that the main thing that you and I
must look to in our faith is, that it be agreeable to the holy Scriptures; and
if ours be so, (as I am fully persuaded it is) and yours the contrary, neither
antiquity is any argument for you, nor Novelty against us. Besides, when you
charge our Church with Novelty, I suppose you mean that our Doctrines are new.


Pop. I do so.


Prot. Then you cannot justly charge us with Novelty; for,

1. You confess the Antiquity and verity of most of our Fundamental Doctrines,
and your selves do approve them, only you make additions of your own to them;
you own all the Scriptures in our Bible, only you add the Apocrypha: you
acknowledge Scripture the rule of Faith, only you add Tradition: we believe all
the Articles of the Apostles Creed (the Sea Potter and Chillingworth.
belief whereof the Ancient Fathers thought sufficient to Salvation). And the
Doctrine of the four first General Councils, as you do also: You own our
Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction and Justification by Christ and Faith, only
you add your own works and satisfaction: Our two Sacraments you approve, only
you add five more: Our Doctrine of the two states of Men in heaven and Hell you
own, only you add Purgatory: You own Christ for your Mediator and Prayers to
God through him, only you add other Mediators; Our worship of God you own,
only you add Images. These are the principal points of our Religion, and dare
you now say that our Doctrines are new?

2. Many of your ablest Doctors confess, that diverse of the peculiar Doctrines
of your Church are new and unknown to the Ancient Fathers; and it is most
evident and undeniable concerning Indulgences, Purgatory, Communion in one
kind, Worship in a strange tongue, the receiving some of your Apocryphal books,
Transubstantiation (especially as an Article of Faith) the Popes Infallibility,
Worship of Images, denying of the reading of Scriptures to the people and
others. And will you yet brag of the Antiquity of your Religion?

3. These Doctrines wherein we differ from you have been not only proved from
Scripture, but from the plain testimony of Ancient Fathers, as I think none can
doubt that, (laying aside prejudices,) shall read what our Jewel, and Morton,
and Field, and others have written; How then can you have the confidence to
charge us with Novelty?


Pop. Your Church is new in this respect, that although some others before you
might own some of your Doctrines, there was no Church that owned all your
Doctrines, both positive and negative.


Prot. That is not necessary. I hope every alteration of Doctrines of less
moment, does not make the Church new; if it does, it is most certain, that your
Church is new also; for nothing can be more plain, than that the Catholic
Church, nay even your own Church of Rome, did not anciently, in former ages
hold all these Doctrines which now she owns (as your own greatest Authors
confess) this is sufficient, that the Church of God, in most former ages, has
owned all our Substantial Doctrines. But what have you further to say?


Pop. It is sufficient against you, that your Church is Schismatical, and you
are all guilty of Schism in departing from the true Catholic Church, which is
but one, and that is the Roman.


Prot. I desire to know of you, Whether in no case a man may separate from the
Church whereof he was a member without Schism?


Pop. Yes certainly, if there be sufficient cause for it, for the Apostles did
separate from the Church of the Jews after Christ's death, and the Orthodox
separated from the Arrian Churches, and all Communion with them, yet none ever
charged them with Schism.


Prot. Since you mention that instance, I pray you tell me, Why they separated
from the Arrians?


Pop. Because they held this Heresy, That Christ was a Creature, and not the
true God.


Prot. Very well: hence then I conclude, That if your Church do hold any
Heresy, and require all her members to own it too, it is no Schism for us to
separate from you.


Pop. That must needs be granted, but this is but a slander of yours, for our
Church holds no such Heresies.


Prot. Your Church does not hold one, but many dangerous Errors and Heresies,
as I do not doubt to manifest e're you and I part: And if you please, we will
leave the present Argumeut to this issue, if I do not prove your Church guilty
of Heresy, and the imposition of it too, I am content you should charge us
with Schism; if I do, you shall mention it no more.


Pop. You speak reason, let it rest there.


Prot. Besides, methinks, you deal barbarously with us, you drive us out from
you by your tyranny, and then you blame us for departing; as if Sarah had
called Hagar a Schismatic for going out of Abraham's family, from which she
forced her: Tell me, I pray you, if the case be so that I must depart from the
Roman Church, or from God, What must I do?


Pop. The case is plain, you must rather depart from that Church.


Prot. This is the case, If I do not depart from your Church, she will force me
to live in many mortal sins. I must believe a hundred lies, I must worship the
Cross and Relics, and Images, which God commands me under pain of his highest
displeasure not to worship. I must worship the Sacrament with divine worship,
which I am assured is no other for substance than bread; for your Church is not
content to hold these opinions, but she enjoins these practices to all her
members. And if things be thus, I think you will not have the confidence, any
more to charge us with Schism for obeying the command of God to come out of
Babylon, since you force all your members to partake with you in your sins,
Rev. 18. 4. Besides all this, let me ask you upon what account you charge us
with Schism.


Pop. For departing from the Catholic Church, and from your Mother Church of
Rome, and from the Pope, whose Subjects once you were.


Prot. If then I can prove that we are not departed from the Catholic Church
nor from our Mother Church, nor from any of that subjection we owe to the Pope,
I hope you will acquit us from Schism.


Pop. That I cannot deny,


Prot. Then this danger is over: For 1. We never did depart from the Catholic
Church, which is (not your particular Roman Church, as you most ridiculously
call it, but) the whole multitude of Believers and Christians in the world:
Nay, the truth is, you are the Schismatics in renouncing all Communion with
all the Christian Churches in the world, except your own, (which are equal to
yours in number; and many of them far superior in true piety.) Next, we do not
own you for our Mother: Jerusalem which is above, (not Babylon that is beneath)
is the Mother of us all. If we grant now you are a true Church, yet you are but
a sister Church.


Pop. You forget that you received the Gospel from our hands.


Prot. Suppose we did really so; Does that give you authority over us? If it
did, not Rome, but Jerusalem should be the Mother Church, from whom you also
received the Gospel: This you deny, which shows that you do not believe your
own Argument to be good. And for the Popes Universal and Infallible Authority
which he pretends over all Christians, I have diligently read your Arguments
for it; and I freely profess to you, I find your pretenses both from Scripture
and Fathers so weak and frivolous, that I durst commend it to any understanding
and disinterested person as a most likely means to convince him of the vanity
and falseness of that Doctrine; that he would peruse any of your best Authors,
and the very sight of the weakness and impertinency of your Arguments would
abundantly satisfy him of the badness of your cause.


Pop. You have no Ministers, because you have no uninterrupted succession from
the Apostles, as we have, and therefore you have on Church, and therefore no
Salvation.


Prot. I observe you take the same course that the Adversaries of the Gospel
ever did, who when they could not reprove the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, they quarrelled with them for want of a Calling, as you may see,
John. 1. 25. Mat. 21. 23. Act. 4. 7. But the good Christians of that time took
another course, and examined not so much the Call of the persons, as the truth
of the Doctrine, Act. 8. 17. It seems to me a secret confession of your guilt,
and the Error of your Doctrine, that you are so careful to turn off men's eyes
from that to a far meaner point. But tell me, Do you believe that such an
uninterrupted Succession of Ministers from the Apostles, is absolutely
necessary to the being of a Church?


Pop. Yes verily, or else this Argument signifies nothing.


Prot. How then can you convince me or any other Christian, that you have had
such an uninterrupted Succession in your Church? You must produce, and, it
seems, I must read all those many hundreds of great Volumes wherein such
passages are mentioned. In those you must show me a perfect catalogue of the
several names of those Popes, and others who have without interruption
succeeded one another ever since the Apostles days, and this catalogue must be
such that all your Authors are agreed in, (whereas I am told for certain, they
differ very much in their reports therein) and are not so much as agreed among
themselves who was Peter's next Successor, (whether Linus or Clemens, or some
other person they know not who,) and those Historians that report these things,
you must assure me that they were infallible (which you do not pretend they
were) or else they might mistake the things themselves, and mis-report them to
me; and I have heard and read that there have been diverse interruptions and
Schisms even in your Church, one Pope set up against another, and each
pretending to be the true Pope, and disannulling all the Acts of the other, and
that the Christian people were then woefully divided, some cleaving to one,
others to another; but it may be this was a mistake of our Ministers; therefore
tell me, Was this true or no?


Pop. I confess it was true, after the year of Christ 1300. there were several
Popes at the same time, one at Rome, another at Avignon.


Prot. And how long did this difference last?


Pop. For about 50. years.


Prot. And is it true that I have heard, that your great Baronius reports that
for 150 years together the Popes were rather Apostates than Apostolicks, and
that they were thrust into the Papal Chair by the power of Harlots, and the
violences of the Princes of Tuscany.


Pop. I must be true to you, Baronius does say so at the year 897.


Prot. Then never hence forward be so impudent to pretend to such a lawful,
clear and uninterrupted succession; but blush that ever you mentioned it. But
besides, I have heard that diverse of our first reformed and reforming Ministers
too, were such as had received Ordination from and in the Church of Rome, and
from your Bishiops. Is it true, or is it not?


Pop. I will be ingenuous, Our Doctors confess it; but if your Ministers, or
some of them had a call from our Church, yet they were only called to Preach,
not to overturn the world (as they did) and to undertake the Reformation of the
whole Church.


Prot. You have said enough: if they were called to the Ministry, their Work
and Office was to bear witness to the Truth; and therefore to undeceive the
world in those many Errors and Heresies, which you had brought into the Church:
and Ministers are set for the defense of the Gospel; they were therefore bound
by their Office to edeavour the Reformation of the Church, and salvation of
Souls: and as in a great Fire (especially where the public Officers neglect
their Duty) every man brings his Bucket to quench it; so, in that miserable
estate, into which you had brought the Church, (when the Pope and Bishops would
not do their duty) it was the duty of every Minister to endeavor, and to stir
up the Kings and Magistrates of the World to endeavor a Reformation. Surely
you cannot pretend to an higher privilege than St. Paul, and yet he gives all
Ministers and Christians this leave and charge, that if he himself should bring
any other doctrine than what he had delivered, any Minister (though happily
such a one as received his calling from him) or Christian might not only
forsake him, but judge him accursed. I shall only add this, our Ministers are
in a very hard case. I have discoursed with Anabaptists, who have reasoned
against our Ministers as no Ministers, because they had their calling from
Rome; and now you will make them no Ministers, because they had no Calling from
Rome. (How shall they please you and them too?) But what have you further to
say?


Pop. I have this further (which is indeed unanswerable) namely, the horrible
divisions of, and in, your Churches: Here is Luther an and Calvinist, Episcopal
and Presbyterian, Independent and Anabaptist, and Quaker, and Socinian, and
Familist: and what not? so that a man that would turn to your Church, knows not
which to turn to: but our Church is one and entire, at perfect unity in it self.


Prot. I pray you tell me in the first place, are divisions a certain Argument
to prove any Church not to be true?


Pop. I cannot say so; for it is plain, the Jewish Church in Christ's time was
full of Divisions; there were Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, etc. And so was the
Church of Corinth in St. Paul's time, while some said, I am of Paul, others, I
of Apollo, others, I of Cephas; and some denied Paul's Ministry and Apostleship,
and some denied the Resurrection.


Prot. Very well, then you may blush to use such an Argument: I am told that
the old Heathens did use this very Argument against the Primitive Christians.


Pop. It is true, they did.


Prot. What a shame is it that you are forced to defend your cause with such
weapons as were used by the Pagans, and wrested out of their hands by the
Ancient Fathers?

But besides, you talk of our Divisions, I pray you let me ask you, will you
allow me to father all the opinions of every Papist, I read or talk with, upon
your Church?


Pop. No, in no wise, Let our Church speak for her self. It is one great fault
of your Ministers, they catch up every particular Opinion of any Private
Doctor, and presently charge our Church with it; though it be such as she has
condemned: whereas they should judge of our Church only by her own Decrees and
Councils.


Prot. Very well, I desire only the same justice from you; Do not father upon
our Church those Opinions which she dislikes and abhors: Socinians, Quakers,
etc. are yours rather than ours, and join with you in abundance of your
Doctrins: Judge of our Churches by their public Confessions; and there also
you would find, that our divisions are generally inconsiderable, being almost
all about a Form of Government, or oft-times, but a manner of expression, and
none of them in fundamental Points. But since you talk of Divisions, let me ask
you, are all the Members of your Church of one mind? I have been told
otherwise: We hear great talk every day of the difference between the
Jansenists, and the Jesuits: and (if we may believe either of them) it is a
Fundamental difference, and such as concerns the very life of Religion. I will
not trouble you with other things: But are you agreed in that, which is the
foundation of your unity, I mean, concerning the Supreme Infallible Judge of
Controversies? I remember your self told me, that some of you thought it was
the Pope, and others a Council: And I have read, that Popish Nations, and
Universities, and Doctors, are all together divided about it; and for the Pope,
I have heard that Bellarmin reckons up the several opinions, and amongst
others, that the Pope (if he be without a general Council) may be an Heretic,
and teach Heresy: and this (says he) is the opinion of diverse Papists, and is
determined by a Pope himself, Adrian the 6th by name, in his question about
Confirmation: Is this true, or is Bellarmin belied?


Pop. It is true, Bellarmin does say so much, De Pontific. l. 4. c. 2.
and moreover, that this opinion is not heretical, and is tolerated by the
Church: but withal he tells you, that he is of another opinion, which is also
the common opinion.


Prot. However, that is sufficient for my purpose. This one difference among
you being far more considerable, than all those points wherein Protestants
differ among themselves: for though they differ in other and lesser things,
they all agree in this great means of Union, that they own the Holy Scriptures
to be the Judge (or more properly the Rule) of Controversies: and therefore if
you please, let this pass, and let me hear what further you have to say against
us, or for your selves?


Pop. This further I say, the true Church must needs remain visible perpetually
to the end of the world, such our Church has been, whereas yours was invisible
and (as I said before) unheard of in the world till Luthers days.


Prot. I do not well understand you; Do you think the Church must needs be
visible at all times to the whole world?


Pop. I cannot say so, for she was not always visible to many great and famous
parts of the world, as China and America; it may suffice, that she is visible
in some Kingdom or part of the world, and that she remains so in all ages.


Prot. Then the Church may remain invisible to the greatest part of the world,
and so your argument reaches but a small part of the world: How I pray you
must the Church be always visible?


Pop. There must be in all ages, in some eminent place, a great company of
Christians visibly united together, in the worship of God in one body and
Congregation, and governed by their successive Pastors under the Pope.


Prot. Very well: now I know your mind: and first I deny, that it is necessary
for the true Church to be so visible in all ages: Do you prove it?


Pop. That I shall easily prove, from those many and glorious promises made to
the Church; the Church is called a great Mountain, and said to be exalted above
other mountains, Isa. 2. She is a City set upon a hill that cannot be hid, Mat.
5. Christ has promised to be with her to the end of the world, Mat. 28. The
gates of Hell shall not prevail against her; Christ's Kingdom, is an everlasting
Kingdom, Psalm. 88. Dan. 2. A few invisible and dispersed Christians, cannot
make a Kingdom.


Prot. Your proofs are impertinent, Isa. 2. does prove that the Church under
the New Testament should be glorious (that is spiritually) and prevalent: so it
was (and we trust will be) but he says not, the Church should always continue
in that condition (which is the point that you should prove) Mat. 5. If it
speak of the Church, Christ only tells us what the Church then was, not that it
should always remain such; besides he speaks of their duty, not their
condition: and Mat. 28. proves that Christ will be with his Church, but not so
as that it shall always be illustrious and united in a great body: this,
neither that, nor any of your other Texts, prove, nor can you. But suppose that
Christ had made such a promise that his Church should be visible in all Ages in
a considerable body; How do you prove that our Church has not been so visible
in all ages?


Pop. If you affirm that it has been visible in all Ages, you are bound to
produce a Catalogue of your Churches in all successive Ages.


Prot. That is not necessary neither: If I did positively affirm that our
Church had been visible in such manner in all Ages, then I confess I am bound
to prove it. But if I leave it in doubt as a thing which (for ought you or I
know) might be true or false, he that affirms it was not so, is bound to make
it good; and if I deny your Proposition, by all Laws of dispute, you must prove
it: I will show by an instance how unconvincing your argument is; There are
several Prophesies and Promises in Scripture, the execution whereof is not
recorded there, nor any where else; suppose an Atheist comes to you, and offers
this Argument against the Scripture; If the Scripture be true, and the Word of
God, then all its Prophesies and Promises were accomplished; but there are
several Prophesies and Promises there which never were accomplished within the
time appointed, therefore it is not true; What would you answer?


Pop. I would deny this Proposition, viz. That there are any such Prophesies or
Promises there which were not accomplished.


Prot. Suppose then he urge it thus, If they were accomplished, then you must
show when and how they were accomplished either in Scripture or other Stories,
if you cannot, I shall conclude they never were accomplished.


Pop. I should tell him, That he is obliged to show they were not accomplished,
not I to show that they were accomplished; I should tell him that they might be
accomplished, though the accomplishment of them were never put into any writing
(and being but an Historical Tradition, might easily be lost) or if it were put
into writing, that also might be lost by the injury of time, as thousands of
other Books have been, so that no prudent man will believe this mad
Proposition, That nothing was done in former Ages that was not mentioned in the
Records which we have. But if it were possible that some particular things were
not recorded, or were lost, yet it is probable that so eminent and public a
matter as a Succession of Churches should lie hid.


Prot. I confess it is not so probable that a large and glorious Church should
so lie hid; but since it was sufficient for the making good of Christ's promise
of being ever with his Church; if there were some few Congregations and
Ministers, though scattered in diverse places, that these should not be
recorded, is not at all strange nor improbable to any one who considers, 1. How
many matters of far greater note are recorded only in some single Author, which
if he had been lost (and that he was as liable to, as they that were lost) the
memory of those things had perished with him. 2. How woefully dark and ignorant
some ages of the Church were, as you all confess, wherein there was not much
reading, but to be sure, there was little or no writing. and that little that
was written, was written by men of the times, who would not do their Enemies
that honor or right to put them into their Histories: 3. If any did mention
such things, it is not at all improbable, that such Book or Books wherein they
were recorded, might either be lost by the injury of time, (as thousands of
other Books were, which was much more easy before Printing was found out, or
suppressed by the tyranny of your Predecessors, who made it their business (as
Isreal's enemies of old) that the name and remembrance of true Christians might
be blotted out of the earth. So then, if Christ did indeed promise the
perpetual visibility of his Church, I will conclude he made it good, though
History be silent in the point; nor will I conclude it was not done, because it
is not recorded: But I pray you let me further ask you, Is it true that I am
told, that in the former ages there were many Christians and Ministers whom
your Church did persecute and burn for Heretics?


Pop. That cannot be denied.


Prot. This shows there were not wanting even in former ages, some that
testified against your corruptions, and this was a sign they were the true
Church, (whose office it is to contend for the Faith delivered to the Saints)
for these things were not done in a corner. I am told that your great
Bellarmine, when is was objected against him, that the Church was obscure in
St. Hilaries days, answers, that though the true Church may be obscure by
multitude of Scandals, yet even then it is visible in its strongest members, as
then it was in Athanasius, Hilary, Eusebius, and two or three more whom he
mentions: De Eccl sia militante, l. 3. c. 16.
whence I gather, that some few eminent Preachers and Professors of the Truth
are sufficient to keep up this Visibility: I remember I have read in the
History of the Waldenses, who (though your Predecessors branded them with
odious names and opinions, yet) do sufficiently appear to have been a company
of Orthodox and serious Christians, and indeed true Protestants, these began
about 500 Years ago, says your Genebrard Chron. l. 4.
, and your Reinerius, who was one of their cruel Butchers, (otherwise called
Inquisitors) writes thus of them; This Sect (says he) is the most pernicious
of all others, for three causes; 1. Because it is of long continuance, some say
that it has endured from the time of Silvester; others from the time of the
Apostles; The 2. is, because it is more general, for there is almost no Land in
which this Sect does not creep. 3. That whereas all others by the immanity of
their blasphemies against God, do make men abhor them, these having a great
show of godliness, because they do live justly before men, and believe all
things well of God, and all the Articles which are contained in the Creed, only
the Church of Rome they do blaspheme and hate. Behold here out of your own
mouths, a plain Confutation of your Objection, and a testimony of the
perpetuity, amplitude, visibility, and sanctity of our Church; for it is
sufficiently known that our Church and Doctrine is for substance the same with
theirs. Now tell me, I pray you, if this History of them had been lost, and no
other mention of them made in other Records, Had it been a truth for you to
affirm, that there never were any such men and Churches in that time?


Pop. No surely, for the recording of things in History does not make them
true, nor the silence of Histories about true Occurrences make them false.


Prot. Then there might be the like Companies and Congregations in former ages
for ought you or I know; nor can you argue from the defect of an History to the
denial of the thing: And all this I say not as if there were no Records which
mention our Church in former Ages; for as I said before, it is sufficiently
evident, that all our material Doctrines have been constantly and successively
owned by a considerable number of persons in several Ages, but only that you
may see there is a flaw in the very foundation of your Argument. Moreover, I
find in Scripture several instances of such times when the Church was as much
obscured, and invisible as ever our Church was, as when Israel was in Egypt, so
oft-times under the Judges, Judge. 2. 3. and so under diverse of the Kings, as
Ahab, when Elijab complained he was left alone, and the 7000. which were
reserved, though known to God, were invisible to the prophet; and under Ahaz
and Manasseh, and so in the Babylonish captivity: and so under Antiochus; read
at my desire, 2 Chr. 15. 3. 28. 24. 29. 6, 7. 33. 3, 4. so in the New
Testament, how obscure, and in a manner invisible, was the Christian Church for
a season! Nay, let me add, this perpetual visibility and splendor is so far
from being a note of the true Church, that on the contrary, it is rather a sign
that yours is not the true Church, as appears thus: Christ has foretold the
obscurity and smallness of his Church in some after ages; he tells us that
there shall be a general Apostasy and defection from the faith, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1 Timothy 4. I read of a woman, Rev. 12. and she is forced to flee into the
Wilderness; and I am told your own Expositors agree with us, that this is the
Church which flees from Antichrist into the Wilderness, and secret places,
withdrawing her self from persecution. Is this true?


Pop. I must confess our Authers do t^ke it so.


Prot. Then it seems you do not believe your selves, when you plead the
necessity of perpetual visibility and splendor, for here you acknowledge her
obscurity; and really this place and discourse of yours does very much confirm
me, that that obscurity which you object against us, is an argument that ours
is the true Church though, according to this Prediction, the Pope this
Antichrist, did drive our Predecessors into the Wilderness, I read of a Beast
rising out of the Sea. Revel. 13. which your own Authors, Menochius, Tirinus,
and almost all Expositors (as Riberus says) acknowledge to be Antichrist, and
this Beast all the Inhabitants of the World do worship, except those whose
names are written in the Book of life, verse 8. that is, excepting only the
invisible Church; if any Church be visible and glorious at that time, it must
be the false and Antichristian Church; and now I speak of that, I have heard
that you your selves confess, that in the time of Antichrist the Church shall
be obscure, and all public Worship in the Churches of Christians shall be
forbidden and cease: Is it so?


Pop. It is true, it shall be so, i. e. during the time of Antichrists reign,
as Bellarmine acknowledges De Pontif. l. 3. c. 7. Denique quod,
, but that is only for a short moment, for three years and a half, which is all
the time that Antichrist shall reign.


Prot. I thank you for this, for now you have exceedingly confirmed me in the
truth of my Religion; for since you grant that the Church shall be obscured
durings Antichrist reign, I am very well assured that your opinion of the
Triennial reign of Antichrist is but a mere dream, and that he was to reign in
the Church for many hundred of years, for 1260 days, Rev. 11. 3. and 12. 6.
(that is, years, it being a very familiar thing to put days for years, in
Prophetical Writings.) But if the Church may be obscured for three years, why
not for thirty, yea, three hundred? Did Christ in his supposed promise of
perpetual Visibility in the Church, make an exception for these three years? I
trow not: And tell me, I pray you, should you live till that time when
Antichrist shall prevail, and your Religion no less than ours be obscure and
invisible; if any of the followers of Antichrist should dispute against you,
that yours was not the true Church because not visible, Would you grant it?


Pop. God forbid I should be so wicked to deny my Mother, and Church, because
of her Afflictions.


Prot. Then I see you your selves do not believe this to he a good argument,
and that you do not make perpetual visibility a necessary token of the true
Church. To this I add, there is no need we should show a constant succession of
Protestant Churches ever since the Apostles days, (as you pretend is
necessary) the succession that you pretend in your Church is sufficient for
ours, and so long as we generally agree that your Church was a true Church
(till later years) though woefully corrupted, and our Predecessors continued in
it, till your wounds stunk and became incurable, we need no other succession
than yours; but when your impiety came to the height, then we visibly departed
from you, and have given such reasons for it, as you will never be able to
answer; In the mean time let me hear what you have further to say.


Pop. For as much as all your Ministers confess our Church was once a true
Church, I pray you tell me how, and when she did fall? you cannot tell either
the time when she fell, or the manner how, by Apostasy, or Heresy, or Schism;
if you can, name your Authors.


Prot. This is a most unreasonable demand: A friend of mine had the Plague last
year, and died of it I asked him when he was sick, how and when he got it, he
said he knew not; Shall I then conclude he had it not? Shall I make Christ a
liar, and dispute that there were no tares, because they were sown when men
slept, Mat. 13. 25. and so could not know when or how they came? Shall I
believe no Heresy to be an Heresy, unless I can show how and when it came
into the Church? What if the Records of these things by the injury of time are
lost, and their original left in obscurity; shall I therefore say, it is now
become no Heresy? I beseech you answer me freely this question. Suppose I
could bring plain and strong evidences from the holy Scripture, and from
ancient Tradition, or the unanimous testimonies of the Ancient Fathers, that
your Doctrine of Merits (for instance) is an Heresy, your Doctrine of
worshipping Images is Idolatry; and that you are in diverse particulars
apostatized from that faith which the Scriptures and Fathers do own; in this
case, Would you not confess, that you are guilty of Idolatry, Heresy, and
Apostasy?


Pop. If it were so, and you could really bring (as you falsely pretend you
can, but indeed cannot) any such solid proofs, I must and will confess it: For
all our Writers agree, that although we must believe many things that are not
contained in the Scripture, yet we must believe nothing contrary to the
Scriptures, nor to the consent of the ancient Fathers.


Prot. Very well, hence then I gather that the only question between you and me
is, Whether we can evidently and solidly prove the particulars now mentioned,
which if we can do, as I am satisfied our Ministers have done, you are
convicted in your own Conscience, and will confess your self and your Church
guilty of Heresy, Idolatry, and Apostasy, whether I can tell the manner or
time, or Authors of this doctrine or no.

Therefore leaving these frivolous and impertinent questions, let me hear what
you have to say more against our Religion, and whereas your discourse I observe
has wholly run upon Generals, I beseech you come to some particulars, and show
me the falsehood of the Doctrines of our Church. But it does not a little
confirm me in my Religion, that you confess (as I showed before) most of our
Doctrines to be true, and grounded upon Scripture, whereas yours are additions
of your own devising. Now if things be thus, you shall not need to trouble your
self about many particulars. But if you please single out some of our principal
Heresies, (as you call them) and let me hear what evidences you can bring
against them.


Pop. Your Heresies are very many, but I shall mention one which may be instead
of all, and that is your rule of Faith and Judge of Controversies, which you
make to be the Scripture only.


Prot, I am glad you have fallen upon so material a point, the deciding whereof
may make other Disputes in great part useless. Tell me then what you have to
say against this Doctrine.


Pop. I will urge four Arguments against it. 1. Scripture has no authority
over us but from the Church. 2. You cannot know what Books are the holy
Scriptures, or part of it, but by the Churches report. 3. If neither of these
were true, yet Scripture is not a sufficient rule for your faith without
Tradition. 4. If it were sufficient, yet it is so obscure, that you cannot know
the sense of it without the interpretation of the Church. You see here is a
fourfold cord, which you will find is not easily broken.


Prot. Make these things good, and I confess you do your work in a great
measure. Let me hear your Proofs.


Pop. For the first then, I say, that Scripture has no authority over us but
from the Church: neither you nor I are bound to believe the Scripture to be the
word of God, nor can any man know it or prove it to be so, but from the
testimony of our Church concerning it.


Prot. I pray tell me, if you were to discourse with an Atheist, who utterly
denies the holy Scriptures and the Church too, Could you not prove against him
that the Scriptures are the Word of God?


Pop. God forbid, but that I should be able to defend the truth of the
Scriptures against any adversary whatsoever.


Prot. How then I pray you would you prove it?


Pop. I need not tell you the Arguments which in this case our Doctors use, and
I stand by them in it, they allege for the truth of the holy Scriptures the
testimony of all ages and all sorts of persons, the miracles wrought for it
acknowledged even by the Enemies of it, the martyrdom, that so many thousands
(and many of them wise and learned men) did run upon in the defense of them
(who living so near the time of the writing of them were best able do discern
the truth) and the wonderful power that goes along with them in convincing,
converting, and comforting or terrifying sinners.


Prot. Do you believe these are solid Arguments, and that the Atheist ought to
yield to them?


Pop. Yes doubtless, for every man is bound to receive the truth, especially
when it is so proposed and proved to him.


Prot. It seems then by this, when you list, you can prove the Scripture to be
the Word of God without taking in the Churches Authority; I hope you will allow
me the same benefit. But again let me ask you, your Church that you talk of,
which believes the Scripture to be the Word of God; Does she believe it to be
the Word of God upon solid grounds or no?


Pop. Yes doubtless, our Church is not so irrational as to believe without
grounds; nor do we pretend Revelation, but she believes it upon solid Arguments.


Prot. I wish you would give me a list of their Arguments: But whatever they be
that are sufficient to convince your Church, why should they not be sufficient
to convince any private man, Popish or Protestant, or Atheist? And therefore
there is no need of the Churches testimony: Or will you say, the Church has no
other sufficient reason to believe the Scriptures but her own testimony, that
is, she believes because she will believe?


Pop. God forbid that I should disparage the Church, or give Atheists that
occasion to scoff at the Stripture.


Prot. Then I also may be satisfied without the Churches testimony, that the
Scriptures are the Word of God; and I am so, by such Arguments as your self
mentioned; but really I cannot but smile to see what cunning sophisters you
are, how you play at fast and loose: The same Arguments for the Scriptures are
strong and undeniable when you talk with an Atheist, and are all of a sudden
become weak as water when a Protestant brings them.


Pop. But if you can prove in the General, That the Scriptures are the Word of
God, yet you cannnot without the Churches Authority, tell what Books of
Scripture, or which are Canonical, and so you are never the nearer.


Prot. Here also I must ask you again, How does your Church know which Books
are Scripture and Canonical, does she know this by Revelation?


Pop. No, we leave such fancies to your Church.


Prot. How then does she know this, and why does she determine it? Is it with
reason, or without it?


Pop. With reason doubtless, being induced to believe and determine it upon
clear and undoubted Evidences.


Prot. I pray you tell me what are those Evidences upon which she goes.


Pop. I will be true to you, our great Bellarmine mentions these three, The
Church ( says he) knows and declares a Canonical Book, 1. From the testimonies
of the Ancients. 2. From its likeness and agreement with other Books. 3. From
the common sense and taste of Christian people De verbo Dei. l. 1. c. 10.
Itaque non dicimus.
.


Prot. Since a private man especially one that besides learning and experience
has the Spirit of God to guide him, which is that anointing given to all
Believers, which teaches them all things, 1 John 2. 27.) may examine and
apprehend these things as well as the Pope himself, (and better too,
considering what kind of creatures diverse of your Popes are confessed to have
been) he may therefore know without the Churches Authority, what Books are
indeed Canonical; but I pray you tell me, Do not you acknowledge those books to
be the Word of God which we do that are in this Bible?


Pop. I must be true to you, we do own every Book you have there; but you
should receive the Books which you call Apocryphal, so that indeed your Bible
is not complete, for you believe but a part of the written Word of God, which I
must tell you is of dangerous consequence.


Prot. If these Books be a part of Gods Word, I confess we are guilty of a
great sin, in taking away from Gods Word; and if they be not, you are no less
guilty in adding to it; so that the only question is, Whether these Books be a
part of the holy Scripture or no? Now, that if you please we will try
Bellarmines rules.


Pop. The motion is fair and reasonable.


Prot. First then, for the judgment of the Ancient Church, let us try that; I
know you hold the Churches judgment infallible, especially in matters of this
moment; and I suppose you think the Jewish Church was infallible before Christ,
as the Christian Church now is.


Pop. We do so, and the Infallibility of the Jewish Church and High Priest,
Deuteronomy. 17. is one of our principal Arguments for the Infallibility of our Church
See Nullity of Romans faith. chapter 2.
.


Prot. Then only these Books of the old Testament were Canonical, which the
Jewish Church did own.


Pop. That must necessarily follow.


Prot. Then your cause is lost, for it is certain, the Jews rejected these
Apocryphal Books which you receive, and they reckoned only 22. Josephus his
words (acknowledged for his by Eusebius Hist. l. 310.
), are most express for us, The Jews have only 22 Books, to which they
deservedly give credit, which contains things written from the beginning of the
World to the times of Artaxerxes: other things were written afterward, (so the
Apocryphal Books are granted to have been) but they are not of the same credit
with the former, because There was no certain succession of Prophets, Contra
Appionem, lib. 1.
and I am told diverse of your learned Authors confess it, as Catharinus, In
Annot. adversus Cajet. de libris Maccab.
Costerus, Enchir. c. de scrip. de number. lib.
Marianus Victor, In Scholiis ad Epist. 116. Hieronymi.
and Bellarmine himself, whose words are these; All those Books which the
Protestants do not receive, the Jews also did not receive: De Verbo Dei, l. 1.
c. 10. In principio.
and this is more considerable, because to the Jews were committed the Oracles
of God, Romans 3. 2. And neither Christ nor his Apostles did accuse them of
breach of trust in this matter. Moreover, I am told (and surely in all reason
it must needs be true) that the Canonical Books of the Jewish Church were
written in the Jewish or Hebrew language, whereas these were written in Greek
only. Are these things so?


Pop. What is true I will acknowledge; It is so; The Jewish Church indeed did
not receive them, nor yet did they reject them, as our Canus well answers. Loc.
Theol. l. 2. c. 11.



Prot. Either that Church did believe them to be Canonical, or they did not; if
they did, then they lived in a mortal sin against Conscience in not receiving
them; if they did not, they were of our opinion.


Pop. Well, what soever the Jewish Church did, I am sure the Ancient Christians
and Fathers did receive these Books as a part of the Canonical Scriptures.


Prot. I doubt I shall take you tardy there too; I am told that the Council of
Laodicea, (in the year of our Lord 364.) drew up a Catalogue of the Books of
the Scripture, in which (as in ours) the Apocryphal Books are rejected.


Pop. It is true, they did not receive them, nor yet reject them.


Prot. If they did not receive them, that undeniably shows that they did not
believe them to be Canonical, and yet they diligently scanned the point, and
the Books had then been extant some hundred of years, and they were far more
likely to know the truth than we at this distance, having then such special
opportunities of knowing the judgment of the ancient Church, both Jewish and
Christian: Besides, I am informed that the famous Bishop of Sardis Melito, (a
man of great judgment and venerable holiness, as your Sixtus Senensis says)
did take a journey to the Eastern Churches (where the Apostles principally
preached) to find out the true Canon of the Scripture, and returned with the
same Canon that we own; but for the Apochrypha brought home a Non est inventus:
And moreover that diverse of your greatest Champions do confess, that a great
number of the Ancient Fathers were of our opinion, among which themselves
reckon Melito, Origin, Athanasius, Eusebius, Ruffinus, Hierom, and Amphilocius,
so say Canus and Bellarmine, and Andradius; and in the General, Sixtus Senensis
confesses, that the Ancient Fathers were of our opinion. Are these things so?


Pop. I will not deny the truth, it is so; but you must know that other Fathers
were of another mind, as Clemens, Cyprian, and Ambrose, and especially St.
Austin, and the Council of Carthage.


Prot. The Fathers of our opinion, were both far more numerous, and such as
lived nearest the Apostolical Times, and Churches: The Council of Laodicea was
more ancient than that of Carthage, (and therefore of greater Authority) and
besides, the sixth Council of Constantinople does expressly confirm all the
Decrees of the Council of Laodicea, among which this was one) and the Council
of Carthage too does not your work: For in their Catalogue there is both more
than you own, to wit, the third Book of Esdras, (although they call it the
second, as the Greeks did) and less too, for they shut out Baruch and the
Maccabees; But besides all this, I am told that very many of your most eminent
Doctors have disowned these Books which we reject, as the Parisian Divines, and
Cardinal Ximenius, with the Complutensian University, and Aquinas, and Lyra,
and Pagnim, and many others. Is it so?


Pop. I confess this is true. Rainoldus in his Praelections concerning the
Apocryphal Books, proves this out of their own words, see Praelect. 40, 41, 42,
43.



Prot. Then I am sure this may satisfy any rational man, concerning the
Testimony of the Ancient Church; and for the next point, viz. their agreement
with the Canonical Books. I think it is plain enough that they do grossly
contradict them, and the truth too; that fact of Simeon and Levi, which good
Jacob acted by Gods Spirit detesteth, Judith commends, Chap. 9. Tobit is said
to have lived 202. years, Chap. 14. whereas if he said true, he must have lived
twice as long, for he says he was taken captive by Salmanasser, Chap. 1. and
2. and 14. and when he was about to die, he says, the time was near for the
return of the Israelites from their Captivity, and the re-building of the
Temple which was burned: If the Books of the Maccabees say true, Antiochus his
soul had a lease of his body for three lives, and he was killed thrice over, (I
commend the Author, he was resolved to make sure work of him.) 1. He dies at
Babylon in his bed, 1 Mac. 2. 6. then he is stoned in the Temple of Nanea, 2
Mac. 1. Lastly, he dies in the Mountains by a fall out of his Chariot, 2
Maccab. 9. And the fine fetches of your Authors to reconcile these gross
contradictions, put me in mind of a story we heard at School (if you remember)
of a Gentleman that told this lie, See Rainoldus and Spanhem de libris
Apocryphis*
That he shot a Deer at one shot through his right ear, and left hinder leg;
and you know how hard his man was put to it to help his Master out; but I will
not launch forth into the Sea of untruths and absurdities that are contained in
those Books; these may suffice to show you that we do not without warrant
reject them; but howsoever it is sufficient for my purpose, that you grant that
my Bible as the Word of God, and these Books in it Canonical, and I can know
this without the Churches Authority.


Pop. Do not make too much haste, if I do grant that these Books in the
Original Language are the Word of God, yet yours is but a Translation.


Prot. Is it rightly translated for the substance, or is it not? What Bible is
that which you have?


Pop. A Latin Bible.


Prot. Is that the Word of God, and rightly translated?


Pop. Yes, the Council of Trent has decreed so.


Prot. Then I pray you let us try this Experiment; do you pick out any 20.
verses in several parts of the Bible, and turn them into English out of your
Bible.


Pop. The motion is fair, I will do it.


Prot. I do not find any substantial difference in all these places between
your Translation and mine, the difference is wholly in words, not at all in
sense; so now, I thank you for this occasion, for I have heard some of your
Priests ranting highly against our Translation, and now I see they have no
cause for it.


Pop. If all this were over, yet the Scripture is not a sufficient Rule to
guide you to Heaven of it self without Tradition.


Prot. Why so I beseech you?


Pop. Because you are also commanded there to hold the Tradition, true in your
Bible to 2 These. 2. 15. Hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether
by Word or Epistle.


Prot. How do you prove that he speaks of such Traditions as were not written
in the Scripture?


Pop. Because he so plainly distinguishes between what he taught them by word,
and what he taught them by Epistle or Writing.


Prot. That may be true that he speaks of some things of which he had not
written to them, and yet they might be written by him to others, or by others,
at least after that time; but besides, notwithstanding this distinction between
Word and Epistle, diverse of your own Authors affirm, that Tradition is perfect,
and that St. Paul taught all things necessary by word of mouth; and why may not
I as well say, that he taught all by Epistle? But I pray you, What do you mean
by these Traditions?


Pop. I mean all the Traditions which either he, or any other Apostles did
deliver: all these you are bound to receive.


Prot. I will not quarrel with you for that, bring me solid proofs of any of
your unwritten Traditions, that they did indeed come from the Apostles, I
promise you I will joyfully receive them; But I pray you, what are these
Traditions you speak of?


Pop. Such as these, the Doctrine of Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, of the
Popes Supremacy, of the single life of Priests, of the Fasts of the Church,
private Masses, Worship of Images, etc.


Prot. And do you think, that all that did not believe and receive these
Traditions shall be damned?


Pop. No, by no means, for, then I should condemn many of the Holy Fathers and
Martyrs who differed from us at least in some of these Points.


Prot. Then it is not necessary to salvation to receive these Traditions; and
the Scripture may be sufficient without them: But further, These unwritten
Traditions you talk of, I beseech you how came you to discover them, and
discern the true from the false?


Pop. I altogether approve of Bellarmin 's Rule, which is this, That ( says
he) is a true Tradition, which all former Doctors have successively in their
several Ages acknowledged to come from the Apostles, and by their Doctrine or
Practices have approved, and which the Universal Church owneth as such; and the
reason is, because the Universal Church cannot err De Tradit. cap. 9.
.


Prot. I see all depends upon this Foundation, that the Catholic Church (in
your sense) cannot err; which, having disproved, I need not trouble my self
further: But to wave that, How I pray you do you know what former Doctors have
successively owned by word or practice? I presume none of your Popes have so
good a memory as to remember all that has been said or done in former Ages,
though in my opinion when your inventions were upon the wheel, and you did
confer upon the Pope an infallible judgment, you should have given him also an
all-sufficient memory, and then you had done your work.


Pop. No Sir, we pretend no such thing: but we know this from the Writings
which the Doctors have left. It is true, Bellarmine mentions another rule,
which is the continual usage of the Church in all ages; but (to deal heartily
with you) I cannot know what their use was, but by their Writings; so all must
come to that.


Prot. First, then I note, you forsake your cause, and it seems a writing is
now made a rule for your unwritten Traditions; if it may be so, let me beg your
favorable opinion of the Apostles writings; Besides, those Writers which
record these Traditions, were they infallible?


Pop. No, we do not hold any particular Writers Infallible, especially not in
matters of Fact, such as reporting a Tradition or use of the Church undoubtedly
is.


Prot. Then they might mistake false Traditions for true: Besides, how can I
tell what the Ancient Doctors did agree in, since most of them never wrote; and
many of their writings are lost; and yet all of them had equal liberty of
voting in this case? besides, I have heard that diverse of the Ancient Fathers
did report several things to be Apostolical Traditions which your Church now
rejects, as that Infants should receive the Communion, and that Christ should
reign on earth a thousand years, and many others: I am told also, that your
great Baronius, writing concerning the Apostles, professes, He despairs to
find out the truth, even in those matters which true Writers have recorded;
because there was nothing which remained sincere and incorrupted: Is it so?


Pop. You shall find me ingenuous; it is so, Baronius says it, Anno 44. sect.
42.


Prot. Then truly I shall bid Tradition (in your sense) good night: For as to
your Traditions I see there is no certainty in them. Shall I forsake the
certain and acknowledged verity of the Scripture for such trash? God forbid.


Again, I pray you tell me, does not every wise man that makes any thing, make
it sufficient for its end? If you build an house to live in, will not you make
it sufficient for that end? If a man makes a Sword to cut with, a Coat of Male
to defend him, etc. is he not a fool if he does not, if he can, make them
sufficient for their end and use?

Pop. That must needs be granted.


Prot. And was not our Instruction and Salvation the end for which God wrote
the Scripture?


Pop. How do you prove that it was?


Prot. God himself tells me so, John 20. 31. These things are written that you
may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you
might have life through his Name.


Pop. S. John speaks there of Miracles, not of doctrines, and so that is
nothing to the purpose.


Prot. He speaks of Miracles, which were done in confirmation of the Doctrine
of Christ, and so the Doctrine is not to be excluded: besides, I suppose you
will not say that S. John wrote the Doctrines of Christ for one end, and the
Miracles for another: Moreover, it plainly appears, both that this was the end
for which the Scripture was written, and that it is sufficient for its end,
from that 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. he says expressly, The Scriptures are able to
make a man of God wise unto salvation. Of which see Nulli^y, Append. p. 92.



Pop. Well, but if all these things be so, yet since the Scripture is dark and
doubtful, and you can never apprehend the true meaning of it but from the
Church, you are never the nearer; and the Scripture is not a convenient judge
of Controversies.


Prot. Tell me I pray, does your Church understand the true meaning of the
Scripture?


Pop. Yes doubtless, because she has the Spirit of God.


Prot. Then certainly she is most deeply guilty of uncharitableness, or envy,
or cruelty to souls, that she does not put forth a clear and infallible Comment
upon the whole Scripture, but still suffers the whole world to live in
contention about the true meaning of hundreds of Texts of Scripture.


Pop. She forbears that, for reasons best known to her self: But this is not
much to the purpose.


Prot. Whereas you pretend your Church certainly knows the true sense of the
Scripture, and this Church you say is the Pope, or a Council, and if these be
infallible, you say they are so in their Decrees: If this be so, how comes it
to pass that none do more grossly mistake, and mis-apply Scripture than diverse
of your Popes and councils have done, even in their Decrees, and decretal
Epistles (which you reverence as the Gospel)? Your Pope Nicholas the first,
proves his Supremacy from that Text, Arise Peter kill and eat: small
encouragement to us to become his sheep, if he so use them; and from hence,
that Peter drew to the shore his net full of Fishes, your Pope Boniface the
eighth proves it from Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning God created Heaven and Earth,
therefore the Pope has power in Temporals and Spirituals: and this (says he)
you must hold, unless with the Manichees you hold two principles: And your
councils are not more happy Expositors. The council of Lateran proves the Popes
power from Psa. 72. (which speaks of Solomon and Christ) All Kings shall fall
down before him. The second council of Nice alleges these Scriptures for the
Worship of Images, that God created man in his own Image, Genesis 1. Let me see
thy countenance, Cant. 2. No man when he has lighted a Candle covers it
under a vessel, Luke 8. 16. In my opinion they spoke like a council, expecting
that the world should receive their Decrees, not for any solidity of Argument
(that had been pedantick) but merely for the Churches Majesty and Authority.
Nay, the jest is, when their Adversaries had taken notice of these absurd
impertinencies, up steps Pater Noster, Pope Adrian, and he says, he will
maintain it (in spite of fate) that they alleged them rightly and excellently:
So here we have a Pope and council joining together (and therefore undoubtedly
infallible) in these Expositions. Nay, the council of Trent it self (when one
would expect they should have grown wiser, though not better) prove the unequal
power of Popes, Bishops, and Priests, from Romans 13. 1. The powers that be are
ordained of God; that is, digested into order. I hope ere you have done, you
will put forth an entire Comment upon the whole Bible, which I assure you will
be the rarest book that ever saw the light. But further, I desire to know of
you how your Church comes to have this true and certain sense of Scripture;
has she it by Revelation or Inspiration?


Pop. No, we pretend to no such thing; but she comes to know it by the diligent
use of means, by prayer, by reading, and comparing Scripture, by consulting
ancient Interpreters, Analogy of Faith, the coherence, etc. and even the Pope
himself, when he set forth his Translation of the Bible, He professes to all
the world, that he did it in the very same manner, and by the same helps, that
other Translators do; that is, by advising with learned Men, and consulting
Ancient Copies, and the like Sixtus the Fifth, Pope, tells us in his Preface to
his Translation of the Bible, that He picked out of the Cardinals, and almost
out of all Nations, a College of most learnned men, who advised him in that
work; They ( says he) consulted, and I chose that which was best. And he adds
these remarkable words, It is most evident, that there is no surer, nor
stronger Argument, than the comparing of ancient and approved Copies. And (he
tells us) that he carefully corrected it with his own hands. And then the Pope
imposes this Translation upon all the world, to be followed without adding or
diminishing, or altering, under pain of Excommunication. And yet (that you may
see how they abuse the peoples credulity to make them believe the Popes
Infallibility which themselves do not in earnest believe.) About two years
after comes Clement the Eighth, and he puts forth another Edition and
Translation of the Bible, differing from, and contrary to the former Edition in
two thousand places, as Doctor James has proved, by producing the places, as
they are in In his Bellum Papale, and defense of it.
both Editions. And which is more than all this, in the Preface to his last
Bible of Clement the Eighth, we have these words; Receive, Christian Reader,
this old and vulgar Edition of the Scripture corrected with all possible
diligence, which, though in respect of humane weakness it be hard to affirm,
that it is every way complete; yet it is not to be doubted, but it is more pure
and corrected than all that has gone before it. I think this were sufficient
evidence (if there were no other) how great a cheat it is, that you pretend the
Pope to be the infallible Interpreter of Scripture. For here we have one of
those infallibles directly contradicting and overturning the other: and
besides, instead of that Divine, (or, after a sort divine) infallibility, which
you ascribe to the Pope, we have here a public acknowledgment of his
imbecility: nor dare he affirm his work to be perfect, which it must needs
have been, if he had been infallibly guided in it (as you pretend he was) nor
would he have said so, if he had believed his own infallibiliy.
.


Prot. Very good, Then I pray you tell me why a Protestant Minister (being often
times both a learneder and better man than the Pope) may not as certainly hit
upon the true sense of the Scripture as the Pope himself.


Pop. The reason is plain, because the Pope is guided by the infallible
assistance of Gods Spirit.


Prot. You ought not to rant at this height, until you have solidly answered
what our Divines have wrote against this Infallibility. And I heard before the
woeful weakness of your arguments; for it is to me the vainest thing in the
world to pretend a promise of the Spirit of God infallibly to guide such men,
as (if the Scripture be true) have not the Spirit of Christ in them, being (as
you confess many of your Popes and Bishops were) sensual, not having the
Spirit: and having apparently no other spirit in them, but the spirit of the
world, the spirit that lusts to envy and all wickedness: But since you
pretend the Scripture is so dark, I pray you tell me, what was the end for
which God designed the Scripture? Sure I think it was for our understanding; my
Bible tells me, that whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for
our learning, Romans 15. 4 But if you say true, it seems God meant only to put
forth riddles: Gods Law was designed by him for a light, and that even to the
simple, Psalm. 19. 7, 8, 9. and 119, 105. And in a word, the Gospel is so clear,
that Saint Paul pronounces, it is hid from none but them that perish, 2 Cor.
4. 3, 4. And Saint Luke wrote his Gospel, that Theophilus (and with him other
Christians) might know the certainty of those things wherein they had been
instructed, Luke 1. 4. and generally every discreet man that writes a Book,
writes it so, as it may be understood; especially if it be for the benefit of
the ignorant, as well as the learned (which the Scripture assuredly was.) Tell
me then I pray you, why should God write his mind so darkly and doubtfully as
you know whose Oracles are said to be delivered? was it because God could not
write plainer (and wanted the gift of utterance) or because he would not?


Pop. Notwithstanding all this, it is certain, the Scripture is full of obscure
places.


Prot. I do not deny this: but those things which are obscurely delivered in
one place, are more clearly delivered in another; and those dark places
generally are about Prophecies, and such other things; the knowledge of which
is not necessary to salvation, But for necessaries the Scripture is plain, and
I am told, that diverse of your Authors acknowledge so much: Is that true?


Pop. I confess Costerus has this expression, that things which are necessary
to be known by all Christians, are plainly and clearly delivered in the
writings of the Apostles, and some others of our Doctors say as much See
nullity of Romans faith, chap. 7. sect. 4.



Prot. It could be nothing but the evidence of the truth which forced such an
acknowledgment from its greatest Adversaries, therefore let this go, and let me
hear what further you have to say against our Religion.


Pop. I find you are an obstinate Heretic, and settled upon the lees, and
therefore it will be needless to discourse further with you; if any thing could
have convinced you, surely the Arguments I have offered would have done it; for
I assure you I have picked out the strength and marrow of the Catholic Cause in
the Points we have discoursed. And since I see you turn a deaf ear to my
counsel, I shall give you over as incorrigible.


Prot. You see I have heard you with great patience, and given you all the
freedom you could desire; now I have one request to you, that you would allow
me the same privilege, with patience to hear, and, if you can, answer what I
shall object against your Religion.


Pop. With a very good will, I Will meet you here to morrow at this time, so at
present adieu.


The SECOND CONFERENCE.
Prot. WEll met Sir, I see you are as good as your word, and I hope you will
allow me as much freedom and patience as I did you.


Pop. I shall willingly do it, therefore speak freely, and so will I, and if
truth be on your side let it prevail.


Prot. I shall divide my discourse into two Parts.

1. Some General Considerations, which indeed do very much set me against your
Religion.

2. I shall examine the grounds of your Principal Points of Doctrine; for to
meddle with all, will be needless: If your Pillars fall the rest cannot stand.
For the first, there are several weighty Considerations against your Religion;
I shall give you them in order. The first General Consideration is this;

1. That your Church declines all Judgment but her own, and makes her self
Judge in her own Cause; you do not allow Scripture to be Judge, nor the Ancient
Fathers (for all your talk of Antiquity) nor indeed any but your selves, the
Pope, or a Council of your own, and your Church it seems must determine,
whether she be a true Church or no, and whether she be pure or corrupted, or
whether she be Infallible or no; Is this so?


Pop. I confess this is our Doctrine, and I think grounded upon Reason.


Prot. You speak against the common sense of all men. In all Controversies or
Differences between men and men, we generally suspect that party who will
submit to no judgment but his own; and he who is willing to refer himself to
any third indifferent party, is generally presumed to have the best cause; and
th^s is our case, Protestants do not make themselves and their own Church the
only Judge (though they might as justly and reasonably do it as you) but they
are very willing to submit to other Judges, they refer themselves to be judged
by the Scripture, which is acknowledged to be a most indifferent Judge; If that
do not please you, they refer themselves to the Fathers for the first six
hundred years, till your abominations had leavened the world, according to what
was foretold, Rev. 13. 8.

II. My second consideration is this; You do not only decline the Scriptures
judgment, but you infinitely disparage and vilify it. I meet with several
passages quoted out of your Authors to that purpose.


Pop. Possibly you may out of some inconsiderable ones, but not out of any of
note and name in our Church.


Prot. Yes, out of your prime Authors, I read that Cardinal Hosius in his
Advertisement to King Sigismund has this expression, If they (that is, the
Heretics) say, It is written, that is the voice of the Devil, speaking in his
members De expresso Dei Verbo.
. But that it is below a Cardinal to read the Bible, he would have found the
words also in Christ's mouth. I read that Costerus calls the Scripture by way of
contempt Paper and Parchment. God (says he) would no^ have his Church (by
which always understand the Papists themselves) now depend upon Paper and
Parchment, as Moses made the carnal Israelites: And again, That which is
written in the heart of the Church, does by many degrees excel the Scriptures:
First, because that was written by the finger of God, but this by the Apostles
Enchiridion, cap. 1.
, as if the Writings of the Apostles were only a device of man. I read that
Cardinal Pool writing to Henry the Eighth, says thus, What an absurd thing is
this, that thou do attribute more authority to the Scripture than to the
Church, since the Scripture has no authority but for the decree of the Church
De primatu Romanae Ecclesiae, fol 92.
? (He means the Roman Church.) I see we are highly concerned to please your
Church, else we are like to have no Scriptures. I read that Pighius says, The
Apostles did never intend to subject our faith to their writings, but rather
their writings to our faith Eccles. Hierarch. lib. 2. cap. 2.
. And afterward he says, The Scriptures are (as one said, not more pleasantly
than truly) a nose of wax which suffers it self to be drawn hither or thither,
as a man pleases Ibid. l. 3. c. 3. fol. 103.
. I read that your Bullenger says; The Scripture is the Daughter, the Church
the Mother, which gives being and sufficiency to her she begets. (No wonder
then, the Church makes bold with the Scripture to add, or alter, or dispense
with it. We all know the Mother may correct the Daughter.) I confess, when I
read those passages produced by our Writers, I suspected they wronged them. Are
these things true?


Pop. I acknowledge it, and it is a vain thing for me to deny it, for the Books
and those passages in them are extant under their own hands: And I must
confess, these Authors are as considerable and approved as any we have. But you
ought to put a favorable sense upon them.


Prot. I would not strain them, nor make them worse than they are. Take them as
you will, they are abominable expressions, and (to me) a great evidence, that
the Scripture is no friend to your Church. And I conclude this to be one
accomplishment of what Christ has said, Every one that does evil hates the
light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved, John 3.
20. And if this be the spirit by which your Church is guided, I am sure it is
not the Spirit of God and of Truth; for that teaches men reverence and love to
the Scriptures: You seem to do like Herod, who being convinced that he was not
of the Royal race of the Jews, did burn their Genealogies and Records, that his
false pretenses might not be confuted by them. And just so do you endeavor to
do by the Scriptures:

III. My third Consideration against your Religion is this; That your Cause is
such as dares not abide trial: This is the honor and happiness of our
Religion; We are allowed to examine all that our Ministers say, and we have a
Rule (which we may peruse) to try them by, viz. the holy Scriptures, which you
dare not suffer your people to read. And this I take to be a secret confession
of your guilt; and I am told your Alphonsus de Castro says, That from the
reading of the Scripture all Heresies come Contra haereses, l. 5. c. 6.
.


Pop. I think your experience has justified that expression, You see what you
get by the reading of the Scriptures, even this, that you are crumbled into a
thousand Sects.


Prot. Our Savior was not of your mind, for he thought not acquaintance with,
but ignorance of the Scriptures was the cause of Error; Ye err, not knowing
the Scriptures, Mat. 22. 29. Nor did he only allow, but command the Jews to
search the Scriptures, without any fear of this inconvenience, John 5. 39. Had
S. Paul been of your mind, he would not have commended, but reproved the
Beraans for searching the Scriptures, and examining his Doctrine by them, Act.
17. 11. If any of your people should do as the Beraeans did, they would be sent
to the Inquisition. I do not deny, but too many make a bad use of the
Scripture, and wrest it to wicked purposes, which is to me no better an
argument than this; Wine makes many men drunk, therefore no Wine must be sold.
The Doctrine of Free Grace was abused by thousands (as we read) therefore S.
Paul did ill in preaching of it. The light of the Sun hurts sore eyes,
therefore Solomon was mistaken, when he said, It is a pleasant thing to behold
the Sun. But since you speak of this, I pray you let me ask you one question;
Were not most of the Heresies that ever were in the Church, brought in by
learned men?


Pop. I cannot deny that, for it is notoriously known.


Prot. Then you shut up the wrong door; for, it seems, it is not the unlearned
man's reading, but the learned man's perverting the Scripture, which is the true
cause and fountain of Heresies: And besides, you must not do evil, that good
may come out of it, nor defraud people of their greatest treasure, nor keep
them from their duty, for fear of some inconveniences. This is to make your
selves wiser than God.


Pop. But indeed you slander us in this point: We do not absolutely forbid
reading of the Scriptures. The Council of Trent allows it, provided you can get
the Bishops leave.


Prot, It is true, that Council pretends to give some such liberty; but they
take away with one hand, what they gave with the other; for in their Index of
forbidden Books, they have this passage: Since experience shows that the
promiscuous reading of the Bible brings more evil than good, therefore if any
man shall dare to read, or have a Bible without license from the Bishop, or
Inquisitor, he shall not be capable of absolution In fine Council. Trident. Reg.
4.
unless he part with his Bible. But in truth, this pretended License is but an
handsome blind: For in that very place there is this Observation added to that
Rule, That the power of giving such Licenses of reading, or keeping the vulgar
Bibles, is taken away from such Bishops and Inquisitors, by the command and
usage of the Roman and universal Inquisition. At best, it seems, I must not
obey Christ's command of searching the Scriptures, unless the Bishop give me
leave. But I pray you tell me; Do your people use to ask, and the Bishops to
give them leave to read the Bible?


Pop. I will not dissemble with you, They do not. And, the truth is, an
approved Writer of ours, Ledesima puts the question; What if a man should come
to the Bishop, and desire liberty to read the Bible, and that with a good
intention? to which he replies, that the Bishop should answer him in the words
of Christ, Matt. 20. 20. Ye know not what ye ask, and Indeed ( says he, and he
says it truly) the root of this demand is an heretical disposition De Sacris
vernaculis.
.


Prot. Then I perceive in this, as well as in other things, you are more
careful to deceive people with pretenses, than to inform them. But indeed, you
tell me no more than I had read, or heard out of your own Authors. It was the
speech of your Pope Innocent, That the Mountain which the Beasts must not touch
is the high and holy Scriptures which the unlearned must not read Cap. cum ex
injuncta. Extra de haeres.
and your Doctors commonly affirm, that people must not be suffered to read the
Scriptures, because we must not give holy things to Dogs, nor cast Pearls
before swine.

My fourth General consideration against your Religion is this, That it grossly
contradicts the great designs and ends of the Christian Religion, which all
confess to be such as these, the glorifying of God, and his Son Jesus Christ,
and the humbling and abasing of men, the beating down of all sin, and the
promoting of serious holiness. Are not those the chief ends of Religion?


Pop. I do freely acknowledge they are, and our Religion does most answer these
ends.


Prot. That you and I will now try And for the first: Your Religion does highly
dishonor God sundry ways. What can be a greater dishonor to God, than to make
the holy Scriptures (which you confess to be the Word of God) to depend upon
the Testimony and Authority of your Pope, or Church, and to say, that the Word
of God is but a dead letter, and has no authority over us without their
Interpretation and Approbation; By which means malefactors (for such all men
are, Romans 3. 9, 10. your Pope not excepted) are made Judges of, and superior
to that Law whereby they are condemned. Tell me; would not the French King take
it for a great dishonor, if any of his Subjects should say, That his Edicts
and Decrees had no Authority over his People without their approbation?


Pop. Yes, doubtless he would.


Prot. Just so you deal with God: and what can be a fouler dishonor to God,
than that which your great Stapleton affirmed, and Gretser and others
justified, and your Church to this day have never disowned it: That the
Divinity of Christ and of God (in respect of us) depends upon the Authority of
the Pope? Triplicatio contra Whitak, c. 17.
And what more dishonorable to God than what your great Champion Bellarmine
says, That, if the Pope should err in forbidding Virtues (which God has
commanded) and commanding Vices (which God has forbidden); And that he may so
err, diverse of your most famous and approved Authors confess, See Nullity.
the Church were bound to believe Vices to be good, and Virtues bad, unless she
would sin against Conscience; De Pont. l. 4. c. 5.
that is, in plain terms, the Pope is to be obeyed before God. Again, is it not
highly dishonorable to God, to give the Worship which is proper to God, unto
the Creature? I confess the Prophet Isaiah has convinced me of it, Isa. 42, 8.
I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my glory will I not give to another,
neither my praise to graven Images.


Pop. I also am of the same mind; but it is a scandal of your Ministers, to say
we give Gods honor to the Creature: I know where about you are, you mean it of
Images, whereas we worship them with a lower kind of Worship.


Prot. You worship them with such a kind of worship, as neither Angels nor
Saints durst receive. Cornelius did not worship Peter with a Divine Worship as
God (for he knew he was but Gods Minister) yet Peter durst not receive it. It
was an inferior Worship which the Devil required of Christ, for he
acknowledges at the same time, God to be his Superior, and the giver of that
power he claims, Luke 4. 6. And yet that was the Worship, which Christ says
God has forbidden, to be given to any Creature. You are a valiant man, that
dare venture your immortal soul upon a nice School distinction. I pray you, do
you not worship the Bread in the Sacrament, with that worship which you call
Latria, which is proper to God?


Pop. We do so, and that upon very good reason, because it is not Bread, but
the very Body of Christ into which the Bread is turned.


Prot. But what if the Bread be not converted in Christ's Body: Is it not then
an high dishonor to God, and indeed damnable Idolatry?


Pop. Yes, our Fisher the famous Martyr and Bishop of Rochester, says, No man
can doubt, if there be nothing in the Eucharist but Bread, that the whole
Church has been guilty of Idolatry for a long time, and therefore must needs
be damned Roffensis contra Oecolampadiam, c. 2. fol. 3.
; but we are well assured, that it is no longer Bread; and yet I must add this;
If peradventure it should still remain Bread, yet for as much as we believe it,
to be the Body of our Lord, our ignorance, I hope, would excuse us from
Idolatry, and God would not impute it to us.


Prot. Tell me, I beseech you, Will all kind of ignorance excuse a man?


Pop. No certainly, There is a wilful and affected ignorance; which, because it
is against clear light, will not excuse.


Prot. Tell me farther, Did this excuse the Jews from their sin of crucifying
Christ, and the damnation due to it, that they did it ignorantly? Act. 3. 17.


Pop. No, because they shut their eyes against the plain light, and clear
evidence of that truth that Christ was the Messiah.


Prot. No less do you in the doctrine of the Sacrament; for they had no greater
evidences against them, than Sense, and Reason, and Scripture; all which you
reject, (as I shall prove by Gods help.) And as your Religion dishonours God,
so does it also highly dishonor Jesus Christ whom he has sent, who is
expressly called the one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5. But you have conferred that
honor upon many others, Saints and Angels.


Pop. True, there is but one chief Mediator, but there may be other secondary
Mediators.


Prot. In like manner, to that which the Apostle there says, there is but one
God; it might be said, there are other secondary gods, and so we might
introduce the Heathen gods into the Church. It is the great Prerogative of
Jesus Christ, that he is the Redeemer of the World; yet your Bellarmine was not
afraid to communicate this honor to the creature, and expressly says, It is
not absurd, that holy men be called our Redeemers after a sort De
indulgentiis, cap. 4. sub finem.
, and more of the like stuff we shall meet with before we part: yet again, your
Religion as it depresseth God, so it exalts the creature. I will instance but
in one thing, and that is your Doctrine of Justification by the merit of good
works: A doctrine, which S. Paul affirms, gives unto a man matter of boasting
and glorying, Romans 3. 27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded, By what Law?
of Works? Nay, but by the Law of Faith, and Romans 4. 2. For if Abraham were
justified by works, he has whereof to glory. Next, you grant, That it is the
great design and intent of Religion, to discourage and beat down sin, which
your Religion does exceedingly encourage by your Doctrines and Practice in
Absolutions and Indulgences. In my acquaintance, I have known several Papists
that have wonderfully encouraged themselves in their wicked ways from this
consideration; especially when Easter drew near, because they knew they should
very suddenly be shriven, and absolved, and be (as they said) as sound and
clean as when they came first into the world. I have known also diverse of our
loose Protestants that have turned to your Religion, that they might have
greater liberty for, and the security in sin; and in my Conscience, If I would
let my lusts choose a Religion for me, they would presently lead me to your
Religion: And so again, your Religion does not at all promote serious holiness,
but the soul and spirit of it is dwindled away into mere formality: What can be
of more pestilent consequence to true holiness than to tell a man, that the
saying so many Pater-Nosters, or Ave-Maries, (though it may be he is talking,
or gazing about in the midst of his Devotions) will procure him acceptance with
God? Is it true, that your great and devout Doctor Suarez says, That is it not
essential to Prayer, that a man should think of what he says?


Pop. It is true, he does say so in his Book of Prayer.


Prot. Then I confess, your Religion has the advantage of ours, for a man may
do two businesses at once: It has set me much against your Religion, since I
understood that you turned that great Doctrine of Repentance into a mere
formality: What a sad Doctrine is it that your great Masters teach, that
Repentance is not necessary at all times, but only on Holy Days, (as some of
your Authors say) only once in a year, that is, at Easter (as others.) Nay
indeed, once in all his life, and that in danger of death (as Navar, and
Cajetan)? what an encouragement is this to wickedness, to tell men that a
thousand of their sins are venial, which though not repented of, will not
exclude them from the favor of God, and from Salvation; but I will rake no
farther into this kennel.

I think this may serve turn, to let you see, that I had warrant to say, That
your Religion contradicts the design, and end of all Religion.

V. The fifth Consideration that sets me against your Religion, is the
desperate issues that you are driven to in the defense of your Cause; as for
example, in the great point of Infallibility, I observe your learned Doctors
are beaten out of all their former Assertions and Opinions; you have been
driven from Scripture to the Fathers, from them to the Pope, from him to a
Council, and thence to the Pope with a Council, and (as a further sign of a
desperate cause) the Jesuits are brought to that exigence, that they are forced
to affirm the Pope to be infallible in matters of fact, which is confessedly a
new, upstart, and indeed, monstrous Opinion; and yet those piercing wits see
their cause cannot be defended without it: and others seeing the vanity of all
their former pretenses, have been forced to resolve all into the present
Churches testimony. See Nullity, Chap 5.
So for the point of Idolatry, you are driven to those straits, that you cannot
excuse your selves from Idolatry, but by such pretenses as will excuse both
Jewish and Gentile Idolaters; and one of your ablest Champions is brought to
this plunge, that he is forced to affirm, that some Idolatry is lawful Greg. de
Valentia.
: I might instance in very many others, but I forbear.

VI. A sixth consideration is taken from the partiality of your Religion; That
Religion which is from God, is doubtless agreeable to the Nature and Will of
God. But so is not your Religion, for it is guilty of that respect of persons
which Scripture every where denies to be in God, Act. 10. 34. Romans 2. 11. Job
34. 19.


Pop. How is our Religion guilty of respect of persons?


Prot. I might show it in many things, but I will confine my self to one
particular; and that is, in point of Indulgences: The Souls of all that die in
venial sins, are doomed to those terrible pains of Purgatory, there to continue
none knows how long (by the way, I cannot but take notice of the great
unhappiness of those Christians, that lived and died in the days of Christ and
the Apostles, that have been multitudes of them frying in Purgatory to this
day, and are like to be so as long as the World lasts; whereas those that live
nearer the end of the World, must needs have a far shorter abode there, so men
are punished with continuance of their torments, merely for the circumstance of
time of their birth; but this is not the thing I aim at,) from these pains of
Purgatory, there is no way to deliver a man but by indulgences; and these
indulgences must be bought off with money, and wealthy men may buy off those
corporal pains, (which the rascal herd must suffer without bail or main-prise)
and turn them into a fine of the purse. So I see it was not without reason,
that Solomon said, Money answers all things. I have heard that your tax of the
Apostolical Chancery (put forth by the Authority of your Church, where there is
a price put upon all indulgences, and upon all kinds of sins) has this
expression, Diligently note, that these graces (of Indulgences) are not given
to the Poor, because they are not, and therefore cannot be comforted Diligenter
nota quod eujusmodi gratia* non dantur. pauperibus, quia non sunt, ideo non
possunt consolari. Taxa Cancellariae Apostolicae. Tit. De Matrimoniali.
; by which I see, that if St. Peter himself should rise from the dead, and come
to his Successor, with his old tone, Silver and Gold have I none, if he were a
thousand Peter's, he must into Purgatory without mercy. I am told that another
of your Authors, Augustinus de Ancona, an Author of great note with you, tells
us, that Indulgences are for the relief of the Churches (that, is the Popes,
and their Prelates) Indigencies, which Nam Indulgentiae fiunt ad relevandam
indigentiam Ecclesiae, quae non relevatur per solam voluntatem dandi, sed per
datum. De Potestate Papoe, quest. 30. art. 3.
is not relieved by a willingness to give (which is all that any poor man can
pretend to) but by the gift it self. (It seems your Church is not of Gods
mind; for, if there be a willing mind, he accepts it for the deed, 2 Cor. 8.
12.) And a little after (as I am told) he says, as to the remission of
punishment which is procured by indulgences, in that case it is not
inconvenient, that the rich is in a better condition than the poor, for there
it is not said, come and buy without money Quantum ad remissionem poenae quae
acquiritur per indulgentiam, in tali causa non est inconveniens quod dives, sit
melioris conditionis quam pauper* Ibi enim non dicitur, Venite and emite
sine,pecunia. Ibid.
. I confess that were a dangerous speech, and would utterly undo all the
Church of Rome. It is sufficient that Isaiah once said it, and Christ again,
come and drink freely. People should have been wise, and taken them at their
word, for they are never like to hear it a third time. Is this true?


Pop. They do indeed say so; and the practice of our Church manifests to all
the world, that Indulgences are sold for money, and the condition of the rich,
in that, is better than the poor. But what great matter is that, as to the
Pardon of Sin, and eternal Life, or Death, both rich and poor are alike. This
difference is only as to the pains of Purgatory.


Prot. Is that nothing to you? you speak against your own, and all men's sense:
we see how highly men esteem to be freed from a painful, though short, disease
here; how much more to be freed from such pains as you all confess to be
unspeakably more sharp and grievous, than all the pains that ever were endured
in this world: It is so considerable a thing, that I assure you, it is to me
matter of wonder (if Christ and the Apostles had been of your mind) how it
came to pass so unluckily, that the poor only should receive the Gospel;
whereas, if the men of that Age had not been all Fools, the rich would have
been most forward to entertain it.

VII. But to proceed. My seventh Consideration against your Religion is taken
from its great hazard, and utter uncertainty. According to the doctrine of your
Church, no man can be sure of his salvation (without a revelation) but he must
go out of the world, not knowing whether he goes. Indeed there is nothing but
hazard and uncertainty in your Religion; I suppose you grant that all your
Faith, and consequently your salvation depends upon the infallible Authority of
your Church.


Pop. That is most certain.


Prot. Are you then infallibly certain, that your Church is infallible, or do
you only probably believe it?


Pop. I am but a private Priest, and therefore cannot pretend to Infallibility;
but I am fully satisfied in it, that the Church is infallible in it self.


Prot. Then I see you pretend to no more certainty than I have; for I know (and
you grant) that the Scripture is infallible in it self: and I know its
infallibility as certainly as you know the infallibility of your Church. But, I
pray you tell me, what is your opinion? I know your are divided: but where do
you place the infallibility, or where do you lay the foundation of your Faith?


Pop. To deal freely with you, I place it in the Pope; who when he determines
things out of his Chair, is infallible: for S. Peter who was supreme Head of
the Church, left the Pope his Successor.


Prot. Then it seems your Faith does wholly depend on these things, that Saint
Peter was Bishop of Rome, and died there, and that he left the Pope his
successor in his supreme and infallible Authority.


Pop. It does so.


Prot. How then are you infallibly assured of the truth of these things, which
are all matters of Fact?


Pop. Because they are affirmed by so many of the Ancient Fathers and Writers.


Prot. Were those Fathers or Writers infallible persons?


Pop. No.


Prot. Then might they, and so may you, be mistaken in that point; and so
indeed you have nothing but a mere conjecture for the foundation of your Faith.
But again, are you infallibly sure, that Saint Peter's intention was to leave
his Infallibility to the Pope? For I do not read that S. Peter left it in his
last will. I tell you true it is strange to me, that St. Peter should write two
Catholic Epistles, and (as I observed before) not leave one word concerning
this matter. For my part I shall always rather question the Popes Authority,
than S. Peter's fidelity or discretion, in omitting so Fundamental a Point when
he put in many of far less concernment. But further, I demand, How are you
assured that St. Peter intended to leave his power, and did actually leave it
to his Successors?


Pop. By the unanimous consent of the Ancient Fathers.


Prot. I wonder at your confidence, that you dare affirm a thing which our
Authors Maulin, Reinolds against Heart, and others.
have so clearly proved to be false. But suppose it were so, that the Fathers
had said it; tell me, are the Fathers infallible? at least are they so in their
reports of matter of Fact?


Pop. No: we confess that it is only the Pope or Council that are infallible,
not the Fathers; and to be true to you, even the Pope himself is not infallible
in his Reports of matters of Fact.


Prot. Then you have nothing but a mere conjecture, or historical Report
delivered by men, liable to mistake, for the great foundation of your Faith.
Yet once more, have you any greater or better certainty for your Faith than the
Pope himself.


Pop. God forbid I should be so impud^nt or wicked to say so; for my Faith
depends upon his certainty.


Prot. Very well, How I beseech you is the Pope assured? what is it that makes
him infallibly certain of his own Infallibility? Is he assured of (...)
Revelat^on?


Pop. No (as I have told you often) we pretend to no such things.


Prot. How then?


Pop. By the Spirit of God which guides him into all truth.


Prot. How is he assured that the Spirit of God guides him?


Pop. By the promises God has made to him; I need not repeat them, they are
known already, Thou are Peter, etc. Simon, Simon, I have prayed that thy Faith
fail not, etc.


Prot. I have already shown how absurdly these Texts are alleged. But I
beseech you, how is the Pope infallibly assured that this is the true meaning
of those Texts? You confess it is not by inspiration.


Pop. He knows that, by considering and comparing Scripture with Scripture, and
by consulting the Fathers, and Prayer, Diligence, and Obedience, etc.


Prot. All these things are very good, but any other man may use these means as
well as the Pope, and has as full promises from God, as any the Pope pretends
to as Ioh. 7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God; and the Spirit of Truth is promised to all that ask it,
Luke 11. 13. So if this be all you have to say, God deliver my soul from such a
desperate Religion, wherein all the certainty of its Faith depends upon his
infallibility, that is not certain of his own infallibility.

But I need say no more of this; It is to me an undeniable argument, that there
is no certainty at all in this foundation; because (as you confess) so many
hundreds of your ablest Scholars do utterly reject it. But once more, in my
opinion you run a dreadful hazard in the point of worshipping of Creaturers,
Images, Saints, and especially the Bread in the Sacrament, in which you run
other hazards besides those I spoke of. I am told, that your Doctrine is this,
That it is necessary to the making of a Sacrament (and so to the conversion of
the Bread into Christ's Body) that the Priest intend to consecrate it. Is it so?


Pop. Yes doubtless, Bellarmine and all our Authors largely dispute for that.


Prot. And can I be sure of another man's intentions? It is sufficiently known,
that diverse of your Priests are profane, and atheistical wretches, others
envious and malicious, and some actually Jews. What assurance have I, that my
Priest is not such an one, and that he does not either out of a contempt or
hatred of Religion or malice against my person, intend to deceive me, and not
make a Sacrament of it? Sure I am, they intend to deceive their people in the
preaching of the Word, and why they may not do so in the Administration of the
Sacrament, I know not.

VIII. My eighth and last general consideration is this, that your Religion
destroys even the principles of morality: which true Religion is so far from
destroying, that it improves and perfects it. I confess, the bloodiness of your
Religion has ever made me both suspect and loath it. I find that Christ is a
Prince of peace; though he whipped some out of the Temple yet he never whipped any
into his Church; that he drew in his Disciples with the cords of a man, of
conviction and persuasion; and so did his Apostles after him: but your Religion
(like Draco's laws) is written in blood. I perceive you answer our Arguments
with Fire and Faggot: besides this, your Religion destroys all civil Faith and
Society; your principle is known, and so is your practice of equivocation, and
keeping no faith with Heretics.


Pop. I know where you are, you mean because of John Husse who after he had the
faith of the Emperor given him for his safe Conduct, was contrary to that
faith put to death in the Council of Constance.


Prot. I do so, and what can you say for it?


Pop. This I say you must not charge upon our Church, the opinion of some few
private Doctors, since others disown this, and have written against it.


Prot. It seems it is a disputable point among you, whether you ought to be
honest or not: but I have heard that John Husse was condemned by the Council of
Constance, and that when the Emperor scrupled to break his Faith, they
declared he might do it, and ought to do it. Is it so?


Pop. It is true, what was done in that point; was done by the Council.


Prot. And you hold Councils (especially where the Pope joins with them as he
did with that Council) to be infallible; and therefore this I may confidently
charge upon you as a Principle of your Religion. I cannot but observe your fine
devices: At other times when we allege passages out of any of your learned
Doctors which make against you, you tell us they are but private Doctors, and
we must judge of you by your Councils. Now here we bring an approved Councils
testimony, and you send us back to your private Doctors.


Pop. These discourses of yours are only general; I had rather you would come
to the other thing you proposed, viz. to examine the particular points of our
Religion, wherein I hope I shall give you such solid grounds and reasons, that
when you shall understand them, you will embrace them.


Prot. You shall find me ingenuous and docible, only remember I expect not
words, but solid Arguments. I think our best course will be to pick out some
principal points of your Religion, and examine them; for the rest will either
stand or fall as they do.


Pop. I am perfectly of your mind, let us proceed accordingly.


Prot. First then, if you please, we will begin with the sacrifice of the Mass,
which you say is essential to the Christian Religion.


Pop. It is so, and Bellarmine rightly says, that where there is no sacrifice
( as you Protestants have none) there is in truth no Religion.


Prot. Therefore, I pray you, let me hear one or two (for those are as good as
an hundred) of your chief grounds and reasons for that Sacrifice.


Pop. I approve your motion, and I shall only insist upon two Arguments: First,
the Sacrifice of the Mass was appointed by God, or Christ, in the words of
Institution of the Sacrament, do this in remembrance of me. It is the great
Argument of the Council of Trent Ses. 22. cap. 9. Can. 2, 3,
.


Prot. I adore the fruitfulness of your Churches Invention. It seems they think
these two words, do this, contain no less than two of your Sacraments, to wit,
that of Orders, which makes Priests, and that of the Supper.


Pop. They do so.


Prot. That, no sober man will easily believe; nor that Christ's meaning in the
words mentioned was this, Sacrifice me in remembrance of me. But let me hear
how you prove the Institution of the Mass from these words.


Pop. Christ bid his Disciples, do this, viz. that which he did: Christ did in
that last Supper truly and properly offer up himself to his Father, his Body
under the shape of Bread, his Blood under the shape of Wine; and therefore they
were truly and properly to offer up, or Sacrifice Christ in the Sacrament. The
Argument is Bellarmin's De Missa. l. 6. 1. 12. Sextum.
.


Prot. How do you prove that Christ did in that last Supper truly and properly
offer up his Body and Blood to his Father? I read that Christ offered himself
but once, Heb. 8. 27. and 9. 25, 26, 27, 28. and 10. 14. and that was upon the
Cross; nor do I find that he offered any thing at all to God in that Supper,
but only to his Apostles: And what, did Christ Sacrifice himself, and imbrue
his hands in his own Blood; and did he eat up his own Body? did he take his
whole Body into his Mouth? these are Monsters of Opinions: But how prove you
that Christ did then offer up himself to God?


Pop. Because Christ speaks in the present tense, This is my Body which is
broken, Blood which is shed: he does not say which shall be broken, and shed;
and therefore it must be broken and shed at that very time.


Prot. What a vain Argumet is this? you know nothing is more usual in Scripture
than to put the Present Tense for the Future. Christ says, I do lay down my
life when he means, I will do it shortly, John 10. 15. I do go to my Father,
John 16. 28. that is, I shall go shortly: Do that thou do, that is, art about
to do, John 13. 27. And in Mat. 26. Christ says of his Blood, This is my Blood
which is shed for many for the remission of sins; and yet I suppose it was not
shed at that time; for you all profess the Sacrifice of the Mass is an unbloody
Sacrifice: But again, tell me, I pray you, when Christ said, do this, did they
not obey Christ's command at that Supper?


Pop. I cannot deny that.


Prot. Thence unavoidably follows, that this doing concerns the Communicants,
as well as (if not more than) the Minister; and so it is not meant of
Sacrificing Christ, but receiving of him; and really, if this Text do not,
there is no other which does, enjoin Communicants to receive; which he that can
believe, has got a good mastery over his Faith: Besides, what Christ here
commands his Apostles, I find St. Paul commands the Corinthians, and expounds
doing this by eating and drinking, 1 Cor. 11. And moreover, if the words do
this, were the words which did ordain both Priest and Sacrifice, who can think
that two of the Evangelists, viz. both Matthew and Mark would have omitted them
in mentioning the words of Institution; and therefore this may pass. I shall
only add, that if our Divines should prove their Doctrines no better than by
such wrested Scriptures and Arguments as this, we should hiss them out of the
Pulpit: but I suppose you have some better Argument, therefore let me hear it.


Pop. Consider then that irresistible Argument, Christ is a Priest, after the
order of Melchisedeck. Now Melchisedeck did offer up a Sacrifice of Bread and
Wine to God, Genesis 14. and thefore Christ was bound in agreement with this Type,
to offer up such a Sacrifice, even his Body and blood, under the species of
Bread and Wine.


Prot. You tell me Melchisedeck offered up Bread and Wine to God; I find no
such matter: it is only a dream of your own. The History is, Genesis 14. where
indeed I read of his offering Bread and Wine to Abraham and his Soldiers, to
refresh them (according to the custom of those times and places,) Deuteronomy. 23. 3,
4. and Judges 8. 6. but not a word of any offering to God. It is the strangest
relation of a Sacrifice that ever was; here is not one word of the Altar, or
Offering, or Consecration, or the Destruction of the Sacrifice. You grant the
thing sacrificed must be destroyed when it is sacrificed; I pray you how is
this bread destroyed (save only by the Soldiers mouths, which you say came
after the Sacrifice?)


Pop. The bread possibly was destroyed by putting it in the furnace, and the
Wine sprinkled upon the furnace, as Vasquez answers In part. 3. Tho^^e tom. 3.
q. 83. dis. 220. art. 1. c. 3.
.


Prot. I see it was otherwise in those days than now it is. If I thought my
Bread would be destroyed by putting it into the Oven, I assure you, I would
never put it in.


Pop. It must be a Sacrifice that is there related; for it follows, And he was
the Priest of the most High God.


Prot. Not at all; for his being Priest evidently relates to that which
follows, and he blessed him, and received Tithes of all: Besides, if
Melchisedeck did here offer a Sacrifice, was Jesus Christ obliged to offer the
same kind of Sacrifice that he did? for Christ was to offer up himself, Heb. 9.
10. (which none of his Types did.) Tell me first, Was Melchisedeck a Type of
Christ in that action of eating Bread and Wine?


Pop. Yes doubtless, and this was the principal thing, in respect of which
Christ is called a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, or else I say
nothing.


Prot. Then tell me, how can any man in his wits, believe that St. Paul, who
spends so much of his Epistle to the Hebrews; in comparing Christ and
Melchisedeck, and their Priesthood together; and who picks up the very smallest
circumstances, as that he was without father, etc. Should not speak one word of
this, which (if you say true) was the principal thing? Besides all this, If
Melchisedeck was a type of Christ in that action, Did Christ offer Bread and
Wine as Melchisedeck did?


Pop. No, but he offered his own Body and Blood under the appearance of Bread
and Wine.


Prot. Nay, now I see there is no possibility of pleasing you; for I expected
this all along, that Christ must needs have offered the same kind of Sacrifice
that Melchisedeck did here: But now you forsake your own argument, and because
Melchisedeck did offer Bread and Wine, Christ must not offer Bread and Wine,
but something else under those appearances. Now I have heard your two
principial Arguments, I hope you will hear mine also.


Pop. Good reason I should do so.


Prot. Then first, I argue thus, The Sacrifice of Christ was perfect, and did
perfect all Believers, Heb. 10. 14. and therefore it need not, and ought not to
be repeated, for the Apostle proves the imperfection of Levitical Sacrifices,
because they were repeated, Heb. 10. 1, 2. Where remission of sin is, there is
no more offering for sin, Heb. 10. 18. Either then remission was not obtained
by his once offering, or there must be no more offering; either Christ's
offering upon the Cross was insufficient, or yours in the Mass is unnecessary.


Pop. It is not properly repeated, for it is the same Sacrifice, for substance,
which was offered upon the Cross, and is offered in the Mass Cornelius a Lapide
in Heb. 7. 28.
.


Prot. How is it of the same kind, when you say, the one is bloody, the other
unbloody; the one offered by Christ, the other by a Priest; but if it were of
the same kind, so were the Levitical Sacrifices, and all had relation to Christ
(as you pretend all Masses have) and yet the Apostle makes their Repetition an
evidence of their Imperfection, Heb. 9. 10. And moreover, the Apostle denies
not only the repetition of other Sacrifices, but also of the same Sacrifice,
and tells us as plainly (as man can speak) that Christ was to offer up himself
but once, Heb. 9. 25, etc. whereas you will needs overruled the Apostle, and
force Christ to offer up himself thousands of times*


Pop. It is true, there is but one Sacrifice of Redemption, and Expiation for
Sin, and that was the Sacrifice of the Cross; but there are other Sacrifices of
Application to apply that to us.


Prot. I hope the Word, and Sacraments, and Spirit of Christ, are sufficient to
apply Christ's Sacrifice; must we have one Sacrifice to apply another? who ever
heard of one plaster made to apply another? or a ransom paid the second time
to apply the former payment? And you seem to me quite to forget your selves, to
destroy the nature of your Sacrifice: for the business of a Sacrifice is
oblation to God, not application to men. Besides, I have one Argument more
which fully satisfies me; if the Mass be a real and proper Sacrifice, then the
thing sacrificed must be really and properly destroyed?


Pop. That I readily grant, as Bellarmin Sacrificium verum and reale veram and
realem occisionem exigit. Bell. de Missa, l. 1. c. 27. Denique vel in Missa.
also does, and indeed so it was in all the Sacrifices that ever were offered to
God.


Prot. But surely Jesus Christ is not destroyed in the Mass: Is he? And are
your Priests the murderers of Christ?


Pop. He is not so destroyed, for we tell you, it is an unbloody Sacrifice; yet
he is in a manner destroyed by the Priest's eating of him: for thereby Christ
cease to be where he was before, that is, in the species of Bread and Wine,
and the Bread and Wine are destroyed.


Prot. Call you this a destruction, for one to remove from one place to
another, or to cease to be where he was before? this is ridiculous; and yet
this Ibid.
fantastical and mock-destruction is all which you can bring, instead of that
real destruction, which you confess necessary to the very essence of a
Sacrifice. And as for the Bread and Wine they were destroyed by
Transubstantiation, not by the Oblation or Sacrifice which comes after it.

And now having mentioned that, let us discourse concerning your Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. And first, tell me what is the Doctrine of your Church?


Pop. That the Council of Trent will inform you, which declares, that by
Consecration the whole substance of the Bread and Wine is converted into the
substance of the Body and Blood of Christ Sess. 13. de Eucharist. cap. 4.



Prot. How is it possible for the Bread to be converted into Christ's Body,
which was made already before the Bread? That Christ could turn Water into Wine
was possible, but that he should turn that Water into such Wine as was in being
before that change, this is impossible: but let that go: My next question is,
if a Christian did actually receive Christ's Body and Blood, tell me, what
profit has he by it? I cannot believe that God would work so many Miracles (as
you affirm he does in this Sacrament) to no purpose: Scripture and Reason tells
me, and your Council of Trent confesses Sess. 13. cap. 2.
, that the Sacrament is a feast for my Soul, and not for my Body. Is it not so?
Now, what is my Soul the better for eating the very Body of Christ? When the
woman cried out to our Savior, Luke 11. 27, 28.
Blessed is the womb that thee; Christ replies, Yea, rather, Blessed are they
that hear Gods Words, and do it: nevertheless, if you can solidly prove it, I
will receive it; therefore bring forth your Principal Arguments for it.


Pop. I will do so, and our Church proves this point, especially, from two
places of Scripture, John 6. and the words of Institution. I begin with the
sixth Chapter of John, where our Savior often tells us, that the Bread which he
gives is his flesh, etc.


Prot. I have heard, that diverse of your learned Doctors confess this Chapter
speaks not of the Sacrament: Is it so?


Pop. I will not dissemble with you. That was the opinion of Biel In Canone
Missae.
, Cardinal Cusanus Ep. 7. ad Bohemos.
, Cajetan, In Aquin par. 3. qu. 80. art. 8.
, and Tapperus Artic. Lovan. 15.
, and diverse others.


Prot. Certainly, This Argument is not likely to convince a Protestant which
could not satisfy your own ablest Scholars. But I will not press that
farther. Tell me then, do you judge that Christ speaks here of a bodily eating
and drinking of his very Flesh and Blood?


Pop. We do so.


Prot. I confess some of the Ancient; were of your mind, I mean the Jews. But
with submission, I am rather of Christ's Opinion, who plainly destroys that
gross and carnal sense, telling them, it is the Spirit that quickneth, the
Flesh profits nothing, verse. 63. Again, does not Christ press this as a
necessary, and present duty, upon all the Jews that then heard him?


Pop. That must be granted.


Prot. Then certainly Christ speaks not of the Sacrament which was not then
instituted, and therefore they could not partake of it. I demand further, is
this Sacrament of such efficacy, that all that receive it are saved; and of
such necessity, that all that do not take it are damned?


Pop. No, our Church utterly condemns both those Opinions.


Port: But this eating of Christ's Flesh is such, that Christ says, all that
eat it are saved, v. 24. and all that do not eat it are damned, v. 53.
Therefore surely he speaks not of a Sacramental eating: besides the whole Laity
are utterly undone, if your sense of this Chapter be true; for I find that
drinking of Christ's Blood is no less necessary to life eternal, than eating of
his Flesh; and therefore woe to them to whom you do not allow to drink of the
Cup in the Sacrament. I am told this objection is so considerable, that it
forced diverse of your Doctors (sore against their will) to forsake this
Argument; and therefore this will not do your work: but I presume you have
better Arguments.


Pop. We have so. I shall urge but one, which is of its self sufficient, from
the plain words of Institution, This is my Body. Methinks the very hearing of
them read, should convince you, if you would take the words in their plain and
proper sense, and not devise I know not what Figures and Tropes.


Prot. If it were true that Christ did turn the Bread into his Body by saying
these words, This is my Body, yet how does it follow, that the Priest by
reciting these words, works the same effect, any more than a Priest, every
time he reads those words, Let there be light, does make light; because God did
make it by those words: or than he raises a dead man, every time he reads
those words of Christ, Lazarus, come forth. Moreover, I have heard that diverse
of your most learned Doctors confess, that this place does not, nor indeed, any
other place of Scripture, prove Transubstantiation. I have heard three
Cardinals named, viz. Cajetan In 3. Thomae qu. 75. art. 1.
and our Bishop of Rochester Contra Captiv. Babyl. cap. 10.
and Cameracensis In 4. Sentent. qu. 6. lit. f.
, and diverse famous Schoolmen, as Scotus and Biel, of whom this is known, and
Durandus In 4. Distinc. 11. q 4. art. 14.
, and Ocham In 4. q. 6.
, and Melchior Canus Loc. com. l 3. c. 3.
, and Vasquez Tom. 3. in 3. dis. 180. c. 5.
, and the great Cardinal Perron professes, that he believes
Transubstantiation, not by virtue of any necessary consequence, or reason,
alleged by their Doctors; but by the words of Christ, as they are expounded by
Tradition Traitie p. 793.
: and Bellarmin himself confesses, This opinion is not improbable De Euchar.
l. 3. c. 23.
. Methinks so many learned men's forsaking this Argument (who doubtless would
have been right glad if it had been solid, and employed all their wits to
search out the strength of it) is to me a convincing evidence of its weakness
and vanity, as also of the badness of your Cause, that can find no better
Argument; yet I am willing to hear what you can say.


Pop. This then I say, that these words, This is my Body, are to be taken in
their proper, and not in a figurative sense: for surely Christ would speak
plainly to the understanding of his Disciples, especially when he was so near
his Death, and making his last Will and Testament, and instituting the
Sacrament; in such cases men use to speek plainly.


Prot. I readily grant that Christ did speak plainly and intelligibly: But tell
me, is not that plain enough, when we take the words as they are commonly used
in Scripture?


Pop. I must needs grant that; but this is not the Present case.


Prot. But it is; for we can give you scores of instances, as you very well
know where the word Is, is so taken: nor is any thing more frequent in
Scripture, the seven kine, and so the seven ears of corn, are seven years, Genesis
4. 12, 18. the Stars are the Angels of the Churches, Rev. 1. 20. the seven
heads are seven Mountains, Rev. 17. 9. So Christ says, I AM the way, the door,
etc. So Zach. 5. 7, 8. This woman is wickedness; and a thousand such
expressions. How do you understand these places?


Pop. The sense is plain, they signify those things; the Stars signify the
Angels, and so for the rest.


Prot. Then certainly we have the advantage of you in this point, for we take
is for signifies, (as you confess it is commonly taken) nor have the Jews (as I
have been assured by learned men) any proper word for signify (as the Greeks
and Lutines have) but generally express it in this manner: But you must take it
(if the Particle this denote the Bread, as I shall plainly prove it does) for
is converted into; a sense which you cannot give one example of in all
Scripture. I see it was not without reason that you took the interpretation of
Scripture into the Churches hands* for if you had left it in Gods hands, and
left one Scripture to do that friendly office to expound another, you had
certainly lost an Article of your Faith: And whereas you say that Christ would
speak so as the Disciples might understand him, that sufficiently shows, that
yours is not the true sense; for they could never have understood it, and would
doubtless have been as much puzzled then, as all the World now is, to apprehend
that the body of Christ was contained under the species of Bread and Wine,
invisibly and undiscoverably, after the manner of a Spirit, to conceive of a
body without bigness, long without length, broad without breadth, broken
whilst it remains whole (all which you profess to believe.) This is to turn
Christ's plain speech into a bundle of Riddles; and to call this the plain sense
of the words which is (as you see) a heap of Figures, is a greater figure than
all the rest; but they did well enough understand the words in our sense,
because they were well read in Scripture, wherein, as you grant, that sense of
the words is usual.


Pop. If we grant it is used so in other cases, yet not in Sacramental Texts,
for there Christ would speak properly.


Prot. Yes, It is usual even in the Sacraments; Is not Circumcision called the
Covenant? This is my Covenant, Genesis 17. 10. though proprerly it was not the
Covenant, but the Seal of it, Romans 4. 11. Is not the Lamb called the Lords
Passover? Exodus 12. though all men knew it was not the Lamb, nor the ceremony
of eating it, which was or could be properly the Lords passing over the houses
of the Israelites; thus 1 Cor. 10. The Rock (that followed the Israelites) is
Christ, though it was so only Figuratively and Sacramentally. Moreover, I am
told, that diverse of your own brethren acknowledge figures here. Tapperus
says, It is not inconvenient to admit of Tropes here, provided they be such as
do not exclude the true presence of Christ's body Artic. Lovan, 13.
. And that the Bishop of Eureux owns three Figures in the words of this
Sacrament Repet. 3. c. 3.
; and that Suarez In Tom. 3. dis. 60. sect. 2.
, Bellarmine De Eucharistia, l. 1. c. 11.
, and diverse others confess as much.


Pop. It is true, they do say so.


Prot. Besides, you cannot think strange, if there be Figures in the first
part, This is my Body, since it is most apparent there are Figures in the last
part, This is the New Testament in my blood. Here are not one, but diverse
Figures in it. The Cup you grant is taken for the liquor in it, there is one
figure: The Wine in the Cup is taken for the Blood, which was not in the Cup;
there is a strange figure indeed (Logicians call it Nonsense.) This Cup, or
Wine, or Blood (if you please) is the New Testament or Covenant; whereas it was
only the Seal of the New Testament, as is most manifest, because it is called,
The Blood of the New Testament, and the New Testament in my Blood. Besides
other strange figures, which I shall have occasion to speak to by and by. Here
is figure upon figure, and yet you have the impudence to reproach us for
putting in but one figure, which you confess to be very frequent. Wonder O
Heavens, and judge O Earth, whether these men do not strain at Gnats, and
swallow Camels! And nothing does more confirm the truth in this point, than to
consider into what absurdities this Doctrine has forced you, even to say, that
the Blood of Christ is properly the Covenant or Testament Bell. de Euch. l. 1.
c. 11.
: And that there are two sorts of Christ's Blood, the one in the Cup, the other
shed on the Cross De Euch. l. 1. c. 11. Ad quartam dico.
: And that the Blood of Christ is shed in the Sacrament, and yet never stirs
out of the veins: Did ever God or man speak of such bloodshed? therefore for
shame never charge us with understanding this Text figuratively. But again, let
me ask you, Will you affirm that these words, This is my body, are to be taken
properly? Does your Church understand them so?


Pop. Yes surely, or else we do ill to reproach you for taking them improperly.


Prot. The words are not true in a proper sense, nor indeed do you understand
them so.


Pop. Make that good, and I must give up this cause for ever.


Prot. First, for the word this, it is most evident that it is meant of Bread:
It is impossible for words to express any thing more plainly, than that by
this, is meant the Bread. It is said expressly, that Christ took Bread and brake
it, and gave it, and said, Take eat, THIS is my Body. Where this necessarily
relates to that which Christ, took, and brake, and gave. After Christ came the
Apostles, and particularly Saint Paul, and he expounds the mind of Christ (and
I hope you do not think he was so bad an Expositor, that his Comment was harder
than the Text) and he tells us thrice in a breath that it is Bread, 1 Cor. 11.
26. As often as you eat this Bread, and whosoever shall eat this Bread, and so
let him eat of that Bread. And again, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Bread which we break,
is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? And the participation of the
Sacrament is called, breaking of Bread, Acts 2. 46. and 20. 7. which your
Authors undertand of the Sacrament: and besides this, whatever it is, is
broken, as it follows; but you dare not say, Christ's Body is broken. Now then,
since it is most evident, that this is meant of the Bread, I hope, you will not
say, this is properly Christ's Body.


Pop. No: We are not so absurd to say, this Bread is Christ's body, for that is
false and against common sense as Bellarmine well says De Eucharist, l. 3. c.
19.
.


Prot. What then do you mean by the word this?


Pop. By This, I understand neither the Bread nor Christ's Body, but in general
this substance which is contained under this species Bellarm. de Eucharist. l.
3. c. 19.
.


Prot. What do you mean by that? I pray you tell me, Do you believe that there
are any more substances under those species, besides the Bread first, and
afterward the Body of Christ? Do not you profess, that as soon as ever it
cease to be Bread, it becomes the Body of Christ?


Pop. We do so.


Prot. Then surely if it be a substance, according to you, it must be either
Bread, or the Body of Christ; but you allow it to be neither, and therefore it
is no substance at all. In the next place, for the word is, I have showed, you
do not understand that properly neither: but for the word Body also, do you
understand that properly?


Pop. Yes without doubt.


Prot. I am told that your Church professes to believe that Christ's body is
there after the manner of a spirit, taking up no room; that head, hands, feet,
are altogether in the least crumb of the Host. Is this true?


Pop. Yes, we all agree in that.


Prot. Then sure I am, the word Body is most improperly taken: A learned man
well observes, that you plead for the propriety of words, and destroy the
propriety of things; 1 Place de la mess.
How can you say that it is properly a body, which wants the essential property
of a body; which is, to have quantity and take up room: Take away this, and the
body may be properly a spirit; for it is that only which differenceth it from a
spirit: So now I see you neither do, nor can understand these words properly;
and upon the whole matter that this Doctrine is false, and your Proofs most
weak and frivolous, you shall see that I have better arguments against your
Doctrine than you have for it.


Pop. I pray you let me hear them, but be brief in them.


Prot. I have only three Arguments, your Doctrine is against Sense, against
Reason, and against Scripture.


Pop. Let me see how you will make these things good?


Prot. For the first I ask you, if I am as sure that your Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is false, as you are sure that the Christian Religion is
true; will you desire more evidence?


Pop. If I should, I were an unreasonable person.


Prot. And have you any greater assurance now of the truth of the Christian
Religion, than you could have had, if you had lived in Christ's days?


Pop. That were impudence to affirm: but what do you mean?


Prot. If you had lived then, what greater evidence could you have had of it,
than what your senses afforded; for since the great Argument for Christianity
(as all agree) was the words that Christ spoke and the works that Christ did;
how could you be sure that he did so speak, or so work, if you may not credit
the reports of your eyes and ears? This was S. Lukes great evidence of the
truth of what he writes, that it was delivered to him by eyewitnesses, S. Luke
1. 1, 2. and St. John's what we have seen with our eyes, and our hands have
handled of the Word of life: 1 John 1. And St. Paul for Christ's Resurrection,
that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve, then of the 500, 1 Cor. 15. 5,
6. Even Thomas his Infidelity yielded to this argument, that if he did thrust
his hand into Christ's side he would believe, John 20. 25. Christ judged this a
convincing argument, when the Apostles thought he had been a Spirit, handle me
and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have, Luke 24.
39. Are these things true?


Pop. I cannot deny it, they are not yours, but Scripture assertions.


Prot. And do not all my senses tell me that this is Bread?


Pop. I must grant that, but your sense is deceived.


Prot. Then your senses also might have been deceived about the words and works
of Christ, and so the greatest evidence of Christian Religion is lost: but for
my part it makes me abhor your Religion; that so you may but seem to defend
your own opinions, you care not if you shake the pillars of Christianity: My
second Argument is, that your Doctrine of Transubstantiation is against reason.
Tell me I pray you, do you think any of the Articles of Christian Religion are
contrary to reason?


Pop. No, they may be above reason, but God forbid I should be so injurious to
Christianity to say any of them are against reason.


Prot. But your doctrine is as much against reason as sense, for it makes you
believe things absolutely impossible, and gross contradictions.


Pop. You may imagine many things impossible that really are not so: but if you
can prove any real impossibilities which this doctrine forces us to believe I
must yield, for we join with you in condemning the Lutheran opinion that
Christ's Body is every where, because it is an impossibility, and we therefore
expound those words, I am the Vine, I am a door, etc. figuratively, because it
is impossible for him who is a man, to be a vine, or a door. A Popish Book,
called, Scripture mistaken, p. 276.



Prot. And it is no less impossible for the Bread to be Christ's Body: Why might
not the Vine, (as well as the Wine) be by Transubstantiation, converted into
Christ's Substance? I think the Mother is as good as the Daughter, and
especially since Christ says, I am the true Vine, you might as well have
devised another transubstantiation to make Christ's words good, I know what work
you would have made of it, if he had said, This is my TRVE Body, or my TRVE
Blood.

But to give that over, I will show you, that there is such an heap of
contradictions, as never met together, in the most absurd opinion that ever was
in the world: I profess (when I set my wit at work) I cannot devise greater
absurdities than you believe. Tell me, do you hold that the whole Body of
Christ is present in every crumb of the Bread, and in every drop of the Wine?


Pop. Yes doubtless, Christ is there entire, and undivided.


Prot. I suppose you believe that Christ's Body is in Heaven, in such a
proportion, or bigness, as he had upon Earth.


Pop. No doubt of that.


Prot. Then the same Body of Christ is bigger than it self, and longer than its
self, and which is yet worse, Christ is divided from himself. I know not what
can be more impossible, than to say, that all Christ is at Rome, and all at
London, and all in Heaven, and yet not in the places between.


Pop: All this is by Gods Almighty Power.


Prot. Then I suppose, by the same Almighty Power, it is possible for any other
man to be in so many places; for it matters not that Christ be invisibly in so
many places, and another should be there visibly, or that Christ is there in so
little a bulk, and another must be in a greater.


Pop. I must needs grant that, and I affirm it is not absolutely impossible for
any other man to be at several places at once by Gods Power.


Prot. Then mark what monsters follow from this: suppose now John to be by
divine Power at the same time at Rome, at Paris, and at London; where ever John
is alive, I suppose, he has a power to move himself.


Pop. That must needs be, else he were not a living Creature.


Prot. Then John at Rome may walk toward London, and John at London may walk
toward Rome, and so they may meet (shall I say, one the other?) and you may be
sure it will be a merry meeting: It were worth enquiry, how long they will be
e're they come together. Then again, at Rome all the parts of John may be
excessively hot, and at London excessively cold, and at Paris neither hot nor
cold: This is beyond all the Romances that ever were devised. Besides, John may
be sorely wounded at Rome, and yet at London he may sleep in a whole skin; John
may be feasting at Rome, and fasting at London in the same moment. I might be
infinite in reckoning the horrid absurdities of this Doctrine; he that can
believe these things, will stick at nothing.


Pop. You talk at this rate, because you measure God by your selves, whereas he
can do more than you or I can think.


Prot. There are some things which it is no dishonor to God, to say he cannot
do them, because they are either sinful (so God cannot lie) or absolutely
impossible; God himself cannot make a man to be alive and dead at the same
time: God cannot make the whole to be less than a part of it: he cannot make
three to be more than threescore: he cannot make a Son to beget his Father: he
cannot make the same man to be born at two several times (as your Authors
confess); and therefore in like manner he cannot make the same body to be in
two several places; for this is not one jot less impossible than the other.


Pop. These indeed are great difficulties to humane reason, but reason is not
to be believed against Scripture.


Prot. True, but this is your hard hap; this Doctrine of yours is against
Scripture as well as Reason, and indeed against many Articles of Religion.

And first, it is against the Scripture, in as much as it is highly
dishonorable to Christ, whose honor is the great design of the Scripture.
What a foul dishonor is it to him to subject him to the will of every Mass
Priest, who, when he pleases, can command him down into the Bread? What a
dishonor is it, that the very Body of Christ may be eaten by Rats or Worms,
and may be cast up by Vomit, and the like, as your Aquinas affirms Sum. qu. 80.
art. 3.
. And that your Church in her Missals has put this amongst other directions,
that if worms or Rats have eaten Christ Body, they must be burned; and if any
man vomit it up, it must be eaten again, or burned, or made a Relick; Can. 39.
Glossa in Can. c. 2. De Consecratione.
and yet this is no more than your Doctrine will force you to own: for if you
will believe Christ's words, in one place as well as in another, he assures us,
that whatsoever (without exception) enters into the mouth, goes into the
belly, and is cast forth into the draught, Matthew. 15. 17.


Pop. This is no more dishonorable to Christ than that the Fleas might such
his Blood when he was upon earth.


Prot. You mistake woefully; for though in the days of his flesh, it was no
dishonor to him (and it was necessary for us) that he suffered so many
indignities, and died, and was crucified, yet now, that he is risen from the
dead, he dies no more, Romans 6. and it is a dishonor to him to be crucified
again, and to be brought back to those reproaches which he long since left; and
all this to no purpose, and without any profit to us, (as I showed.) Again, the
Scripture approves and uses this argument, that a body cannot be in two
places at once: it is the Angels argument, He is not here, for he is risen,
Mat. 28. 6. sufficiently implying, that he could not be here and there too: or
must we say, that the Angels argument is weak or deceitful, that yours may be
strong and true?


Pop. He meant he was not there visibly.


Prot. It seems, if a man being sought after should hide himself with you in
some corner or hole in your room, and the pursuers should ask for him, you
could answer with good Conscience, He is not here, because he is invisible. Our
Blessed Savior every where makes these two opposite, his being in the world,
and going to heaven, Joh. 13. 1. The hour was come that he should depart out of
this world unto the Father: It seems you could have taught him the art of going
thither, and keeping here too. I promise you, I durst not venture to buy an
Estate of any of you, for it seems you could tell how to sell it to me, and
keep it to your selves. You may remember, once you and I made our selves merry
with a passage that one used in a speech; that since he could not give content,
neither by going nor staying, hereafter he would neither go nor stay. It seems
you have as good a faculty as he had; for you know how a man may both go from a
place, and stay in it, at the same time. I know not what can be more plain if
you did not shut your eyes: Christ says expressly, me you have not always,
that is, here, Mat. 26. 11. Besides, your doctrine destroys the truth of
Christ's Humane Nature. I read of Christ, that he was in all points like unto
us, sin only excepted; his Body was like ours, and therefore it is impossible
it should be in a thousand several places at once (as you pretend it is;) this
turns Christ's Body into a Spirit: nay, indeed you make his body more spiritual
than a Spirit; for a Spirit cannot be in several places divided from it self.
The soul of man, if it be entire both in the whole and in every part of the
body, yet it is not divided from it self, nor from its body, nor can it be in
two several bodies at the same time, as all confess; and much less can it be in
ten thousand bodies at once (as by your Argument undoubtedly it may). When ever
an Angel comes to earth, he leaves heaven: and so this every way destroys the
truth of Christ's Humane body.


Pop. Much of what you say was true of Christ's Body in the days of his
infirmity; but when he was risen from the dead, then he received a Spiritual
Body, as it is said, ours shall be at the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.


Prot. To this I answer, First, that you ascribe these monstrous properties to
Christ's Body before its Resurrection; for you say, The Flesh and Blood of
Christ were really in the Sacrament, which the Disciples received while Christ
lived. Secondly, Christ's Resurrection, though it heightened the perfections, yet
it did not alter the Nature and Properties of his Body, nor give it the being
of a Spirit; for after he was risen, he proves that he was no Spirit, by this
Argument, Handle me and see, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see
me have, Luke 24. 39. By this it appears, that your Doctrine destroys the Truth
of Christ's Humanity, at least it destroys the main evidence of it (against
those who affirmed, that Christ had only a fantastical Body) namely, that he
was seen, and felt, and heard; for you say, sense is not to be believed. Again,
you destroy the truth of Christ's ascension into Heaven. For Christ is not
ascended if he has not left the world; for these two are joined together, Ioh.
16. 28. I leave the world, and go to the Father: but if you say true, he has
not left the world, but is here in every Sacrament; nothing can be more plain,
than that Christ did visibly and locally leave this world when he went up into
heaven, Acts 1. 9, 10. that being once there, the heavens must receive (or
contain) him, until the time of the restitution of all things, Acts 3. 21. and
that at the last day he shall come visibly and locally from heaven, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
7. but that he should come down a thousand times in a day, at the command of
every Mass-Priest, is such a dream, as the Scripture speaks not one syllable
of, nor can any rational man believe it: Moreover, your Doctrine destroys the
very Essence of a Sacrament, which consists of two parts, an outward element or
sign, and the inward grace signified by it; and this I am told your Doctors
acknowledge Bell. de Sacramentis in genere, lib. 1. c. 9. etc. 11.
I shall forbear mentioning further particulars, these are more than enough to
show the falseness of this Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

In the next place, pray let me hear what you have to say for your great
Article of praying to Saints.

But, first, I am told diverse of your own Authors confess, it is not necessary
to pray to Saints, but only convenient: Is it so?


Pop. It is true; and, I must confess, the Council of Trent do only say, it is
good and profitable. De invocat.



Prot. Then sure, I will never run the hazard of committing Idolatry for an
unnecessary work. But I am further told, that your great Scholar and Wit,
Perron confesses, That he found no footsteps of this praying to Saints, either
in Scripture, or in the Fathers, before the four first Councils, (which was
some hundreds of years after Christ. sanct. lib. 1. c. 18.
He confessed likewise to Isaac Casaubone, (as he told our Bishop Andrews) that
he himself never prayed to Saints, but only as he went in Procession that is
for form sake. Andr. in Opusc. Posthuma, and that Salm^ron, and Cotton, Instit.
1. Book.
and Eccius say as much in effect, viz. That there is no command for this in
either Testament. Is it so?


Pop. It is true; and Bellarmine confesses, That the Saints began to be
worshipped, not so much by any Law, as by Custom Beatit. sanctorum. l. 1. c. 8
sect. ult.
.


Prot. Methinks these two Considerations should startle you, that it is both
unnecessary and uncommanded. I perceive I am not like to hear Scripture
Arguments in this point.


Pop. Some of our Authors do urge some Scriptures, but you tie me up to use but
few, and those the best Arguments; and therefore I will rather urge other
Considerations.

1. Humility and Discretion advises us to this duty, for I suppose, if you
have any request to the King, you do not sawcily rush into his presence, but
make use of some of his Courtiers.


Prot. But tell me, I pray you, If a King not only allows, but commands all his
Subjects to call upon him in the day of trouble, to come to him freely, and
upon all occasions, to pour out their complaints to him, not doubting but he
will receive and answer them, and this King were always at perfect leisure to
hear their requests, and the oftener they come to him, the welcomer they are;
and he appoints his own Son the Master of the Requests, from time to time, to
receive all the Petitions of his Subjects; and both the King and the Prince are
ten thousand times more compassionate than the Courtiers; would you not in this
case account him a fool (and somewhat else too) that should spend his time in
petitioning this and the other inferior Courtier to gain access to the King?


Pop. I cannot deny that.


Prot. Then your Church has need to make use of that counsel, James 1. 5: If
any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God; they rather choose to ask it of
Saints, and that is the reason they go without it. Most plain it is, this is
the very case, and such a King God in all points is, and infinitely better than
all this, and such a Master of Requests Christ is: but for the humility you
talk of, I think therein you do prudently; for I remember the worship of Angels
came in under a show of humility, Col. 2. 18. and the door being once opened,
it was discreetly done to bring in the worship of Saints there too: let me hear
what else you can say?


Pop. We use to pray to living Saints, why not as well to departed and
glorified Saints; S. Paul writes to the Thessalonians, Pray for us; Col. 4. 3.


Prot. Surely Scripture makes a sufficient difference; You meet with very many
Commands and Examples of Prayers or Addresses to the living, not one to the
dead. Besides, you know the living hear your Prayers, you know nothing that the
dead do so: Besides, I trow, you do not pray to the living in such manner as
you do to the dead; you do not religiously worship the living (and about that
all our question is,) Did St. Paul invocate the Colossians, because he desired
their Prayers? Can you say any thing more?


Pop. The Saints in Glory pray for us, and therefore we may pray unto them.


Prot. Will you affirm, that I may and ought to worship, and pray unto all
those that pray for me?


Pop. No: Then our Churches practice would condemn me; for we grant, that the
Fathers in their Limbus did, and so those in Purgatory do, pray for us, and so
do all the Living Saints upon Earth, yet we do not allow Prayers unto them.


Prot. Then your argument is lost, from their Intercession to your Invocation.


Pop. Let me hear, if you have any better Arguments against this practice.


Prot. You shall. 1. Since all grant that Prayer is a part of Gods Worship,
then your praying to Saints is directly contrary to Gods command, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.


Pop. We do not worship the Saints, as God, with the highest kind of Worship,
which is proper to God, but only with an inferior kind of Religious Worship,
and therefore do not transgress this command.


Prot. The Devil himself did not require the highest worship, as I showed
before; yet Christ thought that inferior worship a breach of that law. Nor did
those Angel-worshippers, mentioned, Col. 2. worship the Angels, as God, with
the highest worship, for they were either Jews, or Judaizing Christians, (both
of which never pretend to equalize the Angels with God, but judged them far
inferior to God, and worshipped them accordingly) yet nevertheless are they
condemned by S. Paul for giving divine Honor to the Creature. Next, this
praying to Saints is an high dishonor to Jesus Christ. God has made him the
only Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5. he has invited all persons to come freely and
boldly to him, has promised those that come to him, he will in no wise cast
out, Ioh. 6. 37. why do not you then go immediately to Christ? This is a
manifest questioning either of his power, or faithfulness, or goodness.


Pop. It is one of the slanders of your Ministers, that we dishonor Christ; we
only pray to Saints to pray to Christ.


Prot. All your Books of Devot on confute that pretense; for you profess in
your Mass Book Quorum meritis precibusque rogamus.
they help you by their Merits, as well as by their Prayers. Bellarmine
affirms that the Saints in some sort are our Redeemers: De Indulgentiis, l.
1. c. 4.
Is this no more than only to pray for you? Is it no more than this, when you
pray thus to the Virgin Mary; Do thou protect us, drive away evil from us, and
require good things for us: and in right of a Mother, command thy Son? Is it no
more than this, when you say the Lord was with her, (i. e. the Virgin* Mary)
and she with the Lord in the same work of redemption: and when Esa. 63. is
objected, I trod the Wine press alone, and there was no man with me; they
answer cunningly, true Lord, there was no MAN with thee, but there was a WOMAN
with thee; In Martiali, Ann. 1493.
Is it no dishonor to Christ that your famous Biel says, that God has given
the Virgin Mary half of his Kingdom; and that whereas he has justice and
mercy, he kept justice to himself, and granted mercy to the Virgin? In Canone
Missae sect. 80.
In my opinion they shall do well to take in Christ for a share in the mercy.
Is it no dishonor to Christ to say, that Prayers which are made to, and
delivered by the Saints, are better than those by Christ, as Salmeron says? In
1 Timothy 2. dis. 8. p. 467.
Is it no dishonor to Christ, that Barradius the Jesuit asks of Christ, why
he took not his Mother up with him when he ascended up to Heaven? and frames
this answer; Concord. Evang. Tom. 1. l. 6. c. 11.
Peradventure, Lord, it was lest thy heavenly Courtiers should be in doubt,
whether to go out to meet thee, their Lord, or her, their Lady Is it no
dishonor to Christ, that Carolus Scribanius (otherwise Clarus Bonarscius)
professes, he cannot tell which to prefer, the Mothers Milk, or the Sons blood
In Amphitheatro honoris.
. I believe neither Christ nor his Mother will give these men thanks for this
another day; and all these passages are not in obscure Authors, that privily
steal abroad into the World; but in eminent Persons, and Books Licensed by the
Approbation, and according to the Orders of your Church: and besides, your
Church owns them, in that she does not blot them out, nor put them into her
expurgatory Indices. Moreover, I must pray to none, but those in whom I must
trust, Romans 10. 13, 14. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believ^d? And trust is Gods Prerogative incommunicable to any creature, Ier.
17. 5. Cursed is he that trusts in man. Again, I must pray to none, but to
whom I may pray in faith, and without doubting; and (upon good grounds
believing that I shall receive) Mat. 21. 22. James 1. 5, 6. But I am not sure
that the Saints do hear my prayers, or can and will grant them.


Pop. The Saints in glory do know what we pray to them.


Prot. How does that appear?


Pop. There are several ways whereby they know these things, but I adhere to
what Bellarmine says, that they knew this by revelation from God.


Prot. You should not only say this, but prove it. One of your infallible Popes
Gregory denies this, no Scripture informs you thus much; nay, that sufficiently
implies, that the Saints do not particularly know, nor mind the concerns of
this world. God tells Josiah, 2 Chr. 34. 28. Thou shall be gathered to thy
grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see the evil I will bring upon this
place, Eccl. 9. 5. the dead know not any thing of the particular occurrences of
this life, see Job 14. 21. I am sure these are ten times better arguments than
what you bring for the contrary. And in a word, its Gods incommunicable
Prerogative to know the Heart and secret Prayers, 2 Chronicles. 6. 30. Mat. 6. 6. So
upon the whole matter, I conclude; and now by the vanity of your Arguments and
Answers, do fully discern the falseness of this opinion, and the wickedness of
the practice of calling upon Saints: let me hear whether you have any better
evidences for the worship of Images; I hope you have; and I am sure you need
very clear and strong arguments for that practice, or else you are guilty of
that damnable sin of Idolatry.


Pop. We have very good arguments for that: I will use only two, and those our
strongest arguments, as you desire. First, we have the example and command of
God for it: he caused the Images of the Cherubims to be made and put upon the
Ark which was worshipped: Psalm. 98. If the Ark was to be worshipped because it
represented Gods footstool, much more may an Image be worshipped; as our Mr.
Bishop rightly argued Against Perkins of Images.
.


Prot. I suppose if this be a good Argument to us now, it was so to the Jews
formerly; for length of time does not turn false arguments into true ones; tell
me therefore if you had lived when the Law, Exodus 20. was newly given, and one
had persuaded you to worship Images by your own argument, what would you have
answered?


Pop. I would have said, it does not follow that because the Ark was to be
worshipped (which God commanded them to worship) therefore Images were to be
worshipped (which God forbad them to worship.)


Prot. Good Sir, bestow this answer (as a token from me) upon any of your
Brethren that shall argue so absurdly: besides, it seems very unlikely to me,
that the Cherubims were ordained to be worshipped by the people, because they
were never seen by the people. You put the Images which you worship in the most
visible and conspicuous places.


Pop. Yet no man could worship the Ark but he must worship the Cherubims, for
they were over the Ark.


Prot. In that case the Cherubims were not at all worshipped, unless you will
say, that he that worships one of your wooden Images, worships also the Spider,
(which peradventure is paying its devotion there, and got into the Saints
mouth.) Besides, it does not appear that the Ark it self was worshipped, for
that also was not so much as seen by the people, therefore not like to be
worshipped. All that we read is, that the Israelites did and ought to worship
God toward the Ark; and so they are said to worship God toward the whole
Temple, and toward Jerusalem, and toward the Holy Mountain, and toward
Heaven. Yet I presume you will not say all these places were to be worshipped,
and if God was to be worshipped toward these places; because he tells us
expressly, his special presence was there. What is this to Images? which God
banisheth from his House and presence: and to conclude this, I pray you tell
me, Is it lawful to worship every place where God is in a special manner
present?


Pop. I conceive it is.


Prot. Then it is lawful to worship every religious man in the World; It is
true, your great Vasquez professes, that a man may worship a Stone, or a
Straw, or any creature where God is, for God is there according to this
essence. De adoratione l. 3. dis. 3. c. 2. p, 455, and 458,
By which Argument it seems Christ might have worshipped the Devil; for the
essence of God being everywhere, must needs be in him. But what, I pray you,
is your other Argument?


Pop. The honor of God requires the worship of his Images, for that redounds
to God; as if I honor a Prince, I will honor his Picture; and we show our
reverence to the King in being uncovered in his Presence Chamber, though the
King be not there.


Prot. Tell me, I pray you, If a King forbid any Pictures of himself to be
made, or set up; if any over-officious Subject should, notwithstanding this,
set up the Kings Picture, pretending to do it in respect to the King; would the
King esteem himself honored or dishonored by it?


Pop. In that case certainly the King is dishonored, when his commands are
broken, and his Authority despised.


Prot. You say right. And so God will give you little thanks for breaking his
Commands, upon pretense of his Service. If a King require such reverence to be
given to his Presence Chamber, it is fit that he should be obeyed (seeing it is
only a civil, and not a religious respect:) and if God forbid any such
reverence, any Religious worship should be given to any graven Images, good
reason his prohibition too should be obeyed. You talk of honoring God, but for
the way or means of honoring God, whether it be most reasonable to take an
estimate from the Rules and Practices of all former Idolaters (who have all
justified their Idolatry from this pretense of honoring God) or from the
Commands of Gods, Word, and the practices of the godly Jews before Christ, and
godly Christians, and Fathers, for some hundreds of years after Christ (who are
all known to detest all manner of Worship of Images) See Dallaeus de Imaginibus.
I leave to any indifferent person to judge: besides, if you will needs
testify your respect to God, by honoring his Images, what a madness is it to
confine this honor to dead Images of Wood or Stone, and to deny it to his
Saints upon earth, who are his living, and far more noble and express Images.


Pop. Since you scorn my Arguments, for the Worship of Images, let me hear your
Arguments against it?


Prot. My first Argument is this, the holy Scripture condemns it as Idolatry.


Pop. We have Images in our Churches only as remembrancers (to put us in mind
of worthy and excellent persons) but not as objects of Worship.


Prot. No friend, it is not that time of day: you cannot now deceive us with
such foolish excuses, for your Councils of Nice and Trent do both command the
Worshipping of Images, and all your Authors plead for this.


Pop. Well, but this I am sure is true, we do not worship the Images, but only
God by them, and in them; we worship them only as representations of God or
Christ, etc. and the honor passes from them to God.


Prot. That cannot acquit you, neither before God nor man. Micah and his Mother
were guilty of Idolatry, yet the silver was dedicated to the Lord (Jehovah) to
make a graven Image, Judge. 17. 3. also Judge. 18. 5, 6. And the Israelites are
charged with Idolatry in the worshipping of the Golden Calf, Acts 7. 41. 1 Cor.
10. 7. And yet they could not be so brutish, as to think that Golden Calf,
which they brought out of Egypt in their earrings, was that God which brought
them out of Egypt with strong hand.


Pop. But they said, These be thy gods O Israel, which brought thee up out of
the Land of Egypt.


Prot. You use also to call an Image by the name of him whom it represents; you
commonly say, this is the blessed Virgin, or S. Matthew, etc. when you mean,
it is only their Image, and so it cannot be strange to you, that they express
themselves in the same manner. Besides Aaron himself proclaims the feast of the
Calf in these words, Tomorrow is a feast to Jehovah. The Heathens also excused
their Idolatry by this very pretense. So Celsus Lib. 7. Contra Celsum. Arnobius
lib. 6. Lactant l. 2. c. 2. Eusebius de preparatione Evangelica, lib. 3. and
lib. 4. in Praefat.
and other said (as the ancient Fathers tell us) We do not worship the Images
of Gold or Brass, etc. as believing them to be gods; but we worship the gods in
them, and by them.


Pop. They worshipped wicked Men; but we worship only Holy Men, and the Friends
of God, as such, and because they are such, and their Images, and therefore are
not guilty of Idolatry.


Prot. Then Saint Peter, Acts 10. and the Angel, Rev. 22. and Saint Paul, Acts
14. might have received that adoration (as being the friends of God) which they
so utterly rejected. Moses was the friend of God, yet God hid away his body,
lest the Israelites should worship him. And I have heard that the Fathers
charged the Collyridians with Idolatry, for worshipping of the Virgin Mary;
Epiphanius Haeresi. 97. per totum.
and the Arrians for worshipping Christ, whom they believed to be but a
creature (though all agreed they were the friends of God.) I suppose if any man
should attempt to give the honor, proper to the King, to his Brother, or
Friend, this would not excuse them from Treason; nor will it excuse any
Adulteress that she lay with her Husbands dearest Friend or Relation. Again, it
matters not much to this point, for what reason you worship Images: the only
question is, whether you do worship Images? for the very doing of that
(whatsoever pretenses it may have) is Idolatry. Besides, if you worshipped God
alone, and not the Image, your excuse would have some color; but it is most
evident, that you worship not only God, but the Image too. I am told that your
own Azorius affirms, that it is the constant opinion of your Divines, that the
Image is to be honored, or worshipped, with the same honor and worship which
is given to him whose Image it is. Lib. 9. Instit. mor. c. 6. art 3.
And that Cajetan In Thom. part. 3. qu. 25. art. 3.
and Gregory de Valentia, Tom. 3. Disp. 6. qu. 11. punct. 6.
and Costerus Enchirid. p. 438.
affirm as much. And that your Bellarmin expressly disputes for this, that
Images are not only to be worshipped as they are exemplars, but also properly
and by themselves, so as the worship may be terminated in them. De Imag. l. 2.
c. 21. prop. 1.
Are these things true?


Pop. I cannot deny but they are.


Prot. Then I see the vanity of your pretenses, and that you only seek to raise
a mist before the eyes of ignorant people; for in truth you worship the Image
it self, though happily not for its self: as if a Heathen Emperor commanded his
Subjects Religiously to Worship such a Vicegerent of his; no man, who did
worship that Vicegerent, could deny that he worshipped him, though he did it
only for the Emperors sake. Tell me, I pray you, do you not hold, that there
are two kinds of Religious Worship; namely, absolute, (which you give to God or
the Saints) and relative, (which you give to their Images)?


Pop. I must own it.


Prot. Then it is horrible impudence to say, you do not give worship to the
Images, since you give one of these two kinds unto them, and unto them only:
besides, if all you say were true, this would not acquit you from Idolatry; for
your Church professes and commands the Worship of the Images of Saints, as
well as of God and Christ; and since it is Idolatry to give Divine Honor to
any creature (as I before proved) you are no less guilty in giving it to the
Saints themselves, than to their Images, and so you are double-dy'd Idolaters.

My second Argument is taken from the second Commandment, Thou shall not make
any graven Image.

But first, I pray you, tell me true, has your Church left out this second
Commandment in diverse of her Breviaries and Offices of Prayer, or do our
Ministers slander them? I hear; that In the Hours of our Lady, Printed at
Paris, An 1611. The Commandments of the first Table are set down in these
words, and no other.


1. Commandment.
I am the Lord thy God, thou shall not have nor worship any other God but me.

2. Commandment.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain.

3. Commandment.
Remember to keep holy the Sabbath Day and Feasts.

And that the Council of Ausburg, Ann. 1548. delivering the Commandments in
Dutch for the People, leave out the mention of Images; and, that their cheat
might not be discovered, that the people might have their full number, they
make use of the mistake of one of the Fathers, and divide the last Command into
two, against Sense and Reason, and the practice of the whole ancient Church.
Are these things so?

Pop. It is true, it is left out in some of our Books, but we leave it in, in
all Bibles, and diverse of our Catechisms.


Prot. Very well, I see you had wit in your anger; I commend your discretion,
that you did not your work so grossly, that all the world should cry shame of
you: But that you blotted it out in any, is an evidence of your guilt. but what
say you to this Argument?


Pop. Then my first answer is, That this Command was peculiar to the Jews, who
were most prone to Idolatry Vasquez de adoratione.
.


Prot. This is not true. It sufficiently appears that the Gentiles were under
the obligation of this Law, from those punishments which God inflicted upon
them for their transgression or breach of it by Idolatry, Romans 1. But where
there is no Law, there is no transgression. Besides, Christ tell, us, He came
not to destroy the Law, (the Moral Law) but to fulfill it, Mat. 5. 17. Belike,
you are not of his mind; and dare you say the Jews, as soon they believed in
Christ, were discharged from this command, and allowed to worship the Images
which that command forbad?


Pop. I will not say so; but I have a second Answer; The thing prohibited here
is not Images, (which are representations of real things) as you falsely render
it, but Idols, which are the Images of false gods, which are not, and never
were in the world.


Prot. The Text its self is full against you; for the Images there prohibited,
are not said to be the Images of the false gods of the Heathens (whereof many
never had any being) but the Images of any thing in heaven or earth, etc.
Moreover, diverse of the Heathen gods were men whom they deified. I hope their
Pictures were Pictures of real things, yet these are Idols.


Pop. Though they really were Men, yet their pictures were made to represent
them as gods, and such they were not really, and therefore were Idols.


Prot. The learned Heathens knew (as well as you and I do) that Jupiter, and
Mars, and Mercury, and the rest, were mere Men, (and they smiled at the
ignorance of their Vulgar, that thought otherwise) only they thought of them
just as you do of the Saints, that the great God had put some of his honor
upon them, and therefore they might worship them; you cannot be so silly to
think, the learned Heathens thought Augustus was a god really, when he was
dead; yet their worship of his Image was Idolatry. And they that worshipped the
Image of Caligula, (while he lived) were not so sottish to take him for a god
(whom they knew to be a foolish and wicked man) yet I hope you will not excuse
them from Idolatry. But further, as the Jews did universally understand this to
be a prohibition of all manner of Images; so all the Prophets, and Christ, and
the Apostles were so far from reproving them (which they would have done, if it
had been an Error) that they every where strengthen them in this opinion, by
declaiming against all worship of Images, without any distinction. And tell me,
I pray you, if any Jew had at that time made (for instance) an Image of the Sun
not looking on it as God, but as a glorious creature of God, and therefore fit
to be religiously worshipped (as you think of the Saints and Angels) and had
bowed down to it and worshipped it: Do you think he had not broken this Law?


Pop. I dare not deny but he had broken it.


Prot. Yet this had been no Idol, but an Image, according to your sense of it.
Besides, I find that all manner of Images are forbidden, Lev. 26. 1. howsoever,
to me you seem to venture your salvation upon a nice point, for the Hebrew word
is neither Image nor Idol, but Pesel, as a Divine told me; and this, I
understand is diversely translated; some render it an Image, others an Idol. Now
you ventrue your soul upon it, that the last is the only true Translation,
which is a dreadful hazard; because it is otherwise rendered, not only by
Protestants, but by the most and best ancient interpreters Aquila, Symmachus,
Theodotion, Sic Josephus (...) Philo (...).
, even those whom your Vulgar Translation very often follows in other places.
These render it not an Idol, but a graven Image; and the Seventy Interpreters
(I am assured) po promiscuously render the word sometimes an Idol, sometimes a
graven Image: Nay, more than this, that it may appear how desperately our cause
is, I am informed your own Vulgar Translation (from which you are obliged not
to swerve) does frequently render it not Idol, but a graven Image (Sculptile)
particularly in Exodus 20. 4. Levit. 26. 1. and Deuteronomy. 4. 16, 25. and 5. 8. Are
these things so?


Pop. I cannot deny it, for the Authors themselves would confute me; But one
thing I have to say, you must understand one Scripture so as to agree with
another: Now I find God himself allows and prescribes some Images, as those of
the Cherubims; either then he contradicts himself, or he does not forbid all
Images, but Idols only.


Prot. Though I might say, God may make an exception to some of his Laws, when
no man can (as in the case of Abraham's offering up Isaac, and the Israelites,
spoiling the Egyptians of their Jewels) yet I need no other answer but this; I
directly deny that here is any contradiction at all: For our question is not
about the making of Images (whether by Gods order or Man's) but about the
worshipping of them. And albeit there were such Images made, yet they were not
made to be worshipped, as I before proved; nor was there any danger the people
should worship them, because they were not admitted to see them. But I pray you
answer me this one question, I am told that diverse of your own Authors confess,
that the Jews indeed were; though Christians are not forbidden the use of
Images by this command. Is it so?


Pop. These indeed are the words of our famous Vasquez, after he has mentioned
diverse Authors for the contrary opinion, There are ( says he) other Authors,
neither fewer, nor inferior to them, who are of the contrary opinion, which to
me always seemed most probable, to wit, that all the use of Images is here
forbidden to the Jews De Adorat. l. 2. des. 4. c. 2.
, and for this he quotes many of our approved Authors; and Salmeron says no
less In Romans dis. 29. sect. prima^
.


Prot. And you need say no more, for then all these Authors thought your
distinction of Image and Idol frivolous, and that the word P^sel is meant of
any Images, and not of Idols only, as you foolishly distinguish, and so your
principal refuge is lost, and you are convicted Idolaters, and then, if you
repent not, you know where your portion will be. Go now and brag of the
safeness of your Religion.

I see how little it is that you can say for your Worship of the Dead (Saints
and their Images) let me hear whether you have any better Arguments for your
Prayers for the Dead and Purgatory.


Pop. I am glad you mention that, since all your Divines do agree that Prayer
for the Dead was the practice of the Ancient Church and Fathers.


Prot. If that be true, it is not sufficient for your purpose, for I am fully
satisfied that the Fathers were not infallible, and your own greatest Doctors
think so too See Nullity. c. 3.
. But Besides, I am told that their Prayers for the dead were quite of another
nature than yours, and for other purposes, and they were grounded upon some
private opinions of theirs, which you disown; for they prayed not only for
those whom you suppose to be in Purgatory, but for those who (you confess) many
of them never did come there: they pray for all the Saints from the righteous
Abel to this day; they pray for all their Ancestors, Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Martyrs, as I have heard it in some of their Liturgies. Is it so?


Pop. It is so.


Prot. I pray you tell me, what do you pray for the Dead?


Pop. We pray that God would deliver them from those dreadful pains of
Purgatory.


Prot. Then if there be no Purgatory, the foundation of your Prayers for the
dead is gone.


Pop. I grant it.


Prot. Then let us discourse of the most fundamental point, (as we have
hitherto done) the rest will fall of course. Therefore.

First, I pray tell me your opinion concerning Purgatory.


Pop. Our Doctrine in brief is this, That though God freely gives, to all that
are truly penitent, forgiveness of their sins, and freedom from eternal death;
yet since they have much venial sin and corruption in them, in which oft-times
they die: therefore it is necessary that they should, for the expiation of
those sins, and for the satisfaction of Gods Justice, either do or suffer, such
Penances, Fastings, Prayers, etc. as are enjoined them here, or ( where those
are not sufficient) suffer the pains of Purgatory.


Prot. I understand your Doctrine; now let me hear two of your strongest
Arguments to prove it: I hear that Bellarmin threatens us, that whosoever does
not believe Purgatory, shall be tormented in Hell Bell. de Purgat. l. 1. c. ult.
Is it true?


Pop. He does say so, and I am of his mind.


Prot. Then I hope you have very clear Arguments for it, because you lay so
great a stress upon it. But first, I have heard that this Doctrine of Purgatory
is confessed by diverse of your own Brethren to be but a new Doctrine. Is it so?


Pop. I will not dissemble with you, several of our Doctors have unadvisedly
blurted out such expressions as these: our famous English Martyr Fisher Bishop
of Rochester confesses, That Purgatory was for a long time unknown, and either
never or very seldom mentioned among the Ancient Fathers In consut. Luther.
art. 18.
and Alphonsus de Castro says, That many things are known to us, of which the
Ancient Writers were altogether ignorant adv. hareses ^ 12. tit. Purgat. f. 258.
and amongst them he reckons Purgatory, which ( says he) the Greek Writers
mentioned not, and even to this day it is not believed by the Greek Church.


Prot. I suppose, you do not think all these Ancient Fathers were damned.


Pop. No, God forbid, for many of them were glorious Confessors and Martyrs.


Prot. Then I see Bellarmines threats are not very formidable. But to let this
pass, How do you prove this Doctrine?


Pop. From plain Scripture, 1. From Mat. 12. 32. Whosoever speaks against the
Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world, neither in the
world to come. Which clearly implies, that some sins not forgiven in this
world, are forgiven in the next, and that must be in Purgatory.


Prot. I pray you tell me, what sins are they which are forgiven in Purgatory?


Pop. Not great and mortal, but small and venial sins, as we all agree.


Prot. Is not blasphemy against the Son of Man a mortal sin?


Pop. Yes doubtless, But what of that?


Prot. If this Text proves the pardon of any sins, it proves the pardon of that
sin no less than others, because the sin against the Holy Ghost is here spoken
of as the only sin which is unpardonable in both worlds: Besides, Christ speaks
thus in opposition to a corrupt opinion, which, I have heard, now is, and then
was rife among the Jews, to wit, that diverse of their sins were pardoned after
this life, and that this was one of their ancient Prayers, Let my death be the
expiation of all my sins: for they thought the sufferings of this life and
death, the last of them, did free them from the punishments of the other life:
And I have heard that it was one of their sayings, That every Israelite has a
part in the future life: Are these things so?


Pop. To deal freely with you. This is not only true, but it is one of our
Arguments for Purgatory, that Jason the Cyrenian ( who lived long before
Christ's time) expressly affirms, that it is profitable to pray for the dead,
that their sins may be pardoned, 2 Mac. 12.


Prot. I think that is impertinently alleged for Purgatory: for the sin those
men died in, was a mortal sin, (as you confess) and therefore not pardonable in
Purgatory. But I thank you for this; for now I am satisfied that it was an
ancient opinion among the Jews, and so Christ had just occasion to use this
expression, to confute that vain expectation of theirs. But besides, the
meaning of this phrase, Shall not be forgiven, is, that it shall be punished in
both Worlds: this is a frequent phrase in Scripture. Thus Exodus 20. 7. God will
not hold him guiltless, that is, he will severely punish: To accept persons in
judgment is not good, that is, is very bad; The father of a fool rejoices not,
that is, grieveth much. I hear S. Chrysostom expounds it thus In locum.
, and a greater than he, S. Mark 3. 29. He has never forgiveness, but is in
danger of eternal damnation.

Besides all this, we all agree that there is a kind of forgiveness of sin
after this life, and at the Day of Judgment, Acts 3. 19. Repent, that your sins
may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence
of the Lord; for then indeed the pardon of sin is completed and fully
manifested. And it is a common phrase in Scripture to speak of a thing as done,
when it is only declared and manifested, as the Apostle says, those words,
Psalm. 2. This day have I begotten thee, were fulfilled in Christ's Resurrection,
Act. 13. because that declared him to be the only begotten Son o God, as S.
Paul says, Romans 1. 4.

To which I might add, that by the World to come, Christ may very probably
understand the time of the New Testament, which begun at Christ's death. The
Jews (I hear) often use this expression of the days of the Messiah. Nay, the
Apostle himself does so, Heb. 2. 5. This also I have read, that the Jews did
generally expect a more plentiful and glorious remission of sins at that time,
and so Christ's meaning may be this, That this blasphemy shall not be forgiven,
neither in that time nor state of the Church, (in which Christ then was) nor in
the time of the Gospel and Kingdom of the Messiah which began at his death (as
I said) when, though there should be many great sins and sinners pardoned (as
we see there were) yet this should not. I hope you will not brag much of your
Argument from this place, let me hear your other place.


Pop. My second Argument is from, 1 Cor. 3. 15. He shall be saved, yet so as by
fire, that is, the fire of Purgatory.


Prot. It seems you understand this fire properly, which is something strange
when the whole place is metaphorical, or figurative; The Gold and Silver, Hay
and Stubble, all are metaphorical, and so doubtless is the fire. I hear your
Bellarmin confesses, that the fire mentioned, v. 13. The fire shall try every
man's work, is not meant of Purgatory.


Pop. He does indeed say so.


Prot. That is enough to overthrow this Argument, for it is most evident that
the fire, verse. 13. and 15. is one and the same. And this Fire cannot be
Purgatory, 1. Because it is the Fire of the Day of Judgment, when you confess
Purgatory ends. Bell. de Purg. l. 2. c. 9. ^. Iam. vero.
The time of the last Judgment is called the Day by way of eminency, Heb. 10.
25. 2 Timothy 1: 12. 18. and 4. 8. and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 4. And the day of revelation or
manifestation of all things, (because then all men's works will be manifested)
and the day wherein Christ will come in flaming fire. 2 This fire burns the
works of men, only their Hay and Stubble, not their persons, as your Purgatory
does. 3 This fire tries both good and bad. All pass through it. The Gold and
Silver is in this fire, no less than the Hay and Stubble.


Pop. How then, I pray you, do you understand this place?


Prot. It is a Metaphor, or Figurative way of speaking, frequent in Scripture,
and common use. The delivered Jews are said to be as a fire brand plucked out of
the burning, Amos 4. 11. Zach. 3. 2. So here, he shall be saved so as by fire,
that is, not without difficulty of loss, and possibly some momentany shame: but
howsoever the fire shall burn up his work, and he shall lose that part of his
reward. Now I have heard your Arguments, I hope you will hear m^ne.


Pop. I am ready to do that.


Prot. I shall urge only two.

First, Christ has fully paid our debt, and satisfied Gods Justice for all our
offenses; and therefore it were injustice in God to require the payment of any
part of that debt in Purgatory. Christ is a complete Savior, His blood
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. He is able (and sure he is no less
willing) to save to the uttermost, those that come to him, Heb. 7. 25. God laid
all our sins upon him, Isa. 53. and he bare them all in his body, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
In short, either you make Christ but an half Savior and believers wash away
part of their own guilt; or if Christ has fully washed away their guilt, you
make god both unmerciful, and unjust, and untrue too; so dreadfully to punish
innocent persons, and those too his own children (as you acknowledge) whom he
declares he has freely and fully pardoned; and to do this for sins, which you
confess venial, and such as do not deserve the loss of Gods favor, and that
without any necessity, This is not the act of a Father, especially so tender a
Father as God is.


Pop. Christ is a sufficient Savior, and has fully satisfied, but his
satisfaction is applied to us by the pains of Purgatory.


Prot. If Purgatory only apply Christ's satisfaction to us, then he satisfied
for our temporal as well as our eternal punishments; and if he did so, surely
he did it fully, or not at all. Besides, you need not trouble your heads about
the application; God has provided for us more comfortable means of
application, on his part, the Word, Sacraments, and Spirit; on our parts,
Faith. You may keep Purgatory for your own use, it is not fit you should be
pestered with any Heretics there. But was ever such an application of Gods
Grace heard of since the World began; that God should apply his Mercy, and the
Grace of Christ Jesus, by such exquisite torments? This is (as one truly says)
as if a man should apply Physic by poison, or apply the light of the Sun, by
putting out our eyes. God deliver us from such appliers. This is as if a Prince
should pretend a free pardon to a Malefactor, and apply it by putting him upon
the Rack.


Pop. Though Christ made satisfaction for the guilt of mortal sins, and eternal
punishment, yet he did not for venial sins, nor temporal punishment; and
therefore they must purge out those themselves in Purgatory.


Prot. If it were true that you say, yet there is no need of Purgatory; for
this purging work may be done by temporal afflictions in this life. The truth
is, you add sin, to sin, and excuse one error with another. But what do you
mean by venial sins?


Pop. We mean such smaller sins as do not exclude a man from Gods favor, nor
from Heaven.


Prot. Then surely you have very slight thoughts of sin, of God, and of his
Law, that can so judge of such an horrid evil as Sin. Scripture fully condemns
this Doctrine. It tells me that the wages of sin (all sin, without any
difference) is death, even that death which is opposite to eternal life, Romans
6. 23. that He that shall break the least of Gods commands, and teach men so,
(though peradventure he do it ignorantly and so according to your opinion, it
is a venial sin) shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; that is,
he shall have no portion there. It tells me, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.
10. And he speaks of that curse which Christ underwent for us, and redeemed us
from. It tells me, that for every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give an account thereof in the Day of Judgment, (and by such words, if not
repented of, they shall be condemned) Mat. 12. 36, 37. So now your foundation,
and one of the Pillars of Purgatory is gone. And as for your other fancy, that
Christ did not satisfy for our temporal punishments, I pray you tell me, did
not Christ suffer temporal afflictions?


Pop. Yes doubtless, the whole Gospel is full of such sufferings.


Prot. Surely all that Christ suffered, he suffered for us, both in our stead,
and for our good. He was cut off, not for himself, (but for our sins) Dan. 9.
25. It was for our sakes that he bare that temporal part of the curse, to be
hanged on a Tree; and all that pain and shame was but a temporal punishment,
Gal. 3. 13. I read, Isa. 53. that Christ bore our griefs, and carried our
sorrows, v. 4. which was not only accomplished in this, that he bare the guilt
of our sins, as S. Peter expounds it, 1 Pet. 2. 24. but also in this, that he
delivered them from sicknesses and temporal afflictions, as St. Matthew
expounds it, Mat. 8. 16, 17. and both these consist well together, since Christ
removed both sin the cause, and affliction the effect of it.


Pop. If Christ had satisfied for our temporal punishments, then Believers
should be free from all pains, and loss, and death, which it is apparent they
are not; and therefore notwithstanding the fullness of Christ's satisfaction,
they may be liable to pains in Purgatory as well as in this life.


Prot. To this I answer three things. First, Your inference from the pains of
this life to the torments of Purgatory is weak, and false. I may, and must
believe, that God afflicts his people here, because Scripture and Experience
put it out of doubt. But that Cod will punish his people in Purgatory after
this life, no Scripture affirms. You that can multiply your instances of the
sufferings of Believers in this life, and can tell us of Adam, and David, and
Solomon, and many others, have not to this day been able (though often urged)
to produce one instance of the sufferings of any one Believer, after this life
(which one consideration is sufficient to overthrow this Argument in the
judgment of any indifferent man.)

Secondly, There is not the same reason for the sufferings of believers here,
and those which you suppose in Purgatory, nor are they of the same nature. The
present sufferings of Believers are necessary, (1 Pet. 1. 6. You are in
heaviness if need be) both for Believers themselves to subdue the Flesh, which
in this life is potent, and altogether needs such a curb. By this shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, Isa. 27. 9. and to prevent their eternal
damnation, 1 Cor. 11. 32. as also for the terror and caution of other
offenders. So that, albeit Christ has fully paid the debt, yet it is upon
other accounts convenient that they should smart and suffer here. But there is
no such necessity nor use of Purgatory sufferings, neither for Believers
themselves (since there is no mortification of corruption after this life, no
temptations to sin there, no improvement of grace, no fear of eternal
damnation) In Purgatorio animae nec mereri nec peccare possunt, Bell. de Purg.
l. 2. cap. 2. Animae in Purgatorio certae sunt de sua salute, ibid. cap. 4.
nor for example and warning to others; For their fellow sufferers in
Purgatory, you do not pretend they are at all edified by their sufferings; and
men here, they neither see nor know any thing of these pains, nor has God
revealed any thing concerning them; but when God makes any examples to others,
he sets them in the view of others, or at least acquaints them fully therewith,
as he did with Hell torments to this end. It were a sensles^ thing to hang up a
man in Iamaica, for the terror of those that live in England. Besides, the
sufferings of Believers here do come from the love, and faithfulness of God,
Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, Psalm. 119. 75. In faithfulness
thou have afflicted me. Accordingly, good men have looked upon them as choice
mercies, Psalm. 97. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest, and Psalm. 119.
67. It was good for me that I was afflicted: and the denial of afflictions is
threatened as a grievous punishment, Is. 1. 5. Hos. 4. 14. 17.

But now the sufferings of Purgatory are in all points contrary; they are
purely vindictive, and the effects of mere wrath: nor do you esteem those
sufferings a mercy, and your happiness, but freedom from them. And therefore
your Argument, from the pains of this life to those in Purgatory, is foolish
and absurd.

Thirdly, Believers suffering here do not at all derogate from the fullness of
our Redemption by Christ, because (as I have showed) admitting that to be
complete, yet they are necessary for other purposes. But your Purgatory
sufferings do, by communicating at least some part of his proper work to your
selves. You profess they wash away part of your sins, which is Christ's peculiar
honor, He washed us from our sins in his own blood, Rev. 1. 5. You make them a
part of the curse of the Law from which (and not only from a part of it) Christ
has redeemed us, himself being made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. You make them
a real satisfaction in part to Gods justice (which is not satisfied by all that
Christ did or suffered without them.) And, in a word, you make men in part
their own Redeemers and Saviors I hope by this you see how weakly you reason
from present troubles, to Purgatory torments; and that notwithstanding your
objection, my first Argument stands good against Purgatory.

My second Argument is this, that the Scripture every where speaks of the state
of Believers immediately after death, as happy and blessed; and that all the
sufferings of Believers are confined to this life; and of this we have many
expressions and examples too in Scripture, and not one to the contrary. The
sufferings of this present time (says S. Paul) are not worthy to be compared
with the glory, Romans 8. 18. He knew no other sufferings: the afflictions of
Believers are light, and but for a moment, and they too are in things that are
seen, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. and therefore he knew of no sufferings in the invisible
world, unless happily you will say that S. Paul's Travels were in another road
into the third heavens, and so he was ignorant of Purgatory. Lazarus received
his evil things in this life, Luke 16. 25. But now he is comforted, therefore
surely not in Purgatory. If our earthly house of this Tabernacle be dissolved,
we have an house in Heaven, says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We are no longer absent
from the Lord, than present in the Body, says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5, 6, 7, 8. The
Prophet assures us, that when righteous men die, they enter into peace, they
rest in their beds, Isa. 57. 1, 2. I tell you, their beds are very hard, and
the Prophets mistake was very great, if they be frying in the flames of
Purgatory. The Beggar died (and it follows immediately) he was carried by
Angels into Abraham's bosom. I cannot think these Angels mistook their way: the
Theif was to be with Christ that day in Paradise, Luke 23. 43.


Pop. The Thief was a kind of Martyr, and so had that privilege.


Prot. His death was so far from being a Martyrdom, that it was a just
punishment for his evil deeds, as he confesses, v. 41. But because some of
your Martyrs (as you call them) were indeed Malefactors; therefore to salve
their honor; you make this Malefactor a Martyr. I will give you but one place
more of many, and that is Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord, from henceforth, that they may rest from their labors. A place so clear,
that I am told, a famous Doctor of your own, and one of the Sorbon-Colledge,
Picherellus by name, did ingenuously confess, St. John had in these few words
put out the fire of Purgatory. De Missa p. 156.
And I am persuaded you would have been ashamed to have kindled it again, but
that by this craft you get all your living.

I think I need say no more to this point, let us now go to another. We have
discoursed of Purgatory: Now if you please, let us discourse of the ways
whereby you pretend to free men from it, which is by Absolutions, and
Indulgencies, and that which is necessary thereunto, to wit, Auricular
Confession.


Pop. It is well you mention that, for I assure you it is a matter of salvation
and damnation; our Council of Trent has determined that it is by divine right
necessary, and as attrition alone (which is a grief for sin, arising only from
a fear of hell) will save a man where confession to a Priest follows; so all
the repentance in the world will never save him, without this Confession to a
Priest, viz. actual where it may be had, or in desire when it cannot be
actually had.


Prot. Since you lay so much stress upon it, I expect suitable evidence for it.
But first I pray you inform me, what your Doctrine is in this point.


Pop. I will give you that in the words of the Council of Trent as near as I
can: they say, That every Christian is bound under pain of damnation, to
confess to a Priest all his mortal sins, which after diligent examination he
can possibly remember; yea, even his most secret sins, his very thoughts; yea,
and all the Circumstances of them which are of any moment Council. Trident. ses.
14. de poenitentia cap. 4.



Prot. Now let me hear your strongest Arguments to prove this.


Pop. You shall: Our two great Arguments are these; First, Priests are by God
made Judges, and entrusted with power of the Keys for the Remission of Sins:
but no Judges can exercise judicature, unless they know and understand the
cause; and the Priest must know all the particular sins, and their
circumstances by the man's own confession, or else he knows not whether to bind
or loose him, to forgive or to condemn him: This is the Argument upon which the
Council of Trent builds their Decree Ibid.
.


Prot. Tell me I pray you; Is it necessary to Salvation, to confess every
particular mortal sin? What if a man unavoidably forget some of them?


Pop. In that case we confess they may be pardoned without it, and it may
suffice to say with David, Cleanse thy servant from secret sins Ibid.



Prot. Now your Argument is quite lost: For it seems in this case (which may be
in many hundreds of sins, especially in a person of bad memory) your Judge can
pass sentence without knowing the particular Cause, and therefore such
knowledge is not necessary to his giving Absolution. Moreover, tell me, I pray
you, may not a Priest absolve him from his sins, whom Christ has absolved?


Pop. Yes doubtless.


Prot. And is not every Priest bound to believe, that Christ has absolved
every person that is truly penitent?


Pop. There is no question of that.


Prot. Suppose a sinner has visibly forsaken all his wicked ways and company,
and lives a very holy life before he comes to the Priest, and the Priest is
certainly informed of this: Is not the Priest bound in that case to believe he
is truly penitent?


Pop. I should be most uncharitable if I should deny that.


Prot* Then he may without any more ado upon his desire absolve him, because it
appears that Christ has absolved him, It is not at all necessary to a Priest
to this purpose to know whether a man be a greater or a less sinner, since the
grace of God is offered unto great as well as little sinners: and therefore
seeing this is your strong argument, and that learned Council could find no
better, I see your cause is very low and bad; but I suppose you have some other
Argument for it.


Pop. There is so, and that is Jam. 5. 16. Confess your faults one to another.


Prot. Is this your strong argument? here is not a word of the Priest, nor of
Confession to him, but only to our fellow Christians; this confession is
mutual, and it will as well prove that the Priest is bound to confess his sins
to the People, as that the People are bound to confess to the Priest: the very
next words are, Pray one for another; what are we bound to pray only for the
Priest? It is one thing that sets me against your Religion to consider what
pitiful arguments you rely upon. I am assured your own brethren confess the
weakness of this argument, as Vasquez In 3. Thom. qu 90. Art. 1. sect.
Omittimus.
, and Cajetan In locum.
, and Caenus Relect de poenit. part 6.
, but it seems you have no better. The weakness of your arguments for it, might
save me the labor of mine against it; therefore I shall only offer to your
thoughts these two considerations.

1. Your doctrine makes that necessary to salvation which God has not made
necessary. There is no command of God or Christ for it, as your eminent Doctors
acknowledge, Scotus and omnes decretorum interpretes inquit Maldon in summa qu.
18. Art. 4. Cajet. in Ioh. 20. 22. Bell. de poenit. l. 1. c. 4.
and it sufficiently appears from the vanity of your proofs for it; you confess
it was not necessary in the old Testament, and yet there was as much need and
use of it then as now, and Christ has made the condition of his Church not
more, but less burdensome than it was before. Many commands and exhortations
to repentance there are in Scripture, not one which either commands this
auricular confession to a Priest, or declares the necessity of it, produce one
place and I yield; there are many instances of John the Baptist, and Christ and
the Apostles, either actual giving, or in Gods Name proposing and offering
remission of sins upon the conditions prescribed in the Gospel Luk: 18. 13.
Mat. 9. 2. Act. 2. 38. and 3. 19, and 22. 16.
among which not one of them requires this auricular confession: Bring one
instance to the point and I yield.


Pop. I will give you two instances, Matt. 3. 6. The Pharisees were baptized --
confessing their sins: and, the conjurers confessed their sins, Act. 19. 18.


Prot. These places do both speak of public confession and in case of
scandalous sins (which we acknowledge to be a duty) but what is this to
auricular confession? will you never speak to the purpose? besides these places
cannot be meant of auricular confession for that was not then instituted, as
your council of Trent confesses. Well, I see you can bring neither instance of
this confession nor precept for it, and therefore I am sure there is no sin in
the neglect of it, for where there is no law, there is no transgression, Romans
4. 15.

2. Your doctrine makes that insufficient for pardon and salvation which God
makes sufficient. The great God assures us. That he that confesses and
forsakes his sins shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13.


Pop. That makes against you, for you s^e there is confession required.


Prot. And no doubt it is a man's duty to make confession to God, and in case of
wrong, unto men, and sometimes to a Minister also, as in case of doubt or
trouble of conscience, but this is nothing to auricular confession, nor can the
text mean that, sor you grant it was not as yet instituted. God declares that
if the wicked for sake his (evil) way and thoughts and turn unto God, he shall
have mercy, Isa. 55. 7. so Isa. 1. 16. 17, 18. so Act. 16. 31. S. Paul in Gods
name promises, believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved. Thus To. 10.
13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: And who
dares say, that he that does all these things shall not be saved, unless he
confess to a Priest, since God never spoke such a word? What is it to add to
Gods word, if this be not? The terms upon which Christ offered promised
salvation, are Repent and believe.


Pop. Auricular confession is a part of repentance.


Prot. When Christ preached that doctrine it was no part of repentance, for you
confess it was not then instituted, your Council of Trent determines, that it
was instituted by Christ after his resurrection. De Poeniteutia
And you will find it hard to persuade any rational man, that repentance wanted
a necessary part before Christ's resurrection, or that it was of one kind before
it, and quite another after it. But I will not waste more time about so vain a
fancy, for my part I rest upon Christ's gracious promises to repenting and
believing Sinners: By Gods grace I will endeavor to do these things, and I
doubt not but he will make good his words whether you will or no; let God be
true and every man a liar.

But possibly you have better arguments for Absolutions and Indulgences:
Produce them, but first let me hear what your doctrine in this point is.


Pop. I will give you this in brief together with the rise and ground of it: We
believe; first. That there are diverse Saints who have not only merit for
themselves, but a great deal to spare, and all their merits are put into one
treasury. Secondly, That these merits are appliable to others, so as God will
pardon Thomas, for example, for John's merit. Thirdly, That God has put this
treasure into the Churches, that is, the Popes hands, and from him into the
hands of all Priests, who have a power to apply these merits as they see fit.


Prot. There is nothing sound and solid in this whole discourse; first, I have
proved that there is no Purgatory, there is your foundation of indulgences
gone; next I hope ere we part to show, that there is no such thing as merit in
good works, which is another of your foundations. Next, that any man's merits
(except Christ's) may be applied to another, I pray you inform me, for I have
learned quite otherwise: I read that every one shall bear his own burden, Gal.
6. 6. Every one shall receive according to what HE has done in his body, 2
Cor. 5. 10. The wise Virgins differed from you, they thought they had oil
little enough for themselves and none at all to spare, Mat. 25. 9. So if you
are Virgins, it seems you are none of that sort. If you can prove this conceit
of yours, do.


Pop. I will give you a clear place, Col. 1. 24. S. Paul says, I now rejoice
in my sufferings for you and fill up that which is behind or that which is
lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake which is
the Church.


Prot. First tell me, do you think any thing was lacking or defective in
Christ's sufferings.


Pop. No, You use to charge us with that opinion, but falsely.


Prot. It is well you grant thus much, but if you denied it, a cloud of plain
Scriptures would force you to grant it, which tells us that by one offering
Christ perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14. and that he is
able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. By sufferings of Christ then, we
must understand the sufferings of Christ mystical, or Christ in his members,
which are usually so called; Act. 9. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 7. Heb. 11. 27.
when Christ had done suffering in his person, he left it as a legacy to his
members, that they should suffer with him, and for him, Act. 9. 16. and 14. 22.
2 Timothy 3 12.
and St. Paul bore his share in these sufferings; and for the last clause of
his suffering for the Church, The phrase, it is true, is ambiguous, and
sometimes indeed it signifies to satisfy Gods justice for another, but in this
sense St. Paul rejects it with indignation, 1 Cor. 1. 13. was Paul crucified
for you? But it is not always thus taken, for St. Paul says he suffered for
Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 10. not surely to satisfy for him: There is therefore
another sense, and that is, he suffered for the Churches edification, and
establishment, and so indeed he elsewhere explains himself, Phil. 1. 12. and I
am told that your own brethren understand it thus, Tho. Est. Justin in locum.
and your Bellarmin confesses the words may be thus expounded, but only says,
the words may conveniently receive this sense, De Poenit. l. 3. c. 3.
which is as much as to say, if you will be courteous you may grant him the
Argument, but if you do not, he cannot prove it. But, admit there be such a
treasury of Merits for others, as you pretended; how prove you that your
Priests are made Judges, and invested with such a power of distributing those
Merits and giving Absolutions, as you challenge?


Pop. Our great Argument is, John 20. 23. Whosesoever sins ye remit they are
remitted, and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained. Answer me this
Argument, and I will yield up this Cause.


Prot. What Argument do you draw from these words?


Pop. Hence it appears that Ministers are made judges, and entrusted with full
power and authority of binding and loosing; so as Christ does not loose ( or
forgive) a sinner by himself, but only by the Priest, as Bellarmin says. Ia 3.
partem Thomae qu. 84. art. 3.
And to speak properly, as our most learned Vasquez affirms, God does not
properly loose a sinner, but only approves of the Priests loosing of him ( Ia
3. partem Thomae qu. 84. art. 3.
).


Prot. Now in my opinion, it were good manners to make the Priest come after
God, and not to make God depend upon the Priest. It seems then, if the Priest,
should grow surly or envious, and deny me a Pardon, Christ cannot help me, for
he has given the power out of his hands: So you make the Priest the Judge, and
God only the Approver. The Lord rebuke this spirit of Blasphemy. Again, nothing
is more familiar in Scripture than for Gods Ministers to be said to do that,
which they do only authoritatively declare that God will do. Thus God says to
Jeremy, I have set thee over Kingdoms to root out, and pull down, and destroy,
that is, by declaring that God would do it: In like manner Gods Ministers are
said to bind and loose, because they have from God authority, to declare a
Sinner to be bound by his Sins, or loosed from them, which (if they declare
truly and according to Gods word) God in heaven does and will make it good. As
for this Text, it says nothing but this, that every one whom they bind or
loose, that is, proceeding according to their rule, (which is always to be
understood) shall be bound or loosed in heaven; but it does not say that no man
is bound or loosed, but they whom the Priest binds and loses.


But besides, if all these things were granted, how does this Text prove that
the Priest or Pope can absolve or release any souls out of Purgatory, if there
were such a place? I pray you tell me, can the Pope bind any soul and keep him
in Purgatory?

Pop. No, we do not pretend to that.


Prot. Then he cannot loose a soul neither out of Purgatory; for I am sure
binding and loosing are of the same extent. But upon second thoughts, I must
own your discretion; for the binding of souls in Purgatory was an invidious and
unprofitable work, and would have bound up men's hearts and purses: It is only
the loosing of them out which opens their purse strings, and tends to the
edification of the Church, that is, the Pope and Priests (as they always
understand that word.) In sober sadness, it is enough to make any serious
Christian abhor your Church, that your Pope should not be content to usurp a
power over the whole visible world, but that he should extend his Authority to
the other world, even to Purgatory. In my opinion he had done more wisely to
have extended his empire to Hell, for there are many of his Predecessors (so
far as can be judged by any man's life) whom he might have appointed his
Deputies: but there is never a Pope in Purgatory; for they who can release
others at pleasure, will certainly deliver themselves: But now I speak of that,
I pray you tell me if it be true that I have heard, that the Pope when he dies,
receives Absolution from his Confessor, and that after his death the Cardinals
give him Absolution, and give order for the singing of abundance of Masses?


Pop. It is true, I was at Rome when the last Pope died, and it was so then,
and our Books justify it.


Prot. I am much pleased with your ingenuity, so the Pope gives the Priest a
power to pardon himself; methinks he might save the charges of a Confessor; it
were enough to say, I absolve my self. But tell me, do you say Masses for any
that are in Heaven or in Hell.


Pop. No, we utterly disclaim that.


Prot. Then I perceive the Pope goes into Purgatory. I see your Popes are not
self-seeking men (as they are slandered to be) that help so many thousands out
of Purgatory, and leave themselves in.


But really, this is to me a convincing Argument, that you do not believe your
selves, but deceive poor silly people against your Consciences: For else you
might be assured the Pope would never come into Purgatory; for you say he can
keep himself out, and no man doubts of his will to do it. Besides, your
Doctrine usurps upon God's Prerogative. I had thought it was only my Father in
Heaven to whom I should have prayed, Forgive us our Trespasses: Now it seems we
must pray so to one of these Padre's upon earth. You make Subjects the supreme
Judges of all Offenses committed against their Sovereign, and your Priests sit
as Umpires between God and the Sinner, and determine what Satisfaction God
shall have, and what Penance the Sinner shall undergo. Methinks they are brave
fellows; and I now see it was not without ground that Father Cotton bragged,
That he could do any thing when he had his God in his hand, (that was the
Sacrament) and his King upon his knees (in Confession.) I think you will bring
Christ upon his knees too, for it seems you have resolved, that he shall stand
to your Priests Arbitration.

I might add to this, that you leave the souls of people to endless
perplexities; you confess, that Indulgences profit not, If a man be not in the
state of grace Bell, de Indulg. l. 1. c. 13.
, (which you say a man cannot certainly know) or if a man have not made a free
and full Confession after sufficient examination Council. Trident. de
Poenitentia.
and who knows when he has done these things sufficiently?) or if the Priest do
not intend to pardon him (and who knows another man's intentions?) and yet you
would have me so desperate to venture my soul upon such sandy foundations, that
your selves are afraid and ashamed of. But, to leave this, I perceive that
this, and diverse of your other Doctrines are grounded upon that of the merit of
good works, which because I judge a very pernicious and dangerous Doctrine; let
me hear what you can say for it: but first, let me understand your Doctrine:
for I have heard some of you cry out, that our Divines slandered them, and
profess that they did not hold Merit strictly, but cast the honor of all upon
Christ and the grace of God; therefore I pray you inform me.

Pop. I will be plain and candid with you, I do not like such Artifices; The
Council of Trent in plain terms affirms, That our good works do truly merit
increase of grace and eternal life Cap. 11. can. 32.
; and our famous Bellarmiue disputes, and proves, That good works do not only
merit in respect of Gods gracious Covenant, but in regard of the worthiness of
the works themselves, and that eternal life is not only due from Gods
liberality, but from his just judgment De Iustificat. l. 5. cap. 16. and 17.
.


Prot. I pray you tell me, has Bellarmin such expressions as these, That
because God would honor his children, he would have them to get Heaven by
their merits, which is more honorable to them, than to receive it ly Gods free
gift?


Pop. Bellarmine does say so De Iustif. l. 5. c 3.
.


Prot. I see he was a man of a brave spirit, and much a Gentleman: but in my
poor opinion, he should have taken a little care for the honor of God, as well
as of the Saints. But I have heard of many other strange expressions ascribed
to your Authors. I hear your Tapperus says, Far be it from them, that
righteous men should expect eternal life as a beggar does an alms. It is much
more glorious that they should receive it as Conquerours and Triumphers, and
possess it as a reward due to their labors In Explic, Artic, Lovan. Tom. 2
Art. 9.
; I see also this was a man of honor: And again, That our good works deserve
the reward from God as from a just Judge, and are able to abide the severe
judgment of God, though he weigh all Circumstances Ibid. art. 8.
. I am told that your renowned Vasquez says, That Eternal life is due to the
works of good men, without any Covenant, or the favor of God In 1. secundae
tom. 2. dis. 214.
. And your learned Cajetan and Dominicus a Scoto say as much, as I hear
Bellarmine reports De Iustif. l. 5. c. 17.
. And that Vasquez again says, The merits or Person of Christ adds no worth to
the works of good men ubi supr.
. This man was resolved so far to tread in Abraham's steps; as Abraham would
not receive from the King of Sodom, so he would not receive from Christ, from a
thread to a shoelatchet, lest it should be said Christ had made him rich. Are
these things true?


Pop. It is so.


Prot. Then sure I am, our Religion is the safest way; If we do err, it is in
giving too much to God; but if you err, it is no less than the worst kind of
sacrilege to rob God of so much of his glory and the honor of your Salvation.
Yet, if you can prove this, I will receive it. Produce your strongest Arguments.


Pop. First then, I prove it hence, That Eternal life is called a reward, Mat.
5. 12. and given to Laborers in the Vineyard, Mat. 20.


Prot. We must compare Scripture with Scripture: other places tell us, it is an
Inheritance, Gal. 4. 7. Romans 8. 17. The same Estate cannot be mine both by
inheritance and purchase.


Pop. Yes it may, I will prove it by an instance. The glory which Christ had
was his by inheritance (for he was heir of all things) and yet by purchase,
Philip. 2. 8, 9.


Prot. I thank you for this objection: I have scarce had any thing from you
like a solid Argument but this: It deserves an Answer; First then, this will
not reach our case: The great hinderance of merit in our works is, that the
best of them are imperfect, and a debt we owe to God before hand; but Christ's
works are of another kind, they are complete and perfect, and in part no debt;
for though when Christ was made Man, he was a debtor to God, and bound as a
creature to fulfill the Law, yet this was a voluntary act, and no debt to God,
that he would become Man, and so put himself under the Law. Besides, the
dignity of his Person made his works proportionable unto all the glory he
received; whereas all our sufferings are not worthy to be compared with our
glory, Romans 8. 18. Secondly, It might be both an Inheritance and Parchase in
Christ in diverse respects; because he had two natures; as he was God, or the
Son of God, it was his Inheritance, and belonged to his Manhood only as united
with the Godhead; as he was Man, he might purchase it, by what he did and
suffered in the flesh: But in us there are not two natures, nor any of these
pretenses to merit. Moreover Scripture speaks of two kinds of Rewards, the one
of Grace, the other of Debt, and withal affirms, that the reward which God
gives to good men is merely of grace, (as we profess) and not of debt (as you
pretend) Romans 4. 4.


Pop. Possibly it may be of both, as Bellarmin says Lib. 5. cap. 17.
.


Prot. No, the Apostle forbids that, Romans 11. 6. If by grace, it is no more of
works, otherwise grace is no more grace, but if it be of works, then it is no
more grace, otherwise work is no more work, and this reward is not given to him
that works, but believes, Rom 4. 5. No Protestant could speak our Doctrine
more fully.


Pop. But God gives this reward to men for working in his Vineyard, Mat. 20.


Prot. It is true; but still the reward appears to be of grace, because it is
alike to him that came at the last hour, as to them that had born the heat and
burden of the day, verse. 12. but that Heaven is a reward of Justice, and a due
debt, (as you profess) this Text proves not, and other Scriptures plainly
contradict.


Pop. But God is said to reward men according to their works, that is according
to the proportion of them, and that implies merit.


Prot. Not so neither; for since God is pleased to reward in us, his own gifts
and graces, not our merits, as S. Bernard speaks, he may still keep the
proportion, and to them to whom he gives more grace here, he may give more
glory hereafter; and yet there is no more merit in this additional reward than
in the rest. Again, I may as well conclude, that the blind men merited their
sight, because Christ says, Be it unto you according to your faith, Matthew. 9.
29. as you gather merit from this phrase, according to your work; therefore let
me hear if you have any other Argument.


Pop. Our works are mentioned as the causes for which God gives eternal life,
Mat. 25. Come ye blessed, for I was hungry and you fed me, and other like
places.


Prot. S. Paul did not think this a good Argument; for though he knew that it
was said of Abraham, Because thou have done this, I will bless thee, Genesis 22.
16, 17. yet he positively denies the merit of Abraham's works, Romans 4. and Gal.
3. And he says of himself, I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1. 13. yet I hope you do not think his ignorance merited mercy: The King
says, I forgive thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me, Mat. 18. 32.
Did his asking deserve it? Besides all this, if God did reward them for their
good works, this will not prove merit; if God reward men infinitely more than
their good works deserve (as God indeed does) and Bellarmine acknowledges so
much. De Iustif. lib. 5. cap. 19.



Pop. But good men are said to be worthy, Rev. 3. 4.


Prot. They are so comparatively to other men, and also by Gods gracious
acceptance in and through Christ, but otherwise the holiest Saints of God have
ever judged themselves unworthy of the least of Gods mercies (so far were they
from thinking they were worthy of eternal life) Genesis 32. 10. Mat. 8 8. And
since it is Gods grace which gives them all their worth and meetness for
Heaven, Coloss. 1. 12. it is impudence to pretend to merit from God by it. If
yet you will boast of your own worth and merit, answer the Apostles question at
your leisure, 1 Cor. 4. 7. For who makes thee to differ from another? and what
have thou that thou did not receive? now if thou did receive it, why do
thou glory as if thou had not received it? If you can baffle your conscience
now, you will find it an hard question to answer at the last day.


Pop. But eternal life is given them by Gods justice, 2 Thessalonians. 4. 6. 1 Timothy 4.
7, 8.


Prot. This word also does not prove any merit, for Gods Justice is oft-times
taken improperly, I read 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins he is just and
faithful to forgive them, yet justification is not merited as you confess, but
is an act of mere grace, being justified freely by his grace, etc. Romans 3. 24,
28. thus, 2 Pet. 1. 1. we are said to obtain precious faith through the
righteousness of God; and yet faith is the gift of God, and you confess that is
given without merit (for you grant none but justified persons can merit)
therefore, in such places, justice is taken either for equity and the congruity
of it with Gods nature or word, or for the faithfulness of God, or the like.


Pop. Since you despise my arguments, let me hear if you have better against
the merit of good works.


Prot. You shall, and methinks that one place, Luke 17. 10. should convince
you, when ye shall have done all these things which are commanded you, say we
are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do.


Pop. Christ does not affirm they are unprofitable, but only bids them say they
are unprofitable, and teaches them to be humble. Bell. de Iustif. l. 5. c. 5.
sect. quart.



Prot. Very well: then you think Christ taught them to think one thing, and say
another, that is, he taught them the art of lying, and that to God.


Pop. I answer further, that without Gods grace men are unprofitable, they only
can merit that are in the state of grace as our Church holds.


Prot. Does not your Conscience tell you the Apostles, whom Christ commands to
say thus, were in the state of grace?


Pop. Though a man cannot profit God, he may profit himself.


Prot. If he cannot profit God, he cannot properly merit any thing from God,
for that implies a proportion between giving and receiving.


Pop. It is true we are unprofitable by our selves in regard of Gods absolute
Sovereignty, but not unprofitable in regard of Gods gracious Covenant.


Prot. It is ridiculous to say, that is merit properly which depends on Gods
mere grace, and besides the Pharisees themselves, whose error Christ there
strikes at, were never so vain or absurd to think, that they could be
profitable to God, in any other sense than what you affirm.


Pop. Let me hear your other Argument.


Prot. The nature of merit shows the impossibility of it in men: It is evident
that to merit, these amongst other ingredients, are required.


First, that the work be not due already: does any man deserve an estate for
that money whereby he pays an old debt?

Secondly, That the work be our own; you do not think a noble man's Almoner,
merits by distributing his Masters Alms.

Thirdly, that it be profitable to him of whom he merits.

Fourthly, That the work be perfect; for that action which needs a pardon,
certainly cannot deserve a reward.

Fifthly, That it be suitable to the reward; if I present my Prince with an
Horse, and he requites me with a Lordship, who but a Horse would pretend this
was merited?

Pop. I must acknowledge most of these things are true, but this does not
concern our works.


Prot. That we will now examine, and first, all the works now we can do for God
are deserved by him: It fills me with horror to hear men pretending to merit
of that God, who (as they profess) created them, and every day upholds their
souls in life, and redeemed them, and is so infinitely before hand with them
every way; Tell me, dare you say that God does not deserve, that you should do
the utmost you can, for his service and glory?


Pop. I will not say so.


Prot. Then it is impudence to pretend merit from God; besides, the good works
we do, are not properly our own, but Gods; Faith is the gift of G^d, Ephesians. 2.
8. Phil. 1. 29. So is Repentance, Acts 11. 18. and 5. 31. and in general, every
good and perfect gift is from God, Jam. 1. 17.


Pop. The first grace is from God, but that I use it right, that is from my
self, and thereby it is that I merit.


Prot. St. Paul was not of your mind; what good work is there but it lies
either in willing or doing? yet both these God works in us, Phil. 2. 13. not
only the power of believing, but the act too, (and suffering also) is the gift
of God, Phil. 1. 29. and St. Paul's abundant labors in the Gospel, which
certainly amounted to merit, if there were ever such a thing in the world, and
which, if any thing, was his own act, yet he dare not take to himself, I
labored, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. No
less evident is it, that our works cannot profit God, Psalm. 16. 4. Job 22. 3.
and 35. 7, as also our best works are so far from meriting, that they need a
pardon for the infirmities accompanying them, by reason of which the best of
Saints have been afraid of the severe judgments of God even upon their best
works; so was Job Job 9. 2.
and David Psalm. 130. 2.
and Paul 1 Cor. 4. 4.
And lastly, it is so evident that our works are not proportionable to the
reward, that Bellarmin has a Chapter upon this head, to prove that good works
are rewarded above their desert; De Iustiff. l. 1. c. 19.
and therefore it is an intolerable arrogance to affirm that diverse of the
Saints have not only merit enough to purchase eternal life, but a great deal to
spare for the relief of others.


To let this point pass, now I would willingly be informed of two things, which
concern us Lay People in an especial manner;

First, Why you defraud us of the Cup.

Secondly, Why you order Prayer to be made in a language that many, nay, most
of us do not understand: For the first, you rob us of one half of the
Sacrament, viz. of the Cup; what can you say to acquit your selves from
sacrilege?


Pop. Let me hear what right you have to it.


Prot. First, I remember you disputed for Transubstantiation out of John 6.
which, you said, spoke of the Sacrament; now if you say true, there is a
passage in it, verse 53, except you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, you have no life in you; if this be spoken of the Sacrament (as you
say it is) and the wine be really his blood, then you do no less than murder
all your people, by robbing them of that which is necessary to their life.


Pop. Not so, (for as I shall show you) you have the blood in the body (or
bread.)


Prot. If it be so, yet my taking it in that manner cannot be called a drinking
it, unless you will say that every man that eats rawish meat, may be said to
drink the blood which he eats in it; but further, I think we have as great
right to the cup as your Priests, we have Christ's do this, and you pretend no
more; in short, we have both the legacy and command of Christ fortified with
this strong reason, this cup is the new Testament in my blood which is shed for
many for the remission of sins; whereby it sufficiently appears, that the sign
belongs to all that have interest in the thing, and are capable of discerning
the Lords body; and this command of Christ is express and positive, Mat. 26.
Drink ye ALL of it, it is remarkable that he does not say, eat ye all (though
they were to do so) but drink ye all of it, as foreseeing the sacrilege of
your Church; what can you say to this?


Pop. First I say here is no command but an institution only.


Prot. I understand no subtilties; but if you say, this was no command of
drinking, then it was no command of eating, to say, take, eat, and so the
Sacrament is not commanded: but people may receive or refuse it as they please,
and Christ's do this is no more than do as you list; for my part I shall never
know when Christ commands any thing, if this be not a command, for no command
can run in more express words.


Pop. If this be a command, it concerns only Priests, for such the Apostles
were, and they only were present.


Prot. Since it is evident, that eating and drinking belong to the same
persons, if the one be restrained to the Apostles; so is the other, and because
you confess the eating belongs to the people by virtue of this precept. [ Eat
of it] by the same reason also does the drinking reach to them also by virtue
of that precept, [ Drink of it.] Besides the Apostles though they were
Ministers, yet in this act they were in the peoples stead, and Christ was the
Minister or dispenser of the Sacrament, and they only the receivers of it at
this time.

Besides, as they were Ministers he bad them do this, that is, take and
distribute bread and wine to the people as he had to them; If Ministers be
under any command of administering and giving the Sacrament, certainly it is
here (for no command can be more express) and if they are commanded to give the
bread to the people, they are commanded to give the wine also, for here is no
difference at all.

Add to this that St. Paul has put this out of doubt, and he expounds this
of, and applies it to the people, for thus he writes to all the Corinthians,
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that
Cup, 1 Cor. 11. 28. in four verses together, viz. 26, 27, 28, 29. eating and
drinking are inseparably joined together, which you have so wickedly divided:
If it be a Command, Let a man examine himself, (which none will deny) then it
is a Command (which immediately follows) so let him eat this Bread, and drink
this Cup.


Pop. It does not appear, that there is an absolute command of drinking, but
only that as often as they do drink it, they should drink it in remembrance of
Christ.


Prot. If this be so, then here is no command for the Priest, either to
Consecrate the Cup, or to Receive it. And further, then here is no command for
his Consecrating or receiving the Bread neither; for there is no more than a Do
this, and that is for the Wine as well as for the Bread.


Pop. Here is a difference, for he says of the Body simply, Do this in
remembrance of me; but of the Cup, This do ye as often as you drink it.


Prot. If you lay any stress upon these words, as often as you do it, I beseech
you make use of your eyes, and you shall read that it is said of the Bread as
well as of the Cup, Verse. 26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this
Cup. Well, I am sorry to see that you dare oppose such plain Scripture upon
such pitiful pretenses. But I pray you let me ask you, I have been told that
your famous Council of Censtance, in their Canon, for the receiving the
Sacrament in one kind, have these expressions; Although Christ did Minister
this Sacrament under the forms of Bread and Wine -- And although in the
Primitive Church this -- Sacrament was received by the faithful under both
kinds -- Yet they make a Canon that it shall be received under one kind only.
Is this so?


Pop. It is true; they are the very words of the Council.


Prot. This was a wise Council indeed, wiser than Christ and all his Apostles;
but I should think we are on the safest side, having Christ and all the
Primitive Churches for our patterns: and by this I see what to judge of your
glorious pretenses, that yours is the Ancient and Apostolical Faith, and ours
(forsooth) but a new Religion. But I pray let me hear what you have to say for
this fact of yours in taking away the Cup? I see Scripture is against you, and
the Ancient Church, at least so far that for 1400. years together the people
might drink of the Cup, (if they would) as I am told your Becanus confesses In
manuali de communione sub utraque specie.
.


Pop. You are greatly mistaken, we have Scripture for us, we have examples
there, of receiving the Sacrament in one kind, Acts 2. 42. They continued in
the Apostles Doctrine, and breaking of Bread; and Acts 20. 17. They came
together to break Bread.


Prot. It is usual to express an whole Feast by this one thing, Christ went
into the Pharisees house to eat bread, Luke 14. 2. I suppose, you think it was
not a dry feast; Ioseph's Brethren sat to eat, Genesis 37. 25. so Act. 27. 35.
Paul (and the rest) took bread and eat it, yet none doubts but they had drink
with it. Besides, here is as much said of the People, as of the Ministers
drinking of the Cup, that is, neither is here mentioned; and if the silence
concerning the Cup be a good Argument, it proves that neither did partake of
it: if it be not, then both might partake of it: But what have you more to say?


Pop. You need not be troubled so much at the loss of the Cup, since the blood
is contained in the Bread, that is, in the Body, by concomitancy.


Prot. This is in effect to tell Christ the Cup was a superfluous device:
Besides, we are commanded to drink the Cup: If I should dip bread in drink and
eat it, no man will say I drink the bread. Again, this destroys the main end of
the Sacrament, which is to show forth Christ's death, and the shedding of his
blood; and this was the reason why Christ appointed the Bread and Wine apart,
as the fittest means to bring to our memories, the pouring of his blood out of
his body for us; and as God would have us to remember the thing, so he
commanded us to use this sign of drinking the Cup.


Pop. But there are many weighty reasons why it is not fit you should partake
of the Cup.


Prot. I dare not forsake plain Scripture for any subtle pretenses of Humane
Reason; but let me hear them.


Pop. 1. In some Countries Wine is not to be had. 2. Some there are who have an
antipathy against Wine, and cannot drink any. 3. There is great danger of
spilling the Wine, which is the Blood of Christ.


Prot. Are these your weighty Reasons; I see the Reason and Religion of Rome
are both of a Complexion. But I pray you how came it to pass, that Christ and
his Apostles, and all the Primitive Christians for so many hundreds of years
should prescribe and use the Cup, notwithstanding those reasons? surely if
these reasons are strong now, they were so 1660. years ago: Wine was as scarce
then (as now it is) in some Countries; abstemious persons were then as well as
now; the Wine might be spilled then as much as now. But they feared none of
these things; either they were all stupid that did not see these things, or
your Church is audacious, that dare in effect teach Christ and his Apostles,
what they should have done. It might peradventure be added, that in such places
where Wine cannot be had, or for some persons who cannot drink Wine, some other
thing proportionable to it may be allowed; but if it might not, or if in such
special cases they were confined to one kind, I am sure it is a ridiculous
consequence, that because they must be content with the Bread that cannot drink
of the Cup, therefore they that can, shall go without it; and because it may be
omitted where it cannot be had, therefore it shall be omitted where it may be
enjoyed. And for the danger of spilling of the Wine, there is also danger in
dropping some of the Bread, and so that should be denied: By this Argument also
the Priest should not meddle with the Wine, for he may spill it; but indeed
such fantastical Reasons as these deserve no Answer; they make me almost sick
to hear them.

There is only one point more, I would be informed in, what you can pretend for
it, and that is, That your Public Prayers are performed in a Language unknown
to most of your people.


Pop. What have you to say against it?


Prot. What can be said more plainly and fully against it by us, than what S.
Paul says, 1 Cor. 14. there I find some, who having the Gift of speaking with
diverse Languages, did use it without interpreting them in the Public Assembly;
those the Apostle informs, that there is a better gift and more desirable than
that of Tongues, namely Prophecy, and he uses diverse reasons, which are so
many undeniable Arguments against your Latin Prayers: He tells them it is
their duty to manage Public Worship, so as the Church may be edified, verse.
4, 5, 12. I hope you will not deny this.


Pop. None can deny that.


Prot. Well; then he tells us that what is spoken in an unknown Language does
not edify the Church, verse. 4, 11, 12, 14. 2. Yet again, the Apostle commands
that if any do speak in an unknown Tongue it must be interpreted, verse. 27. you
disobey this command. 3. He argues that Public Prayers are so to be made by
the Minister that the People may say Amen, v. 16. And he also tells us that no
man can say Amen to that which he does not understand, verse. 15. so the Apostle
stops all your starting holes.


Pop. The very word* men is Hebrew.


Prot. You dispute not only against me, but against the Apostle himself; but
Amen, though an Hebrew word, is by common use sufficiently known to us all, to
express our consent to his Prayers, and confidence that God will hear them. 4.
Yet again, he argues that strange Tongues are designed only for the Conviction
of Unbelievers, not to be used be Believers amongst themselves, unless
interpreted, v. 22. What can, or dare you say against such clear places?


Pop. S. Paul speaks not of the ordinary service of the Church, but of
extraordinary Hymns and Songs.


Prot. That is false; he speaks of the ordinary service of the Church, though
at that time there was something extraordinary in it; and besides, his reasons
reach to all times and services, ordinary or extraordinary; must we not look to
the Edification of the Church in the one as well as the other? Must not the
people say Amen in one as well as the other? Let me hear therefore what you
have to say for your selves.


Pop. Preaching ought to be in a known language; for the end of that is the
peoples Edification, but Prayers are made to God.


Prot. Though they are made to God, yet they are made by the Church, who are to
join in those Prayers, and to signify their consent by saying Amen, which
requires their understanding: And moreover, that Chapter speaks as expressly of
Praying as it does of Prophesying in the Church. Surely the people went not to
Church to sit there like senseless Images, but to offer up a reasonable
service, and to tender their Prayers and Praises unto God by the mouth of the
Minister, as they did, Act. 4. 24, They lift up their voice with one accord.
And if we pray with you, we must understand; else we cannot pray in faith (as
it is our duty to do) and we shall fall into their error to ask we know not
what.


Pop. You need not concern your self about that; you may rely upon the wisdom
and fidelity of the Church, who takes care that your prayers be right.


Prot. I confess there is this great encouragement for it, that your Church, it
seems, is wiser than St. Paul: but as a friend I advise you to give this
Counsel of relying upon your Church to the Indians, or some remote places, for
they that know her will never trust her. For my part, my Saviors words make me
cautious, If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. If I had
no other argument of your Churches Fallibility and Apostasy; this one point
were a sufficient evidence of them both. But what have you more to say?


Pop. I will give you then a Scripture instance; The Priests prayed in the
Temple when the People waited without, Luke 1. 21.


Prot. What is this to the purpose? I do not read, that the Priest prayed at
all, but only went in to offer Incense; but if he did pray, he did it alone,
not with and before the people, as your prayers are; you might as well plead
thu; Those Priests said nothing at all, and therefore your Priests need only
make a dumb show, and may serve their Latin (as well as their English) which
may be good counsel for many of them, that have so little to spare.

But seriously can you, or any rational man think, these reasons of sufficient
weight to oppose against that great Scripture rule of Edification, and the
express words and plain arguments of St. Paul; God deliver me from such a
besotting Religion.

Besides what I have said, I shall leave this with you at parting, that you do
not only oppose Scripture, but also that Ancient Church which you pretend to
reverence, and to follow her steps, and your practice is contrary to the Church
in all ancient times.

The Prayers of the Jews in public, were always made in the Hebrew tongue,
and in that Tongue God gave them those forms of Prayer and blessing which were
then used, Numb. 6. 10.

God gave the gift of Languages to that end, that the Apostles might establish
the Worship of God in every Nation in their own Language: And I am told, that
Origin reports this, to be the practice of the Church in this time (as well as
his own Judgment) That every one did pray to God in his own dialect, Greeks in
Greek, and Latins in Latin, etc. (...) Orig. contrac elsum. lib. 8.
Besides, I am told, that your own Authors, Lyra, Aquinas, and Harding, and
others confess, this was the practice of the ancient Church, and that one of
your own Councils, that of Lateran in the year 1215. did make this order, that
Whereas in many places there were mixed people of diverse Languages and customs,
the Bishops should take care to provide fit men, that should perform divine
Service amongst them, according to this difference of Rites and Languages.
Quoniam in plerisque partibus intra candem civitatem and dioecesin, permixti
sunt populi diversarum linguarum, habentes sub una fide varios ritus and mores,
districte praecipimus, ut Pontifices hujusmodi civitatum provideant vires
idoneos, qui secundum diversitatem rituum and linguarum divina officia illis
celebrent, c. 9.
Moreover, that your great Cardinal Cajetan confesses, that Prayers ought to be
in a known tongue. Ex hac Pauli doctrina habetur, quod melius ad aedificationem
Ecclesiae est orationes publicas, quae audiente populo dicuntur, dici lingua
communi clericis and populo, quam dici Latin. Cajet. in 1 Cor. 14.
Are these things so?


Pop. I cannot deny it. Their Books are extant.


Prot. Then by this, I see, how far your Church is, not only from
Infallibility, but from common honesty, that dare pretend they hold nothing But
what has been by constant Tradition conveyed to them from the Apostles times
until this day. And by this I shall judge of all your other brags of Antiquity
in your Doctrine. So I see you are obstinate and incorrigible, and therefore I
shall trouble my self no further to talk with you.


FINIS.

