THE HISTORY OF POLYBIUS, THE MEGALOPOLITAN: CONTAINING A General Account OF
THE Transactions of the World, AND Principally of the ROMAN PEOPLE, During the
First and Second Punick Wars.

Translated by Sir H. S.

To which is added, A Character of Polybius and his Writings. By Mr. Dryden.

The First Volume.

The Second Edition.

LONDON: Printed by W. Onley, for Sam. Briscoe, in Covent Garden; and R.
Wellington, at the Lute, in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCVIII.

A Mapp of Ancient SICELE Mentioned in Polybious. by Sr. H.S. Vol: I.

map of Sicily

THE CHARACTER OF POLYBIUS, AND HIS WRITINGS.
THE worthy Author of this Translation, who is very much my Friend, was pleased
to entrust it in my Hands, for many Months together, before he published it;
desiring me to review the English, and to Correct what I found amiss; which he
needed not have done, if his Modesty would have given him leave, to have relied
on his own Abilities; who is so great a Master of our Style and Language, as
the World will acknowledge him to be, after the Reading of this Excellent
Version. It Is true, that Polybius has formerly appeared in an English Dress;
but under such a Cloud of Errors, in his first Translation, that his native
Beauty, was not only hidden, but his Sense perverted, in many places; so that
he appeared unlike himself, and unworthy of that Esteem, which has always been
paid him by Antiquity, as the most Sincere, the Clearest, and most Instructive
of all Historians. He is now not only redeemed from those Mistakes, but also
restored to the first purity of his Conceptions: And the Style in which he now
speaks is as plain and unaffected, as that he wrote. I had only the pleasure of
Reading him, in a fair Manuscript, without the toil of Alteration: At least it
was so very inconsiderable, that it only cost me the dash of a Pen in some few
places, and those of very small importance; so much had the Care, the
Diligence, and Exactness of my Friend prevented my Trouble, that he left me not
the occasion of serving him in a Work which was already finished to my Hands: I
doubt not but the Reader will approve my Judgment. So happy it is for a good
Author, to fall into the hands of a Translator, who is of a Genius like his
own; who has added Experience to his natural Abilities; who has been Educated
in Business, of several kinds; has Traveled, like his Author, into many Parts
of the World, and some of them the same with the present Scene of History; has
been employed in Business of the like nature, with Polybius; and like him is
perfectly acquainted, not only with the Terms of the Mathematics, but has
searched into the bottom of that admirable Science, and reduced into Practice
the most useful Rules of it, to his own Honor, and the Benefit of his Native
Country; who, besides these Advantages, possesses the knowledge of Shipping and
Navigation; and, in few Words, is not ignorant of any thing that concerns the
Tacticks: So that here, from the beginning, we are sure of finding nothing that
is not thoroughly Understood. The Expression is clear, and the Words adequate to
the Subject. Nothing in the Matter will be mistaken; nothing of the Terms will
be misapplied: All is natural, and proper; and he who understands good Sense
and English, will be profited by the first, and delighted with the latter. This
is what may be justly said in Commendation of the Translator, and without the
note of Flattery to a Friend.

As for his Author, I shall not be ashamed to Copy from the Learned Casaubon,
(who has Translated him into Latin,) many things which I had not from my own
small Reading, and which I could not, without great difficulty, have drawn but
from his Fountain, not omitting some, which came casually in my way, by reading
the Preface of the Abbot Pichon, to the Dauphin's Tacitus, an admirable and
most useful Work; which Helps, I ingeniously profess, to have received from
them, both to clear my self from being a Plagiary of their Writings, and to
give Authority by their Names, to the weakness of my own Performance.

The taking of Constantinople by Mahomet the Great, fell into the latter times
of Pope Nicholas the Fifth; a Pope not only studious of good Letters, and
particularly of History, but also a great Encourager of it in others. From the
dreadful Overthrow of that City, and final Subversion of the Greek Empire, many
Learned Men escaped, and brought over with them into Italy, that Treasure of
ancient Authors, which by their unhappiness we now possess. And amongst the
rest, some of these remaining Fragments of Polybius. The Body of this History,
as he left it finished, was consisting of Forty Books, of which the eighth Part
is only remaining to us, entire. As for his Negotiations, when he was sent
Ambassador, either from his own Counttry-men, the Commonwealth of the Achaians,
or afterward was employed by the Romans, on their Business with other Nations,
we are obliged to Constantine the Great, for their Preservation; for that
Emperor was so much in Love with the dexterous Management, and Wisdom of our
Author, that he caused them all to be faithfully Transcribed, and made frequent
Use of them in his own Dispatches and Affairs with Foreign Princes, as his best
Guides in his Concernments with them. Polybius, as you will find in reading of
him, though he principally intended the History of the Romans, and the
Establishment of their Empire, over the greatest part of the World, which was
then known; yet had in his Eye the general History of the Times in which he
lived, not forgetting either the Wars of his own Country, with their Neighbors
of Etolia, or the concurrent Affairs of Macedonia, and the Provinces of Greece,
(which is properly so called;) nor the Monarchies of Asia and Egypt, nor the
Republic of the Carthaginians, with the several Traverses of their Fortunes,
either in relation to the Romans, or independent to the Wars, which they waged
with them, besides what happened in Spain and Sicily, and other European
Countries. The Time which is taken up in this History consists of Three and
Fifty Years, and the greast part of it is employed in the description of those
Events, of which the Author was an Eyewitness, or bore a considerable part in
the Conduct of them. But in what particular Time or Age it was, when Mankind
received that irrecoverable Loss of this Noble History, is not certainly
delivered to us. It appears to have been perfect in the Reign of Constantine,
by what I have already noted; and neither Casaubon, nor any other, can give us
any further Account concerning it. The first Attempt toward a Translation of
him, was by Command of the same Pope Nicholas the Fifth, already mentioned, who
esteemed him the Prince of Greek Historians: Would have him continually in his
Hands; and used to make this Judgment of him; That, if he yielded to one or
two, in the Praise of Eloquence, yet in Wisdom, and all other Accomplishments
belonging to a perfect Historian, he was at least equal to any other Writer,
Greek or Roman, and perhaps excelled them all. This is the Author, who is now
offered to us in our Mother Tongue, recommended by the Nobility of his Birth,
by his Institution in Arts and Sciences, by his Knowledge in Natural and Moral
Philosophy, and particularly the Politics; by his being conversant both in the
Arts of Peace and War; by his Education under his Father Lycortas, who
voluntarily deposed himself from his Sovereignty of Megalopolis, to become a
principal Member of the Achaian Commonwealth, which then flourished under the
management of Aratus, by his friendship with Scipio Affricanus, who subdued
Carthage, to whom he was both a Companion and a Consellour; and by the
Good Will, Esteem, and Intimacy which he had with several Princes of Asia,
Greece and Egypt, during his Life; and after his Decease, by deserving the
Applause and Approbation of all succeeding Ages. This Author so long neglected
in the barbarous times of Christianity, and so little known in Europe,
(according to the Fate which commonly follows the best of Writers) was pulled
from under the Rubbish which covered him, by the Learned Bishop, Nicholas the
Fifth. And some parts of his History, (for, with all his Diligence, he was not
able to recover the whole) were by him recommended to a Person (knowing both in
the Greek and Roman Tongues, and learned for the Times in which he lived) to be
Translated into Latin: And, to the Honor of our Polybius, he was amongst the
first of the Greek Writers, who deserved to have this Care bestowed on him.
Which notwithstanding, so many Hindrances occurred in this Attempt, that the
Work was not perfected in his Popedom, neither was any more than a third Part
of what is now recovered in his Hands; neither did that learned Italian, who
had undertaken him, succeed very happily in that Endeavor; for the perfect
Knowledge of the Greek Language was not yet restored; and that Translator was
but as a one-ey'd Man, amongst the Nation of the Blind, only suffered, till a
better could be found, to do right to an Author, whose Excellence required a
more just Interpreter, than the Ignorance of that Age afforded. And this gives
me occasion to admire, (says Casaubon,) that in following Times, when Eloquence
was redeemed, and the Knowledge of the Greek Language flourished, yet no Man
thought of pursuing that Design, which was so worthily begun, in those first
Rudiments of Learning. Some indeed, of almost every Nation in Europe, have been
instrumental in the recovery of several lost Parts of our Polybius, and
commented on them with good Success; but no Man before Casaubon, had reviewed
the first Translation, corrected its Errors, and put the last Hand to its
Accomplishment. The World is therefore beholding to him for this great Work;
for he has collected into one their seattered Fragments, has piec'd them
together, according to the natural Order in which they were Written; made them
intelligible to Scholars, and rendered the French Translator's Task more easy
to his Hands. Our Author is particularly mentioned, with great Honor, by
Cicero, Strabo, Josephus, and Plutarch; and in what rank of Writers they are
placed, none of the Learned need to be informed: He is copied in whole Books
together by Livy, commonly esteemed the Prince of the Roman History, and
Translated word for word: Though the Latin Historian is not to be excused, for
not mentioning the Man to whom he had been so much obliged, nor for taking as
his own the worthy Labors of another. Marcus Brutus, who preferred the Freedom
of his Country to the Obligations which he had to Julius Caesar, so prized
Polybius, that he made a Compendium of his Works, and Read him not only for his
Instruction, but for the Diversion of his Grief, when his noble Enterprise for
the Restoration of the Commonwealth had not found the Success which it
deserved. And this is not the least Commendation of our Author, that he, who
was not wholly satisfied with the Eloquence of Tully, should Epitomize
Polybius, with his own Hand. It was on the Consideration of Brutus, and the
Veneration which he paid him, that Constantine the Great took so great a
pleasure in Reading our Author, and collecting the several Treaties of his
Embassies; of which, though many are now lost, yet those which remain are a
sufficient Testimony of his Abilities; and I congratulate my Country, that a
Prince of our Extraction, (as was Constantine) has the honor of obliging the
Christian World, by these Remainders of our great Historian. It Is now time to
enter into the particular Praises of Polybius, which I have given you before,
in gross; and the first of them, (following the Method of Casaubon,) is his
wonderful Skill in Political Affairs. I had Read him in English, with the
pleasure of a Boy, before I was ten Years of Age; and yet, even then, had some
dark Notions of the Prudence with which he conducted his Design; particularly
in making me known, and almost see the Places where such and such Actions were
performed. This was the first distinction which I was then capable of making,
betwixt him and other Historians, which I Read early. But when being of a riper
Age, I took him again into my Hands; I must needs say, that I have profited
more by reading him, than by Thucydides, Appian, Dion Cassius, and all the rest
of the Greek Historians together: And amongst all the Romans, none have reached
him in this particular, but Tacitus, who is equal with him.

It Is wonderful to consider, with how much care and application he Instructs,
Counsels, Warns, Admonishes and Advises, whenever he can find a fit occasion:
He performs all these sometimes in the nature of a common Parent of Mankind;
and sometimes also limits his Instructions to particular Nations, by a friendly
Reproach of those Failings and Errors, to which they were most obnoxious. In
this last manner, he gives Instructions to the Mantinaeans, the Elaeans, and
several other Provinces of Greece; by informing them of such things as were
conducing to their Welfare. Thus he likewise warns the Romans of their
Obstinacy and Wilfulness; Vices, which have often brought them to the brink of
Ruin. And thus he frequently exhorts the Greeks in general, not to depart from
their Dependence on the Romans; nor to take false Measures by embroiling
themselves in Wars with that Victorious People, in whose Fate it was to be
Masters of the Universe. But as his peculiar Concernment was for the Safety of
his own Countrymen, the Achaians, he more than once insinuates to them, the
care of their Preservation, which consisted in submitting to the Yoke of the
Roman People, which they could not possibly avoid; and to make it Easy to
them, by a cheerful compliance with their Commands, rather than unprofitably to
Oppose them, with the hazard of those remaining Privileges, which the Clemency
of the Conquerours had left them. For this reason, in the whole Course of his
History, he makes it his chiefest business to persuade the Grecians in general,
that the growing Greatness and Fortune of the Roman Empire was not owing to
mere Chance, but to the Conduct and invincible Courage of that People; to whom
their own Virtue gave the Dominion of the World. And yet this Councellor of
Patience and Submission, as long as there was any probability of hope
remaining, to withstand the progress of the Roman Fortune; was not wanting to
the utmost of his power to resist them, at least to deferr the Bondage of his
Country, which he had long foreseen: But the Fates inevitably drawing all
things into subjection to Rome, this well-deserving Citizen was commanded to
appear in that City, where he suffered the Imprisonment of many Years: Yet even
then his Virtue was beneficial to him; the knowledge of his Learning and his
Wisdom, procuring him the friendship of the most Potent in the Senate; so that
it may be said, with Casaubon, that the same Virtue which had brought him into
distress, was the very means of his relief, and of his exaltation to greater
Dignities than those which he lost: For by the intercession of Cato the Censor,
Scipio Emilianus, who afterward destroyed Carthage, and some other principal
Noblemen, our Polybius was restored to Liberty. After which, having set it down
as a Maxim, that the Welfare of the Achaians consisted, as I have said, in
breaking their own stubborn Inclinations, and yielding up that Freedom which
they no longer could maintain, he made it the utmost aim of his Endeavors, to
bring over his Countrymen to that Persuasion: in which, though to their
Misfortunes, his Counsels were not prevalent, yet thereby he not only proved
himself a good Patriot, but also made his Fortunes with the Romans. For his
Countrymen, by their own unpardonable Fault, not long afterward, drew on
themselves their own Destruction: For when Mummius, in the Achaian War, made a
final Conquest of that Country; he dissolved the great Council of their
Commonwealth. But in the mean time, Polybius enjoyed that tranquillity of
Fortune, which he had purchased by his Wisdom. In that private State, being
particularly dear to Scipio and Lelius, and some of the rest who were then in
the Administration of the Roman Government: And that Favor which he had gained
amongst them, he employed not in heaping Riches to himself; but as a means of
performing many considerable Actions; as particularly, when Scipio was sent to
demolish Carthage, he went along with him, in the nature of a Counselor, and
Companion of his Enterprise. At which time, receiving the Command of a Fleet
from him, he made Discoveries in many parts of the Atlantic Ocean; and
especially on the Shores of Africa: And doing many good Offices to all sorts of
People, whom he had power to Oblige, especially to the Grecians, who in Honor
of their Benefactor, caused many Statues of him to be erected; as Pausanias has
Written. The particular Gratitude of the Locrians in Italy, is also an
undeniable Witness of this Truth; who, by his Mediation being discharged from
the burden of Taxes, which oppressed them, through the hardship of those
Conditions which the Romans had imposed on them in the Treaty of Peace;
professed themselves to be owing for their Lives and Fortunes, to the only
Interest and good Nature of Polybius; which they took care to Express, by all
manner of Acknowledgment. Yet as beneficent as he was, the greatest obligement
which he could lay on Humane-kind, was the Writing of this present History:
Wherein he has left a perpetual Monument of his public Love to all the World,
in every succeeding Age of it, by giving us such Precepts as are most conducing
to our common Safety, and our Benefit. This Philanthropy (which we have not a
proper Word in English to express) is every where manifest in our Author. And
from hence proceeded that divine Rule which he gave to Scipio, that whenever
he went abroad, he should take care not to return to his own House, before he
had acquired a Friend, by some new Obligement. To this Excellency of Nature we
owe the Treasure which is contained in this most useful Work: This is the
Standard by which all good and prudent Princes ought to regulate their Actions:
None have more need of Friends than Monarchs. And though Ingratitude is too
frequent, in the most of those who are Obliged; yet Encouragement will work on
generous Minds; and if the Experiment be lost on Thousands, yet it never fails
on All. And one virtuous Man in a whole Nation is worth the buying; as one
Diamond is worth the search in a heap of Rubbish. But a narrow-licarted Prince,
who thinks that Mankind is made for him alone, puts his Subjects in a way of
deserting him on the first Occasion; and teaches them to be as sparing of their
Duty, as he is of his Bounty. He is sure of making Enemies, who will not be at
the cost of rewarding his Friends and Servants. And by letting his People see
he loves them not, instructs them to live upon the square with him, and to make
him sensible in his turn, that Prerogatives are given, but Privileges are
inherent. As for Tricking, Cunning, and that which in Sovereigns they call
King-craft, and Reason of State in Commonwealths: To them and their Proceedings
Polybius is an open Enemy. He severely repoves all faithless Practices, and
that (...), or vicious Policy, which is too frequent in the management of the
Public. He commends nothing but Plainness, Sincerity, and the Common-good,
undisguis'd, and set in a true Light, before the People: Not but that there may
be a Necessity of saving a Nation, by going beyond the Letter of the Law, or
even sometimes by superseding it; but then that Necessity must not be
Artificial, it must be Visible, it must be strong enough to make the Remedy not
only pardoned, but desired, to the major part of the People: Not for the
Interest only of some few Men, but for the Publick-safety, for otherwise, one
Infringement of a Law, draws after it the practice of subverting all the
Liberties of a Nation, which are only entrusted with any Government; but can
never be given up to it. The best way to distinguish betwixt a pretended
Necessity and a true, is to observe if the Remedy be rarely applied, or
frequently. In times of Peace, or times of War and public Distractions, which
are the most usual Causes of sudden Necessities. From hence Casaubon infers,
That this our Author, who preaches Virtue, and Probity, and Plain-dealing,
ought to be studied principally by Kings and Ministers of State: And that
Youth, which are bred up to succeed in the management of Business, should read
him carefully, and imbibe him thoroughly, detesting the Maxims that are given by
Machiavel and others, which are only the Instruments of Tyranny, Further-more,
(continues he) the study of Truth is perpetually joined with the love of
Virtue: For there is no Virtue which derives not its original from Truth: As on
the contrary, there is no Vice which has not its beginning from a Lie. Truth is
the foundation of all Knowledge, and the cement of all Societies. And this is
one of the most shining Qualities in our Author. I was so strongly persuaded of
this myself, in the perusual of the present History, that I confess, amongst
all the Ancients, I never found any who had the Air of it so much; and amongst
the Moderns, none but Philip de Commines. They had this common to them, that
they both changed their Masters: But Polybius changed not his side, as Philip
did: He was not bought off to another Party; but pursued the true Interest of
his Country, even when he served the Romans. Yet since Truth, (as one of the
Philosophers has told me) lies in the bottom of a Well; so it is hard to draw it
up: much Pains, much Diligence, much Judgment is necessary to hand it to us,
even Cost is oftentimes required; and Polybius was wanting in none of these. We
find but few Historians of all Ages, who have been diligent enough in their
search for Truth: it is their common method to take on trust what they
distribute to the Public; by which means a Falsehood once received from a famed
Writer, becomes traditional to Posterity. But Polybius weighed the Authors from
whom he was forced to borrow the History of the Times immediately preceding
his; and oftentimes corrected them, either by comparing them each with other,
or by the Lights which he had received from ancient Men of known Integrity
amongst the Romans, who had been conversant in those Affairs, which were then
managed, and were yet living to Instruct him. He also learned the Roman Tongue,
and attained to that knowledge of their Laws, their Rights, their Customs and
Antiquities, that few of their own Citizens understood them better; having
gained permission from the Senate, to search the Capitol, he made himself
familiar with their Records, and afterward translated them into his
Mother Tongue. So that he taught the Noblemen of Rome their own Municipal Laws,
and was accounted more skilful in them than Fabius Pictor, a Man of the
Senatorian Order, who wrote the Transactions of the Punick Wars. He who
neglected none of the Laws of History, was so careful of Truth, (which is the
principal,) that he made it his whole Business to deliver nothing to Posterity,
which might deceive them; and by that Diligence and Exactness may easily be
known to be studious of Truth, and a lover of it. What therefore Brutus thought
worthy to Transcribe with his own Hand out of him, I need not be ashamed to
Copy after him. I believe, says Polybius, That Nature herself has constituted
Truth as the supreme Deity, which is to be adored by Mankind; and that she has
given it greater Force than any of the rest: For being opposed, as she is on
all sides, and appearances of Truth so often passing for the thing itself, in
behalf of plausible Falsehoods; yet, by her wonderful Operation, she insinuates
herself into the Minds of Men; sometimes exerting her Strength immediately, and
sometimes lying hid in Darkness for length of time; but at last she struggles
through it, and appears Triumphant over Falsehood. This sincerity Polybius
preferred to all his Friends, and even to his Father; In all other Offices of
Life, says he, I praise a lover of his Friends, and of his Native Country; but
in writing History, I am obliged to divest myself of all other Obligations, and
sacrifice them all to Truth. Aratus, the Sicyonian, in the Childhood of our
Author, was chief of the Achaian Commonwealth; a Man in principal Esteem, both
in his own Country, and all the Provinces of Greece; admired universally for
his Probity, his Wisdom, his just Administration, and his Conduct: In
remembrance of all which his grateful Countrymen, after his Decease, ordained
him those Honors which are only due to Heroes. Him our Polybius had in
Veneration, and formed himself by imitation of his Virtues; and is never
wanting in his Commendations through the course of his History. Yet, even this
Man, when the cause of Truth required it, is many times reproved by him, for
his slowness in Counsel, his tardiness in the beginning of his Enterprises, his
tedious, and more than Spanish Deliberations; and his heavy and cowardly
Proceedings are as freely blamed by our Polybius, as they were afterward by
Plutarch, who questionless drew his Character from this History. In plain
Terms, that wise General scarce ever performed any great Action but by Night.
The glittering of a Sword before his Face was offensive to his Eyes: Our Author
therefore boldly accuses him of his Faint-heartedness; attributes the Defeat at
Caphiae wholly to him, and is not sparing to affirm, That all Peloponnesus was
filled with Trophies, which were set up, as the Monuments of his Losses. He
sometimes Praises, and at other times Condemns the Proceedings of Philip King
of Macedon, the Son of Demetrius, according to the Occasions which he gave him,
by the variety and inequality of his Conduct; and this most exquisite on either
side.

He more than once Arraigns him for the inconstancy of his Judgment: And
chapters even his own Aratus, on the same Head; showing by many Examples,
produced from their Actions, how many Miseries they had both occasioned to the
Grecians. And attributing it to the weakness of humane Nature, which can make
nothing perfect. But some Men are brave in Battle, who are weak in Counsel,
which daily Experience sets before our Eyes, others deliberate wisely, but are
weak in the performing part; and even no Man is the same to Day which he was
Yesterday, or may be to Morrow. On this account. says our Author, a good Man is
sometimes liable to Blame, and a bad Man, though not often, may possibly
deserve to be Commended. And for this very reason he severely taxes Timaeus, a
malicious Historian, who will allow no kind of Virtue to Agathocles the Tyrant
of Sicily; but detracts from all his Actions, even the most Glorious, because
in general he was a vicious Man. Is it to be thought, says Casaubon, that
Polybius loved the Memory of Agathocles the Tyrant, or hated that of the
Virtuous Aratus? But it is one thing to commend a Tyrant, and another thing to
overpass in silence, those laudable Actions which are performed by him: Because
it argues an Author of the same Falsehood, to pretermit, what has actually been
done, as to feign those Actions which have never been. It will not be
unprofitable in this place, to give another famous Instance of the Candor and
Integrity of our Historian. There had been an ancient League betwixt the
Republic of Achaia and the Kings of Egypt, which was entertained by both
Parties, sometimes on the same Conditions, and sometimes also the Confederacy
was renewed on other Terms. It happened in the 148th Olympiad, that Ptolomy
Epiphanes, on this Occasion, sent one Demetrius his Ambassador to the
Commonwealth of Achaia. That Republic was then ruinously divided into two
Factions: whereof the Heads on one side, were Philopoemen, and Lycortas the
Father of our Author; of the adverse Party, the Chief was Aristaenus, with some
other principal Achaians. The Faction of Philopoemen was prevalent in the
Council, for renewing the Confederacy with the King of Egypt: In order to
which, Lycortas received a Commission to go to that Court, and treat the
Articles of Alliance. Accordingly he goes, and afterward returns, and gives
Account to his Superiors, that the Treaty was concluded. Aristaenus, hearing
nothing but a bare Relation of a League that was made, without any thing
belonging to the Conditions of it, and well knowing that several forms of those
Alliances had been used in the former Negotiations, asked Lycortas in the
Council, according to which of them this present Confederacy was made? To this
Question of his Enemy, Lycortas had not a word to answer. For it had so
happened by the wonderful neglect of Philopoemen and his own, and also that of
Ptolomy's Counselors; or, as I rather believe, by their Craft contrived, that
the whole Transaction had been loosly and confusedly managed, which, in a
Matter of so great importance, redounded to the Scandal and Ignominy of
Philopoemen and Lycortas, in the Face of that grave Assembly. Now these
Proceedings our Author so relates, as if he had been speaking of Persons to
whom he had no manner of relation, though one of them was his own Father, and the
other always esteemed by him in the place of a better Father. But being mindful
of the Law which himself had instituted, concerning the indispensible Duty of
an Historian, (which is Truth) he chose rather to be thought a lover of it,
than of either of his Parents. It Is true, Lycortas in all probability was dead,
when Polybius wrote this History; but had he been then living, we may safely
think that his Son would have assumed the same Liberty, and not feared to have
offended him in behalf of Truth. Another part of this Veracity is also
deserving the notice of the Reader, though, at the same time, we must conclude,
that it was also an effect of a sound Judgment; that he perpetually explodes
the Legends of Prodigies and Miracles, and instead of them, most accurately
searches into the natural Causes, of those Actions which he describes; for,
from the first of these, the latter follows of direct consequence. And for this
reason he professes an immortal Enmity to those Tricks and Jugglings, which the
Common People believe as real Miracles, because they are ignorant of the Causes
which produced them. But he had made a diligent Search into them, and found out
that they preceeded either from the fond Credulity of the People, or were
imposed on them by the Craft of those whose Interest it was that they should be
believed. You hear not in Polybius, that it Rained Blood, or Stones; that a
Bull had Spoken, or a thousand such Impossibilities, with which Livy
perpetually crowds the Calends of almost every Consulship. His New Years could
no more begin without them, during his Description of the Punick Wars, than our
Prognosticating Almanacks without the Effects of the present Oppositions
betwixt Saturn and Jupiter, the foretelling of Comets and Coruscations in the
Air, which seldom happen at the times assigned by our Astrologers, and almost
always fail in their Events. If you will give Credit to some other Authors,
some God was always present with Hannibal, or Scipio, to direct their Actions:
That a visible Deity wrought Journey-work under Hannibal, to conduct him
through the difficult Passages of the Alps; and another did the same Office of
Drudgery for Scipio, when he Besieged New Carthage, by draining the Waters,
which otherwise would have drowned his Army, in their rash Approaches. Which
Polybius observing, says wittily and truly, That the Authors of such fabulous
kind of Stuff, write Tragedies, not Histories. For, as the Poets, when they are
at a loss for the Solution of a Plot, bungle up their Catastrophe, with a God
descending in a Machine: So these inconsiderate Historians, when they have
brought their Heroes into a Plunge, by some rash and headlong Undertaking,
having no Humane way remaining to disingage them with their Honor, are forced
to have recourse to Miracle; and introduce a God for their Deliverance. It Is a
common Frenzy of the ignorant Multitude, says Casaubon, to be always engaging
Heaven on their side; and indeed it is a successful Stratagem of any General,
to gain Authority among his Soldiers, if he can persuade them, that he is the
Man by Fate appointed for such, or such an Action, though most impracticable.
To be favored of God, and command, (if it may be permitted so to say,) the
extraordinary concourse of Providence, sets off a Hero, and makes more
specious the Cause for which he Fights, without any consideration of Morality,
which ought to be the beginning and end of all our Actions. For where that is
violated, God is only present in permission; and suffers a Wrong to be done,
but not Commands it. Light Historians, and such as are Superstitious in their
Natures, by the artifice of feigned Miracles, captivate the gross
Understandings of their Readers, and please their Fancies by Relations of
things which are rather Wonderful than True: But such as are of a more profound
and solid Judgment, (which is the Character of our Polybius,) have recourse
only to their own natural Lights, and by them pursue the Methods at least of
Probability, if they cannot arrive to a settled Certainty. He was satisfied
that Hannibal was not the first, who had made a Passage through the Alps, but
that the Gauls had been before him in their Descent on Italy; and also knew,
that this most prudent General, when he laid his Design of Invading that
Country, had made an Alliance with the Gauls, and prepossessed them in his
Favor, and before he stirred a foot from Spain, had provided against all those
Difficulties which he foresaw in his Attempt, and compassed his Undertaking,
which indeed was void of Miracles, but full of Conduct, and Military
Experience. In the same manner Scipio, before he departed from Rome, to take
his Voyage into Spain, had carefully considered every particular Circumstance
which might cross his Purpose, and made his Enterprise as easy to him as
humane Prudence could provide; so that he was Victorious over that Nation, not
by virtue of any Miracle, but by his admirable Forecast, and wise Conduct in
the execution of his Design. Of which, though Polybius was not an Eyewitness, he
yet had it from the best Testimony, which was that of Lelius, the Friend of
Scipio, who accompanied him in that Expedition, of whom our Author with great
Diligence inquired concerning every thing of Moment, which happened in that
War, and with whom he commends for hi^ sincerity in that Relation. Whenever
h^ gives us the Account of any considerable Action, he never fails to tell us
why it succeeded, or for what reason it miscarried; together with all the
antecedent Causes of its Undertaking, and the manner of its performance; all
which he accurately Explains. Of which I will select but some few Instances,
because I want Leisure to expatiate on many. In the Fragments of the 17th Book
he makes a learned Dissertation concerning the Macedonian Phalanx, or gross
Body of Foot, which was formerly believed to be Invincible, till Experience
taught the contrary, by the success of the Battle, which Philip lost to the
Commonwealth of Rome; and the manifest and most certain Causes are therein
related, which prove it to be inferior to the Roman Legions. When also he had
told us in his former Books, of the three great Battles, wherein Hannibal had
Overthrown the Romans, and the last at Cannae, wherein he had in a manner
Conquered that Republic, he gives the Reasons of every Defeat, either from the
Choice of Ground, or the Strength of the Foreign Horse in Hannibal's Army, or
the ill-timing of the Fight on the vanquished side. After this, when he
describes the turn of Fortune on the Part of the Romans, you are visibly
conducted upwards to the Causes of that Change; and the reasonableness of the
Method which was afterward pursued by that Commonwealth, which raised it to the
Empire of the World. In these and many other Examples, which for brevity are
omitted, there is nothing more plain, than that Polybius denies all Power to
Fortune, and places the Sum of Success in Providence. (...), indeed are his
Words. It Is a Madness to make Fortune the Mistress of Events, because in
herself she is nothing, can Rule nothing, but is ruled by Prudence. So that
whenever our Author seems to attribute any thing to Chance, he speaks only with
the Vulgar, and desires so to be understood: But here I must make bold to part
Company with Casaubon for a Moment. He is a vehement Friend to any Author with
whom he has taken any Pains; and his Partialily to Persius, in opposition to
Juvenal, is too fresh in my Memory to be forgotten. Because Polybius will allow
nothing to the Power of Chance, he takes an occasion to infer, that he believed
a Providence, sharply inveighing against those who have accused him of Atheism.
He makes Suidas his Second in this Quarrel, and produces his single Evidence,
and that but a bare Assertion neither without Proof, that Polybius believed,
with us Christians, God administered all humane Actions and Affairs. But our
Author will not be defended in this case, his whole History reclaims to that
Opinion. When he speaks of Providence, or of any Divine Admonition, he is as
much in jest, as when he speaks of Fortune; it is all to the Capacity of the
Vulgar. Prudence was the only Divinity which he Worshipped; and the possession
of Virtue the only End which he Proposed. If I would have disguised this to the
Reader, it was not in my Power. The Passages which manifestly prove his
Irreligion, are so obvious, that I need not quote them. Neither do I know any
reason, why Casaubon should in large so much in his Justification, since to
believe false Gods, and to believe none, are Errors of the same Importance. He
who knew not our God, saw through the ridiculous Opinions of the Heathens
concerning theirs; and not being able without Revelation, to go farther,
stopped at home in his own Breast, and made Prudence his Goddess, Truth his
Search, and Virtue his Reward. If Casaubon, like him, had followed Truth, he
would have saved me the Ungrateful Pains of contradicting him: But even the
Reputation of Polybius, if there were occasion, is to be sacrificed to Truth,
according to his own Maxim. As for the Wisdom of our Author, whereby he
wonderfully foresaw the Decay of the Roman Empire, and those Civil Wars which
turned it down from a Commonwealth, to an absolute Monarchy: He who will take
the Pains to review this History will easily perceive, that Polybius was of the
best sort of Prophets, who predict from Natural Causes those Events, which must
naturally proceed from them.

And these things were not to succeed even in the compass of the next Century
to that wherein he lived. But the Person was then living, who was the first
mover toward them; and that was that great Scipio Africanus, who by cajolling
the People, to break the Fundamental Constitutions of the Government, in his
Favor, by bringing him too early to the Consulship, and afterward by making
their Discipline of War precarious, First taught them to devolve the Power and
Authority of the Senate, into the hands of one, and then to make that one to be
at the Disposition of the Soldiery; which though he practiced at a time, when
it was necessary for the safety of the Commonwealth, yet it drew after it those
fatal Consequences, which not only ruined the Republic, but also, in process
of time, the Monarchy it self. But the Author was too much in the Interests of
that Family, to Name Scipio; and therefore he gives other Reasons, to which I
refer the Reader, that I may avoid prolixity. By what degrees Polybius arrived
to this height of Knowledge, and consummate Judgment in Affairs, it will not
be hard to make the Reader comprehend; for presupposing in him, all that Birth
or Nature could give a Man, who was formed for the Management of great Affairs,
and capable of Recording them; he was likewise entered from his Youth into
those Employments which add Experience to Natural Endowments. Being joined in
Commission with his Father Lycortas, and the Younger Aratus, before the Age of
Twenty, in an Embassy to Egypt. After which he was perpetually in the Business
of his own Commonwealth, or that of Rome. So that it seems to be one Part of
the Roman Felicity, that he was Born in an Age, when their Commonweath was
growing to the height, that he might be the Historian of those great Actions,
which were performed not only in his Lifetime, but the chief of them even in
his Sight. I must confess that the Preparations to his History, (or the
Prolegomena, as they are called) are very large, and the Digressions in it, are
exceeding frequent. But as to his Preparatives, they were but necessary, to
make the Reader comprehend the Drift and Design of his Undertaking. And the
Digressions are also so Instructive, that we may truly say, They Transcend the
Profit which we receive from the Matter of Fact. Upon the whole we may conclude
him to be a great Talker; but we must grant him to be a Prudent Man. We can
spare nothing of all he says, it is so much to our Improvement: and if the rest
of his History had remained to us, in all probability it would have been more
close; for we can scarce conceive what was left in nature for him to add, he
has so emptied almost all the Common-places of Digressions already; or if he
could have added any thing, those Observations might have been as Useful, and
as Necessary, as the rest which he has given us, and that are descended to our
Hands. I will say nothing farther of the Excerpta, which (as Casaubon thinks)
are part of that Epitome, which was begun to be made by Marcus Brutus, but
never finished; nor of those Embassies which are collected and compiled by the
command of Constantine the Great: Because neither of them are translated in
this Work. And whether or no they will be added in another Impression, I am not
certain. The Translator of these Five Books having carried his Work no farther,
than it was Perfect. He, I suppose, will acquaint you with his own Purpose in
the Preface, which I hear he intends to prefix before Polybius.

Let us now hear Polybius himself describing an accomplished Historian, wherein
we shall see his own Picture, as in a Glass, reflected to him, and given us
afterward to behold, in the Writing of this History.

Plato said of old, That it would be happy for Mankind, if either Philosophers
administered the Government, or that Governors applied themselves to the study
of Philosophy. I may also say, That it would be happy for History, if those who
undertake, to Write it, were Men conversant in Political Affairs, who applied
themselves seriously to their Undertaking; not negligently, but as such, who
were fully persuaded, that they undertook a Work of the greatest Moment, of the
greatest Excellency, and the most necessary for Mankind: Establishing this, as
the Foundation whereon they are to Build, that they can never be capable of
performing their Duty, as they ought, unless they have formed themselves
beforehand to their Undertaking, by Prudence, and long Experience of Affairs;
without which Endowments and Advantages, if they attempt to Write a History,
they will fall into a various and endless Labyrinth of Errors.

When we hear this Author Speaking, we are ready to think our selves engaged in
a Conversation with Cato, the Censor, with Lelius, with Massinissa, and with
the two Scipio's, that is, with the greatest Heroes, and most prudent Men of
the greatest Age, in the Roman Commonwealth. This sets me so on Fire, when I
am Reading either here, or in any ancient Author, their Lives and Actions that
I cannot hold from breaking out with Montaign, into this Expression: It Is just,
says he, for every honest Man to be Content with the Government, and Laws of
his Native Country, without endeavoring to alter or subvert them: But if I
were to choose where I would have been Born, it should have been in a
Commonwealth. He indeed names Venice; which, for many Reasons, should not be my
Wish: But, rather Rome in such an Age, if it were possible, as that wherein
Polybius lived; or that of Sparta, whose Constitution for a Republic, is by
our Author, compared with Rome; to which he justly gives the Preference.

I will not undertake to compare Polybius and Tacitus; though, if I should
attempt it, upon the whole Merits of the Cause, I must allow to Polybius the
greater Comprehension, and the larger Soul; to Tacitus the greater Eloquence,
and the more close Connection of his Thoughts. The Manner of Tacitus in
Writing, is more like the Force and Gravity of Demosthenes; that of Polybius
more like the Copiousness, and diffusive Character of Cicero. Amongst
Historians, Tacitus imitated Thucidydes, and Polybius, Herodotus. Polybius
foresaw the Ruin of the Roman Commonwealth, by Luxury, Lust, and Cruelty;
Tacitus foresaw in the Causes, those Events which should Destroy the Monarchy.
They are both of them, without dispute, the best Historians in their several
kinds. In this they are alike, that both of them suffered under the Iniquity of
the Times in which they lived: both their Histories are dismembered, the
greatest part of them lost, and they are interpolated in many places. Had their
Works been perfect, we might have had longer Histories, but not better.
Casaubon, according to his usual Partiality, condemns Tacitus, that he may
raise Polybius, who needs not any sinister Artifice, to make him appear equal
to the best. Tacitus described the Times of Tyranny; but he always Writes with
some kind of Indignation against them. It Is not his fault, that Tiberius,
Caligula, Nero, and Domitian, were bad Princes. He is accused of Malevolence,
and of taking Actions in the worst Sense; but we are still to remember, that
those were the Actions of Tyrants. Had the rest of his History remained to us,
we had certainly found a better Account of Vespasian, Titus, Nerva, and Trajan,
who were virtuous Emperors; and he would have given the Principles of their
Actions a contrary turn. But it is not my Business to defend Tacitus; neither
dare I deeide the Preserence betwixt him and our Polybius. They are equally
profitable, and instructive to the Reader; but Tacitus more useful to those who
are Born under a Monarchy; Polybius, to those who live in a Republic. What may
farther be added concerning the History of this Author, I leave to be
performed, by the Elegant Translator of his Work.

John Dryden.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOR.
MY Attempt to render this Excellent Author into English, puts me under a
necessity of making my Excuse to the World for ingageing in so nice and
difficult a Work; And I frankly, first, confess, That I had no Warrant from my
Depth of Learning, whereof to make Ostentation, and wherein indeed, he who most
abounds, ever finds least cause of boasting. This I own to prevent the
Critics, who, for the most part, while they amuse and busy themselves about
the Interpretation of Words, show but little Insight in the Matter whereof
their Authors treat; which is the solid and useful part of Knowledge. Nor was
it a Desire to be seen in Print, it being never my Purpose to appear in
Public. For who of but tolerable Sense would take pleasure to be found among a
Crowd of Fools, who in these our Days so much pester the Press? My Motive then,
in a word, was principally to comply with the Injunctions of a Great Man, and a
Friend, whose Commands to me while he lived were Sacred, as his Memory must be
now he is removed from among us. To this Gentleman interpreting now and then
some Select Passages out of Polybius, to entertain his Retirement, he grew so
far in love with our Author, and so charmed with the Force and Perfection of
the Roman Discipline, that no Excuse I could make of my Insufficiency availed,
but I must render him into English. This Command, I say, which could not be
decently excused, begat the Attempt, which, by new Importunity, is permitted to
visit the World; when he, for whose sake it was done, has left it, to enjoy
that Repose in a better, which his Enemies (jealous of his Virtue) maliciously
refused him. And he who would have gloried to Die in the Service of his
Country, who was the best Friend and every way one of the best Men of the Age,
had the mortification to be a Sacrifice to Slander, and the restless
Persecution of those who thought, and perhaps justly, that they could not shine
till he should be extinguished. My diffidence then, to do right to my Author,
being vanquished by the Importunity of my Friend, I took assurance to think,
that my Defects on the one hand might in some degree be supplied by the long
Acquaintance and Conversation I have had in those Matters which are principally
treated by Polybius: who himself and most others of that sort, who have been
interpreted to us by mere Scholars and Book-learned Men, have been so misused,
that it may be said, They are rather Tradue'd than Translated: And I dare
appeal to the discernment of the knowing World, Whether the great Genius of one
of the most extraordinary Men of the last Age, Mr. Hobbs, appears like himself
in his Translation of Thucydides! And if he, who when he writes his own
Thoughts and Matter, is so admirable both for Purity of Language, and Strength
of Reason, does not there, for the most part, disappoint the Expectation of the
Reader? It Is no wonder then if Undertakers of so much a lower Form, as most are
who engage in these Works, so seldom succeed, notwithstanding their Knowledge
in Letters and Skill in Tongues, when in their own Mother-language, I will be
hold to affirm, they will be often found at a loss to conceive rightly of the
Since of many Passages in History, where Military, Naval or the like
Occurrences are handled. So necessary it will be found to be a Man of the
World; of Business, Science, and Conversation, who would engage with any
prospect of doing well in such Enterprises. How it may happen to me in this
Essay, is left to the Candor of the knowing Reader: And if it shall appear I
have played the Fool, it chances to be in so very good Company, that I shall be
content with my share of Shame. It is an Employment wherein he who performs
best, Trafficks for small Gain, and it would be unfair and unconscionable to
make the Loss more than the Advent^^^ and, at the worst, it having been rather
a D^version than a Task, helping me to while away a few long Winter Hours,
which is some Recreation to one who has led a Life of Action and Business, and
whose Humor and Fortune suit not with the Pleasures of the Town. Wherefore I
shall have little cause of complaint, if my well-meaning in consenting to its
Publication be not so well received: I have been worse treated by the World, to
which I am as little ind^bted as most Men, who have spent near Thirty Years in
Public Trusts; wherein I labored and wasted my Youth and the Vigor of my
Days, more to the Service of my Country and the Impairment of my Health than
the Improvement of my Fortune, having stood the Mark of Envy, Slander, and hard
Usage, without gleaning the least of those Advantages which use to be the
Anchorhold and Refuge of such as whether wrongfully or otherwise suffer the
Strokes of Censure.

I was saying how difficult I thought it was to Translate a good Author well:
there is no way more beaten and traveled, yet none more hard to find; Xenophon
and Thucydides have the Voice of the Learned, in favor of their Eloquence, and
other Advantages of Style and Manner in their Writings: But where, I say, do
these Excellencies shine in their Interpreters, who I take for granted wanted
not competent Furniture of Knowledge in the Greek Tongue? For my self, I can
own, without scruple, that I am not touched nor edified by what I there read;
their Charms are not by their Spokesmen conveyed to my Understanding. Let us,
for trial, consult an Example out of Thucydides, and make choice of Pericles's
Funeral Oration, so much applauded by Learned Men; what I pray does it speak in
English? The Substance and Materials I confess are seen, but the Composition,
the Style and Structure, are slight and Gothic: And, for my own particular, I
can ingenuously say, that I have no Bowels, no Tears for those poor Men; I
neither hear their Groans, nor see their Merits, as they are rendered in our
Language. And this will always happen to Translators, who are but plain mere
Scholars, and even to others who with over anctious scrupulosity walk so
timorously in the Track of their Authors, that they cannot hold pace with them;
and think they do enough, if they but keep them in view, though at never so great
a distance. For it is not Transcribing his Words, but Transfusing his Mind, that
does an Author justice; if the Spirit and the Genius do not in some degree
every where appear, we do but slammer out his Meaning, and so draw his Picture,
that but for the Title, no body could know it. Yet I am in no doubt, that Mr.
Hobbs could have abundantly shown and displayed all the Beauties, and justly
expressed the Energy of the Style, and the Graces and Perfections of that
Oration; and given us another kind of Version of Thucydides, had not his fear
of falling into the Hands of merciless Critics withheld him. But while I study
to conceive aright, and explain my Sense of the Duty of a Translator, I am at
the same moment deeply conscious of my own weak Performance; so much easier it
is to think justly, than to do well; and under this Self-sentence I trust I may
find some shelter against Censure. I know, that to have done Polybius exact
justice, I ought to have studied him longer; I should have been better
acquainted with his Life and Manners, and as familiar with him, if possible, as
his Friends Scipio and Lelius; for so I might in many places, obscure in words,
have penetrated his Meaning by my knowledge of the Man: But what shall I say? I
have dealt him the fairest measure I was able, I have made him speak the best
English I could, without hurting his Sense, while I have neither setter'd my
self to his Words, nor been tied so much as to his Expression: But when I
thought I knew his Mind, I uttered it in the best manner I could. Thus I have
proceeded in the Narrative-part, and his Accounts of Matter of Fact; but where
he Moralizes, Instructs and Acts the Orator, which are the most difficult to be
handled, I have there dealt more tenderly and shown the best care I was able to
approach his manner. Polybius was, without all question, a very great Man, he
was Noble, and of the first Rank of his Country, a Soldier, a Statesman and a
Philosopher, and withal of an excellent Understanding; Polished and Cultivated
by Business and eminent Trusts, and Tempered and Balasted by his own and his
Country's Afflictions. So that it may be said, No Man ever engaged in a Work of
this sort better furnished with Requisites; and he seems to fill the Chair,
when he treats distinctly on any of the above-named Subjects: But when he talks
of War, which is the Favorite, Subject and Darling of History; How like a
General and perfect Master in that Trade does he acquit himself! How exact and
painful is he in his Descriptions of Battles by Land and Sea, descending to
every particular that may afford light to his Reader! How finely, fruitfully,
justly, and morally does he Instruct and Reason on Events of Councils, Battles
and all kind of Transactions! How does Hannibal's Craft and Wisdom, and
Flaminius's Rashness and Folly appear in his Account of the Battle of
Thrasymene, insomuch that from Readers we become Spectators of all those
Exploits! How faithful is he to the Character of the Carthaginians, in their
Naval Knowledge and Strength! And with what Frankness, Assurance and
Impartiality does he show the Romans Ignorance, and reprove their Rashness,
when he compares those two People on the Subject of their Maritime Affairs and
Adventures! All which we read with pleasure, and approve with ease. So that, in
a word, he will be found throughout to preserve his Character of a Grave, Able
and Impartial Writer. He is censured I know somewhere, for his little Religion,
which Aspersion his own Words will best wipe off, where, in his Fifth Book, he
so solemnly reprehends Philip, Son of Demetrius; and the Etolians for their
impious Razing of Temples, and casting down of Statues, and the Altars of the
Gods. But I should entrench on the Province of a much abler Undertaker, should
I further prosecute this Subject; the Character of Polybius being, as I am
told, undertaken by One, who of all others, is best able to do him Justice.
Wherefore leaving my Author in so good Hands, I proceed to the Subject, and
observe that the Person, the Matter, and the Period of Time wherein he Wrote,
seemed to conspire to the Dignity and Perfection of the Work, which was a Body
of General History, consisting of Forty Books; of which Number, to the
unspeakable Loss of the World, Five only entire have descended down to us: But
it has happily chanced, that they are the Five Books from the beginning in
their Order; though the two first not being of the Body of his History, and
rather a Proem to that great Undertaking; the Reader will not be Surpised, nor
take Offense to see the Preface, as I may say, to what is now published, swell
so much out of all Proportion to the Book, when he shall consider that properly
Speaking, it is the Portico or Frontispiece of a so much statelier Edifice; and
as it contains a Summary or Abstract of the entire Work, so does it not a
little confer to Institution. The whole Work contained the History of the
Romans; their Transactions and Adventures with the Carthaginians, Greeks, the
Princes of Asia, Egypt, Spain, and all the most memorable Occurrences of the
World, during the space of Three and Fifty Years, beginning with the second
Punick War, which commenced in tho third Year of the hundred and fortieth
Olympiad, and of the World three thousand seven hundred eighty seven, and
ending with those Affairs which gave a Period to the Macedonian Monarchy. Which
Space of time, as it contains the Bulk of all the great Actions, Conquests, and
Successes of the Roman People, so it seems to be the very Meridian of their
Glory and Virtue; for they had now by their long practice in War and their
conversation with the Greeks, and other polished Nations, resin'd their
Manners, which before were course and rustic. They had scoured off the Rust of
their Old Iron Discipline, so Austere and Rigid, that it grew to an Idol, a
Moloch; to which Generals sacrificed even their Sons: No Citizens Blood, in
civil Dissension, had yet slain'd their Concord: Poverty, it is true, had began
to cease to be a Virtue, and was not so venerable as when their Dictators went
to Plough: But their Taste of Riches seemed rather an Effect of their Ambition
and Military Glory to adom their Triumphs, and replenish their Treasury with a
Fund to enable them to prosecute their Design of Subduing the World. They had
yet no leisure for Luxury; and that eager Spirit of Conquest which spurred and
inspired them, had preserved their Minds hitherto untainted with the Vices of
Ease and a voluptuous Life. In a word, their good Discipline, which Industry,
long Practice, and the Necessity and Danger of the State had taught them, while
they were yet but weak, and under the apprehension of dangerous Rivals, became
at length, when it had secured them against Invaders, to inspire them with the
Spirit of Invasion; and conducted them to the acquisition of that stupendous
Power and Dominion, which was the Subject of so many Triumphs, and completed,
in conclusion, their Subjection of the Universe. What their Discipline was, has
been the Argument of many Pens, and would not suit with this Work to enlarge
on: But what Discipline is, in the Abstract, I may essay to deliver my Opinion
in few words.

Good Discipline is the Substance and Sum-total of Military Science, and he who
would aspire to the Command of Armies by Sea or Land, and is not himself duly
Trained, and a Master therein, and a Lover, Promoter, and Exacter of it in
others, shall betray the Prince or State who Trusts him; and expose himself and
Country to manifold Perils and Disasters. The Principles of Discipline are
partly collected and digested into a Body of standing Rules and Instructions;
the Harvest of wise and long Experience of the best Men, in the best Times; and
partly Unwritten and Traditional, infused by Practice, Conversation and
diligent Application and Inquiry of those who would be Proficients therein. In
short, it is an Art or Habit of prudential Fortitude, on the nicest and most
perilous Adventures of Humane Life. Now the Fruit which is gathered, is in the
Practice of these Documents; and the hinge and center of Motion of this great
Machine, on which it turns, is Obedience; which among the Romans was Sacred and
Inviolable, as the Oracles of their Gods, the Breach whereof was more
punishable when successful, than otherwise. For though Fortune was among them a
Deity, Discipline was more Worshipped, and they would not allow her to justify
a rash Action. Thus Papirius, the Dictator, was hardly won to spare young
Fabius, his Master of the Horse, for Fighting though successfully in his
absence, against his Order; whose Life, with much Difficulty, was given to the
Tears and Merits of his old Father. And the Story of Titus Manlius, who
condemned his brave Son to Death, is a cruel Instance. Discipline is the Art of
doing the hardest Things, the easiest and nearest way; her prime Element is
Honor: She teaches us to Dye without Fear, when we cannot Live without
Reproach; she absolves the most unfortunate Actions where she Conducts; she
shows us how to be Savers when we cannot Win, and loses many a Battle without
loss of Fame; she rallies and reunites broken Troops, and has often snatched
the Laurel from the Brow of Victory her self; she is the brave Man's Motto, and
the Coward's Shield. The one she Vrges, while she Animates the other; she
sustains hunger-starved Armies, and makes them Obey, March, Fight and Vanquish
without Clothes on their Backs, Meat in their Bellies, or Flesh on their Bones.
To suffer patiently Hunger, Cold, and want of every needful Thing, is a lasie,
feminine, and, as I may say, a vagabond Virtue: but to act bravely, to obey
silently, and exactly, and to do worthily in every thing under such Straights
and Trials, belongs only to those whose Minds and Manners are imbued with this
Sovereign Virtue of good Discipline. But that we may not Spin this Thread too
fine, let us contract our Speculation, by saying in short, That Discipline is
the Soul of Military Action; it is the Founder and Preserver of Kingdoms; she
leads Fortune her self in Triumph, and by her (under Providence) Princes Reign,
and their Thrones are Established. Under her Banners did the Romans subdue the
World, and vanquish in Battle more than double their number of Enemies, equal,
if not superior to them, in Strength and natural Courage; and the Glory of
that great State ebbed and slow'd with their Discipline, which, as it is the
Parent of Success, so is it the Child of mighty Virtue and Industry: Vice and
Luxury (which are her mortal Foes) have no Footing where she Governs; they are
so incompatible, that the Depression of the one, is ever the Advancement of the
other; no State, but by Miracle, can sink under her Conduct, or be safe where
she is not cherished. What has made our Neighboring Prince so Formidable, but
their excellent Form, and exact Observance of the Precepts of good Discipline,
where Obedience, like the Key-stone in the Arch, binds and sustains the whole
Fabric? And if discerning Eyes would look near, and penetrate the ground and
necessity of this Duty, in our Case, they would discover Reasons that are not
visible to vulgar Eyes. Wherefore I will take leave of the Gentlemen of the
Long-Robe, to allow this kind of Obedience, the preference to all kinds of
Submission, or Resignation whatsoever. The Ancients have painted Occasion only
bald behind, but here we may add Wings too; For what is more sleeting and
fugitive, when she is often hardly seen, but she is past? Crowns, Religion, Laws,
and Liberties, and every thing Sacred and Valuable among Men, do, in our Case,
often hang on a single Thread of a Moment; which by one bare Act of
Disattention, or Disobedience to Orders, may be lost: And History is thick set
with Instances, (which I may here be excused from exemplifying) where what I
say is abundantly proved. The Schools may amuse and entangle us with their
Cobweb-learning, their Terms and Subtilties; but let them show me in sound
Wisdom and safe Morals any Transgression of Obedience to whatsoever Humane
Precept, that can bring a heavier Judgment on Mankind, where no Sacrifice, or
Penance can Atone, or Power Absolve. We shall not then (I trust) be thought in
the wrong, in thus dignifying this Virtue of Obedience in Military Conduct.

I was almost engaged unawares to extend my Contemplation on this noble Theme,
which, by applying it to Ourselves, with respect especially to Our Naval
Discipline, might perhaps have proved no Disservice to my Country. But as we
never visit Persons of Quality by the bye, but obtain an Hour to perform our
Respects with Decency: So I have concluded I ought to treat that Subject, which
as it would swell beyond the due Bounds of a Preface; so it deserves to be
handled with more Regard, than could be observed toward it in this Place.

H. S.

POLYBIUS's General History OF THE TRANSACTIONS OF THE WORLD.
VOL. I. BOOK I.
IF other Authors, who have gone before us, had omitted to speak in the Praise
of History; it might perhaps have left an Engagement on us, to recommend
principally, that sort of Study to the World, in as much as there is no Means
or Method more short, or less difficult, whereby to cultivate the Mind, than
the knowledge of Times past. But in regard it has been the Business of many
Writers, to show, that the Fruit we gather from History, is the most mature and
instructive, and yields the properest Materials to form the Understanding for
Public Uses; and best arms and prepares us, against the shocks of adverse
Fortune, by the knowledge and reflection on other Men's Crosses and Calamities;
our silence therefore on that Subject, will be the more pardonable, while the
best we should be able say, would be no other than what so many excellent Wits
have said before us; and when we have done all, our Subject needs it not: For,
in short, the Account of those surprising Events, which we have undertaken to
Publish, will suffice for its own Recommendation, and bespeak the Attention of
Mankind to what shall be related. For who is so stupid and incurious, that
would not be glad to learn, by what wonderful means and force of Conduct, the
People of Rome could within the space of three and fifty Years, be able to
compass the Conquest and Dominion of the greatest Part of the known World? A
Felicity which never yet happened to any People, at least it has not any
parallet in History. And indeed what Spectacle, how magnificent and
entertaining soever, to the most Curious; or what Speculation, though never so
profitable to the most Studious, has at any time been the Subject of our
Contemplation, that ought not to give place and yield the Preference both in
Pleasure and Instruction to the Knowledge of this Transcendent Story?

Nor will it be difficult to Exemplify the Grandeur and Singularity of the
Work we have undertaken, by drawing Parallels between the Roman Empire, and the
most Flourishing States that have been recorded in Story. And those, which in
my Judgment are most worthy to be considered, are namely these that follow:
First, the Persian Empire; which was once Great and Formidable, yet so it
happened, that they never attempted to extend their Conquests beyond the bounds
of Asia, but they not only endangered the loss of their Armies, but hazarded
the State it self. The Lacedaemonians strove long for the Dominion of Greece,
and at length obtained it; but scarce held it Twelve Years in peaceable
Possession. The Macedonians acquired a good share of Territory in Europe,
extending from the Adriatic Sea to the Danube; but who will not confess, that
this was but a small Tract, compared with that vast Continent? Afterward
indeed, their Conquests and Dominion spread into Asia, and the Persian Monarchy
composed a part of their Empire. But what People is there, how powerful and
enterprizing soever, of whom, it may not with Truth be said, That a very great
part of this our World has escaped their Power and Ambition. In a word, the
Macedonians never dreamed of attempting either Sicily or Sardinia, or of
carrying their Arms into Africa; nor had they the least notice of many fierce
and mighty Nations inhabiting the Western Parts of Europe. While of the Romans
it will with Justice be granted, that they have not vanquished by parcels, here
and there a Kingdom; but subdued and extended their Empire over almost the
known World, and have exalted and established the Glory of their Dominion, to
that degree of Power and Perfection, that if the present Age can but wisely
support the Excess of their Prosperity, no future Times shall be able to
produce the like.

The Sequel of this extraordinary Story, will prove with Evidence enough what
we but now observed; namely, That of all Studies, That of History yields the
most solid and profitable Fruit, when it makes profession of recounting
Occurrences of past Ages with Candor and Fidelity. Ours with respect to
Chronology, shall take beginning from the one hundred and fortieth Olympiad:
The Subject Matter shall be; First, with respect to the Greeks, the Confederate
War which Phillip, the Son of Demetrius, and Father of Persius, did in
Conjunction with the Achaians, wage against those of Aetolia. Touching the
Asiaticks, we shall treat of the War in Syria, betwixt Antiochus and Ptolomy
Philopater: As to what concerns Italy and Asrick, we shall begin with the
History of the War between the Romans and Carthaginians, commonly called the
War of Hannibal. In brief, our History shall commence where Aratus the
Sycionian gives a Period to his. For, in truth, the State in general of things
to those Days, were (as one may say) scattered and confused, and without any
common Relation; the Motives to their great Enterprises were diverse, and also
their Ends; and Times, and Places, were equally dark and distant. But here we
have a Foundation and Body of History for our Guide; the Affairs of Italy,
Greece, Asia and Africa, were now as it were incorporate, and conspiring to one
and the same great End. And therefore I resolved, and thought it my best
Method, here to begin what I have determined to write.

The Romans, proving Superior to the Carthaginians in the War we mentioned,
found Assurance to believe, that they had now advanced far toward the Dominion
of the World; and took resolution thence to pursue their good Fortune, and
formed thereupon their first Project, for transporting their Arms into Greece,
and so into Asia. Were we not for the most part in the dark, touching the
general State and Circumstances of those People, who from time to time
contended for Sovereignty, we might perhaps spare the Pains we shall take, to
enquire and show, by what Means and Motives, the Romans were incited to engage
in so vast an Enterprise. But in regard the World for the most part is to learn
by what stock of Strength and Military Conduct, the Carthaginians strove with
their happier Rivals the Romans, and what Battles it cost to decide the
Controversy; we have therefore thought it necessary, to conceive and digest
our two first Books, into a form of Preface to the main Work; fearing lest if
we should be engaged unawares, into the Narrative of such wonderful Adventures
as will occur; we should with Astonishment look back on the mighty Progress,
and be to seek for those Causes and Motives, that inspired the Romans to Embark
in so extraordinary a Design, as the Acquisition of the Universal Empire. At
least it may suffice, to initiate the Reader, and instruct him in the
feasibleness of the Enterprise, and show, that their Power was not short of
their Ambition, to attempt, and, in effect, to compass what they had projected.
For what will be found singular and extraordinary in this Work, and those
unparalleled Examples of Events in this our Age, is, that Fortune leaning, and
as it were with a strong Biass, bending all her Power one way, and Collecting
and Confederating (as one may say) the Forces of the Universe, for the
Accomplishment of one vast Design: We shall therefore labor to show, and in
one Draught, as in a Picture, gratify the Reader with a Prospect of those
Means and Steps, by which she conducted her Counsels to bring this mighty Work
to pass. And this indeed was what principally incited me to adventure on this
Work, jointly with the Reflection, That no Author in these our Days, has yet
engaged in the like Enterprise, of Compiling and Publishing a General History;
which under less Encouragement I should hardly have been drawn to undertake.
But having observed, that albeit there are plenty of Writers, who have employed
their Pens in Recording particular Wars, and some certain contemporary
Transactions and Occurrences; yet there is not One (that I remember) who has
given us any Light into the Notions of General History; nor have those who have
written, shown any Care in adjusting the Chronology of the Affairs they have
handled; nor the Causes and Reasons leading to any Revolution; nor the Progress
and Management, nor the Manner of the Event of Things. I have then on these
Reflections concluded it necessary, and that it would not be an ungrateful
Present, to delineate and expose to Public View this most Magnificent, and of
all others the most Instructive Instance of Fortune's Power; who, though we have
daily and numerous Accounts of her extraordinary Operations, and behold her
constantly attempting new Proofs of her Abilities, we must nevertheless
conclude, without any difficulty, that she has given such Evidences of her
Strength in our Days, as surpasses all Example.

Nor would it be easy to obtain a right Knowledge of so many marvelous
Transactions, by any help that may be derived from the Study of particular
History, any more than one can be enabled to give a true Account of the
Structure and Figure of the wide Universe, by having consulted the Map, or
visited some few Towns or Provinces thereof. And we may fitly compare such as
make that wrong Judgment, to those, who, beholding the dispersed and single
Members of some Body, which while it had Life and Motion, had Beauty and other
Excellencies; would undertake to determine and distinguish of the Graces and
Perfections wherewith it was Adorned, when Living; while, in Truth, were it
possible to give a perfect Image of them, by uniting the scattered Parts,
restoring the Form, and giving it Spirit and Motion, he would be obliged to
confess that all his Conjectures had been a Dream: And yet we maintain not, but
that a sort of Judgment may be made of the whole, by consulting only the Parts,
but the Certitude and entire Verity of Things cannot be so acquired. In like
manner we conceive, that the bare Study of particular and limited Occurences,
can but little avail toward the Improvement of our Knowledge in General
History; which cannot be attained, but by sorting (as I may say) and comparing
Counsels and Events, by the Resemblances of Things we shall Observe, and the
Difference we shall Remark; and thus we approach the Sanctuary, and penetrate
the very Bosom of History, and the Fruit we gather will both profit and please.
To conclude, The first Naval Expedition the Romans ventured on, beyond the
Bounds of Italy, shall be the beginning, and as it were the Groundwork of this
our first Book; wherein the Story is continued, where Timaeus the Historian
ends, which fell out in the Hundred and Twenty Ninth Olympiad.

It behooves us then to instruct the Reader, first, in the Time when, and the
Means and Manner how the Romans composed their Affairs in Italy; and then to
observe what their Motives were to attempt crossing the Seas into Sicily, for
that was their first Exploit out of Italy. These things, I say, it will be
necessary first to explain, to the end we may avoid all danger of Obscurity in
the pursuit of our History, and preserve the Coherence and Gradation of Causes
and Things unbroken: It is likewise further necessary, that we should take our
beginning from some certain and limited Period of Time, known and remarkable to
all. And this will be found so very useful, that Matters will almost explain
themselves, when there should be occasion to look back, to renew in the Mind
the Notices of what is past. For where Accounts are not founded on plain and
uncontroverted Testimony, we read without Faith, and determine of nothing;
whereas, when the Understanding is once set right, and established on the
Evidence of clear and unblemished Grounds, we Study and Digest what we Read,
with Pleasure and Assurance, and yield a ready Consent to the Candor and
Authority of the Writer.

Nineteen Years after the Naval Battle that (...) ^ought on the River Aegos,
and sixteen (...) before the Field of Leuctra; about the (...) that the
Lacedaemonians made Peace with the Persian King, by the procurement of
Antalcidas; Dionysius the Elder having vanquished the Greeks, who inhabited
Italy near the River Elleporas, laid Siege to the City of Rhegium. The Gauls
were at that time Masters of Rome, which they had taken all but the Capitol;
and the Romans, having compounded with the Enemy, under such Capitulations as
the Gauls themselves thought fit to impose, were rescued, as it were by
Miracle, and restored to their Country beyond all Expectation: And having now
laid in some Materials toward the Foundation of their growing Power; they
began to wage War on the neighboring States. And after they had well-nigh
subdued the Latins, partly by their Courage, and partly by the Address they had
acquired by their long Exercise in Arms, they advanced against the Tuscans, and
had to do, almost at the same time, with the Gauls; and then warred on the
Samnites, who were the Northern and Eastern Borderers upon the Latins. Soon
after, and about a Year before the Gauls invaded Greece, and the Remainder of
that People who had rifled Delphos, and were almost all cut off, passed into
Asia; Pyrrhus, King of the Epirots, arrived in Italy, invited thither by the
Tarentines, who began to apprehend the Consequences of their having violated
the Roman Ambassadors. The Romans having subdued the Tuscans and Samnites, and
often vanquished the Celtae, began to prosecute their Success against the rest
of Italy; not so much to invade the Property of their Neighbors, as to
ascertain and secure what they now reckoned their own; having by their long and
frequent Wars with the Samnites and Gauls greatly improved their Discipline and
Experience, so as to conduct their Armies with better prospect of Success. The
Romans having then, greatly to their Reputation, sustained the shock of so many
hazardous Enterprises, and expelled all Foreign Invaders, and even Pyrrhus
himself out of Italy; they now proceed to show their Resentment against those
who had taken part with that Prince; whom, after they had subdued, and brought
under their Power, together with what remained unconquered of Italy, the Gauls
only excepted; they made an Expedition against Rhegium, then possessed by
certain of their own mutinous Subjects. One and the same Adventure befell two
principal Places, situate in the Straight of that Sea, namely, Rhegium and
Messina. In short, some time before those things happened, which we have been
relating, a Party of Campanian Mercenaries, who had served under Agathocles in
Sicily, tempted with the Beauty and Riches of Messina, formed a Conspiracy to
surprise it, and keep the possession; which they did by Treachery, being
received into the Town, and entertained as Friends. When they became Masters of
the place, some of the Inhabitants they expelled, and others they murdered,
retaining to their own use the Wives and Children of that unfortunate People,
as they chanced to fall into their hands during the dispute: Thus having
without much hazard or trouble obtained a remarkable Victory, and become
possessed of an opulent City, they divided the Riches and Territory amongst
themselves. This Action gave Example to another of the like barbarous
Treachery. During Pyrrhus's Devastations in Italy, those of Rhegium,
apprehensive of the danger of this new and formidable Enemy; and being on the
other hand in dread of the Carthaginians, who were in those days Masters of the
Sea, besought the Romans to lend them Succors, and furnish them with a
Garrison: Accordingly they supplied them with four thousand Men, giving the
Command to one Decius a Campanian, who for some time kept good Garrison, and
demeaned themselves as they ought: But at length, in Imitation of the
Mamertines, who supplied them with Forces to effect their Treachery, they
violated their Faith by the like villainous Act, tempted thereunto by the
commodious Situation of the Place, and the Wealth of the Inhabitants; of whom,
having possessed the Town, some they expelled, and some they cut off,
transcribing the Treachery of that People exactly. The Romans had a just Sense
of this wicked Act; but having at that time too much Business on their hands,
by the Wars we but now related, were not in a Condition to express their
Indignation in the Punishment of the Authors; but as soon as their Affairs
permitted, they marched against Rhegium, where they straightly besieged the
Traitors, and in the end subdued them, who fought obstinately, as being
desperate of Pardon, not above three hundred of them being taken alive; who
being sent to Rome, were by the Command of the Praetor, dragged to the common
place of Execution, where, as the manner is, they were first scourged with
Rods, and then beheaded. The Romans, over and above the Equity, were not
without Foresight, that the Consequences of this Act would be to conciliate in
their Neighbors, the Opinion of their Justice and Honor, which had been much
blemished mished by this piece of Treachery; so the Rhegians were forthwith
restored to their Town and their Possessions.

As to the Mamertines (for that Appellation those Campanians assumed) who had
so wrongfully possessed Messina, they enjoyed, without any Molestation, both
the Town and Territory, so long as they could derive Succors from the Romans
their Friends in Rhegium, and lived not only secure, and fearless of any
danger, but were often the Aggressors on their Neighbors the Carthaginians,
and those of Syracuse, and gave them work enough to defend the adjacent
Country; putting many Towns and Villages under Contribution. But they were no
sooner deprived of the Aids of Rhegium, which now could not defend itself, when
the face of their Fortune changed; being attacked by the Syracusians, and
driven within their own Walls; that People having declared War against them for
Reasons we shall briefly deliver.

Sometime before this, while the Army of the Syracusians encamped near
Mergania, there happened a Dissension between the Soldiers and Citizens of
Syracuse; the Soldiers thereupon made choice of new Leaders, namely,
Artemidorus and Hieron, who was afterward King of Syracuse, he was then indeed
but young, howbeit Nature had given him all the good Qualities to be wished in
a Prince. He was no sooner advanced to this Power, but by the secret Practices
and Address of some of his Friends, he got possession of the City, where he
soon suppressed those of the contrary Faction; but proceeding in all things
with so much Gentleness and Humanity, that though the Syracusians would not
approve the Election made by the Army, he was nevertheless received as Praetor,
without the least Contest. From the very beginning, by the manner of his
Administration of that Authority, it plainly appeared to those who could best
discern, that he was Born to something yet greater than the Praetorship. For
having rightly informed himself of the Humors and Manners of the Syracusians,
that they were Seditious, and no sooner in Arms, but they fell into Factious
and Mutinous Practices; and farther observing, that Leptines, one of the prime
Citizens, Superior to the rest both in Credit and Interest, and in great
Reputation with the People for his Justice and Probity, would be very useful to
him; with him he made an Alliance, by taking his Daughter to Wife, and
proposing to lodge the Authority in the City with him, during his Expeditions
with the Army abroad. Having compassed these things, and observing the old
Mercenary Soldiers to have lost their Discipline, to be quite spoiled with
Idleness and Debauchery, and to be over and above not very well affected to
him, but were bandying and meditating some new Commotions; he therefore forms a
pretense of an Expedition against the Barbarians, who were possessed of
Messina; and having marched out his Forces, he Encamped near Centuripa, in
sight of the Enemy, where, drawing up to engage them, not far from the River
Cyamosoros, he so ordered his Battle, that keeping his own Horse and Foot near
himself, with show of attacking the Enemy elsewhere, he by that means
designedly exposed the Mercenaries to the entire shock of the Mamertines, where
they were all cut off; and while the Enemy were busied in the Execution,
withdrew his own People in safety to Syracuse. By this Artifice he punished his
Mercenaries, and got rid of the disorderly and seditious part of his Army. In
brief, having formed an Army to his own Mind, he governed and preserved his
Authority in great Peace and Security; and observing the Enemy to be grown
Inrolent by their late Success, and that they made Inroads, and spoiled the
neighboring Country, he marched out of the City with his new Army, which he
had now well Disciplined, and meeting them in the Plains of Mylaeus, near the
River Longanus, he obtained an entire Victory, routing their Army, and taking
their principal Officers Prisoners: By which Success they were so humbled, that
they lost all Courage for the future. Having performed these things against the
Barbarians, he returned with his Army to Syracuse, where he was proclaimed King
by the Soldiers.

As to the Mamertines, they being now deprived of their wonted Succors from
Rhegium, and their own strength being greatly diminished by their late losses,
one Party applied to the Carthaginians, and delivered the Citadel into their
Hands; another sent Ambassadors to the Romans, praying their Assistance, and
offering them the possession of the City, imploring their Protection on the
account of their Alliance and common Original. The Romans were long debating
what to determine herein, nor indeed could they honestly resolve to assist
them, it being apparent how great a blemish it would be to their Honor, who,
while they animadverted on the Treachery of their own Citizens at Rhegium,
should be found abetting and supporting the Mamertines, eminently guilty of the
like Crime. But they saw too, that the Carthaginians had not only subdued
Africa, but had made themselves Masters of many places in Spain; and that
Sardinia, and all the adjacent Islands on the Coast of Italy, were already in
their possession; these Reflections were weighed with apprehension enough, for
the Romans already looked on the Carthaginian Neighborhood with an Eye of
Jealousy, being, as it were, now surrounded by them; and knowing that they had
designs on Italy it self; they foresaw how formidable they would grow by the
Accession of all Sicily to their State; and perceived too, that this Island,
unless they interposed to prevent it, by assisting the Mamertines, would
certainly fall into their Hands: For Messina would soon be theirs, and Syracuse
would not then be long able to withstand them, the Territory of which two
places contained a principal part of the Island. All this they clearly
understood, and knew it would not be fafe for them to abandon those of Messina,
and permit the Carthaginians to be Masters of a Post, that might prove as it
were a Bridge to conduct them into Italy. These Points were long and solemnly
debated, and yet the Senate could not be drawn to determine without mighty
difficulty, foreseeing that the Reproach in assisting the Mamertines would be
greater than the Benefit. But the People, who had been greatly impoverished by
their late Wars, and each Man propounding to himself some way or other to
repair his own particular damage, decreed to carry on the Enterprise; and the
rather, for that those who were to have Command of the Armies, manifested how
profitable an Undertaking it would be both for the State in general, and each
Man in particular. The Decree therefore passed, and was confirmed by an
Ordinance of the People; and Appius Claudius, one of the Consuls, was ordered
to conduct an Army forthwith into Sicily, to the Relief of Messina.

To him the Mamertines delivered up the City, after, either by Art or Force,
they had got rid of the Carthaginian Officer who commanded in the Citadel: But
the Carthaginians suspecting Treachery or Cowardice, ordered the said Governor
to be Crucified. At the same time they directed their Fleet to make toward
Pelorus, and encamped with their Land-Army near a Town called Senes, and
besieged Messina with all their Forces. Hieron conceiving he saw now a fair
prospect of exterminating the Barbarians, Possessors of Messina, out of Sicily;
enters into a Confederacy with the Carthaginians, and forthwith marches with an
Army from Syracuse toward Messina, and encamped along the Mountain
Chalcidicus, to cut off all Correspondence with the besieged on that side. But
Appius Claudius, with unspeakable Bravery, passing the Straight by Night, got
at length into Messina. Howbeit, perceiving the Besiegers resolute, and the
Town straightly pressed on both sides, and the Army superior by Sea and Land, and
apprehending both Danger and Dishonor in the Enterprise, he dispatched
Ambassadors to the Carthaginians and Hieron, to treat about an Accommodation,
and obtain Peace for the Mamertines. But the Negotiation not taking effect, and
finding there was now no Remedy but Fighting; he resolved first to attack the
Syracusians; Accordingly he marched out against Hieron, who opposed him with
great Readiness and Gallantry, but after a long and very sharp Conflict the
Romans had the day; beating and pursuing the Enemy into their Camp; and so
Appius returned Victorious into Messina, loaded with the Spoils of the Enemy:
And Hieron, who perceived he had made a wrong Judgment touching the Issue of
the War, marched away immediately toward Syracuse. Claudius receiving next
Morning Intelligence of his Retreat, and being now full of assurance by his
late Success, resolved to lose no time, but forthwith to Attack likewise the
Carthaginians. Pursuant to which Resolution, he ordered his Army to take their
repast betimes, and to be under their Arms earlier than ordinary; and sallying
out by break of Day, he surpised the Enemy, and routed them with great
Slaughter; those who escaped being broken and scattered, securing themselves in
the Neighboring Towns. Having obtained these Victories, and raised the Siege
from before Messina, he began now to make Inroads here and there upon the
Neighboring Country, and proceeded without impediment to plunder as far as the
Territory of the Syracusians and their Confederates, whither at length-he
marched with his Army, and sat down before Syracusa. Thus have I related the
Motives, and given the History of the Romans first Expidition out of Italy. And
for as much as we have judged and chosen this Conjuncture, as the most proper
and sure Basis, whereon to superstruct our whole Design; we have therefore
concluded, that we cannot better prepare the Mind of the Reader for what
follows, than by setting out from hence. Though we have looked yet a little
farther back, the better to open and explain the Reasons of Things, to the end
there may not remain the least doubt. For in my Judgment, whosoever would
attain a right Knowledge of the present Greatness of the Roman State, should
first be informed, when, and how Fortune began to Espouse their Cause, for they
had once lost their Country; and farther, to be well instructed in the Means by
which, and the time when, they had entirely reduced Italy under their Dominion,
they began to form Designs of their remoter Conquests. It will not therefore be
thought strange, if when we are to Treat of Great States and Mighty People, we
should labor to unfold the remotest Accounts of Antiquity, and draw our
Supplies from as near the Springhead as may be, which is the course we have
taken, that we might be sure to build on sound and unshaken Principles, so that
whatsoever People shall be the Subject of our Story, we shall endeavor to show
how, and when they began, and the Steps that conducted them to that degree of
Power and Greatness, wherein we shall behold them. And this is the Method we
have been already pursuing, touching the Affairs of the Romans. But we will
forbear farther Digressions, and proceed to our History, after we have lightly
touched on some Preliminary Matters; and what falls in order principally to be
noted, is the Transactions between the Romans and the Carthaginians, during
their Contention about Sicily; next will be the War in Africa: To which is
annexed the War the Carthaginians waged in Spain, managed first by Hamilcar,
and after him by Asdrubal; about which time, the Romans invaded Illiria, and
other remote Countries of Europe; then shall be handled the War they made on
the Gauls inhabiting Italy, and in course, we shall mention that in Greece,
called the Cleomenick War, which gives a period to our Second Book: Of these in
order, with some necessary Remarks for better light into our History; for we
have not conceived it necessary, or in any manner profitable, to be over
particular in those things, it not being our purpose to write their History,
but so to touch them, as may suffice the better to guide the Reader into what
we purpose to relate. In a word, it will be easily perceived by the Thread of
our Discourse, how necessary it was to make some recital of what others have
said before, so as to let in the Mind of the inquisitive, by an easier passage
to subsequent Occurrences: But above all, it behooves us to be punctual in
setting down the Revolutions in Sicily, during the War there, between the
Romans and Carthaginians, than which for duration, there is hardly any Example
of the like in History, nor of the Provisions that were made to Prosecute it,
nor for the Greatness of Action, or importance and hazard of Enterprises,
number of Battles, and extraordinary Adventures. For in short, those two States
had lived hitherto under an exact observance of their Laws, their Diicipline
was pure and unshaken, their Wealth not burdensome, and their Strength equal.
Whosoever therefore shall carefully consider the Form and Power of those two
States respectively, will be better able to collect Matter, whereby to make a
juster Comparison by this War only, than by any subsequent Transactions
whatsoever between them.

And now we have but one weighty Impediment to stay the Course of our History,
which is, that Philinus and Fabius, the Historians, who have the repute of
excelling all others, in their Exactness and Fidelity in delivering this Story,
have not nevertheless been so just in their Relations as became them. And yet
when I consider their manner of Life, I cannot well tell-how to charge them
with designed Falsehood. I am therefore inclined to think it has happened to
them, as it often does to Lovers, Philinus's Affection for the Carthaginians,
has bribed his Belief in favor of their great Conduct, Wisdom and Generosity
in all their Actions and Deliberations, and perverted his Judgment on the other
hand, touching the Romans. As to Fabius, he acts the same part for his
Countrymen, nor would it be blamed in the other Deportments of his Private
Life, it being but just, that a Man of Honor should bear Affection toward his
Country and his Friends, and that he show Aversion to their Enemies, and Love
to their Friends, But when once a Man has taken upon him the Character of an
Historian, his Affections are no more his own, and he is to divest himself of
every Passion. For how often falls it out to b^ the Duty of a Writer, to
applaud the Merits of an Enemy, and blame the Conduct of a Friend, when their
Faults and Follies so require. For as a Horse that is become blind, is rendered
almost useless, so History, if Truth be once wanting, cease to be of any use
or instruction. We are therefore to make no difficulty to detect the Errors of
a Friend, and to do right to the Virtues of an Enemy. Nor must we scruple
sometimes to blame those, who but now had as just a Title to our Applause: It
being impossible, that such, who have the Authority and Administration of
Public Affairs, should not sometimes miscarry, or that those who often err,
should not be now and then in the right. We are not therefore to weigh the Rank
or Fortune of those who are in Authority, but to be careful that our Writings
speak the Truth of their Actions. And that this is a just Observation, will
appear by what follows: Philinus, in the beginning of his Second Book, reports,
that the Carthaginians and Syracusians besieged Messina; and that the Romans,
who crossed the Sea to their Assistance, made a Sally out of the Town, but were
repulsed with great Slaughter of their People: That soon after they made a
second Sally upon the Carthaginians, when they were not only beaten and forced
to retire, but lost the greatest part of their Army, taken Prisoners by the
Enemy. He likewise tells us, That after this, Hieron was seized with a panick
fear, and so violent an apprehension of danger, that he deserted his Camp by
Night, and marched away to Syracuse; not only setting fire on his Tents, but
withdrawing his Garrisons from all such places as he held in the Neighborhood
of the Mamertines. That the Carthaginians, in like manner quitted their Camp,
soon after this Defeat of the Romans, and dispersing, quartered themselves in
the Towns round about, without attempting to take the Field, or daring so much
as to defend whatsoever they had without their Works; and that this
Consternation seizing the Carthaginian Soldiers, disheartened their Officers
from giving Battle to the Romans. That the Romans keeping in their Rear, did
not only spoil and pillage the Country round about, but laid Siege even to
Syracuse. These, in my Judgment, are Absurdities too gross to be examined. For
what is more inconsistent, than to make those, who but now besieged Messina,
and were in all things victorious, to fly without any apparent cause, and to
consent to be themselves besieged. And as to the other Party, which he tells
us, was besieged and vanquished, he gives them the Laurel, makes them Masters
of the Field, pursuing the Enemy, and leads them at length to the Siege of
Syracuse: What Consistency now can be found in this Relation? We must determine
therefore, that what he first delivers is false, or the sequel cannot be true.
But the latter is true, for the Carthaginians and Syracusians were beaten and
forced within their Works, and Syracuse and Echetla were both at one and the
same time besieged by the Romans, as Philinus confesses, the latter being a
Town on their Frontiers. We cannot help concluding then, that this his first
Account was untrue, and the Defeat he mentions a Falsehood of his own coining;
since he allows the Romans to have remained superior to the Enemy in those
Encounters before Messina. But, in short, we shall find both Fabius and
Philinus to be the same Men throughout, as we shall have occasion to observe in
the pursuit of our Story; to which, after this Digression, let us now return,
and with the best Connection we can, labor briefly and truly to relate the
Adventures and Issue of this War.

Upon the News, at Rome, of the Success of Appius and the Legions in Sicily, M.
Octacilius and M. Valerius being chosen Consuls, it was decreed, they should
both go with all the Legions to prosecute that War. The Romans, over and above
the Supplies drawn from their Allies, had at that time a Standing Force of Four
Legions, out of which they formed their yearly Levies, each Legion consisting
of Four Thousand Foot, and Three Hundred Horse. Upon the arrival of the
Consuls, most of the Towns and Places that had submitted to the Syracusians and
Carthaginians, gave themselves up to the Romans; insomuch, that Hieron
observing the Terror that was spread through the whole Island, on the one hand;
and on the other, the Bravery and Number of the Legionaries, began to discern,
that the Designs and Hopes of the Romans were founded on better Measures than
those of the Carthaginians; which, after he had maturely weighed, he determined
to endeavor to be reconciled to the Romans. Accordingly he dispatched
Ambassadors to treat with the Consuls about an Alliance, who without difficulty
embraced the Overture; to which they were the more willingly disposed, on
account of the great difficulty they were under with their Convoys; being
justly apprehensive, lest the Carthaginians, who were Masters at Sea, would be
able totally to debar them of all Supplies of Provision; and this Jealousy was
so much the more reasonable, by how much their Troops, the last Year, were
driven to great Straits.

The Romans then promising themselves good Fruit of this Alliance, readily
yielded, and frankly embraced a Friendship with Hieron, on condition that all
the Roman Prisoners should be released without Ransom, and that the King should
pay them down a Hundred Talents in Silver, on which Stipulations the
Syracusians should be held as Friends and Confederates of the People of Rome.
Thus Hieron, secured by this Treaty, continued ever after a firm and profitable
Friend to the Romans, and passed the rest of his Days in a peaceful enjoyment
of the Sovereignty of that Kingdom, in very great esteem among the Greeks; and,
in a word, according to my Opinion, was one of the most Eminent and Illustrious
Princes that had ever held that Scepter, and few will be found to have reaped a
larger share of Felicity acquired by his own Virtue; whether we consider him in
his Domestic or Public Affairs.

This Treaty being sent to Rome, and ratified by an Ordinance of the People, it
was now thought advisable to abate of the Number of their Troops in that
Service, and to send only two Legions; making account, that by this Alliance
they should be eased of a great part of the Burden of the War; and that their
Army, through Hieron's Friendship, would now live in plenty of all things
necessary. As to the Carthaginians, they considering, that Hieron of a Friend
was become their Enemy, and that the Romans engaged every day farther and
farther in the Affairs of Sicily, and that they were become Superior to them
in Strength, deliberated about providing a greater Force to oppose them, and to
preserve their own Acquisitions in Sicily. Accordingly they raised a great
number of Mercenary Troops in the Transmarine Nations their Friends; as the
Genoves, Gauls, and, principally, the Spaniards; and judging, that Agrigentum
was the most commodiously situate for their purpose, which being besides the
most eminent of all the Cities of their Dominion, they made it the Rendezvous
of their Armies, resolving it should be a place of Arms, and their chief
Magazine. The Roman Consuls, who had concluded the Treaty with Hieron, were now
returned to Rome, and the new ones, L. Posthumous, and Q. Mamilius, arrived
with the Legions, who, after they had been well instructed in the Designs of
the Carthaginians, and of the Preparations they were making at Agrigentum, were
resolved to prosecute the War with all their might, and without taking any
other Affair in hand, forthwith marched with their whole Army and invested that
place; and incamping about eight Furlongs off, totally blocked up the
Carthaginians. This happened about the time of Harvest, and the Siege being in
all probability likely to last, the Soldiers on both sides were wont to
disperse themselves carelessly abroad, farther than they ought, to Forage, and
gather in their Corn. This the Carthaginians observing, and beholding the
Fields full of Roman Soldiers, dispersed in a disorderly manner, made a Sally
upon them, as they were then busy in their Harvest; and having scattered them,
one Party attempted the pillaging the Camp, and another attacked their Guards.
But here the Excellency of the Roman Discipline was eminently seen, as it has
appeared on many occasions, to their great Honor and the Benefit of their
Affairs. For, as it is a most unpardonable fault to desert their Post, or
abandon their Corpse of Guard; those who had thus carelessly neglected their
Duty, resolved to repair their Fault by some remarkable Behavior; accordingly
they rallied, and bravely sustained the shock of the Enemy, though superior in
number; and albeit some of the Romans fell, the loss on the Enemies side was
much greater. In short, they surrounded the Carthaginians, who had well-nigh
forced their Retrenchment, and making a great slaughter among them, compelled
them at length to retreat to their Works. After this Action the Carthaginians
were more cautious in their Sallies, and the Romans became more wary in their
Foraging. And now, seeing the Carthaginians made no more such adventurous
Sallies, and their Fighting was reduced to Skirmishing and Picquering in small
Parties, the Consuls thought it best to divide their Army into two Bodies; with
one they possessed the Ground where the Temple of Aesculapius stands, facing
the Town; and with the other, that on the side toward Heraclea, in which two
places they encamped, and fortified their Leaguer with Lines of Circumvallation
and Contravallation, to prevent Attempts from the Town, and hinder Supplies and
Correspondence from without, and to secure themselves from Surprises: And in
the Space between their two Lines they appointed strong Guards, placed at
convenient distances. Their Provisions and all Necessaries, were plentifully
supplied, and brought by their Allies to Erbessa; and from that Town, which was
not far from their Camp, their Convoys passed without impediment. Affairs
continued in this posture for five Months, neither Party gaining upon the other
any advantage that might augment eithers hopes; their Engagements being, for
the most part, in slight Skirmishes. But, to be brief, there being not less
than Fifty Thousand Souls in Agrigentum; this mighty Number soon reduced them
to great straits for Provision, and a Famine thereupon ensued. In the mean
time, Hannibal, who commanded in chief, foreseeing he should not be able long
to sustain the Siege, dispatched frequent Advices to Carthage, remonstrating
their ill Condition, and demanding speedy Succors. The Carthaginians thereupon
took Order for the embarking Elephants, and all the Soldiers and Succors they
could put on Board their Fleet, consigning them to Hanno their other General in
Sicily. Who assembling his Forces at Heraclea, marched with all his Strength
toward Erbessa; which place he surprised, being put into his Hands by
Treachery; and, by this Success, having deprived the Enemy of all manner of
Relief, the Romans, who were but now the Besiegers became themselves besieged;
and, in a word, were reduced to such Straits of all kinds, that they often
deliberated about raising the Siege; and had put it in execution, had not
Hieron afforded them what Help he was able, which, with great Parsimony,
sustained them.

Hanno having Intelligence of the evil state of the Roman Army, that they were
enfeebl'd by Want, and diminished by Diseases, the Plague being got among them,
took Assurance to think he might be now a Match for them. He chose, therefore,
about Fifty Elephants, and marched with all his Troops in great haste from
Heraclea, sending his Numidian-Horse before, who had Orders to charge up to the
Enemies Retrenchments, with show as if they would Engage them; and to Retreat
toward the Army, in case the Romans Sallied out upon them. This Service they
punctually performed, attacking one of the Roman Camps, who marched out with
their Horse against them, whilst they, pursuant to the Orders they had
received, retreated to the Army, and joined Hanno; then the whole Army facing
about, attacked the Roman Horse, encompassing them round, and doing great
Execution, pursued them to their Camp. Soon after, Hanno seized on an Eminence,
called Mount Torus, distant from the Romans about Ten Furlongs, and there
Encamped his Army: Where two Months passed without any remarkable Action; he
being unwilling yet to come to a pitched Battle, and entertaining the Enemy
only with flight Rencounters in small Parties. But now Hannibal giving notice,
as well by Signs from the Town, as by Expresses; That they were no longer able
to sustain the Wants they were under, and that many were by Famine compelled to
Desert, and go over to the Romans; Hanno was at length drawn to come to a
Decision, to which the Romans were equally disposed, for the Reasons already
noted. So the two Armies were drawn out on the Ground between their two Camps,
where they Fought, and the Success was long doubtful, till the Romans forced
the Mercenaries, who had the Vanguard, to give back; who, as they retreated,
falling in among the Elephants, those Animals, being disordered, broke the Line
that sustained their Rear, which Accident discomposed the whole Army. Whereupon
the Carthaginians were put to flight, the Romans making great slaughter among
them. Many were Slain, and but a few got into Heraclea, the Conquerours taking
most of the Elephants and all the Cathaginian Baggage. But what with the Joy of
the Victory, and Weariness of the Soldiers after the Battle, the Roman Guards,
the following Night, were not kept with their Customary Vigilance; which being
perceived by Hannibal, who now despairing of Safety in the Town, took this
Negligence of the Romans as an Invitation to him to attempt his Escape; he
therefore, about Midnight, with the Foreign Troops that were in the Town, took
his March, and filling the Roman Trenches with Faggots, passed over their
Works, and escaped unhurt and unseen. The Romans, who saw not their Error till
the Morning, contented themselves with a short Pursuit, Attacking them in the
Rear, and at the same time possessed themselves of the Town without Resistance:
Where they took many Slaves, and an inestimable Booty of all sorts of Riches.
There was great Joy at Rome on the News of the taking of Agrigentum; everybody
was pleased, and each Man's Courage and Hopes were raised, and they resolved to
prosecute the Success of these their first Enterprises. They thought it not now
enough to have Rescued Messina, and Enriched themselves by the War, but
elevated their Purposes and Expectations to the entire expelling the
Carthaginians out of Sicily, and exalting the Roman Name and Power; for,
indeed, that was the true Mark toward which all their Aims were levelled. To
proceed, it was now evident, that the Romans were Superior by Land, and that
their Hopes were not ill grounded, that L. Valerius, and L. Octacilius, the New
Consuls, Successors to those who took Agrigentum, would be able to go through
with the Conquest of Sicily. But still the Carthaginians were Masters at Sea,
and this Regard preserved them yet in equal Terms and Hopes with their Enemy.
It is true, that upon the Success at Agrigentum, many Towns and Cities in the
Inland Country of Sicily, terrified with the Roman Power by Land, submitted to
their Discretion, but many of those that were situate on the Coast, abandoned
the Romans, through an apprehension of the Carshaginian Strength by Sea: These
things being well weighed, it appeared, that the Success of the War stood yet
doubtful; it was observed, that the Coast of Italy lay exposed to the
Depredations of the Carthaginian Fleet, who often made Descents upon them; that
Asrich was in perfect Tranquillity, and without any feeling of the Violences of
the War: On these Motives the Romans determined to make Provision of a Naval
Army, to match the Carthaginians on that side likewise: And this, indeed, was
my Motive to enlarge, and be the more particular in setting down the Adventures
of this War, and to treat distinctly about the Motives, and the Means, the Time
when, and possess the Reader with the whole Series of Causes, that incited and
enabled the Romans first to adventure on their Maritime Expeditions. After they
had well considered, that the War was likely to last, they thought it concerned
them to be Masters of a Fleet, and accordingly proceeded on their Preparations,
building at their first Essay, no less than an Hundred Quinquereme Galleys, and
Twenty Triremes, which could not but be a very difficult Undertaking, the
Romans being totally ignorant in the Construction of this sort of Vessels,
which were not yet come into use in Italy. Whence may with Admiration be
gathered, the extraordinary Virtue, and wonderful Bravery of that People, in
Enterprises of the greatest Hazard and Moment, who in the Minority of their
Fortune, destitute of all sorts of proper Means, having never till that time so
much as dreamed of Navigation, could thus at once, and as one may say, at a
Heat, determine on so Adventurous an Expedition; and make the first Proof of
their Skill in a Naval Battle against the Carthaginians, who held uncontested,
the Dominion of the Sea, derived from their Ancestors. And that I may give a
farther Evidence of my Impartial Opinion of the Roman Resolution, it may be
remarked, That when they Shipped their Forces on their first Voyage to the
Relief of Messina, where it imported so much to have covered Ships, they were
not at that time so much as Masters of one single Gally, no not a Brigantine;
but by an intrepid Hardiness of Mind, wafted over their Troops in Vessels
borrowed of their Neighbors, the Tarentines, Locrians, Neapolitans, etc. But
it happening, that the Carthaginians, about that time, Cruising to attack them,
one of their Galleys venturing too near the Shore, chanced to be stranded, and
before they could get her off, the Romans, intercepting them, took her; and by
the Model of this Galley they built their first Fleet. And, but for this Favor
of Fortune, who had espoused their Cause, it would have been almost impossible
to have put their Purpose in Effect, so utterly Ignorant they were of the Art
of Ship-building.

And now while some were attending that Affair, others assembled their
Seafaring People, to instruct them in the use of the Oar, wherein they
proceeded after this manner; They caused Banks to be contrived on the
Shore-side, in the same Fashion and Order as they were to be in their Galleys,
and placing their Seamen with their Oars in like manner upon the Banks, they
there Exercised them; an Officer for that purpose being placed in the midst,
who, by Signs with his Hand, instructed them, how, at once and altogether they
were to dip their Oars, and how, in like sort, to recover them out of the
Water; by which means they became acquainted with the management of the Oar;
and as soon as their Vessels were built, they equipped them, and put to Sea;
where, after they had spent some time in practicing upon the Water, what they
had been learning by Land, they were ordered by the Consul to adventure along
the Coast; for at that time Caius Cornelius, who was General at Sea, was absent
on an Expedition to Messina, with Seventeen Vessels under his Command, to give
Directions there for the Reception and Security of the Fleet; leaving Orders
with the Pilots to make the best of their way to the Streights, so soon as they
could get ready. During Caius's abode at Messina, an occasion seemed to present
for the Surprising of Lipary, but he conceiving earlier hopes of succeeding in
the Design, than in Prudence he ought, went with his Squadron thither, and drew
up under the Walls of the Town: Of this Design, Hannibal, who Commanded at Sea
for the Carthaginians, and was as that time at Palermo, received Intelligence,
and immediately dispatched away Twenty Galleys under the Command of one Boodes,
a Senator; who arriving in the Night, blocked up Caius in the Harbor, and at
break of Day, landing his Men, set upon the Romans: In this Surprise, Caias saw
no Remedy, but to submit, and accordingly yielded himself up: So the
Carthaginian^ possessing themselves of the Vessels, and the Principal Roman
Officers, made the best of their way back to Hannibal. But not long after this
Adventure of Caius, so much talked of, and applauded, it wanted but little that
Hannibal himself had been taken in the like Snare. He receiving Advice, that
the Roman Fleet was at Sea, and Cruising on the Coast of Italy, not far off;
takes with him Fifty Galleys, and went a Head of his Fleet, to view, and be
himself a Witness of the Number, and Posture of the Enemy; and standing toward
Italy, the Romans, it seems, happening to be nearer than he was aware of,
surprised him with their whole Fleet in order of Battle. In this Rancounter he
lost the greatest part of his Squadron, and escaped narrowly himself, when
everybody despaired of his Safety.

The Romans, after this, made the best of their way for Sicily, and receiving
Advice of the Defeat of Caias, sent an Express forthwith for Duilius, who then
had the Command of their Landforces in the Island: But while they attended his
coming, receiving Advice, that the Enemies Fleer was at hand, they prepared to
engage them. But, forasmuch as their Vessels were not built with extraordinary
Art; and, consequently, were found somewhat unwieldy in working, it came into
their Heads to recompense this defect, by contriving some new Invention, that
might be of use to them in Fight; and then was devised that Machine, which was
afterward called Corvus, which Engine was framed after the following manner:
They erected on the Prow of their Vessels, around piece of Timber, of about a
Foot and half Diameter, and about Twelve Foot long; on the top whereof they had
a Block or Pully; round this piece of Timber they framed a Stage or Platform of
Boards, four Foot broad, and about eighteen Foot long, which was well framed,
and fastened with Iron; the Entrance was longways, and it moved about the
aforesaid upright piece of Timber, as on a Spindle, and could be hoisted up
within six Foot of the Top; about this was a sort of Parapet, Knee high, which
was defended with upright Bars of Iron, sharpened at the ends, toward the top
whereof there was a Ring: This Machine, resembling, in some sort, our fashioned
Mills. To be short, it was slung by those Rings, which by the help of the Pully
was hoisted and lowered at pleasure. And with this they attacked the Enemies
Vessels, sometimes on their Bow, and sometimes on the Broadside, as occasion
best served: So when ever they grappel'd the Enemy with those Engines, if they
happened to swing Broadside to Broadside, then they entered from all parts, but
in case they attacked them on the Bow, they entered two and two by the help of
this Engine; the foremost defending the forepart, and those that followed the
Flancks, keeping the Boss of their Bucklers level with the top of the Parapet.
In this posture the Romans prepared for the Battle.

As soon as Caius Duilius had notice of the Adventure of their General by Sea,
he left the Land-Army to the Conduct of the several Colonels, and hastened
himself to the Fleet; where, upon his arrival, receiving Advice that the Enemy
ravaged the Country on the Coast of Mylas, he made the best of his way with the
whole Fleet, to Encounter them. The Carthaginians, on their side, greatly
rejoiced when they descried the Romans, and forthwith detached a Squadron of an
Hundred and Thirty of their Ships, and stood off to Sea toward them, whom they
held in so great Contempt, that they advanced with their Prows directly upon
them, careless of any Order of Battle, dreaming of nothing but certain Victory,
and the Pillage of the Enemy. He who commanded the Carthaginian Fleet, was the
same Hannibal who defended and made his escape with the Army by Night from
Agrigentum. His own Vessel was a Galley of Seven Banks of Oars, belonging
formerly to Pyrrhus King of Epyrus: But as they approached, the Carthaginians
became greatly surprised at the sight of those Engines we before mentioned, and
stood sometime in suspense at the Novelty, never having before seen the like.
Howbeit, this did not diminish their Contempt of the Enemy; and the headmost,
by the boldness of their attack, made it appear how little they valued them.
But the Romans grappling with them, by the help of their Engines, entering by
them with ease, came to fight hand to hand with them, upon Deck, as on firm
Ground: Some of the Carthaginians were slain, others yielded upon Quarter,
frighted at the extraordinary effect of this new and wonderful Invention. They
lost in the Fight, of those that came first to engage, Thirty Ships, with their
whole Company, of which number Hannibal's Gally we mentioned, was one, who
escaped himself in a small Boat, when he was by all given for lost, after
having performed the Duty of a gallant and able Leader. At length the rest of
the Fleet came up, but when they perceived the Defeat of their first Squadron,
they held it safer to shun tempting their Fortune too far, and were surprised
too at the sight of those new Engines. They therefore having greatly the
Advantage in the lightness of their Vessels, used their best skill by nimbly
rowing round them, to attack them with most safety; but when they observed,
that which way soever they approached, those Machines were still traversed and
opposed to them, they were at length compelled to yield the Honor of the Day
to the Romans, retiring with the lost of Fifty of their Ships.

But the Romans Hopes were raised by this Success, who having against the
Judgment of all the World, proved a Match for the Carthaginians at Sea,
resolved to prosecute the War with greater Application; and forthwith landing
their Forces on the Island, marched to the Relief of Aegesta, which was
straightly pressed by the Enemy, where they raised the Siege, and from thence, in
a breath, marched to the Attack of Macella, which they took by Assault. After
these Successes, Hamilcar, the Carthaginian General by Land, who was then at
Palermo, receiving Intelligence of a Sedition in the Roman Army, occasioned by
a Dispute between the Legions and Auxiliaries of the Allies about Precedence,
which came to a Separation of the Army; the Strangers retiring from the Romans,
and being about to Encamp by themselves between Paropus and Thermas; the
Carthaginians surprised them, and slew to the number of Four Thousand.

Hannibal, upon his defeat at Sea, returned with the remainder of the Fleet to
Carthage, and being reinforced with more Ships and able Officers, he put to Sea
again for Sardinia; where he no sooner arrived, when he was surpised in
Harbor by the Romans, who took many of his Ships. These Misfortunes begat a
Mutiny in the remainder of the Army, who seized on his Person, and Crucified
him. And here in may be noted, that the Romans, as soon as they saw themselves
Masters at Sea, formed Designs likewise on Sardinia. The following Year
produced little or nothing Memorable in Sicily. But on the creating their new
Consuls, Aulus Atilius and C. Sulpitius, these, on their arrival, marched with
the Army directly toward Palermo, which at that time was the Carthaginians
Winter-Quarter; where, as soon as they had posted themselves, the Confuls drew
out the Army in Battle, but the Enemy lay quiet within the Town, whereupon they
marched to Hippona, which they carried by assault. They likewise took
Mytistratus, a strong place, which cost them Time and Trouble to reduce; and
formally besieged Camarina, and attacked it by Works and Engines, and, in the
end, retook it, that place having before deserted their Party; and, after
having taken Enna, and several other places of less importance belonging to the
Carthaginians, they prepared to sit down before Lipara.

The following Year the Roman Consul, C. Atilius, being with the Fleet at
Tyndaris, desery'd the Carthaginian Fleet standing along the Coast in a
confused and careless manner, whereupon he ordered a Squadron of Ten Galleys to
give them chase. But the Carthaginians observing them to Embark their Men, and
that some were already put off, and got out of the Port, and that the headmost
were a good distance from the reft; they thereupon tacked, and standing toward
them, quickly surrounded them, and sank, and destroyed the greatest part of
that Squadron, where the Admiral-Gally was in great danger of being taken, and,
only by her lightness, and the force of her Oars, escaped, after she was given
for lost. But the other part of the Roman Fleet that was ordered to follow,
after they were got together, and had ranged themselves into order of Battle,
engaged the Enemy, taking Ten of their Vessels, with their Equipage, and
sinking Eight: Whereupon the Carthaginians retired with the remainder of their
Fleet, to the Islands of Lipara. But, for as much as the Success of this Ba^tel
stood doubtful, and either thought he had the better of the other in the
Conflict, they therefore set themselves to work with all their might upon their
Naval Preparations, to prosecute their Contention for the Dominion of the Sea.
In the mean while their Troops perform little by Land, engaging in no Action of
importance; but having increased their Naval Power on both sides, they put to
Sea the following Summer. The Romans arrived at Messina with a Fleet of Three
Hundred and Thirty Vessels, as well long as covered, from whence they stood
along the Coast of Sicily to the Right Hand, and having doubled the Cape of
Pachin, they stood toward E^nome, where their Landforces then were. The
Carthaginians arrived first at Lilibaeum, their Fleet consisting of Three
Hundred and Fifty Sail, fitted for Service; from thence they went to Heraclea
Minoa, where they remained at Anchor.

The Romans had now formed a Design to Transport the War into Africa, to the
end the Carthaginians might find Employment in the Defense and Preservation of
their own Country, while they were sollicitous to contest for the Mastery in
Sicily; but the Carthaginians, who knew full well how easy it was for an Army
to march to Carthage; and that it would be no difficulty for an Enemy, who had
once got footing in their Country, to make what Spoil he pleased; made appear
by their eagerness to come to a Battle, that they were resolved to oppose this
Design of the Romans with their utmost Power; so that the one Party having
determined to Defend, and the other to Assault, it was not difficult to
foresee, by the Obstinacy that appeared in either, that they would soon come to
a Battle. The Romans then took care, so to provide themselves of all things
necessary, as to be in a Posture and Condition, either to make a Descent on the
Enemies Coast, or to give them Battle by Sea. To this end, after they had first
selected all the prime Men of their Landforces, they divided the Army, into
four Divisions; to each of which they gave two Names; the first they called the
First Legion, and the First Fleet, observing the like order in the rest; saving
that the fourth Division had no other Name than Triarians, after the manner of
their Land-Army. In this Fleet there were a Hundred and Forty Thousand Men that
bore Arms; each Gally had Three Hundred Rowers, and One Hundred and Twenty
Soldiers. As to the Carthaginians, who were most bent on a Sea-Ingagement,
their Naval Preparations were greater than that of the Romans; and as they
exceeded them in the Number of their Ships, so their Army was proportionably
greater, consisting of One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Fighting Men. And who now
could contemplate the mighty Hazard to which those two contending States were
exposed, and but hear the Account of the Preparations of such Fleets and
Armies, without Astonishment, and taking part in the Peril with which they
threatened each other? The Romans had resolved to keep the Sea, as concluding
it to be their safest Course, the Carthaginians having the Advantage of them in
the nimbleness and ready working of their Galleys; wherefore they endeavored,
above all things, so to draw up, and form their Fleet, that by the good Order
and Disposition of their Battle, the Enemy might be the more cautious how they
approached to attack them: which was, in a word, after this manner: The two
Consuls, M. Atilius Regulus, and L. Manlius, were in the two Admiral-Gallies,
in the Front of their two distinct Squadrons, each of them just ahead of their
own Divisions, and abreast of each other; the First Fleet being posted on the
Right, the Second on the Left, making two long Files, or Lines of Battle; and
whereas it was necessary to give a due space between each Gally, to ply their
Oars, and keep clear one of another, and to have their Heads or Prows looking
somewhat outward; this manner of drawing up did therefore naturally form an
Angle, the point whereof was at the two Admiral-Gallies, which were near
together; and as their two Lines were prolonged, so the distance grew
consequently wider and wider toward the Rear; in this manner was the First and
Second Fleet disposed. The Third Legion was drawn up Frontways, in the Rear of
the First and Second, and so stretching along from Point to Point, composed a
Triangle, whereof this Third Line was the Base. Their Vessels of Burden, that
carried their Horses and Baggage were in the Rear of these, and were, by the
help of small Boats provided for that purpose, towed or drawn after them. In
the Rear of all was the Fourth Fleet, called the Triarians, drawn up likewise
in Rank or Frontways; parallel to the Third; but these made a longer Line, by
which means the Extreamities stretched out and extended beyond the two Angles
at the Base. The several Divisions of the Army, being thus disposed, formed, as
is said, a Triangle; the Area within was void, but the Base contained what we
have already mentioned. In a word, the Roman Fleet being formed into this
Figure, was disposed for all that could happen; nor would it have been an easy
matter to have broken them.

The Carthaginian Generals, in the mean time, animated their Soldiers all they
could in few words, letting them know, That if they overcame the Romans in this
Battle, the War would then be prosecuted in Sicily only; but if they should be
beaten, they would then be driven to fight for the Preservation of their Native
Country, their own Inheritance, and their Wives and Children. In short, they
gave order for the speedy imbarking their People, which the Soldiers
cheerfully obeyed, every one reflected on what their Officers had remonstrated;
so they drew out of their Port, full of Hopes and Resolution. When the
Carthaginians had observed how the Roman Army was drawn up, they then
determined after what manner to form their Battle: Accordingly they disposed
their Fleet into four Squadrons or Divisions, and drew it out into one long
File; that part to the Right of this Line, stretched a great way out into the
Sea, as if their Purpose had been to enclose and surround the Romans, their
Prows pointing directly upon them; the Fourth Squadron, which was the Left of
the Line, kept close under the Shore, disposed in manner of a Tenail: Hanno,
one of the Generals, he who had succeeded so ill at. Agrigentum, was on the
Right with the First Squadron, having with him all the nimble, and best rowing
Vessels of the Fleet, being such as were proper to Attack and Retreat, and for
their lightness could row round the Romans. Hamilcar, the same that fought near
Tindaris, commanded the Left-wing; who after they came to Engage, devised a
Stratagem, which showed him an Officer of Experience.

The Romans having observed, that the Carthaginians, by stretching their Battle
to so great a length, were by that means but thinly drawn up, they therefore
attacked them in the middle of their Line, where the Battle began; but the
Carthaginians, pursuant to the Orders they had received, immediately retreated,
with purpose to separate and put the Romans in disorder to pursue them, who
accordingly pressed warmly after them; The First and Second Fleets were those
who engaged in the Pursuit of the Carthaginians, who feigned to fly: Thus their
Army became disjoined, the third Fleet remaining with the Baggage in a Tow, and
the Triarians keeping their Post in the Rear of all. Now when the Carthaginians
judged the First and Second Fleets to be sufficiently distanc'd from the rest,
the Signal was given from Hamilcar's Gally; whereupon that part of their Fleet
which was chased by the Romans immediately tacked, and made head against the
Pursuers, who had followed them so eagerly; and now the Battle increased and
grew warm everywhere, and albeit the Carthaginians had the advantage in the
lightness and ready working of their Vessels, whether it were to Advance or
Retreat, as occasion required, which they performed with great Promptitude and
Facility; nevertheless the Romans lost not their assurance of Success in the
end, they found themselves better Men when they came to the Swords Point, and
they had great trust in their Engines wherewith they grappl'd and boarded the
Enemy; besides the Soldiers were animated by the Presence of the Generals, in
whose Eye they Fought, and who themselves engaged in equal Hazard with the rest.

Now Hanno, who commanded the Right of the Line, and was at a good distance off
from the place where the Battle began, stood out farther to Sea, and attacked
the Triarians, where he succeeded so well, as to reduce them to the last
Extremity; in the mean while, that Squadron of the Carthaginians that was
posted on the Left, under the Shore, ranged themselves into a Front; and
turning their Prows upon the Enemy, charged that part of their Fleet that had
the Guard of the Baggage and Horse-ships; whereupon the Romans casting off the
Ships which they had in a Tow received the Carthaginians, and fought them with
great Bravery. And now might be seen, three Naval Battles fought at one and the
same time, in three several Places; but forasmuch as the Parties engaging, were
of equal strength, it happened, as for the most part it does in the like
Adventures, where two contending Powers happen to be of equal Force, that
Fortune gives the Victory to that side for whom she first began to declare. So
Hamilcar, not being able to sustain the first Shock of the Romans, was beaten
and fled with his Squadron out of the Battle; Lucius towing away such of their
Ships as he had taken. In the mean while, Marcus perceiving the great Danger
the Triarians were in, and the Vessels that carried their Equipage, advanced up
to their Relief, taking with him the Second Fleet, which remained yet entire;
whereupon the Triarians, now well-nigh vanquished, observing with what Bravery
he attacked Hanno, took Heart, and renewed the Battle; insomuch that he seeing
himself now assaulted from all Quarters both in Front and Rear, and that M.
Atilius, contrary to all expectation, was likewise come up, and joined the
Fleet, by which means they were in danger of being quite surrounded; yielded
the Day to the Romans, and flying, got off to Sea. At the same time Manlius,
who was now returned from the Chase, observing that the Third Fleet of the
Romans had been forced under the Shore by the left point of the Enemies Battle,
where they held them surrounded, came up to their Relief, and was seconded by
Marcus, who had now rescued the Triarians and Baggage-vessels, and left them
safe. In a word, this part of their Army was in great danger, and had been lost
ever this, if the Carthaginians, frighted at their new Engine, could have found
Resolution to attack them, but they barely contented themselves to force them
on upon the Shore, and there to keep them beset, not daring to attempt or
approach them; so great an apprehension they were under of being grappl'd by
their Corvi. In short, the Carthaginians were now quickly beset by the Romans,
who routing them, took Fifty of their Ships with their Equipage, very few
either of Soldiers or Seamen escaping. Behold now the Success of these three
Battles, in all which the Romans were Victors. They lost but twenty four of
their own Vessels, and those perished against the Shore; but of the
Carthaginians, above Thirty were destroyed. Of the Romans not a Ship was taken,
but of the Carthaginians Threescore and three.

Sometime after this Success, the Romans making greater Preparations than ever,
and having repaired and enquipp'd the Ships they had taken from the Enemy, and
well refreshed their Army, set Sail for Africa. When the Van of their Fleet had
gained Cape Mercury, which is a Point of Land running out from the Gulf of
Carthage, a good way into the Sea toward Sicily; they there made a Halt, and
attended the Coming up of the rest of the Fleet; and when they were joined,
they stood along the Coast till they came up with a Place called Aspis or
Clupea, where they made their Descent, drawing up their Vessels in the Port
where they secured them with a Ditch and Pallisade; and finding the Inhabitants
resolved to stand on their Defense, they prepared to Besiege them. In the mean
while, those who escaped from the Battle, bringing News home of their
Misfortune, the Carthaginians were then in no doubt, but that, encouraged by
this Success, the Romans would quickly Land, and make the best of their March
up to their City. They therefore dispatched Troops to oppose them and to keep
Guard upon the Neighboring Coast by Sea and Land; but when they received
Advice of their being Landed, and of their Besieging Aspis, that care was over:
Wherefore they now proceed to reinforce their Army with new Levies, which they
performed with all possible Application, making due Provision for the
Strengthening their City, and the Security of the Country. The Romans, in the
interim, became Masters of Aspis, where having left a good Garrison for Defense
of the Town and Country about it, and dispatched Messengers to Rome to give an
Account of their Successes, and to learn the Senate's Pleasure how to proceed;
they marched farther up with their whole Army to Forage and Spoil the Country.
In this Expedition they plundered and destroyed a great many noble Buildings,
took much Booty of all sorts of Cattle, and at least Twenty Thousand Prisoners;
all which they performed without any Opposition, and brought all down to their
Ships. And now they received the Senate's Answer by their Messengers, whose
Pleasure was, That only one of the Consuls should remain in Africa, with a
competent Strength to prosecute the War, and the other should return back to
Rome with the rest of the Army. So M. Atilius remained with Forty Ships,
Fifteen Thousand Foot, and Five Hundred Horse; and L. Manlius returned to Rome
with the rest of the Army, carrying with him many Prisoners; who Sailing along
the Coast of Sicily arrived in safety.

The Carthaginians foreseeing this War was like to last, considered on the
Choice of their Generals; and first chose two, Hanno the Son of Asdrubal and
Bostar. Then they sent their Orders to Hamilcar, who was now at Heraclea, to
return Home with all expedition: Accordingly, he taking with him Five Thousand
Foot, and Five Hundred Horse, came forthwith to Carthage; where, being chosen
their Third General, he and Asdrubal fell to consult about the present posture
of their Affairs; and concluded, That above all things they ought to Succor
the Province, and not endure that the Romans should make their Incursions, and
such Spoil upon the Country. In the mean while M. Atilius Regulus proceeds, and
in a short space makes a mighty Progress; all such Towns as he attacked, that
had no Walls, he carried at the first Assault; and such as were fortified he
Besieged; and coming to Adda, which was a Place of Importance, he encamped not
far from the Walls, and sat down before it. But the Carthaginians knowing the
usefulness of that Place, and being resolved to defend the Country, marched out
forthwith against him; where arriving with their Army, they posted themselves
on an Eminence, which, albeit it gave them an Advantage against the Romans, was
nevertheless very incommodious to themselves in all Respects; for as their
greatest Strength and Hopes were in their Horse and Elephants, so abandoning
the plain and proper Country, and marching and enclosing themselves in rough
and inaccessible Places; they pointed out as it were to the Enemy, the Methods
of their own Destruction. And so in effect it proved, for the Roman Commanders,
who were Men of Experience, saw well enough, that the main Strength, and most
formidable Part of the Carthaginian Army, was rendered useless by their thus
keeping the Mountains, they therefore wisely managed this Error of of the
Enemy, and not delaying till they should be better advised, improved the
Occasion; and accordingly marched at break of Day and surrounded the Hill,
where they were thus encamped, when now there could be nothing more useless to
them than their Horse and Elephants. In this Occasion the Mercenaries of the
Carthaginians behaved themselves gallantly, and engaging with the first Legion
forced them to retreat; howbeit, being attacked in the Rear by another Party,
marching about the Hill, they were at length forced to give ground, and retire;
and now being hard pressed, they forsook their Camp, with their Horse and
Elephants, and gaining the plain Country, saved themselves, the Romans pursuing
their Foot for some space; so they took their Camp, and proceeded as before to
make Inroads, taking of Towns, and spoiling the Country round about, without
any Impediment. Then they marched to Tunes, and becoming Masters of that Place
they lodged within the Walls, which they chose to do in regard the Situation
was proper for the Purpose they had in hand, and was of all Places, the most
useful to incommode and distress Carthage itself, and the Country round about
it.

The Carthaginians, who had so unfortunately managed their Affairs both by Sea
and Land, not so much through the Cowardice o^ their Armies, as the Insufficiency
of their Chiefs, began now to despair: For, over and above the Calamities we
have related, the Numidians taking the advantage of these their Troubles, had
made Inroads upon them and did them as much hurt as the Roman, and in some
parts of the Country under their Dominion, a great deal more. Insomuch that the
People were compelled to retire and save themselves in the City, whither they
brought both Fear and Famine, a mighty Multitude of all sorts flocking at once
th^ther.

And now Regulus, having weighed, that they had been too hard for the
Carthaginian^ both by Sea and Land, and that Carthage itsel^ was not likely to
be able long to hold out, admonished them to treat about an Accommodation;
fearing least his Successor that was expected from Rome should (if he made not
a Peace) deprive him of the Glory of putting an End to that War. The
Carthaginians, on their part, gladly listened to the Proposal, and accordingly
dispatched to Regulus some of their principal Citizens; who, after some time of
Conference, were so far from yielding to the Propositions, that they had not
Patience so much as to hear them repeated, they were so Infamous. For Regulus,
as if he had made a complete Conquest, would have had them esteem it as a
singular Grace and Benifit, to accord them a Peace upon whatsoever Conditions
he should think fit to propound: But the Carthaginians were of a different:
Mind, and reckoned, that nothing could befall them more shameful and calamitous,
than what was demanded; and that it could not be worse with them to be entirely
conquered, and brought under the Roman Yoke. So they returned, not only full of
Shame to be so treated, but of Indignation at the intolerable Insolence of
Regulus. The Senate, likewise, after they had heard the Terms of Peace
repeated, which the Romans proposed, withstood it with so much Courage and
Greatness of Mind, that albeit they were at the brink of Despair, the
determined rather to abide any Adversity their worst Fortune could bring on
them, than stain the Nobility of their Name and Actions by so shameful a Treaty.

About this time, there was returned out of Greece, a Carthaginian, who had
been sent thither to raise Soldiers in those parts for the Service of the
State; who brought a considerable number of Recruits with him, and among the
rest, a certain Lacedemonian, called Xantippus, who had been educated according
to the Spartan Discipline, and was a Person well seen in Military Affairs; he
informing himself of the late Defeat of the Carthaginians, and after having
been thoroughly instructed in their Strength, and the Provision they had made
for the War; their number of Horse, and of their Elephants; he concluded upon
the whole Matter, and so published among his Friends, That it was not the Enemy
that had vanquished the Carthaginians, but the Ignorance of their Leaders. This
Discourse of Xantippus was quickly spread among the People, and came at length
to the knowledge o^ of the Magistrates, who forthwith commanded he should be
brought before them, when he reasoned the whole matter to them, and did
endeavor to Demonstrate, that if by taking his Advice they would alter their
manner of Fighting, and, descending from the Hills, incamp and deal with the
Enemy i^ the Champain Country, he assured them, no only of Safety, but of
Victory. The Soldiers who were edified by these Reasons, concurred entirely
with Xantippus; to whom thereupon the Conduct of the Army was forthwith given;
and indeed this Advice of his was no sooner understood in the Army, but they
took Heart, and conceived new Hopes: And as soon as they were marched out of
the Town, and disciplined, and formed according to his Rules, the Abilities of
this their new Leader, and the Ignorance of their former Captains became so
visible, that the Army expressed their Joy by loud and general Acclamations,
and a mighty Forwardness to be let against the Enemy; having conceived a firm
Assurance that they could not miscarry under the Conduct of Xantippus. In a
word, the Officers observing this Change in the Minds of the Soldiers,
encouraged them with their Exhortations to behave themselves bravely; and
shortly after they marched to find the Enemy, their Forces consisting of Twelve
Thousand Foot, and Four Thousand Horse, and about an Hundred Elephants. The
Romans were a little surprised at the Novelty, to see their Enemy thus to
change their manner of proceeding, by marching down, and incamping in the plain
Country; but being assured of the Event, they marched toward them with all
Expedition, and encamped within Twelve Hundred and Fifty Paces of the
Carthaginian Army, who the next Morning held a Council of War how they should
proceed, while the Soldiers assembling in great numbers, and proclaiming
everywhere the Name of Xantippus, demanded with great earnestness to be led
against the Enemy. The Officers observing this their Willingness, and being
urged and conjured by Xantippus not to let this their Ardour cool without
Action, the Army was directed to prepare for the Battle, and the Order and
Manner of their drawing up entirely committed to Xantippus; who proceeded after
this manner: He drew up all the Elephants in Front, advanced some distance
beyond the Line of Battle: In the Rear of these, at a good distance, he
appointed the Carthaginian Battalions; in the Right Wing was disposed part of
the Mercenaries, and some chosen out of them were mixed with the Horse advanced
before the two points of the Battle. The Romans, seeing the Enemy now ranging
into Battalia, lost no time but readily advanced against them with their usual
Courage: Nevertheless, in regard they had a just Apprehension of the Force of
their Elephants, they appointed their light armed Soldiers to march advanced
in the Front of their Battle; and to sustain them, were placed good Troops in
firm and close order. Their Horse were drawn up on the Wings, not extending in
length so far as their manner usually was, which was recompensed by the
addition of Depth, whereby they justly computed, that they should be the better
able to sustain the shock of the Elephants; but they were entirely in the wrong
touching their Horse; those of the Enemy much out-numbring them: In short, both
Armies being drawn up, according to the Design of their respective Leaders,
they remained some time in suspense, attending the Signal to engage.

And now Xantippus commanded the Guides of the Elephants to advance, and
attempt the breaking of the Romans Order, and to the Cavalry (which out-wing'd
them) to surround and attack them in the Flank: And the Romans, after clashing
their Arms, and giving a Shout, as their manner is, began the Battle; but their
Horse perceiving themselves out-numbred by those of the Enemy, soon abandoned
their Post in the Wings, and the Foot in the Left-point of their Battle, partly
out of fear of the Elephants, and partly beleiving they should find less to do
against the Mercenaries, attacked them on the Right, and put them to flight,
pursuing them to their Retrenchments. But it fared otherwise with those who
were opposed to the Elephants, they being disordered by those Animals, broken,
killed, and trodden under foot: True it is, that the Body of that Battalian, by
reason of its great depth and firm order, was not presently shaken; but when
the Rear, which yet sustained them, perceived the Enemies Horse in their Flank,
and that they were in danger to be surrounded, they were forced to face about
to receive them. On the other hand, such of the Roman Army as had charged
though the Elephants, were no sooner escaped that danger, but they encountered
with the Battalion of Carthaginians, fresh, and in good order, who charging
them, cut them all off. And now the Romans being attacked and worsted on all
sides, many were destroyed by the rage and force of those mighty Animals, the
Elephants; many were killed on the spot by the Cavalry, and very few attempted
to fly; those who did, were most of them, by reason it was an open Country,
slain by the Hourse and the Elephants. Five hundred who followed Regulus in his
flight, fell with him alive into the Enemies Hands. Of the Carthaginians were
killed about Eight Hundred; most of them Mercenaries, who were opposed to the
Left Wing of the Romans, (...) whose Army there did not escape above Two
Thousand, and those were of the Party th^^ broke and pursued the Carthaginians,
wh^^ the Battle first began, as was observed; th^^ rest were all slain, saving
the Consul M. A^lius Regulus, and those taken with him; an the Cohorts that
remained, escaped as by M^^racle to Aspis. As for the Carthaginians, (...) soon
as they had pillaged the Dead, th^^ ^arch'd back to their City full of Glory
an^ Triumph, leading the Consul with them among the rest of the Prisoners.
Certainly, whosoever weighs with Judgment, the Success of this Adventure, may
collect matter of much benefit for reforming the Errors of Mankind. For what is
more easy to determine in this case of Regulus, than that the flatteries of
Fortune are of all others the most vain and trustless; and we may behold him,
who but Yesterstay was triumphing in the Pride of his Success, refusing the
Compassion due to a miserable People, to Day seeing himself a Captive, and in a
state to implore that Grace which he refused them. In short, the Event of this
Action confirms that excellent saying of Euripides, That one wise Head is more
worth than many strong Hands. For it is manifest in the Case now before us,
that the Counsel and Abilities of one single Person subdued the Roman Legions,
who by their Experience and Bravery were esteemed Invincible, rescued a sinking
and despairing Commonwealth, and restored Courage to a beaten and spiritless
Army, grown stupid by their Misfortunes. Let it not therefore be thought
superfluous, that we add these our Reflections, while those who shall read what
we have written, may chance to be edified, and improve their Minds in that
laudable Virtue of Moderation; for as there are two ways to correct Men's
manners; namely, by their own Misfortunes, and the Example of those of others;
so, though the one be more sensible, the other is more safe. It is therefore the
wisest way, by shunning the Perils and Difficulties of the one when without
toil or hazard we may safely contemplate the other, and take out Lessons for
our Instruction at other Men's Experience. So that, in sum, it will be found,
that there is no Doctrine or Method more likely to improve us in the Conduct of
our Life than the Experience we may extract from the Study of History, which
fairly and heartily reports to us, the Transactions of Times past; for by this
means alone it is that we attain Wisdom and Experience for the bare asking,
which at all Times, and in all Events, will be found most preferable: but so
much by way of Refiection.

The Carthaginians, whose Affairs had prosper'd to their Wish, expressed their
Joy with all possible Piety toward the Gods, and mutual Congratulations and
Festivals among themselves. As to Xantippus, who had so happy a share in the
Advancement and Prosperity of their Affairs, he shortly after (an admirable
Example of great Judgment and Wisdom) took his Leave, and departed from
Carthage, foreseeing, as it were, that the Service he had done them, being a
Stranger, as it was too great for a Reward, so it would soon contract him both
Envy and Danger, which a Native, by the Power of Interest, Relations, and
Friendship would be better able to avoid, while another would stand exposed to
Ruin. There are Authors who render a different Account of Xantippus's
Departure, whereof mention shall be made in a fitter place. And now the Romans
having received an account of the posture of their Affairs in Africa, so
contrary to their Expectations, applied themselves with all diligence to the
repairing and equipping their Fleet, and to rescue out of danger those who had
escaped from the Battle; while the Carthaginians did their utmost to reduce
them, and get them into their Power; to which End they marched to Aspis, and
besieged it; but the Garrison made so brave and obstinate a Defense, that after
the Enemy had attempted their utmost to gain it, they were forced to raise the
Siege. When the Carthaginians had received Advice that the Romans were sitting
out a fresh Fleet to attack them again, they applied themselves to the
refitting such of their Vessels as were out of Repair, and to build new ones to
reinforce their Navy; and having equipped, and got together in a few days, a
Fleet of about Two Hundred Sail, they resolved to put to Sea, and attempt to
prevent the Enemies Descent. In the mean time, the Romans had made ready, early
in the Spring, a Fleet of Three Hundred and Fifty Sail; and embarking their
Army under the Command of their new Consuls, M. Aemilius, and Servius Fulvius,
and standing along the Coast of Sicily toward Africa, they met and fought off
of Cape Mercury with the Carthaginian Fleet, which was not able to sustain the
first shock, but being entirely beaten, lost in the Engagement, and Hundred and
Fourteen of their Vessels, and all that was in them, to the Romans; who
afterward prosecuting their Course, arrived at Aspis; where taking their Men
on Board that remained in Africa, they shaped their Course back to Sicily. And
being well advanced on their way, they were surpised off of Camarina with so
dreadful a Tempest, that the Losses and Hardships they sustained were without
Example, and beyond Expression: So terrible it was, that of Three Hundred and
Seventy odd Vessels that composed their Fleet, Fourscore only escaped
Shipwreck, the rest being either foundered in the Sea, or were lost and broken
against the Rocks, that whole Coast being covered with dead Bodies, and strewn
with the Ruins and Fragments of their Ships, insomuch as History affords no
Example of the like dreadful Disaster. And yet it may be said, that this
Calamity was not owing so much to Fortune, as to the Obstinacy of the Consuls:
For the Pilots endeavored to obviate the Hazard they should be exposed to by
Navigating on that Coast of Sicily, which borders on the African Sea, there
being there not only no Harbors to succor Vessels in distress; but the Season
too of the Year was now improper; for by Observation of the rising and setting
of Orion and the Dog Star, they compute and know the safe Seasons for
Navigation. But the Consuls, contemning their Counsel, stood boldly out to Sea,
in hopes that after this signal Victory, their appearing suddenly on the Coast,
might terrify many Towns, and awe them to Submission: But their Folly was
chastis'd by this memorable Loss, which they sustained upon a Motive much too
little for the Hazard. The Romans have indeed this inflexibility of Mind
peculiar to them, believing that whatsoever they have resolved and determined
to undertake, ought to be indispensably performed; and they have established it
into a Principle, That what they once had decreed to execute, cannot be
impossible to bring to pass: The Effect, indeed of a generous Obstinacy, but
the Cause oftentimes of their falling into pernicious Errors and Misfortunes,
and their sustaining unspeakable Losses, especially in their Naval-Expeditions.
As to their Exploits by Land, where the Encounter is only Man to Man, their
Courage frequently conducts them to the Success they propose, by reason their
Adventures are with Men like themselves; and yet there want not Examples
wherein their Measures and Forces have failed, and they have sunk and
miscarried under the weight of their Enterprises. But whenever, by a
temerarious Audacity, they act against these raging Elements, and attempt to
vanquish the Sea and Wind, they are sure to reap no other Fruit of their
Obstinacy, than Loss and Calamity. This we have now mentioned, is an Instance,
and they have heretofore smarted by the like Errors; and they shall always
stand liable to the same Disasters, till they appear better advised and
instructed in the Weakness of that over weaning Presumption, which they are apt
to entertain in all their Designs, vainly imagining, that both Sea and Land
should on all occasions consent and open their way to Success in all their
Enterprises.

The Carthaginians, upon Advice of this Misfortune of the Romans at Sea, were
of Opinion, That they should now be a Match for them by Land, whereunto they
were persuaded through the late Victory they had gained. That they should be
equal to them likewise by Sea, they had no doubt, by reason of their late great
Loss by Tempest; howbeit, they omitted not to reinforce their Strength both by
Sea and Land. They dispatched Asdrubal into Sicily, to whom, besides the Forces
already there, they ordered a farther Supply of Troops out of those that were
lately drawn out of Heraclea, together with an Hundred and Forty Elephants: He
was no sooner departed, but they sent after him Two Hundred Vessels laden with
all things necessary for the Service of the War Asdrubal, being safely arrived
at Lilybaeum, applied himself with diligence to Exercise and Discipline his
Troops and Elephants, intending to spread his Arms all over the Country, and to
make himself entire Master of the Field. As for the Romans, they were not
without a very sensible Sorrow, when by those who had escaped Shipwreck, they
received an Account of the mighty Loss they had sustained at Sea; nevertheless,
being determined not to yield the Advantage to the Enemy, they ordered a new
Fleet to be speedily built, to consist of Two Hundred and Twenty Sail; which
Fleet (a wonderful and incredible thing to relate) was completely built and
finished in the space of three Months; on which the new Consuls, Aulus Atilius,
and C. Cornelius, speedily embarked; who, after having passed the Straight, and
touched at Messina, to take with them the Vessels that had been saved in the
late Storm, shaped their Course for Palermo with a Naval-Army consisting of
three Hundred Sail, and forthwith sat down and besieged that place, which then
was the Capital City of the Carthaginians in Sicily. They made their Attacks in
two several places, and when their Works were advanced to their Minds, they
approached with their Engines of Battery, by which, a Tower or Work standing
near the Sea, was quickly, and without much trouble, demolished; at which
Breach the Soldiers entered, and took by Assault, and kept Possession of that
Quarter of the City called the New Town, whereby the place itself was put into
manifest danger; but the Inhabitants coming seasonably in to the Relief, they
advanced no farther; so the Consuls, after they had put a good Garrison into
the place they had taken, returned back to Rome. Early the next Summer the new
Consuls, C. Servilius, and C. Sempronius, sailed over to Sicily with all their
Naval Power, and from thence, soon after, stood for the Coast of Africa, where
they made several Descents, but performed nothing of moment; at length arriving
at the Island of the Letophagy, which is likewise called Meninx, not far
distant from the Lesser Syrtis, or Flats; here, being unacquainted with the
Coast, their Fleet fell among the Sands, where their Vessels grounded, and
stuck fast, as if they had been a-shoar, and there remained till the Flood
fetched them off; when with great difficulty and hazard, throwing their Lumber
overboard, they made a shift to escape. From thence, like People flying from an
Enemy, they stood away for the Coast of Sicily; and after they had doubled the
Cape of Lilybaeum they got into the Port of Palermo. But from thence, steering
their Course homeward, a Storm took them in the Phare of Messina, where, by a
blind Obstinacy, they were imbay'd; which Storm attacked them with such
violence, that above an Hundred and Fifty of their Ships miscarried. Things
happening thus adverse to them by Sea, though the Senate and People could not
subdue their Thirst of Glory and Empire, nevertheless these Losses and
Calamities, and the Straits to which they were now reduced, prevailed with them
to quit all farther Attemps of trying their Fortune by Sea; so they now totally
abandoned all thoughts of Naval Preparations. And determining to rely solely on
their Land Armies, they dispatched the Consuls, L. Caecilius, and Cn. Furius to
Sicily with the Legions, alotting them only about Threescore Vessels whereon
securely to embark and waft over the Army, their Baggage and Ammunition. These
Misfortunes of the Romans much augmented the Carthaginian Glory and Fame in the
World, and gave a new face to their Affairs. In a word, as the Romans had now
yielded them up the Dominion of the Sea, it was no difficulty for them to be
entirely Masters there; nor were they without hopes of succeeding in their
Affairs by Land; nor did they reckon very wide of the matter, for from the time
of the Defeat of the Roman Army, by the Assistance of the Elephants, which
discomposed and broke their Ranks in the Battle fought in Africa, where those
Animals made such Destruction of their People, the Soldiers became so terribly
awed, that though they had been on several occasions drawn up in Battalia to
engage within five or six Furlongs of the Carthaginian Army; sometimes in the
Territory of Selinunce, sometimes about Lilybaeum, yet for the space of Two
Years together they wanted Resolution to engage them, or to adventure to abide
in the Champain Country, so great a Dread they had conceived of the Fury and
Shock of those stupendous Beasts: So that little or no Progress was made in
their Affairs during all that space, saving the taking of Lipary and Thermes,
the Army continuing cooped up in the Mountains, and inaccessible Places.
Wherefore the Romans, observing this Terror among their Legions, took a
Resolution once more, to tempt their Fortune by Sea: Accordingly upon the
Creation of C. Atelius, and L. Manlius Consuls, they ordered the Building of
Fifty Vessels, and Levies of Men for that Service; and now they had a Navy once
again established.

Asdrubal having observed this Dread that possessed the Roman Army, when ever
he presented them Battle, and having Intelligence that one of the Consuls was
now returned back to Rome, and one half of the Army with him; and that
Caecilius with the rest of the Troops was at Palermo, assisting their Allies in
gathering their Harvest, their Corn being now ripe; he marched out of Lilybaeum
with his Troops, and came and encamped on the Borders of the Territory of
Palermo. Caecilius observing this weak Proceeding of the Carthaginian, kept his
People within the Walls of the Town, thereby to engage him to Advance nearer;
which Asdrubal accordingly did, persuaded thereto by the show of Fear the
Romans were under, and imagining that Caecilius had not Resolution to appear in
the Field, he rashly adventured his Army into a narrow Straight; and albeit he
wasted the Country to the very Walls of Palermo, Caecilius nevertheless held
his first Determination, not to move till the Enemy had passed the River that
runs close by the Town. When, in short, after the Elephants and the whole Army
had got over, he ordered some of his light armed Soldiers, to advance out
against them to Pickeer, and draw them the more boldly on. And observing all
things to succeed as he had projected, he posted a Body of select and skilful
Soldiers on the Counterscarp of the Town, with Orders, that if the Elephants
advanced upon them, to Attack them with Darts and missive Weapons, and in case
they should be pressed by those Animals, that they should then retire into the
Ditch; and from thence gall and molest them all they could. He ordered the
Towns People at the same time to furnish themselves with great quantities of
Darts, and post themselves without the Town at the Foot of the Walls, and there
abide in a Posture of Defense. Caecilius himself with all his Troops remained
in readiness at a certain Gate of the Town, that was opposed to the Right Wing
of the Enemy, from whence he sustained the Troops with fresh Supplies of Men,
who were already engaged. In a word, the Battle began now to grow warm, and the
Leaders of the Elephants being resolved to be Sharers with Asdrubal in the
Honor of the Day, proceeding as if they designed the Victory should be wholly
owing to them, advanced all in order upon the Romans, whom they soon forced to
give Ground and retire into the Ditch. But now the Elephants smarting with the
Wounds they had received, and vexed with the Darts wherewith they were galled
both from the Ditch and the Walls of the Town, began to grow unruly, fell upon
their own People, and destroyed many, and put their Troops in disorder. This
being observed by Caecilius, he forthwith sallied out with his Troops fresh and
in good order, and attacking the Enemy in Flank, who were already in Confusion,
flew many, and put the rest of the Army to flight. Ten Elephants were then
taken with the Indians their Guides, and others who had lost their Leaders fell
likewise into their Hands after the Battle. The happy Issue of this Action go^
Caecilius the Reputation everywhere of having restored the Roman Courage by
Land to attempt incamping in the open and plai^ Country, and to know how to
behave themselves well again out of their Retrenchments. There was great Joy at
Rome on the arrival of the News of this Defeat, not so much on account of the
Elephants which had been taken, though it was a very sensible Blow to the Enemy,
but because the taking of those Animals, and the Victory obtained against them,
had restored the Soldiers Resolution. Wherefore they determined once again, as
had been proposed (to the end they might at any rate put a Period to this War)
to dispatch the Consuls away with a new Navy. And when all things were in
readiness for the Expedition, they departed for Scicily with a Fleet of Two
Hundred Sail, it being now the Fourteenth Year of the first Punic War: And
being arrived on the Coast of Lilybaeum, and their Troops already in Sicily
being assembled thereabout, they resolved to sit down before that City;
concluding, that the possession of such a Post, would greatly facilitate the
transporting the War into Africa. The Carthaginians were of the same Opinion
with the Romans in that Point, they therefore Postponing all other matters for
the present, employed their utmost Counsels and Endeavors to succor and
secure that Place, leaving nothing undone whereby to compass it. Foreseeing,
that should it once fall into the Enemies Hands, the Island being now entirely
theirs, Depranum only excepted, the Carthaginians would be without any Stake or
Footing. whereby to sustain or carry on the War. But that I may not talk
obscurely to those who are not acquainted with the Geography of Sicily, I will
here endeavor first to give some light into the Situation of that Island: The
whole Island of Sicily is situate, with respect to the extreme Parts of Italy,
in a manner as Pelopennesus is to Greece, and the Frontiers thereof; with this
difference only, that this latter is a Peninsula. In brief, one may arrive at
Pelopennesus by Land by means of the Isthmus, but to Sicily we cannot go but by
Sea. Sicily bears the form of a Triangle, at each Corner whereof is a certain
Cape or Promontory: That which looks Southward, and runs out into the Sea of
Sicily, is called Cape Pachine: That which regards the North, is called
Pelorus, where the Sea is almost shut out, the Island being there not above
Fifteen Hundred Paces distant from the Continent: The third Cape, which looks
toward Africa, is called the Cape of Lilybaeum. This Island is commodiously
situate, to Navigate from any of these Head-lands to Carthage, which has been
already noted; being distant about an Hundred and Twenty Five Miles; the
Wester-most Coast winds somewhat with a Compass, and parts the African and
Sardinian Seas. There is a City near this forementioned Cape, bearing likewise
the same Name, being that which we have already mentioned, which the Romans
besieged; it was begirt(...) a strong Wall, and environed with a good Ditch,
which was filled with Water from the Sea, from whence likewise one might go to
the Haven, which was extreme difficult of access; unless to such, who by long
Practice were perfectly acquainted with the way. This Town then the Romans
besieged, making their Attacks in two several places, investing it with their
two Camps, which held Communication by means of a Retrenchment, fortified with
a Ditch, a Rampart, and a Wall. They made their first Approaches against a
Tower, or Work, standing by the Seaside, which looks toward Africa, and by
their Diligence and incessant Application, adding something every Day, they
soon demolished that and Six other Towers standing near it, and then they made
way to approach with their Ram to batter the other Works. And having now
demolished a great part of the Wall, and many of their Towers being shaken, and
some laid level with the Ground, the Besieged began to be hard pressed, the
Enemy having made a Lodgment even within their Works. Insomuch, that though they
had a Garrison in the Town of Ten Thousand Men, Besides the Inhabitants, they
could not conceal the Terror they were under. Nevertheless, Hamilcar the
Governor, performed the part of a Diligent and Able Officer, by Fortyfying and
Rebuilding such Works as the Enemy had demolished, by making Countermines where
it was found needful; and, in a word, by endeavoring to find Work enough for
the Besiegers, wherever they pressed him. His Diligence was such, as it might
be said, He was present everywhere; he was watchful of all Occasions of
molesting the Enemy, sometimes by burning their Engines; sometimes, to the end
to divert them Day and Night, he would make hazardous Sallies; insomuch, that
it might be said, They lost more Men, than if they had fought ranged Battles in
the Field.

While Affairs stood in this Posture, a piece of Treachery was discovered:
Certain Officers, of a principal Rank among the Mercenaries, who served in the
Town, confiding in the Soldiers readiness to follow them, conspired to deliver
up the Place; and by Night, went over to the Roman Camp, to Negotiate their
Purpose with the Consul; but it happened, that a certain Achaian, Alexo by
Name, one who had done the like grateful piece of Service in the Preservation
of Agrigentum, which the Mercenaries would have likewise betrayed to the
Syracusians, discovered this Conspiracy to Hamilcar, who immediately thereupon,
assembled the Commanders of those Mercinaries that remained in the Town, to
whom he imparted the Treason, conjuring them with Promises of great Rewards and
Preferments to preserve their Fidelity, and not to be Partakers in the Villainy,
wherein those who were now absent were engaged. Whereupon, having frankly
assured him of their Faith, he dispatched them to deal likewise with their
Soldiers. He likewise employed Hannibal to the Gauls, whom they both knew and
loved, having served among them; observing by the way, that this Hannibal was
Son of Him of the same Name who was murdered in Sardinia. He likewise sent
Alexo to the other Foreigners who was in great Esteem among them, and in whom
they had great Confidence. In short, the Persons thus employed, having summoned
the several Nations with which they were to Treat, and Exhorting and Conjuring
them to continue firm in their Obedience, and promising them ample Rewards from
their General; they were easily won to give them sincere assurances of their
Faith; insomuch, that when their Agents were returned from the Roman Camp to
render an Account of their Negotiation, they were so far from consenting or
listening to them, that they drove them away with Darts and Stones. Thus by the
Infidility of their Mercenaries, the Carthaginians had been reduced to great
Straits, and their Enterprises defeated, had not Alexo, who had already by his
singular Virtue preserved Agrigentum, both the Town and Country, their Laws and
Liberties, performed now the like eminent piece of Service for them, in
detecting so dangerous a Conspiracy.

Although at Carthage they were yet without any account of the Pressure of
Lilybaeum, they were not nevertheless unmindful of the Necessities they
concluded they must needs be in, who had undergone so long and strait a Siege.
They therefore decreed them a Supply of as many Soldiers as could be carried in
Fifty Vessels, who were dispatched under the Command of Hannibal, the Son of
Hamilcar, and Adherbal's intimate Friend; who, after he had been exhorted to
govern and comport himself as their Affairs upon the place should counsel him,
he was forthwith dispatched with Instructions however to attempt speedily, by
all ways possible, to succor the Town. Hannibal being now departed with a
Supply of Ten Thousand Men, and arriving safely at the Isles of Aegusa, which
lie in the way between Carthage and Lilybaeum; he there attended a fair Wind,
to waft him to his Port, which no sooner presented, but he put to Sea, and came
with a flown Sheet before the Mouth of the Harbor, ordering his Soldiers to be
ranged in a fighting Posture on the Decks of his Vessels. In the mean while,
the Roman Fleet, surprised at this unlooked for arrival of the Cathaginians,
and fearing, if they should attempt to hinder them, they might be forced into
the Port, together with the Enemy, by the violence of the Wind, they therefore
thought it advisable not to attack them: So they kept their Station, having a
good Offin, and contented themselves to abide there, and wonder at this hardy
Attempt of the Carthaginians. In the mean while, the Garrison being drawn
together upon the Walls of the Town, stood expecting, with great Anxiety, the
Success of the Adventure, and greatly encouraged at the arrival of this
Succor, did, by their Cries and Acclamations, much animate their approaching
Friends. Thus Hannibal, by an intrepid Assurance, compassed his Design, getting
safe into the Haven, where he speedily landed his Soldiers. The Town expressed
great Joy by this Reinforcement of their Garrison; and though the Succor was
great in effect, and much comforted and encouraged them, howbeit they were less
affected with the pleasure of their Relief, than to behold the Romans tamely
consenting to their Passage, without daring to oppose them. And now Hamilcar
the Governor, observing the general Joy upon this their increase of Strength,
and weighing farther, that they had not yet felt any extraordinary Hardships
incident to a Town straightened by a Siege; wisely resolved not to permit the
Inclination he observed in the Soldiers, to attempt something upon the Enemy,
to cool without Exercise; he resolved therefore, that their first business
should be to attack and burn the Roman Engines, while this warm Fit lasted;
accordingly he assembled the Garrison and Townsmen, and increased this their
Ardour by his Exhortations, which were suited to the present occasion;
promising magnificent Rewards to such as should signalize themselves in the
Action; and farther assured them of grateful Largesses from the Republic. And
now all, as it were with one Voice, expressing their Willingness to engage, he
dismissed them to take their Repose; letting them know, that this Cheerfulness of
theirs greatly pleased him, directing them carefully to obey their Leaders.
Then he assembled his Officers, distributing their several Posts, and
distinguishing them according to their Talents; some to succor and sustain,
others to attack; giving the Word, and assigning the time when they should
Sally, and directing that all things should be in a readiness at the several
Posts by break of Day: These Orders being punctually observed, as soon as they
could see to march, Hamilcar ordered them to sally out and attack the Machines
in several places at once. The Romans, who were well aware of what might
happen, were not on their side to seek, being prepared for the utmost that
could besal them; wherefore, with great readiness they advanced against the
Enemy, resisting and disputing with a Courage worthy of the Roman Name; till at
length, the access of fresh Supplies, as occasion pressed, it came to pass,
that their whole Strength on both sides became engaged, and a Battle was fought
under the Walls of the Town; for there sallied out of the Garrison no less than
Two and Twenty Thousand Men, while those of the Romans much exceeded that
number. But forasmuch as this Conflict was managed without any Order or formal
drawing up, every Party engaging after their own Humor, the Action became by
that means much more violent; for, in short, though the two Bodies that fought
were numerous, yet the Engagement was a kind of Combat Man to Man, but the heat
of the Conflict was about the Engines; for those who were appointed to attack
and defend, obeyed their Orders with such Gallantry on both sides, that the
Emulation became very bloody, neither Party giving place to the other, but
obstinately dying on the spot where they were posted. In the mean while, those
of the Carthaginians who brought Fire and combustible Matter wherewith to
destroy the Engines, performed their part with so much Resolution, that the
Romans despairing longer to sustain the Attack, were giving all for lost, when
Hamilcar seeing many of his People slain, and observing that they were not yet
Masters of the Enemies Works, which was a principal part of his Design; he
ordered to sound a Retreat; so that the Romans, who were on the point of losing
both their Machines and their whole Equipage of War, having in the end
preserved their Works, preserved in effect all, and might be said, in some
sort, to have had the better of the Day. After this Hannibal passing in the
Night by the Enemies Camp, went to Drepanum, there to Consult with Adherbal,
who Commanded in that Place for the Carthaginians. This Town having a
commodious Port, and being within Fifteen Miles of Lilybaeum, was of that
Consequence, that they thought it imported them to keep it by any means in
their Possession. In the mean while, those of Drepanum having been some time
without any Intelligence from Lilybaeum, and having an anxious Desire to know
the state of their Condition; all Correspondence by Land being cut off through
the straitness of the Siege, and the vigilance of the Enemy; a certain Rhodian
called Hannibal, a Man of Condition among them, undertook to get into Lilybaeum
by Sea, and so bring them Intelligence how their Affairs stood. This
Undertaking was very well received, but every body despaired of the Success of
the Enterprise, in regard the Roman Fleet rid at Anchor, and kept a Guard at
the Haven's Mouth, on the very Spot by which he was to pass, Nevertheless, the
Rhodian, with a Vessel of his own, prepared for his Voyage, and going off to
Sea, got under covert of one of those Islands that lie opposite to Lilybaeum,
and the next Morning with a fair Wind, and a fresh Gale, he stands away for the
Port; and passing in view of the Enemy, got, by Ten a Clock, safely in, to
their great Astonishment and Surpise, at the boldness of the Attempt; and the
next Day he prepared for his Return. In the mean while the Consul gave strict
Orders to have a more careful Eye on the Entrance of the Port on all sides; and
directed, that by Night their nimblest Vessels should be appointed to be on the
Guard, while himself with his Landforces attended on the Shore. So the Vessels
were posted on both sides, and placed as near the Shore as the Shallows would
permit, having their Oars a-peike (as the Term is) like so many Wings
displayed, ready for flight after the Quarry they expected. But the Rhodian
relying on his Knowledge, and the Lightness of his Vessel, passed in open Day
through all those Guards of the Enemy that awaited him; nor did he only escape
without Hazard of himself, and those that were with him, but in a kind of
Mockery and Contempt of the Enemy, he would often lie upon his Oars, and then
take a turn and row quite round them, as it were to provoke them to Fight. In
short, Hannibal happily executed his Enterprise, and found plainly, that by the
excellent make of his Gally, the Romans despaired to deal with him, and beheld
himself as it were Triumphing over their whole Fleet. He frequently after
passed and repassed, whereby he performed great Service to the Carthaginians,
by bringing Advice, and carrying their Orders, to the great Encouragement of
the Besieged, and the Amazement of the Romans at so successful a Temerity. But
we are to consider the Encouragement he had for so adventurous an Undertaking,
namely, his perfect Knowledge of the Passage and Channel that was to conduct
him over the Flats or Shallows; moreover, his use was, that whenever he was
discovered at Sea, he would work his Vessel in such manner as if he had steered
his course from Italy, and then bring a certain Tower that stood nearest the
Sea, right ahead; that Tower covered him from the sight of the other Towers
which respected the Coast of Africa; and by that very means alone it was, that
Vessels coming with a frank Gale under the covert of that Tower gained a safe
Passage. The lucky Hardiness of the Rhodian, gave Encouragement to others, who
were well acquainted with the Place, to attempt the like; which being found of
very ill Consequence to the Romans, they resolved upon blocking and choking
the Mouth of the Port entirely up, but found it a Work of mighty difficulty,
not being able to fix the the Matter that was brought for that purpose, so as
to hinder the Stream from removing and carrying it away: insomuch, that they
labored long at this Work without effect: Nevertheless, this Rubbish, which by
mighty labor they had brought together, chanced on a place at length wherein
to settle, and there begat a new Bank or Shallow, whereon a certain
Carthaginian Gally, attempting to get out in the Nightime ran aground, and so
fell into the Enemies Hands. The Romans, being Masters of the Vessel, equipped
her, and Manning her with chosen Soldiers, and their best Rowers, placed her
on the Guard, to have an Eye on those Vessels that went in and out of the Port,
and to have a special Watch upon the Rhodian, who getting into the Haven in the
Night by his usual Address, was returning out in broad Day. But when he
perceived the working of this new Vessel, that she pursued him turning and
bording lightly after him according to his own manner, for she happened to be a
Gally of a singular Built; he became much surpised, and thought it his best
course to trust now to the lightness of his Vessel, and make the best of his
way from them; but finding himself now in the Snare, and no other way left but
Fighting, he resolutely determined to Engage them; but the Romans out-numbring
them, and being all chosen Men, soon determined the Dispute: So that now being
Masters likewise of this excellent Vessel, they Manned her, and furnished her
with all things necessary, after which there were no more Attempts to go in and
out of the Port of Lilybaeum.

When the Carthaginians had spent much time, and had, with great Industy and
Travel, repaired the Ruins, and rebuilt and fortified the Breaches made in
their Walls; and when they had given over all hopes of destroying the Enemies
Works, there happened a great Storm of Wind to arise, which blew with that
violence on the Romans, that it brake and rendered useless their Machines and
Engines with which they shot into the Town; and even overturned some of their
Towers, whereupon certain Greek Soldiers took Assurance to believe it would not
be very hard to prosecute what the Tempest had already done, in a good degree,
to their hands, and imparted their Project to the Governor, who approving the
Proposition, forthwith made provision of all things necessary to put it in
execution; accordingly they sallied out, and applying Fire in three several
places to the Roman Machines, the Wind and the dryness of the Materials (their
Works having been long built) soon set all in a flame; insomuch, that the
Romans found it impossible to stop its Progress, or apply any present Remedy,
such was their Fright and Surprise. Furthermore, it being in the Night, the
Smoke and Fire, which by force of the Wind were driven in their Faces, greatly
annoyed them, as did the fall of their Engines and Works, which destroyed many
ever they could approach near enough to extinguish the Flame; besides, the
Wind, which molested the Romans in this Conflict, much assisted the
Carthaginians, carrying their Darts and Weapons farther, and with more
certainty, and the Fire they shot into their Works was conveyed with greater
violence, and took effect at a farther distance; every Object was likewise more
visible to them, whereby they were enabled to gall and molest the Enemy with
greater advantage, all which conduced very much to their Success in the
Enterprise. In conclusion, the Roman Works were in this Action so much
damnify'd, that their Rams and Towers were of no use, insomuch that they
utterly despaired of taking Lilybaeum by force. They therefore enclosed it
round with a Rampire, environed with a Ditch, and fortifying their Camp with
good Retrenchments, expected from Time and Patience, what they could not
compass by Force: On the other hand, the Besieged having well repaired the
Walls where they had been battered, and Breaches had been made, gave evidence
of fresh Courage, resolving to suffer generously all the Incommodities of a
Siege.

When Advice came to Rome, that a great number both of Sea and Landforces had
been lost in Defense of their Works and Engines, and in the other Services of
the Siege; the Youth of the City thereupon cheerfully listed themselves, with
resolution to revenge the Cause of their Country. So an Army was levied,
consisting of Ten Thousand Men, and dispatched over into Sicily; upon whose
arrival at the Camp, Pub. Claudius assembling the Tribunes, made them an
Oration touching his Purpose to surprise Drepanum with their Naval-forces,
remonstrating, that Adherbal, the Governor of that Place, and Commander of the
Carthaginians, was not of sufficient present Strength to resist them; that he
dreamed of no approaching Danger, knowing nothing of the Re-inforcement of the
Roman Army; and that after the Losses sustained in the Siege, he would not be
persuaded they could be Masters of a Naval Army. In short, the Design being
generally approved, the Seamen, old and new Comers, were forthwith ordered to
Embark; and out of the Legions, the choicest, best known, and willingest Men,
were picked to Embark in this Expedition; which they concluded would be but
short, and the Profit they should reap being as it were certain. Orders being
now accordingly given, and obeyed, without giving the least Jealousy to the
Enemy, the Army departed about Midnight, the Men stowing close and mingling
promiscuosly a-board, keeping the Coast on their Right Hand. As soon as Day
broke, and the headmost of the Fleet were descried from Drepanum, Adherbal
became much surprised at this unlooked for Danger, but soon recollecting his
Mind, and beholding the Enemy now at hand, he determined to perform all that
was possible for him to execute, and engage in any Hazard, rather than endure a
Siege, which by the Preparations he saw threatened him. He therefore assembled
all the Seamen and Soldiers belonging to the Fleet upon the Shore, and
ordered, by sound of Trumpet, the Mercenary Troops to march out of the Town and
join them; with whom being now assembled, he declared to them in few words,
That he was well assured they should be too hard for the Romans, if they would
resolve to oppose them resolutely: On the contrary, if they, through Fear,
behaved themselves Ill, the Consequence would be to endure all the Sufferings
and Calamities incident to a Siege. Hereupon the Army unanimously declared
their forwardness to Engage, and required with one Voice to be led forthwith
a-board. Adherbal, after he had let them know, that their Behavior pleased
him, and applauded this their Forwardness, made them Embark, and leading
himself the Van, directed the Fleet to follow and do as he did; so putting out
to Sea, he drew up near the Rocks that lie on the Coast, facing the Enemy, who
was now entering into the Haven.

The Consul, Publius, observing the Enemy, contrary to his Opinion, to make
this Stand; and that this his sudden Attempt did not only afright them, but
that on the contrary, he beheld them in a posture ready to give him Battle;
ordered the Fleet to tack and stand back again, whereof the headmost were now
entered into the Port; some were in the Haven's Mouth, and others not far off.
But while those in the Van, who had received their Orders, were hasting back,
they encountered the others who were yet standing in; by which means, falling
fowl one of another, many, both Ships and Men, were in great danger of
perishing. But in short, they drew out as they were able, and as they got clear
and obtained Sea-room, they put themselves in order of Battle along the Shore,
with their Prows pointing toward the Enemy. Publius, who brought up the Rear
of his Fleet, stood off to Sea, and posted himself on the Left of his Line. But
Adherbal having passed the Right-wing of the Romans at the head of five Galleys
with armed Beaks, turning the Prow of his own Vessel upon the Enemy, and making
a Signal for the rest that followed him to do the same; and being now drawn up
in Front, he puts out his Sign for the Attack, and so in good order they
advanced against the Romans; who, as was observed, were drawn up along or under
the Shore, attending the arrival of their Vessels which were not all yet got
out of the Port, which was the cause of their Fighting greatly to their
Disadvantage so near the Land.

The two Fleets being now near, and the Flags of Defiance on both sides put
abroad, the Battle began, where for a while the Conflict seemed to be equal,
both Fleets having on Board the hardiest Men they could pick out of their
respective Land-armies. But in the end, Victory began by degrees to declare for
the Carthaginians, who from the beginning had in many points the Advantage of
the Romans. In short, they surpassed them in the nimbleness of their Ships,
which were every way of a better Built and Contrivance, their Seamen were
likewise more experienced and abler Men; they were posted also greatly to their
advantage, having Sea-room wherein to work their Vessels, as occasion required,
so that at any time, when pressed by the Enemy, they could draw off, spread
themselves, or draw close together, at pleasure, wherein the lightness of their
Vessels very much availed. Furthermore, if at any time the Enemy had given
Chase to any of their Galleys, and were separated any distance from their
Fleet, they would then tack upon them, and intercepting them, who by reason of
their heavy working, and the unskilfulness of the Roman Mariners, could not
disengage themselves, so rowing round them, and coming on their Flank with
their Prows, they Sunk many of them; on the other hand, when any of the
Carthaginian Vessels chanced to be hard pressed, they could come with
expedition up to their Relief, and Succor them without Hazard. But we may say
of the Romans, that all those Benefits which their Enemy enjoyed were wanting
to them: If they chanced to be chased, they were not able to retire for the
Shore, under which they sought; insomuch, that when they were hard driven, and
were forced to give back, they were either run aground on the Sands, or lost
against the Rocks. Furthermore, the Romans were bereft of one principal
Benefit, which much conduces to Success in Naval Engagements; namely, that
through of the sluggishness of their Vessels, and the insufficiency of their
Mariners, they were not able to come up and attack the Enemy in Flank, as
occasion offered, nor come and fall on them in the Rear, who were already
engaged. In a word, those who were a-stern, were not able to come up the
Assistance of those who were pressed at a distance ahead, being obstructed by
the Neighborhood of the Shore, wanting void Space wherein to move, and bring
their Succors where it was needful. The Consul observing, at length, the
Distress of his Fleet, that some were a-ground on the Sands, and others lost
against the Rocks, himself and about Thirty Vessels that followed him, stood
away to the Left, and retired out of the Battle, leaving Ninety Three of his
Galleys taken by the Carthaginians, very few of the Men belonging to those that
were lost against the Shore, escaping. This was a glorious Action for Adherbal,
to whom the Carthaginians did very great Honor, attributing the Success purely
to his single Virtue and Bravery: While the Romans treated their Consul with
grievous Reproaches, laying the whole Disaster, and the Danger to which his
Country was thereby reduced, to his sole Folly and Temerity; formally calling
him to his Trial, and loading him with a very rigorous Sentence; nevertheless
they abated nothing of their Resolution upon these Misfortunes, which did not
in any wise slacken their Purpose, to stretch their utmost strength to recover
new Forces for prosecute the War; such was the Contention between those two
People, who should remain Superior. And now one of the two new chosen Consuls,
L. Junius, was dispatched over to Cicily, with Orders speedily to succor and
supply the Camp at Lilybaeum with Provisions and all things necessary; for the
safe convoy whereof they appointed a Squadron of Sixty Men of War. Junius
having joined the Fleet at Messina that had been rendezvous'd there by the
Army, and diligence of the Islanders, shaped his course toward Syracuse; his
Fleet consisting of One Hundred and Twenty Ships of Burden, and Eight Hundred
other Vessels laden with Provisions and other Stores of War. From thence he
dispatc'd his Questors, with Orders to take care speedily to supply the Legions
with all things of which they might stand in need, allotting them for that
Service, part of his Ships of Burden, and some of his Vessels of War; while
the Consul himself remained at Syracuse, attending the arrival of that part of
his Fleet which was yet behind, and could not keep him company in his Voyage
from Messina; as likewise to receive the Corn the Islanders had provided for
his Army. Adherbal, about the same time dispatched to Carthage the Prisoners
and Ships that were taken in the Battle. Afterward he sent Carthalo with a
Fleet of about an Hundred Sail, adding Thirty of his own Vessels to the
Squadron he had brought with him to surprise and attack the Roman Fleet, riding
at Anchor before the Port of Lilybaeum; with orders to take and bring away as
many as he could get off, and what he could not, those to burn and destroy.
Carthalo, pursuant to his Orders, falls upon the Romans about the fourth Watch
of the Night; and while some of their Vessels were burning, and others towing
off, the Surprise gave great terror to the Enemy, the danger being much
augmented by the cries and tumult of the People, on so unlooked for an
Adventure, for the Romans hasting promiscuously in the dark to succor and
defend their Vessels, the noise and clamor of the Soldiers gave alarm to
Hamilcar, Governor of the Town, who soon perceiving what was doing, prepared
for a Sally; and as soon as it was Day, and that he could discern how matters
went, he orders the Mercenary Troops to march out against the Romans; who being
thus attacked on all sides, were reduced to very great straits, which much
abated their Resolution; but Carthalo, after having taken and towed off some of
their Vessels, and destroyed others, stood to Sea again, and made the best of
his way toward Heraclea, in order to the obstructing, what in him lay, the
Succors that were coming to the Army, and receiving Advice by his Scouts, that
they had discovered a great Fleet of all sorts of Vessels, and that they were
not far off, he having the Romans in great Contempt since their last Defeat,
forthwith puts to Sea with an ardent desire to come to blows with them, but
some of the smaller Vessels of the Roman Fleet, who were advanced ahead of the
rest, having given notice to the Quaestors, that the Carthaginians were at
hand; they not conceiving themselves of sufficient strength to deal with them,
presently took order for the safety of their Fleet, endeavoring to secure them
under the Potection of a Town on the Coast belonging to the Romans; but there
being there no safe Harbor, only Coves and small Retreats among the Rocks,
which gave them some shelter within them, the Quaestors therefore landing their
People, applied themselves to make all Possible provision for the Defense of
their Fleet, bringing out of the Town all their Engines and Machines for
casting of Stones and shooting of Arrows, and in a Posture of Defense expected
when the Enemy should Attack them. But the Chrthaginians being of Opinion that
the apprehension of the danger they were in, would soon drive the Soldiers to
retire and seek Sanctuary in the Town, resolved not presently to attempt them,
but only to Block them up, in expectation they should shortly be Masters of the
Vessels without much contest. But having some time in vain expected the Issue,
and finding that contrary to their hopes, the Romans appeared resolute in the
defense of their Fleet, they contented themselves with surprising only some of
their Victuallers, and (the Station where they were being incommodious) retired
to a Harbor in a Neighboring River, where coming to an Anchor, they there
continued keeping a vigilent Eye on the motions of the Roman Fleet.

After the Consul had dispatched those Affairs which had detained him at
Syracuse, he departed, and doubling the Cape of Pachine, shaped his course for
Lilybaeum, totally ignorant of what had happened to that part of the Fleet
which he had sent before. But the Carthaginian Scouts discovering them, gave
notice to their General, who immediately weighed Anchor out of the Port, with
determination to give them Battle, before they should be able to join the other
part of their Fleet. But Junius observing the Carthaginian Fleet to be now
near, and taking them to be too strong and numerous for him to deal with, was
compelled to seek Sanctuary likewise in such Places as were next at hand, though
never so dangerous, or incommodious, there being no Havens thereabout that
could yield them shelter: Making account that he ought to run any hazard rather
than expose, by the loss of the Fleet, their Army by Land to the mercy of the
Enemy. When the Carthaginians had observed the Romans purpose, by their
working, they forbore to Attack them in so dangerous a Post, but retiring to a
place between the Two Fleets, kept that Station; carefully observing their
motions: While things stood thus, a strong Gale of Wind came up, which, by the
agitation of the Sea, threatened a Tempest at hand: Whereupon the Carthaginian
Pilots, who were well skilled in the Weather and the Coast, foreseeing the
approaching Danger, gave notice thereof to their Officers, and advised Carthalo
by all means to weigh Anchor and get about the Cape of Pachine, thereby to be
covered from the Tempest that threatened them. Carthalo readily followed this
Advice, and with great difficulty doubled the Cape and secured his Ships. While
the two Roman Fleets, remaining on an open harbourless Coast, were so violently
assaulted by the Storm, that not a Ship escaped, nor so much as a whole Plank
of all their Navy.

After this Disaster, the Carthaginians began to respire, and conceive new
Hopes, and take fresh Courage, while the Romans, whose former Losses had much
impaired their Naval Strength, were by this Misfortune quite ruined, and began
now to despair to Cope with the Carthaginians by Sea, and resolved to content
themselves to hold the Possession of the Inland Towns. In the mean time, as the
Carthaginians were become Masters at Sea, so they would not renounce their
Hopes of succeeding in their Affairs by Land. And albeit the Condition of the
Romans was deplorable enough, and their Army before Lilybaeum driven to very
hard shifts by these Disappointments; nevertheless, they held firm to their
Purpose of continuing the Siege. Accordingly without delay Order was taken, to
have them supplied by Land, with whatsoever they stood in need of; the Army
resolutely determining to abide the utmost Extremity. As to Junius the Consul,
he after this dreadful Shipwreck, speeds away to the Army, full of Anxity, and
meditating on nothing more, than how by some new and remarkable Service, he
might repair this cruel shock of Fortune. Wherefore, he undertook on a very
slight motive, to surprise Erix, which together with the Town and Temple of
Venus, he got into his possession. Erix, is a Mountain standing on the Coast of
Sicily that looks toward Italy, situate between Depranum and Palarmo, the
most difficult and inaccessible part thereof being on that side which regards
Drepanum. This is the highest Mountain in the whole Island, Mount Aetna
excepted: On the top whereof there is a Plain, where the Temple of Venus
Ericina, the most noble and richly Adorned without dispute, and the most
celebrated for Devotion in Sicily. The Town likewise stands on the same Ground,
the Access to it being long, straight, and difficult. Junius places on the top
of this Mountain a Garrison, on the side toward Drepanum; with Orders that
they should keep a strict Watch both ways, for he was unwilling to treat the
People with violence, unless they gave him occasion; concluding that by that
means he should hold both the Town and the Mountain in safe possession.

During these Transactions, the Carthaginians made choice of Hamilcar Barcas
for their General, giving him the Command of their Fleet, in the Eighteenth
Year of the War, With this Fleet, as soon as he had received his Orders, he
departed to the Coast of Italy with Design to make Descents and Inroads on the
Country; accordingly, he fell on the Locrians and the Brutians, and shortly
after, comes with his whole Fleet toward Palermo, near which Place, not far
from the Seaside, betwixt Palermo and Erix, he took possession of a Place,
which he chose for the Commodity of its Situation, where an Army might Incamp
with safety, and be constantly and easily supplied with all necessaries. In
short, it was an Eminence steep on all sides, and hard of Access, on the top
whereof there was a Plain or Level, of at least Twelve Miles in compass, the
Ground yields both very good Pasture, and is proper for the Plow, it is covered
from all the bad Weather that blows from the Sea, where there are no Serpents
or noxious Animals; furthermore, the Situation is so secured by Rocks and
Precipices, both to the Land and Seawards, that to guard the Passes either way,
a very little Fortification suffices. In the middle of the foresaid Plain or
Level, there rises another Eminence, so disposed by Nature, as if it were
designed as a Citadel to the rest, from whence there is a Prospect into all the
Country round about; here is likewise a good Port of great use to such as
Navigate from Drepanum or Lilybaeum to Italy. The Accesses to this Place are
only Four, and those very difficult; Two from the Sea and Two from the
Landward. Here Hamilcar encamped his Army, fortifying himself, with a
Resolution little short of Temerity, having no Friend or Confederate near him,
and without hopes of any for the future, surrounded by, and as it were
abandoned to, the Mercy of the the Enemy. Howbeit he here found Work enough for
the Romans, and often put their Affairs in great danger. For Sailing out of the
Port, he pillaged and wasted the Coast of Italy as far as Cuma; and afterward,
notwithstanding the Romans were encamped within Eight Hundred Paces of Palermo,
he led his Army thither. In a Word, this Place was, as it were for almost Three
Years together, the Stage of so many various Disputes and Rencounters, that it
would be very hard to relate the particular Adventures. In brief, the Behavior
of the respective Captains and Leaders themselves, may not be unfitly compared
to the Bravery of those, who voluntarily mingle themselves with the Gladiators,
and expose themselves to fight for the Prize in Public Spectacles: For they
were in perpetual Action, and giving and receiving Wounds at every turn,
wherein both their Strength, Bravery and Dexterity, was seen so many several
ways, that it would be difficult for the Soldiers themselves to recount the
various Passages, much less for the Spectators to remember and relate them, or
to make a Judgment, otherwise than in general to determine by the
remarkableness of the Actions, the Courage and Experience of the Actors.

For, in brief, whosoever should attempt to set down the many Plots, and
Ambushes, mutually contrived one aganist the other, how sometimes those who
laid the Snare fell themselves in their own Toiles; if, I say, one should think
to recount the many Attacks, Surprises and Rencounters that occurred, and the
various Scenes of Action that passed, the Historian would never have done, nor
indeed would the Relation be either pleasant or profitable to the Reader. Let
us therefore make a Judgment of the Virtue of the Commanders, by a general
Relation of their Performances, and the Issue and Sequel of so many great and
hazardous Enterprises; though it shall be our Care however to pass by nothing,
that may become an Historian to relate, neither their Stratagems, nor any
extraordinary Inventions, which Necessity or Occasion might suggest to put in
Practice, nor any singular or remarkable Action, that required more than
ordinary Talents of Bravery to execute.

And here it is observable, that it was not possible for them to come to a
pitched Battle, for sundry Reasons: First, their Forces on both sides were
equal, their Camps likewise were by Nature difficult of Access, and by the help
of Art rendered Impregnable, so that each being assured of their Safety in
their Works, they prosecuted their Contention by Parties and daily Rencounters,
neither seeming inclined to put an Issue to the War by a decisive Battle. So
that at length it became as it were a Custom between them, to divide and keep
the Success of their Enterprises as it were in Balance, assigning Victory to
him to Day, who was to lose on the Morrow. Fortune presiding as a sage Judge in
the Lists, and appointing at her Pleasure now one place, now another, to be the
Scene of Action, diversifying the nature of their Disputes, and changing the
Place as she pleased, from one sort of Ground to another, from Places more open
to others more straight and enclosed.

While the Romans kept Guard both on the top and at the foot of the Mountain
Erix, as has been observed, Hamilcar surpised the Town, which stands between,
on the skirt of the Hill, notwithstanding the Roman Solers within it. So that
the Romans who were in Garrison on the top, became by that means besieged by
the Enemy, who were by them before shut up, where they endured all the
Hardships, and were exposed to all the Dangers imaginable, which they suffered
however with unspeakable Constancy. The Carthaginians likewise opposed the
Enemy with an obstinate Bravery, who pressed them hard on all sides, depriving
them of all means of Subsistence, saving by the Avenue that lay toward the
Sea, whereby their Provision was not obtained but with great difficulty.

And now albeit they attempted one another with all the Art and Address, that
is practiced in Sieges and Attacks; after they had equally felt all sorts of
Violence, were pinched with extremity of Famine, and had experimented
whatsoever Hardships, are done or suffered in the most calamitous Adventures
incident to a Siege; they may nevertheless be said to have been mutually
crowned with Victory, but not as it is represented by Fabius, who reports them
to have been Vanquished by the Miseries they underwent; but Triumphing over all
that could be put in practice to subdue each other. For before it could be seen
who was likely to have the better, though it was a Dispute, on one single Spot,
of two whole Years duration; yet the War at length determined after another
manner.

Thus have I recounted the Occurrences of Erix, and the Actions of the
Land-armies; those two States being fitly resembled to Birds, which in Fight
show more Courage than Strength, where it often happens that their Anger
remains when their Power is lost, and so retireing by Consent, leave it
doubtful, who had the Advantage. In like manner, may it be said, to have fared
with the Romans and Carthaginians, who, weakened by so long a War, and wasted
by the expense of so many Years Dispute, were reduced on both sides to the last
Extremity. Nevertheless the Romans maintained a certain Inflexibility of
Resolution, not to be expressed; for although for the space of five Years, they
had totally desisted from all Naval Preparations, discouraged by the many
Misfortunes which attended their Navigations, proposing they should be able to
put a period to this long and dagerous War, with their Landforces alone, yet
at length perceiving that the great Abilities of Hamilcar were likely to
frustrate that Expectation, they determined now the third time, to place their
Hopes in a Fleet, concluding it to be the only Means, whereby to put a happy
Issue to the Dispute, if Fortune would but in any sort favor their Beginning;
and the Sequel proved they did not reckon amiss. They forsook the Sea, the
first time, by reason of the Shipwrecks they had sustained, and the second time
they were compelled by the loss of their Fleet, in a Battle near Drepanum. And
yet they wanted not Assurance to attempt Fortune a third time, how averse
soever she had hitherto been. And now having cut off all the means of
Subsistence from the Carthaginians in Erix, they by that means subdued them,
and put an end to the Strife.

But let us observe by the way, that this Undertaking of the Romans, was owing
more to their Virtue, than to any other Cause whatsoever. For their Treasure
was exhausted to so low an Ebb, that there appeared no sort of Fond, whereby to
enable them to pursue their Design; but their Greatness of Mind, and the
Generosity of those who were in the Government, surmounted all Impediments. And
it so sell out, that means were at length found more than sufficient to effect
this great Determination, for every one voluntarily contributed in proportion
to his private Fortune, and undertook as they were able among themselves; some
two, some more joining their Stock, to build and equip a Vessel for their
share, on no other Condition than to be reimburs'd by the Public at the end of
the War. So that in a short space a Fleet of Two Hundred Sail was Built, and
put to Sea, all contrived according, to the Model of the Rhodian Vessel, we
have elsewhere mentioned; the Command of this Fleet was given to the Consul C.
Lutatius, who departing early in the Spring, arrived in Sicily when he was
least looked for, the Carthaginian Fleet being retired. He presently possessed
himself of the Port of Drepanum, and all the Harbors in the Neighborhood of
Lilybaeum; then he made Preparations for laying Siege to the Town of Drepanum,
but he proceeded therein with such Caution as betoken'd his Forsight, that the
Carthaginian Fleet might speedily arrive; and bearing in Mind what had been
concluded in their Deliberations at their first setting out, namely, that
nothing could put a Period to the War, but a Naval Battle; he therefore,
pursuant to that Result, lost no occasion of Exercising and Disciplining his
Soldiers and Seamen in all Points wherein they might be rendered serviceable to
his Design. And as he was careful to preserve good Order among them, so they
soon became expert and knowing in their Business, and his Soldiers ready and
capable of pursuing any Orders they should receive.

The Carthaginians, very much surprised at the News of a Roman Navy, dispatched
away a Fleet with all expedition against them, sending at the same time a good
relief of Provision of Victuals and all sorts of Stores of War. But their chief
care was, that those who were straightened in Erix might be supplied with
whatever they wanted. Hanno, therefore, who Commanded the Carthaginian Fleet,
shaped his Course first toward Hieronnesus, with design to touch at Erix,
before the Romans should have any account of his Motions; determining, after he
had supplied them, and lightened his Vessels, to reinforce his Troops from
thence, with the choice of the Mercenaries that were there, and that then
joining with Barcas, he should be in a condition to give the Enemy Battle. But
Lutatius, who had got Advice of Hanno's Arrival, and suspected, indeed, his
Design; took on board the choice of his Landforces, and sailed away for the
Island of Aegusa, commonly called Aegates, which lies just against the Port of
Lilybaeum, where, after an Exhortation to the Army, suiting the Time and the
Occasion, he notify'd to the Commanders of his Vessels, that he purposed the
next Day to give the Enemy Battle; but when, in the Morning, he observed the
Wind to blow in favor of the Enemy, and consequently, not fair for them; and
further, that the Sea began to swell, and threaten foul Weather, he then became
undetermined how to proceed. But after he had well weighed the matter, and
considered, that by engaging them, though the Weather were not favorable, he
should, however, have to do with Hanno alone, and the Troops only that Embarked
with him; that over and above, he should deal with a Fleet laden, and
encumbered with the Stores and Provisions which they had taken on Board; and
that, on the other hand, if he delayed out of fear of the foul Weather, and by
that means gave the Enemy the opportunity of passing by, and joining their
Forces, he must then fight, not only with a Fleet light and discharged of all
their Lumber, but with an Army strengthened with the choice of their
Landforces, and what was yet more formidable, he must engage against the known
Gallantry of Hamilcar. Wherefore he resolved not to lose the occasion that
offered. And now it was not long before they descried the Enemy coming with a
flown Sheet, whereupon he stood out of the Port, and drawing up in a Line of
Battle, made directly toward them; for his Seamen being strong, in good
plight, and well exercised, though the Sea and Wind was against them, surmounted
the difficulty; and contemning all Opposition, advanced in good order against
the Enemy.

When the Carthaginians saw themselves thus waylaid by the Enemy, and their
Passage barred, they forthwith struck their Sails, and after the Captains of
their respective Ships had exhorted their Men to behave themselves as they
ought, they prepared for the Battle. But the Scene was now shifted, and the
circumstances of the Combatants being totally changed, from what it was in the
Battle near Drepanum, it will not therefore be thought strange, that the
Success should fall out otherwise. In short, the Romans were to seek, till now,
in the good Contrivance and Built of their Ships; they had now no Lumber on
board to pester and incommode them, having nothing with them but what was of
use in the Battle. Furthermore, their Seamen, who were now able, and well
exercised, were a mighty help toward their Success in this occasion; they were
likewise, for Soldiers, furnished with the choicest Troops they could pick out
of the Land-army. The Carthaginians, on the other hand, could boast of none of
those Benefits, for their Ships were laden and pestered, and in no wise in
condition for fight; their Seamen were raw and unable, being taken up and
entertained in haste; their Soldiers were likewise new-raised Men, having never
before seen a Battle; for they had laid aside all thoughts of Naval
Preparations, on Presumption that the Romans would never more adventure to Sea.
In a word, the Carthaginians being in every thing inferior to their Enemy, the
Dispute was soon ended, the Romans routing them at the first Encounter. Fifty
of the Carthaginian Vessels were sunk, and Seventy taken, with all their Men
a-board; the rest, making the best of their way before the Wind back toward
Hieronnesus, there being scarce an Example of so sudden and seasonable a change
of Wind, which came about, as it were, to supply a present pressing Necessity.
After the Battle, the Consul stood away with the Fleet for Lilybaeum, to
dispose of his Prizes and Prisoners, which gave him business enough, there
being, at least, Ten Thousand taken. When the Carthaginians had notice of this
Defeat, so contrary to their Expectation, though they were surprised, yet they
were not humbled, and would willingly have continued the War, could they have
found means to sustain it; but of that they had no Prospect. For while the
Romans continued Masters at Sea, there was no way whereby to succor and
sustain their Forces in Sicily; and on the other hand, utterly to abandon them,
would be in a manner to betray them; and leave themselves destitute both of
Officers and Soldiers for the Service of the Commonwealth; they therefore
dispatched a plenary Power to Hamilcar Barcas, committing the entire Conduct of
their Affairs in Sicily to his Management, who, with great Reputation and
Honor, acquitted himself of that Commission; performing, in every thing, the
part of a Wise and Able Commander; for so long as he had but the shadow of Hope
to advance the Interest of his Country, he left nothing unattempted that was
not Imprudent and Temerarious to promote it, acting so, as hardly any Man in
Military Performance may be named before him; but Fortune had deserted the
Carthaginians; and he, after he had unprofitably taken all the best Measures
that Experience had taught him, or Reason could suggest, began, at length, to
take thought for the safety and preservation of those under him, and wisely
yiedling to Necessity, and the Circumstances, and State of their present
Fortune, dispatched Ambassadors to the Consul, to treat about a Peace. For
it is fit we should know, that the same Prudence is seen in the Management of a
Defeat as of a Victory. Lutatius lent a willing Ear to this Message, knowing
full well how much the Roman State had suffered by the War; and that they
themselves were sinking under the Burden: So a Period was given to that bloody
Strife, the Articles of Peace being a little more or less, as follows;

If the People of Rome approve thereof, there shall be Peace and Friendship
between the Romans and Carthaginians, on Condition, That the Carthagians
entirely depart out of Sicily; that they shall not make farther War upon
Hieron, nor the Syracusians, nor against their Confederates: That the
Carthaginians shall deliver up all the Roman Prisoners Ransom-free; and shall
pay them, within the space of Twenty Years, the Sum of Two Thousand Two Hundred
Talents of Silver. These Articles were forthwith dispatched to Rome; but
forasmuch as the People were not entirely satisfied, Ten Deputies were
empowered to go into Sicily, and after they had thoroughly informed themselves of
the State of their Affairs, to determine on the place what should be concluded;
who, upon their arrival, after they had maturely considered of all things, they
agreed to the Treaty, with this Alteration of shortning the Time for Payment,
adding Two Hundred Talents to the Sum, and obliging the Carthaginians to depart
our of all the Islands situate between Italy and Sicily. Thus the War
determined, which was waged between those two People, for the Mastery of
Sicily, which had lasted full Four and Twenty Years, and was the longest and
most Memorable that History has any where recorded; nor was there ever any
that had been prosecuted with so little Intermission. In conclusion, not to
recount the numerous Conflicts, and the mighty Preparations that were made
during that space, let it suffice to note, as has been already abserv'd, that
they once fought at Sea with Five Hundred Vessels, comprehending both Fleets,
afterward with few less than Seven Hundred Sail. On the part of the Romans
were lost during this War, what by Tempest, what by other Accidents, Seven
Hundred Ships; and on the Carthaginians part, near Five Hundred. So that if
People were surprised, and wondered at the Naval Battles heretofore fought
between Antigonus Ptolomy and Demetrius, they will have much more cause of
Doubt and Astonishment, when they shall hear related, the stupendous
Transactions that compose our History. And if we shall make Comparison between
the Fleets wherewith the Persians waged War with the Greeks, and the Athenians
and Lacedaemonians among themselves, it will be a farther Subject of their
Wonder, how such mighty numbers could be brought to fight in a Sea-Ingagement.
Whence it will become manifest, as we have remarked in the beginning of our
History, that if tho Romans Design extended to the Subjection of the Universe
and they arrived at their End, it will not be found owing so much to Fortune or
Accident, as some Greek Authors would suggest, as to the plain and evident
measures of Reason, inasmuch as they had acquired a perfect and through
Knowledge and Insight into all those extraordinary Enterprises which they had
made the subject of their Meditation. But it may be demanded, How it comes to
pass, that now at this day, when they are arrived at the Universal Dominion,
and their Affairs in a more prosperous state than ever; that if their should be
occasion, they would not be able to provide and fit out such Fleets, nor make
such Naval Preparations, as in those days? To which I answer, That as it is
true, so the Reason is very plain, which shall be made appear, when we come to
treat about the Form of the Roman Commonwealth. But to the end the Reader may
be thoroughly enlightened, we will not decide here (as it were by the by) so
important a Point. Let us lend our Attention then to the present Subject; for
what we shall now farther deliver will appear worth our while, though we had not
yet related any thing to the purpose. For as some Authors have heard nothing of
the Adventures of the Romans, so others have handled their History with so much
Obscurity, that no profit can arise thereby. We may observe then, that in this
War which we have been relating the Forces and Courage of the two Contending
States, seemed to be equal almost in every thing; and principally in their
obstinate Emulation for Dominion and Empire. As for their Armies, I believe we
may safely grant, in the general, that the Roman Soldiers were the better
Militia. But as to their great Officers, Hamilcar Surnamed Barcas, Father to
the famous Hannibal, who afterward made War upon the Romans, may be justly
reckoned, both for Courage and Wisdom, the ablest Commander of that Age.

The Peace was no sooner ratified between those two States, when they happened
about the same time, to fall, as it were, into one and the same Misfortune: The
Romans had a kind of Civil War, by a Rebellion of the Faliscans, but it was
soon ended by the Suppression of that People, and the taking their City. And
the Carthaginians suffered by a War with the Numidians and Africans, their
Neighbors, who joined in an Insurrection with their own Mercenary Soldiers;
but the Carthaginians had not the like Success as the Romans; for they were
often reduced to the last Extremity, and fought many Battles, not only for the
Safety of the Government in general; but for their own private Stakes, their
Families, and Fortunes. In short, the account of the Occurrences of that War,
for many Reasons might have been deferred, howbeit, we shall, in few words, as
it was our Purpose, give an account thereof here; for it will be thereby made
manifest, by what then came to pass, what the nature of that War is, which the
Greeks have called Inexpiable. Furthermore, we may be instructed by that which
happened to the Carthaginians, what Foresight is to be practiced, and Caution
ought to be used by those who will compose their Armies of Mercenary and
Foreign Troops. We shall likewise be taught the difference in Manners between
a barbarous People, and those who have been bred and educated under the Laws of
good Discipline. In a word, it will appear by the Sequel of those Transactions,
what gave rise to that War between the Romans and Carthaginians that was
prosecuted by Hannibal. And in regard, not only Historians, but the Managers
themselves, of the War, are to this day in dispute about the Causes thereof, it
will not be an unprofitable Work to set the World right therein.

As soon as Hamilcar had finished the Treaty, and led the Troops that were in
Erix to Lilybaeum, he resigned his Commission; and Gesco, who was Governor of
that place, had the charge of transporting the Army into Africa; who,
foreseeing what might happen, did not Embark them all at once, but prudently
dispatched them by Divisions and Parties, allotting so much time between their
Embarking, as might suffice for his purpose; which was, that those who were
first sent, might be paid, and discharged, and sent to their Country, before
the others should arrive. But the Carthaginians had another Project, for their
Treasure being greatly exhausted by the War, they determined to defer their
Payment till they had them all together; and then to propose to satisfy them
with part only of what was due to them; so they remained in the Port, and were
received and detained in Carthage as they arrived.

But the City at length growing weary of the Neighborhood of those Strangers,
who daily molested them by insupportable Injuries and Insolence, they wrought
with their Officers to accept of Quarters elsewhere, at a Town called Sicca,
whither they marched them, receiving a certain Sum for their present
Subsistence, till their Pretentions should be adjusted, and the whole Army
transported; but upon their resolving to leave their Families, and their
Equipage, as they had done heretofore, behind them in the City, in expectation
speedily to return to receive their Pay; the Carthaginians, fearing, that after
so long an absence, it would be hard to keep some from remaining behind, and
others from returning back out of love to their Relations, by which means, the
Relief they designed to the City, by their departure, would be without effect;
they therefore prevailed with them, to march with Bag and Baggage. And now when
the whole Army was got into Sicca, and began to relish the Pleasure of Repose,
whereof, for a long time they had not tasted, Idleness soon begat Liberty and
Neglect of Discipline; Evils commonly incident to Soldiers without Employment;
and, in short, the cause, for the most part, of all Mutinies and Disorders.
They therefore began to be very clamorous for their Pay, exalting their Merits
much above their due; and although their Claim was unreasonable, yet they
determined among themselves to abate nothing of their Demands. Furthermore,
calling to mind, the many Promises their Officers had made them of Largesses
and Rewards, for the well-performance of their Duty in the many perilous
Conflicts wherein they had been engaged, they raised their Expectations yet
higher, and with a covetous Impatience, attended the Issue of their
Pretensions. When the Army, as we said, was arrived, and all received into
Sicca, Hanno, who at that time was chief Magistrate in Carthage, was dispatched
to them, who not only did not answer their Demands, but came even short in his
Propositions of what they had already promised, remonstrating to them the
Poverty of the State, and the heavy Tributes the Country was already under, and
therefore labored to persuade them to be satisfied with, and take for good
Payment, a part only of what appeared due to them; which Proposition was not
only rejected, but answered with a present Insurrection of the Soldiers;
sometimes the several Nations mutining apart, sometimes joining in a general
Sedition, all running to their Arms; and in regard they were of different
Countries and Languages, not understood by one another, the Disorder was
thereby greatly increased, and nothing but Trouble and Tumult was seen in the
Camp. In short, the Carthaginians, whose Militia is for the most part composed
of Mercenary Troops, have their Policy of forming them out of diverse Nations,
believing it hard to conceive a general Conspiracy or Sedition, in an Army,
where the Soldiers are of different Languages and Manners, and by that means,
likewise, that Soldiers are preserved in better Obedience to their Superiors.
But if it arrive once to a general Defection, and that the Sedition spreads
throughout the Army, the Disease then becomes incurable, it being impossible to
reduce them to their Duty; and the Instance now before us, convinced the
Carthaginians of the Defect of their Politics in that Custom. For whenever
it happens, that Armies so composed, conceive a general Distaste or Hatred, the
Effects extend beyond the common measures of Outrage and Inhumanity, and Men
exceed, in savage Cruelty, wild Beasts themselves. This Calamity, then, befell
the Carthaginians, whose Army consisted of Spaniards, Gauls, Lygurians,
Baleareans and Greeks; among whom were many fugitive Slaves, who were most of
them Africans; so that it was impossible to speak to them all at once, or in
one place; or, indeed, to contrive any means to do it; for one Officer alone
could not perform it, though he were qualified to speak in all their Languages;
it would have been likewise equally difficult to assemble and speak to them at
one and the same time by different Interpreters, who would never be able to
render the same Sense equally intelligible to four or five different Nations at
once. Their best course, then, was to instruct the Commanders, to deal with,
and harangue their several Troops, when they had any thing to command or
persuade the Soldiers. Hanno, accordingly gave out his Orders to them as he was
able; while those who were to execute them, had themselves, but an imperfect
understanding of what was ordered; others, though they understood what was
directed them to say, yet reported quite the contrary to the Soldiers; so that,
what through Ignorance, what through Treachery, Distrusts and Jealousies daily
increased, the Soldiers Complaints not duly heard, and the Conspiracy and
Disaffection grew stronger and stronger. The Army thought themselves outrag'd,
that instead of sending to them Officers, under whom they had served in Sicily,
who knew their Merits, and who had so often assured them of Rewards; the
Carthaginians had sent them one, who knew them not, and had no manner of
knowledge of their Services. In short, as they slighted and contemned Hanno, so
they began to distrust their own Officers; and thus enraged as they were, with
their Arms in their hands, they marched Twenty Thousand of them toward
Carthage, and encamped near Tunes, about Fiften Miles from the City.

And now the Carthaginians became convinced of their Weakness, when it was too
late, and no present Remedy could be had; for it was a mighty Fault in them to
permit such a Body of Strangers to Assemble all in one Place, while at the same
time they well knew, that in case any Disorder should arise, they had not
Strength sufficient at home to appear in their own Defense. Another great Error
they committed, in permitting their Wives, Children, and their Equipage to go
out of the City, which, like so many Hostages, would have served, not only to
have preserved them in their Duty, but would have gone far toward composing
the Differences that were arisen between them. In a word, the Carthaginians
affrighted to behold such an Army, as one may say, of Enemies at their Gates,
labored all they could to win them to Obedience and good Order. They sent them
supplies of Provision, which they bought at their own Rates; they dispatched
Deputies to them likewise out of the Body of the Senate, who assured them of
all they should demand, that was in the Power of the State to perform: But
these Mutineers sound something new to require every day, and the Fear they
perceived the Carthaginians to be in, added to their Insolence; who having
served against the Romans in Sicily, they took for granted that neither the
Carthaginians, nor any other People whatsoever, would have Courage to oppose
them, or offer them Battle in the Field. No sooner therefore had they adjusted
their Demands of Pay, but they proceeded to further Exactions; they required
payment for the Horses they had lost in the Service; when that was agreed to,
they demanded payment for the Corn that had been delivered them short of their
Allowance for many Years past, and they would be paid too at the Rate that it
had at any time been sold at, in the utmost Extremity of the War. In brief, as
there were many Mutinous and Seditious Persons in the Army, so those propagated
new Exorbitances, and every day found fresh occasion of Complaint, and
prevented their Agreement by impossible Proposals. Nevertheless the
Carthaginians were resolved to agree to every thing, and now the Mutiny began
to be appeased, when they understood that an Officer should be sent them under
whom they had served in Sicily, who should have Power to Agree and Adjust with
them all their Pretenses. They were not pleased with Hamilcar Barcas, under
whom they had born Arms, believing he had been the occasion of the ill
Treatment they had found, because he never came near them; and they believed
too, that he had quitted his Command of his own Motion. On the other hand they
had an Affection to Gesco, who had likewise commanded them in Sicily, and who
had appeared their Friend and Advocate in many Occasions, especially in the
matter of their Transportation, so they determined to choose him as Arbitrator
in the Matters depending. He therefore embarks, taking Money with him, and upon
his Arrival at Tunes, first calls an Assembly of their Principal Officers, and
then he Summons them separately, Nation by Nation. Where, after he had gently
reproved them for their past Behavior, he Remonstrates to them the present
State of Affairs, and above all labors to persuade them to continue their
Affection and Duty to a Government under which they had so long Served, and
taken Pay; and, in short, exhorted them to be content with the Remainder of
their Pay as it appeared due. Among the Mutineers there happened to be one
Spendius a Campanian, who had been a Slave to the Romans, and had harbored
himself among the Carthaginians: He was strong of Body, and in all occasions of
Danger very forward; this Fellow, fearing to fall into the hands of his Master,
for by the Custom of Rome his Fault was punished with Death; labored both with
Words and Actions, to trouble and perplex the Treaty they were upon; and to
hinder by all means possible their Agreement with the Carthaginians. Another
there was, whose Name was Matho, who was an African, of free condition, and a
Soldier among them, having been an active Stirrer in this Conspiracy, and out
of fear of Punishment, joined with Spendius to obstruct the Accommodation,
possessing the Africans, That as soon as the Strangers should be paid, and
dispatched to their Country, it would be their lot to Pay for all, and that the
Carthaginians would take such Revenge on them, for the Injuries which had been
done them, that all Africa should tremble at it. The Soldiers grew hereupon
enraged anew, and in regard they were not likely to receive of Gesco any other
Satisfaction than their Arrears of Pay; what was due for their Horses and
Bread, being respited to another time, they therefore took thence occasion of
fresh Disorders, and assembled in the public Meeting Place in a mutinous
manner. To Spendius and Matho they lent a willing Ear, who railed both against
Gesco and the Carthaginians, and if any one presumed to offer them temperate
Counsel, he was forthwith stoned to Death, even before it could be understood
what the Purport of his Discourse was, whether for or against Spendius, and now
great slaughter was made both of People of public and private Condition, and
nothing was heard during the Tumult, but, Kill, kill; and what greatly
augmented the Rage of those People, was the excess of Wine they had drunk,
having newly risen from their Repast. So that the word Kill resounding suddenly
throughout the Camp, there was no escaping for any one against whom they
conceived any distrust or distaste. In a Word, there being now none who
presumed to open his Mouth to divert their Determinations, they chose Spendius
and Matho for their Leaders and Commanders in Chief.

Gesco was not without a due Sense of the Danger he was in among these People,
but he let that Consideration give place to the Duty he owed his Country; he
foresaw that if this Mutiny once came to a head, the Commonwealth would be
driven to great straits, to prevent which, he was willing to be exposed to any
hazard. He therefore with great Constancy of Mind pursued his Purpose of
reducing them to their Duty by all means possible: Sometimes he treated with
their Officers, sometimes with the sundry Nations apart; but now being in
present want of Bread in the Camp, they impatiently demanded it of Gesco; he,
as it chanced, in a sort of Contempt, to reprove their Insolence, bad them go
to Matho their Captain; this put all in a Flame, so that without any further
delay or respect, they seize on the Money that was brought, and lay ready told
in order to their Payment, and arrested Gesco, and all the Carthaginians who
accompanied him.

And now Matho and Spendius conceiving the only way to put matters past
Accommodation, and to come to open Hostility, was to engage the Soldiers in
some such violent Action, as should be a manifest breach of their Duty, and a
violation of the Treaty they were upon. Wherefore they fomented with all their
Art and Industry, this Audacious Proceeding of the Multitude; who now had not
only seized on the Carthaginians Money and their Baggage, but laying violent
hands on Gesco and his Followers, committed them to Prison, loading them with
Irons, and then most impiously conspired, and, against the Law of Nations,
declared War against the Carthaginians. This then was the Beginning and the
Cause of the War with the Mercenaries, which was called the African War. After
this, Matho dispatched Deputies to the Cities round about, exhorting them to
think on their Liberty; to send him Succors; and to enter into a Confederacy
with him. And now the several Heads of the Faction finding the Africans
disposed to Revolt, and to shake off the Carthaginians Yoke; and that Supplies
both of Men and Provisions were dispatched to them from al^ Parts, they divided
their Army into Two: One they sent against Vtica, and the other toward
Hippona, which two Places had refused to join with them in their Defection from
the Carthaginians.

The Custom of the Carthaginians had ever been to Sustain themselves out of the
Fruits and Growth of the Country, and the greatest part of their Treasure and
Income, wherewith they defrayed their Wars, and made their Military
Preparations, arose out of their Revenues in Africa. But their Armies in all
their Expeditions were ever composed of Strangers, by which means it will
appear, and by what we have related, that all things conspired at once to their
Damage, and what had been their Support, converted to their Disadvantage, so
that from Consternation they fell to Despair; for so great was their Surprise,
that nothing could possibly have befaln them so remote from their Expectation.
For after the War of Sicily, which had consumed their Treasure, (being now
assured of Peace) they promised themselves a breathing Space of Tranquillity;
and took for granted, their Condition would be at least Supportable. But those
Hopes soon vanished, and were changed into the sad Prospect of a War more cruel
and dangerous. Their Contest with the Romans, was for the Dominion of Sicily
only; now they were to Fight for their own proper Safety, and the Preservation
of the Commonwealth; and all this without any Stores of War, Armies or Fleets,
or any Provision toward it; after so many Unfortunate Conflicts wherein they
had been engaged. Furthermore, they were without either Money, or hopes of
Friends to whom they might have recourse for Succor. And here they came to
perceive the difference betwixt a Foreign and remote War, beyond the Seas; and
Civil Dissension at their own Doors.

In short, this People were of themselves the Authors of their own Calamities;
for during the first War, with what grievous Tyranny did they oppress the poor
Africans, thinking they savored them, by exacting from them but the one half
of their Income, continuing the same Levies upon their Towns and Cities in time
of Peace, as were drawn from them to carry on the War; and this was extorted
with that rigor that the poorest Subject was not exempted. And whenever they
were to elect new Magistrates for the Provinces, the Choice never fell on those
who were likely to Govern the People with Lenity and Moderation, but on such
whose Rigor promised them the greatest Fruits of their Oppression, by draining
them of their Money to furnish out their Fleets and their Armies; and, in a
word, to Minister to the Ambition of the Republic; among whom Hanno was a
principal Minister. All this considered, the Africans were not likely to be
backward to Rebel; to whom the bare Report only of what was transacting was
sufficient to engage them. The Women themselves, who had so often seen their
Fathers and Husbands dragged to Prison by the Tax-gatherers, were in every Town
active in promoting the Revolt, combining among themselves to refuse nothing
that could be compassed to carry on the War, sparing neither their Ornaments,
nor precious Movables to raise Pay for the Armies: Insomuch that Matho and
Spendius were so plentifully supplied with Money, that they had not only
sufficient to Pay the Arrears that were due, which they had assured them of,
the better to engage them to their Purpose: but were enabled to sustain the
Expense and growing Charge of the Army. For Wise Officers extend their Prospect
beyond the present Occasion. And now, notwithstanding the Carthaginians were
heavily oppressed by these Misfortunes, they ommitted not however to provide
the best Means for their Defense. The Conduct of the War they gave to Hanno, of
whose Service they had heretofore made use, in the Conquest of that part of
their Dominions lying about Hecatompolis. They levied Soldiers likewise, from
all Parts, and commanded all their Citizens, who were able to bear Arms, to be
Mustered, they exercised the Horse also that belonged to the City, and repaired
their decayed Ships, and ordered the Building of new ones. In the mean time
Matho and Spendius, who had (Seventy Thousand Africans in their Army) besieged
Vtica and Hippona at one and the same time; being without any Apprehension of
the Enemy; for they kept Guard in their Camp near Tunes, by which means the
Carthaginians were debarred all Commerce and Communication with Africa. For
Carthage is situate on a Peninsula which runs far out into the Sea, and is
bounded by that on the one side, and the other by Marish and unpassable
Grounds; so that the Isthmus that joins it to the Continent, is not three Miles
broad; Vtica stands not far from that Part of Carthage which regards the Sea,
and Tunes on the side of the Marish Ground: So that the Enemy being encamped in
those two Places, did in effect not only block up the Carthaginians from the
Continent, but even alarmed the City itself, marching sometimes by Night, some
times by Day, to their very Walls; filling the Inhabitants with great Fear and
Disorder. Neverthelsss, Hanno omitted no part of his Charge, making all
Provision possible for the War, wherein he was very capable, being well
practiced in Affairs of that Nature, but he was found no able Soldier,
whenever he marched against the Enemy; for he knew not how to improve
Occasions of Advantage, and not only manifested his Want of Judgment, but of
Courage, too when it came to the Trial. For marching to the Relief of Vtica,
when he had terrified and disordered the Enemy by the help of his Elephants,
whereof he had an Hundred in his Army, and Victory had already declared for
him; yet through his Default, not only the Army, but the Town it self, was in
great hazard of being lost; for having brought from Carthage all sorts of
Machines, Engines, and Equipage of War, proper for the Attack of Towns, and
incamping near Vtica, he assaulted the Enemies Works, who, not able to stand
the Force of the Elephants, were forced to quit their Camp. Many were slain by
those Animals, and such as escaped, retired to a neighboring Mountain for
Safety, which being strong by Situation, and overgrown with Wood, they thought
themselves there secure enough. While Hanno, who had been accustomed to make
War with the Africans and Numidians, who, upon any Defeat, are wont to Retreat
as far from Danger as they are able, often slying for Two or Three Days
together: thought himself secure of the Victory, and that the Enemy had been
totally defeated, insomuch that he neglected the Guard of his Camp, left his
Soldiers at Liberty, and retiring into the Town, there made good Cheer and
thought of nothing but his Ease. In the mean time the Enemy, who had been well
trained in War, and had learned of their Leader Hamilcar in Sicily, how to
sustain such Shocks and Rencounters, laid hold on this occasion; for being used
to fly before an Enemy, and to Face again, and Attack in one and the same Day
those who had pursued them; and receiving Intelligence that Hanno was retired
into the Town, and that the Soldiers, confident of their Victory, neglected
their Duty in Guarding the Camp; they marched forthwith down, and attacked
their Retrenchments, killed a great number, and constrained the rest shamefully
to Retreat into the Town; taking all their Baggage, Engines, and Equipage of
War. Nor was this the only Occasion wherein Hanno had given Marks of his
Insufficiency; for this Disaster was followed by another, soon after, near a
Town called Gorza: For, notwithstanding he lay encamped in the Face of the
Enemy, and had it in his power totally to have subdued them; after having twice
worsted them in Battle, nevertheless, by his Imprudence, the Opportunity was
lost.

Wherefore the Carthaginians, dissatisfied with the Conduct of Hanno, gave the
Command of their Army once again to Hamilcar Barcas and dispatched him to the
Field with Seventy Elephants, and all the Foreigners they could get together,
with the Militia of the City, both Horse and Foot; amounting in all to about
ten thousand Men. With this Army he marched against the Enemy, whom he
surprised in such manner, that they were constrained to remove their Camp, and
raise their Siege from before Vtica; for which Action alone he was judged
worthy of the great Character he had obtained in the World, and confirmed the
Hopes they had conceived of his Success; and here we have an occasion to make
recital of his Adventures during this Expedition.

On the narrow, or slip of Land, and that joins Carthage to the Continent,
stand two Mountains, almost inaccessible on the side that looks toward the
Country; in those two Mountains there are two Ways or Passes made by Art, which
lead into the Champaign. These Mountains were possessed by Matho, who had placed
Guards in every needful place. Furthermore, the River Macar hinders all passage
from Carthage into the Country on that side, which is so deep, as to be no
where fordable; over which River there is but one Bridge, near which there
stands a Village, which Matho possessed likewise, and guarded with great
Vigilance; by this means, not only an Army could not pass, but even a single
Man could hardly get passage undiscovered of the Enemy: This was well
considered by Hamilcar, who, having a watchful Eye everywhere, lights, at
length, on a Stratagem which afforded him the only means to get his Passage. He
had remarked, that upon the blowing of certain Winds, the Mouth of the River
used to be choked up with Sand, which was wont to bank up in nature of a Bar,
and afforded a kind of watery Passage over the River; he therefore marched his
Army to the River's Mouth, where he halted, without communicating the reason to
any Body, till those favorable Winds, we mentioned, should blow; which no
sooner happened, but he marches his Army, by Night, over the River; without
giving the least Suspicion to the Enemy: This Action (wherein he performed
great Service, and thought to be impossible) was matter of great Astonishment,
both to the Carthaginians and the Enemy; and now Hamilcar gets into the Plains,
and marches toward those that guarded the Bridge. Spendius receiving Advice
of what had passed, gets before him, and marches on the one side with a Body of
above Ten Thousand Men, which he drew out of the Town near the Bridge; and on
the other were at least Fifteen Thousand, which he ordered from the Camp before
Vtica, with purpose, by that manner of proceeding, to surround and hem
Hamilcar's Army in; under which hopes, the Soldiers became so attentive, that
they punctually obeyed the Orders they received, and mutually animated each
other to do their Duty as they ought. In the mean time, Hamilcar advances with
the Elephants in his Front, then the Cavalry, with the light armed Foot, and
those who carried Bucklers, in the Rear. But when he observed the Enemy to
approach with Precipitation, and, as it were, without any Order, he presently
changed the Order of his Battle, commanding those who were in the Rear to
advance to the Front; who marching with a compass, became opposs'd in Battle to
the Enemy; who taking those Motions to be an effect of Fear, and a sort of
Retreat, attacked them with great Resolution, though without any Order. But
Hamilcar's Horse were no sooner advanced, and those who followed them boldly
sustaining them; and altogether coming to the Charge, when the Enemy who came
in confusion, and in haste, began to fear; finding, so contrary to their
Opinion, the Resistance that was made; which not being able to endure they soon
betook themselves to flight, one of their Parties encountering with another of
their own, which was coming to their Relief, took them for Enemies in the
Fright, and engaging, defeated one the other; most of the rest were destroyed
by the Horse and the Elephants. In this Conflict there died of the Africans
near Six Thousand Men, and about Two Thousand were taken Prisoners; the
Remainder, some got into the Town near the Bridge, and some into the Camp
before Vtica. After the Victory, Hamilcar pursues the Straglers everywhere,
taking the Town by the Bridge which the Enemy had abandoned, and retired to
Tunes; and forraging the Country round about, some Towns yielding to him out of
Fear, others were reduced by force; by which means having, in a good degree
recovered the Carthaginians form the Fear they were under, being almost at the
point of Despair; he gave them new Courage, and lent them more Assurance in
danger.

In the mean time, Matho, who continued the Siege of Hippona, advised Spendius
and Autaritus, who was Chief among the Gauls, to be careful not to lose sight
of the Enemy, but to take care, however, not to be surprised in the Champion
Country, by reason of Hamilcar's Superior Strength in Horse and Elephants, but
to keep the skirts of the Hills, and to march and incamp as near the Enemy as
they could, and to take the advantage of attacking them, when they should
perceive them at any time encumbered or molested in their March; but while he
gave them this Counsel, he forgot not to solicit the Numidians and Africans for
Succors, and to incite them to make use of the present Occasion to recover
their Liberty. So Spendius made choice of Six Thousand Men, out of the several
Nations that were encamped at Tunes, to march, and attend the Motions of the
Carthaginians, wheresoever they went; keeping, as he was advised, the Foot of
the Mountains. He took likewise with him, the Horse of Autaritus amounting to
Two Thousand Gauls, (all the rest of that Nation, who had served at Erix under
Autaritus, having taken Pay with the Romans.) And while Hamilcar was encamped
in a Plain, surrounded on all sides with Hills, Spendius receives Succors both
of Africans and Numidians, and resolves to attack the Carthaginians, by
surrounding them, appointing the Numidians to engage in the Rear, the Africans
in the Front, resolving himself to fall on their Flank. The Carthaginians were
hereby reduced to very great straits, looking on the Danger to be almost
inevitable. But it happened that at this time there was a certain Numidian in
the Enemies Army, called Naravasus, a Man of Account both for Nobility and
Courage: He had heretofore been of the Carthaginian Party, on the account of
the Friendship that had been between them and his Father; and now charmed by
the Virtue and Fame of Hamilcar, he was resolved to renew old Kindness; and
conceiving this a proper occasion to put his Purpose in effect, he determined
to find out Hamilcar, and contract this new-design'd Friendship with him:
Accordingly he advances toward their Camp, attended only with about an
Hundred Numidians; and coming near their Lines, he there halts, and with a
noble Assurance, makes a Sign with his Hand, that he had something to
communicate with them. Hamilcar, not a little wondering at the Hardiness of the
Action, sent a Horseman out to him, to whom Naravasus replied, He had
something to say to the General; but in regard the Carthaginians showed some
Diffidence to trust him, Naravasus forthwith dismounts; and giving his Horse
and Arms to his Guard; in that manner, naked and disarmed, with a gallant
Boldness, adventures into Hamilcar's Trenches. Every body wondered at the
Bravery of the Man, but received him amicably, and freely discoursed with him;
and being conducted to Hamilcar, he told him, He wanted not good Inclinations
for the Carthaginians in general; but his Ambition was principally to engage in
a Friendship with him, which was the Motive that brought him; which, if he
approved, he should find him for the future, a faithful Friend, whether it were
for Counsel or Action. This Discourse of Naravasus, and the Action it self,
performed with so frank a Boldness, filled Barcas with unspeakable Joy,
insomuch, that without the least show of Distrust, he embraced the Offer; and
not only made him his Confident in his most secret Negotiations, and his
Companion in all his Enterprises; but to purchase his Fidelity to the
Carthaginians, he promised him his Daughter to Wife. And when the Conference
and Treaty was ended, Naravasus joins Hamilcar with a Body of Two Thousand
Numidians, with which Re-inforcement he offers the Enemy Battle. Spendius
likewise, on his part, being strengthened by the Africans, marches against him,
where the Battle was obstinately fought. The Victory was long in suspense, but
Hamilcar, in the end, had the Day, whose Elephants did great Service, and
Naravasus signalized himself above all others. Spendius and Autaritus escaped
by Flight, about Ten Thousand of their Men being slain, and Four Thousand taken
Prisoners. After the Battle, Hamilcar released all the Prisoners that were
willing to take Pay in the Army, and armed them with the Spoils of the Dead. As
to those that were not willing to serve, he assembled them together, and there
told them, That he freely Pardoned and Remited their Fault for that time, and
gave them their Liberty, leaving every one to his own Course; with this Caution
only, That if ever they were taken in Arms against the Carthaginians, they were
to expect no Mercy. During these Transactions, the Mercenaries that were in
Garrison in Sardinia mutiny'd likewise, after the Example of Matho and Spendius;
and having shut up Bostar their Commander in chief, in the Citadel, they, at
length, murdered both him and all the Carthaginians with him. Whereupon the
Republic sent a Re-inforcement of more Troops, under the Command of one Hanno,
whose Soldiers likewise abandoned him on their arrival, and joined with the
Rebels; and at the same time seized on their Leader, and crucified him. They
likewise barbarously murdered all the Carthaginians they could find in the
Island; and making themselves Masters of the strong Places, kept them in
possession, and domineered till a Dissension happened between them and the
Natives, who prevailing, chased them into Italy; so that Sardinia became by
this means, entirely lost to the Carthaginians: An Island very considerable, as
well by it is Greatness, and the number of the Inhabitants, as for the Fruits
and Product of the Country. But in regard many have already largely described
it, I thought it unnecessary to say more on a Subject so well known, it being
but so much time lost, to say over again what others have said before me.

And now Matho, Spendius, and Autaritus foreseeing, that the Clemency which
Hamilcar exercised toward the Prisoners, was like to have but an ill Effect on
their Affairs; and fearing least the Africans, and their other Troops, in
Prospect of Pardon, should desert them, and go over to the other Army, they
resolved to commit some new Act of Villainy; such as should put them past all
hopes of Indemnity with the Carthaginians. So they assembled all the Army to a
certain place, and while they were there, a Messenger purposely arrived with
pretended Letters from those who had followed their steps in Sardinia, which
Letters contained strict Injunctions to them, to be careful in guarding Gesco,
and the rest of the Prisoners (who, as we have already noted, were
treacherously imprisoned at the Treaty of Tunes) inasmuch as there were some in
the Army, who had undertaken to the Carthaginians to deliver them up. Spendius
here takes occasion to admonish them, not to rely on the specious Humanity
which Hamilcar seemed to show to those who had fallen into his Hands; that it
was the least of his Purpose to spare them, but by a feigned Clemency, hoped to
draw the rest to Submission; to the End, that having them once at his Mercy, he
might make one Example of Punishment for all; should they be ensnared by those
Allurements. He further proceeded to Counsel them, to take care not to be
outwitted, and, neglecting their Duty, permit Gesco to escape; who being a
principal Leader, and in great Authority, would prove one of their most
dangerous Enemies. Spendius had hardly ended his Discourse, when a second
Courier arrives, pretending to come from the Camp near Tunes, who brings
Letters pressing the same matter that was contained in the others.

Upon this Autaritus applies to the Assembly, to whom he remonstrates, that
their Safety and Success consisted purely in renouncing all those hopes of
Pardon, to which the Carthaginians labored to persuade them; and that he,
whoever he was, that should suggest any Assurance in the Carthaginian Clemency,
should forfeit his Fidelity, and was no more to be trusted. He advised them,
therefore, to be guided by, and give credit to those who knew best how the
Carthginians would deal with them, and to hold them for Traitors and Enemies,
who should attempt to persuade the contrary. When he had ended his Discourse,
he gave his Opinion that they ought to put Gesco to Death; and not only those
who were with him, but all such others as had fallen into their Hands since the
War. This Autaritus was a very popular Man in the Army, and prevailed much in
their Assemblies; he was, moreover, perfect in the Carthaginian Tongue by
reason of his long Commerce among them, as were many others under his Command;
who, in their common Conversation, seldom spoke in any other Language. This
Officer was therefore listened to with general Applause, and the Assembly was
unanimously prevailed with, to consent to his Proposition. Howbeit, there were
some of every Nation, who joined in their common Request, That, in regard of
the many Benefits they had received at the Hands of Gesco, he might have the
Favor only to suffer Death, without putting him to Torment; but in regard
their Discourse was confused and in several Languages, it was not understood
what they demanded; and now it being known what was determined, one of those
there present demanded aloud, That they should forthwith execute the Sentence;
whereupon immediately all the Carthaginian Prisoners that were at hand, were
stoned to Death, who some time after were buried by their Relations, as if they
had been killed and torn by wild Beasts. Then Spendius ordered Gesco to be
brought forth out of the Camp, together with the other Prisoners that were with
him, to the number of Seventy Persons; and being led some distance off, they
first cut off their Hands, beginning with Gesco, whom just before they had
owned for their Benefactor, and whom they had made Choice of to be Umpire of
their Differences, then by degrees they Dismembered them, and after they had
cut off their Legs, they threw them yet alive into a Ditch. The Carthaginians,
upon receiving Intelligence of this Savage Piece of Cruelty, justly deplored
the Calamities of those Miserable People, and sent to Hamilcar and Hanno, who
was the other General, exhorting them to lay the Distresses of the Commonwealth
to Heart, and to do their utmost to revenge the Death of their Fellow-citizens,
by the Destruction of their Murderers. Heralds were likewise dispatched to the
Enemy to demand the Bodies of the Dead, who were so far from dedelivering them,
that they advised them to send no more Messengers or Ambassadors, assuring
them that the first who came should share the Fate of Gesco. In a word, they
now agreed to Treat all the Carthaginians that should for the Future fall into
their Hands, with the like Inhumanity, and such of their Allies as should be
taken, they would cut off their Hands, and so send them back to Carthage; which
cruel Determination they afterward rigorously executed. Certainly, whosoever
shall weigh things rightly, will conclude, that as there are Maladies and
Ulcers in Human Bodies, that may arrive to such a head of Malignity as to be
past all Cure; so the Spirits and Minds of Men are obnoxious to the like
Distempers. In short, there are Sores and Biles in our Bodies which will fester
under the use of proper Remedies, and yet if Applications are neglected, they
spread and prey upon the part affected, and as they grow in Malignity, come at
length to consume the whole Body; not unlike to these, there often happens to
grow Diseases in the Mind, which arrive at such Inveteracy, that one may with
Justice conclude, Savage Beasts themselves come short of them in Rage and
Cruelty. Such as these if you treat them with Humanity, grow into greater
Jealousy, and confide in you less than before, interpreting your Lenity an
effect of Art and Cunning, and become thereby most enraged with those who
discover the greatest Inclination to Clemency. If on the other Hand, you resent
their Barbarities, and pay them in their own Coin, they then make Ostentation
of their Wickedness, and there is no Crime or Inhumanity, how impious or
abominable soever, that they will scruple at, till at length they cease to be
Men, and are Metamorphos'd into Savage Beasts. And though it cannot be
gainsaid, but this Imperfection of the Mind grows out of ill Manners and bad
Education; nevertheless, there are other Causes that minister to the Growth of
this Evil, whereof the greatest are the Injuries and Avarice of Magistrates and
Men in Authority, whereof we have a bloody Example now before us; the truth of
which was made manifest as well in the Soldiers as their Officers.

Hamilcar greatly provoked at these Barbarities, ordered Hanno to join him,
concluding, that by uniting all their Troops into one Body, they should soon
put a Period to the War. And now, contrary to his Custom, he put all of the
Enemy to death, who fell into his hands; and if at any time Prisoners were
brought into the Army, he ordered them without Mercy to be devoured of wild
Beasts; being at length convinced that the only Remedy to the Evils under which
they suffered, was, to extend no Compassion to the Offenders; but, to diminish
and utterly destroy them, by all means possible. But, while the Carthaginians
were in these fair hopes; when Success everywhere attended their Arms, and
they had reason to expect a favorable Issue of the War, behold a Caprice of
Fortune, who changing Face, turned the Tide of their Affairs. The two Generals
had no sooner united their Armies, but they fell at Difference between
themselves, which bred such evil Effects, that by that means, not only many
fair Occasions were lost of molesting the Enemy, but Opportunities given to
them, to damnifie the Carthaginians; which being observed and weighed by the
State; one of them was directed to quit his Command; and who should remain in
Authority, to be left to the Election of the Army. Another Misfortune,
likewise, befell them; about that time, a Convoy of theirs coming from a City
called Emporium, wherein they had great Reliance for Supplies, as well of
Provisions, as other Stores for the Army, was lost by Tempest at Sea. As to
Sardinia, which had ever yielded them great Relief in their straits; that, as
we have already noted, was totally lost. But, to fill the Measure of their
Adversity, the two Cities of Hippona and Vtica, who alone, of all the Towns of
Africa, had, till that time, preserved their Fidelity, and not only during this
War, but in the time of Agathocles, and even when the Romans made their Descent
on Africa, had continued faithful, and never manifested the least Inclination
of Revolt, now abandoned them; and were not content, barely to take part with
the Africans, without any apparent Motive, but linked themselves, to their
Fortunes, in a League of fast Friendship and Alliance; and grew into mortal
Hatred against the Carthaginians; which they witnessed by Murdering five
Hundred of their Soldiers, with their Officers, who were sent to their Relief,
after they had received them into their Towns, and afterward cast their dead
Bodies over the Walls: In short, those two Places gave themselves up entirely
to the Africans, expressing so great an Aversion to the Carthaginians, that
when they sent Ambassadors to them for leave to Bury their Dead, they refused
them. So that now, Matho and Spendius, exalted with the Accession of so much
good Fortune, formed a Design of laying Siege to Carthage it self.

During these things, the Carthaginians dispatched Hannibal to the Army, after
they had maturely deliberated about the matter of Difference that had happened
between the two Generals, and had declared it was expedient that Hanno should
relinquish his Authority. Then Hamilcar, with Hannibal and Naravasus, made
Inroads into the Country, and cut off all the Enemies means of Susistance, in
which Service Naravasus was eminently useful, as he did in every thing greatly
serve them: And this was the State of their Troops that kept the Field.

In the mean time, Carthage itself being blocked up and enclosed on all sides,
they were driven to have recourse for Succors to their Friends and
Confederates; Hiero King of Siracuse, who was their fast Friend, and having
diligently supplied them with whatever they demanded, during the whole War,
gave them now in their greatest Straits, the best Evidence of his Friendship;
and this he wisely saw, to be his safest Course, as conducing to the better
Support of his Power in Sicily, and the Conservation of his Alliance with the
People of Rome, foreseeing, that if Carthage were not preserved in a State to
give them Jealousy, it might be his Lot one Day, to lie at their Mercy,
without any Prospect of Redress.

Herein, I say, Hiero did, without question, proceed like a prudent Prince, it
being in no wise safe, to let a little Mischief grow to a head; but, to
prevent, by all means possible, the exorbitant Increase of a Neighboring
Prince's Power; lest, when it shall be too late, you find it past your Ability
to withstand him, when your own proper Interest shall come to be Contested. On
the other hand, the Romans, pursuant to the Treaty of Peace, were not wanting
in any thing to the Carthaginians; though there soon happened a Difference
between those two States. In brief, the Carthaginians, at the beginning of this
War, had seized and made Prize of all Vessels that traded from Italy, to the
Coast of Africa, who for Lucre supplied their Enemies with whatsoever they
wanted. And now having in their Custody at least Five Hundred Prisoners of that
Nation, the Romans stomach'd it, and began to give evidence of their
Indignation thereat. But, this Point was soon composed, for as soon as they
signified their Resentment by their Ambassadors, the Carthaginians restored
the said Prisoners in so frank a Manner, that they on their side, not to be
behind hand in Courtesy, forthwith enlarged without Ransom all the Carthaginian
Prisoners, which yet remained of those who had been taken, during the Sicilian
War. Furthermore the Romans readily granted them whatsoever Assistance they
demanded; they permitted their Merchants to supply Carthage, with every thing
they stood in need of, and Prohibited all manner of Commerce with their
Enemies. Moreover, they rejected the Overtures made by the Ambassadors of
those who had revolted from the Carthaginians in Sardinia, and were in
Possession of the Island, though they offered to put it into their hands; and
to give farther Evidence of their Sincerity, they refused the Tender the People
of Vtica made them, who would have freely given them their City; so that the
Carthaginians, thus aided, bore the Hardships of the Siege the more cheerfully.
In the mean time Matho and Spendius both besiege, and are besieged, being
reduced to so great straits for Provision, and all other Stores and
Necessaries, by the good management of Hamilcar, that, in the end, they were
constrained to rise from before the City, and selecting out Fifty Thousand of
the choicest Men in their Armies, with whom there joined a Man of note, called
Zarxas, at the Head of his own People; with which Army they marched to
encounter the Enemy, and observe the Motions of Hamilcar; keeping, however the
Skirts of the Hills, out of fear of the Elephants; and the Horse of Naravasus,
still using their utmost Industry to keep Possession of those Fastnesses; and
though in Courage and Hardiness they were equal to the Carthaginians,
nevertheless they were worsted, and came by the loss in all their Rencounters,
as being under worse Discipline, and led by Commanders inferior in Skill and
Sufficiency: And it was here demonstrated, how much the Wisdom and Knowledge of
a great General weighs against Strength and Number; for Hamilcar, like an
Artful Gamester, first draws them in to Pickeer, and engage in small Parties,
and so by degrees, diminished them; and whenever they came to a Battle, what by
his Skill in laying and contriving Ambushes, and otherwise, he cut off great
numbers of them. Furthermore, he never permitted them to be at rest, but
alarmed them Night and Day, and ever contrived it when they least expected it:
And such as fell alive into his Hands, he gave to be devoured by wild Beasts.
At length, surprising them in a place where they were greatly incommoded, and
where he could lie at his ease, there he besieged them in their Camp, at a time
when they thought themselves most secure, where he so straightened them, and
brought them to such Extremity, that they came both to want Resolution to give
him Battle, and were without all possible means to get out of his Hands; to
such Hardships were they driven, that they came to devour one another; an
Instance of the Divine Justice, to chastise the Inhumanity they themselves had
practiced. They were afraid to come to a Battle, knowing, that whosoever fell
into their Enemies Hands, was sure to suffer Death by the most exquisite
Torments; and they despaired of any Terms by Treaty, conscious of the Guilt of
so many abominable Crimes; they therefore determined to abide the utmost
Extremity, and to exercise that Cruelty, one among another which they had
heretofore practiced on their Neighbors, and so to attend the Arrival of those
Succors, which they had been made to hope were coming to them from Tunes.

But when they had spent all their Prisoners, with whose Bodies they had been
sustained, and their Slaves were likewise almost consumed in the like horrid
Repast; and receiving no News from Tunes, and the Army, subdued by the
Sharpness of their Sufferings, beginning to look with an angry Eye on their
Leaders; Spendius, Autaritas, and Zarxas began to form Designs of yielding
themselves up, and so to enter upon Treaty with Hamilcar; whereupon, demanding,
by a Trumpet, a Passport for Persons to be sent on a Treaty, they themselves,
among others, went and put themselves into the Hands of the Carthaginians, to
whom Hamilcar proposed the following Conditions: That the Carthaginians should
make choice of Ten Persons out of the Enemies Army, of what Condition soever,
and that the rest of the Army should be disarmed, and dismissed in their
Shirts. These Conditions being agreed to, Hamilcar then declared, That,
pursuant to the Articles of Agreement, he made choice of those there present;
so the Number was composed of Autaritas, Spendius, and the rest of their chief
Officers. But when the Army was given to understand, that their Commanders were
detained, knowing nothing of the Agreement that was accorded between them, they
took for granted, they had been betrayed. Whereupon, in a tumultuous manner,
they ran to their Arms. But Hamilcar, being beforehand with them, drew out his
Elephants, and with them, and the rest of the Army surrounding them, fell upon
them, and cut them in pieces, to the number of Forty Thousand. The place where
this bloody Service was performed, was called Prion, which signifies a Saw;
forasmuch as it bore resemblance to that kind of Instrument.

After this famous Defeat of their Enemies, the Carthaginians, who were driven
almost to Despair, began to take Heart, while Hamilcar, with Hannibal and
Naravasus forrag'd and scoured the Country; and the News of the Victory being
dispersed, disposed many of the Africans to come into the Carthaginian Army;
and most of the Towns round about to return to their Obedience. After this,
they take their March toward Tunes, where they besieged Matho. Hannibal's
Quarter was on that part that regards Carthage, and Hamilcar's on the opposite
side; As soon as their Army was encamped, they led out Spendius and the rest of
the Prisoners; and bringing them near the Walls of the Town, they there
crucified them in view of the Enemy. But Matho having observed, that Hannibal
did not keep so good a Guard in his Camp as he ought, sallied out, and attacked
his Quarters; where killing many of his People, he put the rest to flight,
pillaged his Camp; and taking Hannibal himself Prisoner, forthwith ordered
Spendius to be taken from the Cross, and Hannibal to be six'd alive in his
place, where he executed him with unspeakable Torments; then they chose out
Thirty Carthaginian Prisoners, of the Noblest they could find; and placing them
about the Body of Spendius, put them to death; as if Fortune had made a Compact
with these two People, to give them Occasions of thus mutually exercising their
Cruelty one on the other. Hamilcar's Post was so remote from Hannibal's, that
the matter was past remedy, before he knew any thing of it; and though he should
have received earlier Notice, the Difficulty of the Ground and Situation of the
Place would have afforded him but little hopes to relieve them. Whereupon he
decamped from where he was, and came and posted himself along the Seaside,
near the Mouth of the River Macheta.

The Carthaginians, affrighted at this unlooked for Loss, began to fall from
their late Hopes; nevertheless, they omitted nothing that might evidence their
Care for the Public. Wherefore they dispatched Thirty of the Body of their
Senate, together with Hanno, who had already commanded in this War, to
Hamilcar; furthermore, they supplied him with a Re-inforcement to his Army,
with all they could pick up, that could bear Arms in the City. The Senators
were instructed, above all things, to labor an Accommodation between Hamilcar
and Hanno, and to dispose them to such an Accord, that the Commonwealth might
not be sacrifie'd to their Differences. Whereupon, bringing them together,
after long Conference and Debate, Hamilcar and Hanno, became Friends, and
passed their Words to agree in all things for the common Good; and accordingly,
afterward, their Affairs were successfully managed, to the full Satisfaction
of their Fellow-citizens. So that Matho was now often reduced to Despair;
sometimes by Ambushes, sometimes by Surprises, which frequently happened, as on
an occasion near Leptis, and others; where in all Parties and Rencounters they
still came by the worst. At length, they determined to come to a Battle, to
which the Carthaginians, on their part, willingly agreed: The Friends and
Confederates of of both Parties were drawn together; and their Garrisons were
drawn out to augment their Armies, for deciding the Dispute; and when all
things were in a readiness, the Battle was fought on the Day appointed, wherein
the Carthaginians had the Day, and the greatest part, of the African Army slain
on the place; some few that escaped, got into a neighboring Town, which soon
submitted, where Matho was taken alive. Upon this Success, all the Towns in
Africa, that had been under the Dominion of the Carthaginians, returned to
their Obedience, Vtica and Hippona only excepted, which continued in their
Obstinacy; who being, indeed, without hopes of Favor, had no ground to demand
it; for from the first of their Defection, they acted against the
Carthaginians, so as to cut off all prospect of Pardon; which may serve for
Instruction, how necessary it proves, even in those sort of Crimes whereof we
have been treating, to leave some place for Moderation, and not to act beyond
the power of Reparation. In short, Hamilcar setting down before those two
Towns, reduced them, at length, to Mercy. And so ended the War of Africa, which
had brought the Carthaginian State in so much Danger: And now they saw their
Dominion restored, and the Authors of the Rebellion punished. Matho, and those
taken with him, after they were carried in Triumph about the City, and treated
with all kind of Ignominy, and used in the cruellest manner that could be
invented, were, at length, tormented to Death. This War lasted three Years, and
near four Months, and contained more Acts of Cruelty, and Inhumanity, than are
to be found any where else in Story.

About the same time the Romans being solicited by the Mercenaries, who were
beaten out of Sardinia, and were fled to them, determined to attempt the
Possession of that great Island; but the Carthaginians having the Right of
first Possession, would not endure the Injury; and in regard they were now
preparing an Army to go over and punish the Infidelity of those Islanders; the
Romans interpreting those Preparations to be against them, took thence Occasion
to declare a new War on them. But the Carthaginians, who had but just laid down
their Arms, and knew themselves to be much too weak, and no ways in a condition
to wage War with them, found it their best course to submit; and did not only
yield up their Right to Sardinia to the Romans, but bought their Peace at the
price of Twelve Hundred Talents.

The End of the First Book.
POLYBIUS's General History OF THE TRANSACTIONS OF THE WORLD.
VOL. I. BOOK II.
WE have shown in our former Book, at what Time it was that the Romans first
adventured on Foreign Expeditions, after they had composed their Affairs in
Italy. We have related the Motives and Manner of their Transporting their Arms
into Sicily, and upon what Grounds they made War on the Carthaginians, and
contended with them for the Dominion of that Island We have also noted the Time
when the Romans first engaged on Naval Action, and what occurred during the
Progress of the War, till the Carthaginians totally relinquished their
Pretensions to Sicily, and their Enemies became Masters of it; all but what was
reserved to King Hiero. Then we came to relate the Transactions of the War,
made by the Carthaginian Mercinaries on their Masters, which was called the War
of Africa. We have likewise, in that Account, given Examples of the utmost
Degrees of the Barbarity of Human Nature, and told what was the Issue of so
many Savage Actions, pursuing the Story to the end of that War, wherein the
Carthaginians remained with Victory.

Now we shall proceed, according to our first Purpose, to set down subsequent
Occurrences; For, the Carthaginians had no sooner composed their African
Troubles, when they raised a new Army, the Command when which was given to
Hamilcar Barcas, with Direction to transport it into Spain, who taking his Son
Hannibal with him, not then above nine Years old, crossed the Sea, somewhere
near the Strait of Hercules's Pillars, and began to lay the Foundation of the
Carthaginian Greatness in Spain. Where, after he had commanded, for the Space
of almost nine Years, and brought many Nations to yield Obedience to that
Government; subduing some by Force, and wining others by Address; he at length
ended his Days, in a manner worthy of the Greatness of his Name, being slain in
Battle, bravely Fighting at the head of his Troops, against a formidable Enemy,
that opposed him. Upon whose Death the Carthaginians gave his Command to
Asdrubal his Kinsman, at that time General of their Galleys.

About the same time, the Romans transported an Army, and made their first
Expedition into Illyria and the Parts adjacent. So that, whosoever would
curiously Search into the History of the Growth of the Roman Greatness, is to
have special Regard to that Part of their Story.

The Causes moving to this Expedition, seem to be these: Agro, at that time
King of Illyria, Son of Pleuratus, surpassed by much all his Predecessors in
Power and Greatness, both by Sea and Land. He had promised Demetrius, Father of
Philip King of Macedon, who had gained him with a Sum of Money, to send Succors
to the Mydionians, whom the Aetolians at that time had besieged, moved it seems
thereunto, for that they refused to join with them, to live under the same
Laws, whom they therefore had determined to Reduce by Arms. And having levied
an Army from among that People, they declared War against those of Mydionia,
whose City they greatly distressed: attacking it with Machins and Engines of
all sorts. During this Siege the time drew near wherein the Aetolians were
obliged to choose a new Praetor; but forasmuch as the Besieged were now brought
to Extremity, and that there were hopes they would soon Capitulate; the present
Praetor, who then commanded the Army, remonstrated to the Aetolians, that in
regard he had born the Toil and Hazard of the Siege, it seemed but just, that
he might be permitted to enjoy the Benefit of Disposing of the Booty, and the
Honor of Taking the Place. But this Proposition found Opposers, especially
among those who were Candidates in the new Election; who persuaded the People
by no means to consent to any Innovation in their Customs, but to manage their
Affairs according to the Prescription of their Laws, and leave the Issue to
Fortune. Whereupon, the Aetolians resolved to proceed to the Election;
allotting however, the Profit and Honor that was to be won, to be divided
between him that now commanded, and the other who should be chosen.

Three Days after this Determination, was to be the Election, when the new
Officer was immediately to enter on his Charge according to Custom; but in the
interim, there arrives a Fleet of a hundred small Vessels with a Re-inforcement
of five Thousand Illyrians, who at break of Day landed secretly near the Town,
and immediately put themselves in Order of Battle, according to their manner;
and being formed in several Divisions, they advanced toward the Aetolians
Camp, who were much surpised at the Hardiness of this sudden Attempt;
nevertheless, they lost nothing of their usual Assurance, and the Pride that is
become habitual to that Nation; for they relied on their Courage, and presumed
their Army was not to be beaten. They having many Troops heavy armed, and
abounding in Horse, these they commanded to March out, and imbattel'd them in
plain ground before their Camp. They likewise ordered their light armed Troops,
and some Horse, to take Possession of certain advantageous Posts, and to seize
on such Eminencies, as were not too remote from the Camp. And now the Illyrians
advancing upon the light armed Troops, soon beat them from their Ground, as
being more in Number, and marching in close Order. Then they forced the Horse
likewise to retire, and winning the advantage of Ground, they charged those who
were drawn up in the Plain; by which means they were the more easily routed;
the Besieged likewise, at the same time made a Sally, and between them, the
Aetolians were at length defeated; many were slain on the Place, and many taken
Prisoners, with great store of Arms, and all their Baggage. Thus, as soon as
the Illyrians had executed their Masters Orders, and loaded their Vessels with
Booty, they immediately embarked again, and made Sail back to their Country.

The Mydionians finding themselves thus happily rescued, when they dispair'd of
Succor, called an Assembly of their Magistrates to consult of their Affairs,
and principally to determine of the Disposal of the Booty; where 'twas agreed,
that the present Praetor, and he who was in Election for the ensuing Year,
should jointly have the Authority in the Distribution thereof.

This Adventure of the Mydionians, is a sort of Lesson to the rest of Mankind,
where Fortune seems by a singular Instance to put us in mind of her
All Sufficiency; for when they thought themselves ruined past Redemption, she
then puts an occasion in their hands whereby to deal to their Enemies the self
same Measure, which they had decreed for them.

As to the Aetolians, who were thus surpised and defeated; their Misfortune
may instruct us, not over-boldly to determine of Events, and to let Doubt have
a share in all our Adventures, while there is a Possibility, that things may
fall out otherwise than we expect. For, it behooves us in all the Transactions
of our Life, especially in Military Matters, to remember, that we are at best
but Men, whose wisest Counsels can never suffice to obviate the Fatality of
such surprising Strokes.

Upon the return home of King Agro's Fleet which he had dispatched on this
Expediton, he fell into such a Fit of Joy at the Report his Captains made him
of the Success of the Battle, and their having vanquished the Aetolians, a
People held in great Esteem for their Valor; that falling into great Excess of
Drinking and Revelling, to Celebrate the Victory, he was seized by a Pleuresie,
which soon put an end to his Days. After him Tuta his Wife reigned, and was
governed by the Counsels of such Friends, as she had about her. But the Queen,
according to the manner of her Sex, amused with the Joy of her present
Prosperity, took no Thought for the future, and without any regard of Danger
that might befall her from abroad; First permits her Subjects to practice
Piracy, who made Prize of all they met with at Sea; then she sitted out a Fleet
equal to that we have mentioned, with Command to the Leaders, to Treat all
Nations as Enemies. Their first Enterprise was on the Eleans, and those of
Messene, who stood most exposed to the Incursions of the Illyrians: For that
Country lying along the Seacoast, and their Towns standing but thin, it was
the more liable to their Attempts, it being hard to send at any time seasonable
Relief wheresoever they should be invaded, by reason of the remoteness of their
Succors: So that the Illyrians ravaged all that Country with Impunity. From
thence they steered toward Phoenice, a City of Epyrus, whether they went to
Revictual their Fleet, when coming to Anchor in the Port, they there entered
into Treaty with certain Gauls, who composed part of the Garrison, to betray
the Town into their Hands, there being no less than eight Hundred of that
Nation then in Pay in the City. The Gauls agree to their Proposal, whereupon
they landed their Forces, and were received into the Town, plundring them of
all they had, assisted in their Attempt by the said Gauls, then in Garrison.

The Epirots, upon receiving Intelligence of what had hapen'd, marched
forthwith to the Relief of the Place, and coming within a little distance of
Phoenice they encamped their Army, which they did in such manner, that the
River which runs through the Town, served for a kind of Retrenchment; and for
their better Security, they took away the Timber of the Bridge, that gave
passage over the said River. But receiving Intelligence, that Scerdilaidus was
coming by Land, at the Head of five Thousand Illyrians, and intended to pass by
the Straits of Antigonia, they thereupon detached a part of their Army thither,
to secure that Place, while the other part lay idle in the Camp, careless of
their Duty, and negligent of their Guard; spending their time in Riot and
Feasting, toward which the Country (abounding) plentifully supplied them; but
for the Military Part, they set little by it, as holding that Profession in a
sort of Contempt. Insomuch, that when the Illyrians got notice of this their
Negligence, and that they had divided their Army, they marched away in the
Night, and repairing the Bridge, boldly passed over the River, and presently
possessed themselves of a secure piece of Ground, and there passed the rest of
the Night, and in the Morning, by break of Day both Armies drew up in Battalia,
where they fought in sight of the Town, in which Dispute the Epyrots were
beaten; many were slain upon the place, and taken Prisoners, and the rest
escaped by taking the way toward the Antitanes.

After this Defeat, the Epyrots dispairing of better Fortune, sent their
Ambassadors to the Aetolians and the Achaians, to solicit Succors, who in
Compassion of their Misfortunes, readily accorded them a Supply; and pursuant
to their Promise, shortly after brought their Forces to Helicranus, in order to
their Relief. The Illyrians, who were possessed of Phoenice, advanced toward
that Place likewise, in Conjunction with Scerdilaidus, and encamped not far
from the Enemy, with Intention to give them Battle, but the inconveniency of
the Ground prevented them. During these Transactions there came Letters from
the Queen, containing Orders for their speedy return Home, to assist her
against certain of her revolted Subjects, who had joined with the Dardanians.
So, after they had spoiled and plundered the Epyrots, they consented to a
Cessation of Arms; and, pursuant to the Treaty, delivered back their Town and
all the Inhabitants of free Condition that were in their Possession. But they
embarked, and carried away their Slaves and the Plunder; Scerdilaidus returning
by the Straits of Antigonia. These Attempts greatly alarmed all the Greek
Cities upon the Coast; for when they considered, that so strong and important a
Town of the Epyrots had been taken, so contrary to the Opinion of all the
World; they began to take thought, every one for themselves, and were not now
only in pain for the Country, but for their Towns and Cities. And now, who
would not have thought, that the Epyrots should have consulted, how to be
revenged for these Injuries, and to render Marks of their Gratitude to those
who so readily succored them! but so it happened, that they did neither, But
dispatched, forthwith, their Ambassadors to Queen Teuta, and entered into
Confederacy with the Illyrians and Acarnanians, insomuch that they never after
quitted their League with them, and continued in perpetual Enmity with the
Achaians and Aetolians; by which Act, they gave at once manifest Evidence of
their Ingratitude and Imprudence.

Whosoever fall into Misfortunes, which Human Reason or Foresight could not
obviate, no Man can justly charge them with the Evil that they suffer, but
attribute it merely to Fortune, and those who are the cause. On the other hand,
when Calamities befall us, through our own Imprudence, we must be content to
bear the blame. Therefore it is, that when we behold a miserable Man, made so,
purely by the Malignity of Fortune, we cannot withold our Compassion, and are
so far from condemning him, that we minister to his Relief. But when our
Miseries are the Fruit of our Folly and Obstinacy, we become justly the
Reproach and Contempt of every wise Man. Now, who, that had ever heard of the
Inconstancy and notorious Perfidy of the Gauls, would have deposited so
important a Place in their keeping, where so many occasions were likely to
occur to tempt their Fidelity! Furthermore, who would not especially have held
that People in Suspicion, that were known to have been expelled their Country,
for their Breach of Faith toward their own Nation? Who, after being taken into
the Service of the Carthaginians, where, on a Rumor, that their Mercenaries
were likely to Mutiny for want to Pay, three Thousand of them that were in
Garrison at Agrigentum, revolted and plundered the City; and afterward being
put into Erix, while the Romans laid Siege to that Place, attempted to betray
it to the Enemy, and on discovery of their Treachery, deserted the Service and
went over to the Romans; and soon after rifl'd the Temple of Venus Ericina: So
that, at length, what for their Impiety, what for their Treachery, the Romans
thought they could not do a more meritorious Act, than totally to expel them
Italy; and, in a word, the Peace was no sooner concluded betwixt the Romans and
Carthaginians, when, disarming them, they caused them to be embarked, and
banished them entirely out of their Dominions. After what has been observed,
then, who can forbear blaming the Epyrots for giving up their Country, their
Laws, and so rich, happy, and plentiful a City to the Custody of such a
perfidious Nation? What Apology can be offered in their Defense, and who will
not be obliged to confess, they were themselves the Authors of their own
Calamities? This Reflection we thought was not amiss to make, touching the
Imprudence of the Epyrots; to the end, we may be instructed in the Danger of
committing the safety of a Town to Strangers, whose strength is superior to
that of the Natives within it.

The Illyrians, during their abode at Phoenice, continued their Custom of
Piracy, insulting over, and pillaging all such as traded from the Coast of
Italy, where they plundered certain Italian Merchants; killed some, and carried
others away Prisoners. Whereupon the Romans, who had hit herto neglected the
Complaints that had been made of these Outrages, being now alarmed with new
Clamours, coming from sundry Places at once, to the Senate, dispatched their
Ambassadors to Illyria, Cajus and Lucius Coruncanus, to be rightly informed
touching the Truth of these Reports. In the mean time, Queen Teuta beholding
her Vessels on their return from Epyrus, laden with so much rich Booty (for
Phoenice surpassed all the Cities in that Kingdom in Wealth and Beauty) became
greatly exalted and encouraged by this extraordinary Success, and thereby the
more strongly incited to enter into a War with the Greeks. Nevertheless it was
respited for the present, in regard of some Troubles at that time in her own
Kingdom, which were no sooner composed, when she laid Siege to the City of
Issa, which alone had refused to yield her Obedience: About which time it was,
that the Roman Ambassadors arrived; who being admitted to their Audience, set
forth the Injuries that had been done. During their Discourse, Teuta treating
them with great Pride and Disdain; in short, told them, She would take Care for
the future, that no public Injuries should be done to the People of Rome by
the Illyrians; but that it was not the Custom of Princes, to forbid their
Subjects to make their particular Profits of what they met with in open Sea.
The younger of the Ambassadors stomaching this Answer of the Queen's, with an
Assurance truly worthy of a Roman, but at that time, perhaps, not so
seasonable, thus replied, It is likewise, Madam, the Custom of the People of
Rome, to make themselves public Reparations for Injuries done in particular,
and to yield Succor to those that receive them: We shall therefore apply
ourselves to Redress our own Wrongs, wherein we shall proceed in such a manner,
that you will be soon obliged to change that Princely Custom. Teuta being a
Woman of a fierce Spirit, heard these Words with so much Indignation, that
without regard to the Right of Nations, as soon as they departed, she ordered
the Ambassador, who had used this Liberty of Speech, to be murdered. The News
of which Violation, acted by this haughty Woman, was no sooner come to Rome,
when they immediately prepared for War, and fell to raising of Troops and
fitting out a Fleet.

Teuta, early the following Spring, dispatched another Fleet against the
Greeks, more numerous than the former; one Squadron whereof sailed toward
Corfu, another toward Dyrrhachium, under color of supplying themselves with
Victual and Water, but with design to surprise the Town. The Inhabitants, on
their arrival, suspecting nothing, imprudently admitted some of them into the
Town, under pretense of fetching Water: These having Arms concealed in their
Water-vessels, were no sooner entered, when killing the Guards, they became
Masters of the Gate. In the mean time, as it had been concerted between them,
those who remained in the Ships, came to assist them; so that by this
Reinforcement, they were quickly Masters of the greatest part of their Works.
And now, albeit the Inhabitants were but ill provided for such a Rencounter,
and greatly astonished at so surprising an Attempt, nevertheless, recovering
Courage, and standing on their Defense, they manfully attacked the Illyrians;
who, after a long Dispute, were compelled to retire. So the People of
Dyrrhachium, who were on the point of losing their Town through their Negligence,
preserved it by their Resolution; and the Danger into which they were like to
fall became a Warning to them for the time to come. The Illyrians hereupon put
to Sea, and joining with the other Squadron that was gone before, stood toward
Corfu, where they landed, and sat down before the Town, filling all the Country
with Terror and Astonishment.

Those of Corfu being thus surprised, and driven almost to the point of
Despair, dispatched, with all expedition, Ambassadors to the Achaians and
Aetolians, those of Apollonia and Dyrrachium arriving at the same time to
implore Succors, and beseech them not to permit the Illyrians to drive them out
of their Country. They were favorably heard by those two People, who agreed
together to dispatch ten Achaian Ships, well manned, and provided with all
things necessary; and when they were ready, they made Sail toward Corfu, in
hopes to be able to raise the Siege. But the Illyrians, having, according to
their Treaty, received a Re-inforcement of ten Galleys of the Acarnanians, were
got ahead of the Enemy, and engaged them near Paxus. The Achaian Vessels that
fought the Acarnanians, made it but a kind of a drawn Business, separating with
little Harm done on either side, only some few Soldiers hurt. But it fared
otherwise with those who fought the Illyrians, who fastening themselves four and
four together, proceeded after such a manner, as (seeming to be entangled) they
might, by exposing their Broad-sides, tempt the Enemy to attack them in Flank,
who, when they had boarded them, they by that Device over-pow'ring them with
Numbers from the adjoining Vessels, entered on the Decks of the Achaian
Galleys, and easily reduced them, taking four, and sinking one, with all her
Men a-board; in which Vessel, was Marcus Carenias, a Man of great Reputation,
who had all his Life long served the Achaians with much Honor and Integrity.
When those who were engaged with the Acarnanians, saw the Illyrians had the
better of the Battle, they retired from the Fight, wherein they were greatly
furthered by the nimbleness and good-built of their Galleys, and so made the
best of their way Home.

Upon this Victory, the Insolence of the Illyrians grew greater and greater,
who now straightened the Town more than before; so that, at length, after some
time of Defense, being deprived of all hope of Succor, they yielded it up,
receiving an Illyrian Garrison, and Demetrius of Pharos for their Governor.
After this Action, the Illyrians returned to Dyrrachium, and laid Siege to that
Place.

In the mean while, the Roman Consuls, Cajus Fulvius, with a Navy of two
Hundred Sail, and Aulus Posthumous with a Land-army, set forth on their
Expedition. Fulvius arriving at Corfu, was in hopes to find the Siege yet
a-foot; and though he found the Town was surrendered, and the Illyrians in
Garrison, he resolved, however, to attempt something, as well to be satisfied
how Affairs had been carried, as to endeavor after some Intelligence with
Demetrius; being informed, That he was fallen into the Queen's Displeasure, and
had sent to Rome, to make a Tender of the Garrison to them. Whereupon, those of
Corfu, glad of the Arrival of the Romans, put themselves (by Consent of
Demetrius) into their Protection, hoping they should thereby be safe for the
future, against the Outrages of the Illyrians. So soon as things were adjusted
here, the Romans made Sail for Apollonia, having Demetrius for their Pilot. In
the mean time, Posthumous embarked his Land-army at Brundusium, consisting of
about twenty Thousand Foot, and two Thousand Horse, who joined the Fleet at
Apollonia; which Town being put into their Hands, they departed for Dyrrachium,
on Intelligence that the Illyrians had besieged that Place; who having notice
of the Romans approach, raised their Siege, and sled, scattering for safety as
well as they could; so that that Town being likewise taken into the Romans
Protection, they advanced toward Illyria, subduing the Ardyans in their way.
And now Ambassadors came to the Romans from diverse Countries, among which,
those of the Parthenians and the Antitanes; these offering to put themselves
under the Roman Protection, were admitted to their Alliance. So they passed on
to Issa, which the Illyrians had likewise besieged, but departed at the
approach of the Romans, to whom the Inhabitants delivered up the City.
Afterward, coasting along the Illyrian Shore, they assaulted and took several
of their Towns, among which, Nutria, where they lost their Quaestor, some
Tribunes, and many Soldiers; but this Loss was repaired, by the taking Forty of
the Illyrians Vessels, which were returning home laden with Booty. As for
those who had besieged Issa, among whom were a Body of Pharians; these were
well treated by Demetrius, and continued in his Service; the rest being
scattered made their escape to Arbon. Teuta, hereupon, with a small retinue,
retired to a strong Place called Rizon, situate a good Distance within the
Country, on a River of that Name. And now, the Romans having put the greatest
part of the Illyrian State into the Possession of Demetrius; and after having
invested him with great Authority, they returned with both their Armies to
Dyrrachium; from thence Cajus Fulvius departed toward Rome, with the major
Part of both Armies; but Posthumous remained behind with forty long Vessels,
and raised an Army from among the Natives, to the end, if there should be
occasion, he might be in a posture of Defense; for they were not sure of the
Fidelity of the Ardyans and others, who had put themselves under the Roman
Protection.

Teuta, early the following Spring sent Ambassadors to Rome, with whom she
made her Peace on the following Conditions, That she should be Tributary to the
Romans, paying such a yearly Sum as they should think fit to impose: That she
should relinquish, entirely, her Interest in Illyria, saving some few Places.
And what was yet more considerable, and wherein the Greeks were principally
concerned, she was not to Navigate beyond Lissus with above two Vessels, and
those unarmed. After this, Posthumous sent Ambassadors to the Aetolians and
Achaians, first to report to them the true Cause and Motives of the War, which
brought the Romans into these Countries; and then to give them an Account of
the Success of their Arms; causing the Treaty of Accord made between them and
the Illyrians to be publicly read: The Ambassadors having been received with
due Honor, and entertained with all manner of Respect, returned to Corfu; and
by the Peace now made with the Illyrians, the Greeks were delivered from their
Fears. For in those Dais, the Illyrians made no fair War with any particular
People, but robbed and pillaged all Nations they met with. These then were the
Motives the Romans had first of carrying their Arms into Illyria, and those
Countries of Europe; and then was the first Intercourse they managed by their
Ambassadors, with the People of Greece. Afterward they sent Ambassadors to
the Corinthians and Athenians, and then it was that the Corinthians ordained,
the Romans should have part in the Isthmian Games.

While these things were transacted in those Parts by the Romans, Asdrubal (for
we were speaking of him, when we broke off our Discourse about Spain) governed
his Province with great Wisdom and Address, performing infinite Services of
extraordinary Moment to the Carthaginians, augmenting their Power especially by
a City he caused to be built, which is called by some Carthagena, by others,
the New Town. This City has a very commodious Situation, whether we respect
either Spain or Africa; but we shall have occasion elsewhere to speak more
particularly thereof, and the Benefit accruing thereby to both those Countries.
When the Romans came to understand, that the Carthaginians had acquired so
great a Reputation in that Country, as to become formidable to the Spaniards,
they resolved to attempt something likewise on that side; and concluding that
the Growth of the Carthaginian Greatness was principally owing to their
Negligence, who, by a profound Carelessness, had, as it were, slept away their
Jealousy; they therefore determined to repair that Error, by their future Care
and Vigilance. They did not dare, however, for the present, to exact any thing
of the Carthaginians, that might appear hard and severe; nor declare a War with
them, from the Apprehensions they were under of the Gauls, who at that time (as
it was bruited) were preparing an Army to march against Rome. They resolved,
therefore, for the present, to sooth and amuse Asdrubal by Art, that they might
have the more leisure to deal with the Gauls. For they rightly judged, that
while they should have that Enemy at their backs, it would be not only
impossible for them to become entire Masters of Italy, but their City itself
would not be out of Danger. Wherefore after they had concluded a Treaty with
Asdrubal by their Ambassadors, by which the Carthaginians were obliged not to
advance their Arms beyond the River Eber, without making mention of any other
Countries of Spain, they prepared to attack the Gauls that inhabited Italy.

But before we come to speak of that War, we have thought it not improper to
say something of the Nation of the Gauls, whereby to Conduct the Reader to a
right Knowledge of those Matters which we purpose to deliver. It will also
beget a better Connection of the Parts of our History, to show the Time when
that People first planted themselves in Italy. In short, we have not only
judged their Actions worthy Recording, and that they ought to be delivered to
Posterity, but have concluded it necessary to our Purpose so to do. For, we
shall learn by that means what sort of People it was that served under
Hannibal, and with what kind of Aids he sustained his great Design of
Subverting the Roman Government.

But it seems fit first, to make mention of the Country, to the end that by
being instructed in the Nature and Situation of their Towns, we may give a
clearer Insight into the principal Parts of our History. Italy then is in Form
of a Triangle; that part which regards the East, is terminated by the Ionian
Sea, and Adriatic Gulf: The Western and Southern Parts are bounded by the
Tuscane and Sicilian Seas; and where these two Lines meet is one Part of the
Triangle, here is a Promontory looking toward the South, which is called
Cothinthus, which separates the Sicilian and Ionian Seas. The part which
regards the North, and joins it to the Continent, is bounded by the Alps,
which take their beginning about Marseilles, and the Places bordering on the
Sardinian Sea, stretching and extending from thence to the bottom of the
Adriatic Gulf; if they do not reach quite as far as Adria beneath these
Mountains, which Line makes the Base of the Triangle; there are spacious and
fertile Plains ranging North and South, which terminate the Continent of Italy.
These Plains which have likewise a triangular Form, (whereof the joining of the
Alps and Appennine Hills near Marseilles, make one Point) exceed in Fertility
all other Parts of Europe. On the North they are bounded by the Alps,
extending above two hundred and sixty Miles in length; but the Bounds thereof
toward the South, are made by the Appennines, containing in length about four
hundred and sixty Miles; toward the Sea, where the Coast of the Adriatic made
another side of the Triangle, is computed from Senagallia to the bottom of the
Gulf, in length about three hundred Miles. So that this Plain or Champaign
Country contains in Circuit, little less than eleven hundred Miles.

Now touching the Fertility of Italy, it is hardly possible to set it forth: It
abounds so much in Bread-corn, that very often, and even in our Days, the
Sicilian Bushel of Wheat has been sold for four Oboli, and Barley at two, and a
Metreta of Wine at the same price: They have Plenty likewise of Millet and all
other Grain, beyond expression. It may be judged also that they abound in
Oakmast, insomuch as the Italians breed infinite numbers of Swine, which are
spent in their Sacrifices, and common Uses, and carried in Herds with their
Armies. In a word, it will be seen, by what follows, how plentifully this
Country is stored with all things necessary to Human Life, those who travel in
these parts, never cheapen any thing in their Inn, but demand only how much
they are to pay by the Head; where you shall be very well treated for a quarter
of an Obolus; and it is seldom, or never, that they demand more. Their People
are numerous, their Men proper and well-propotion'd; and by their Actions, they
make appear, that they are no less qualified for War. The Gauls, who are called
Trans-Alpine, inhabit on the North side of the Alps, about the River Rhone;
the Tauricks, the Agonians and many other Barbarous Nations, live on the Skirts
of the Plains we have been speaking of: Those Gauls differ nothing from the
others, but because they inhabit on the other side of the Alps, the Italians
have given them that Appellation.

The very Tops of these Mountains are not habitable, by reason of the
Difficulty of Access, and the perpetual Snow that covers them: The Ligurians
live on the Appennines, and those Mountains toward Marseilles that join with
the Alps; possessing likewise the other two sides that regard the Tuscane Sea
and the great Plains; but toward the West they spread themselves as far as
Pisa, which is the first Town in Tuscany; and on the Inland-side, as far as
Arrezzo. Then we come to the Tuscans and Ombrians, their Borderers, who dwell
on both sides the Mountains we have mentioned. From thence the Appennines,
which are there distant from the Adriatic Sea, at least Sixty Miles, leaving
the Plains, turn away to the Right Hand; and, dividing Italy, as it were in the
midst, run, stretching along, as far as the Sicilian Sea: As to the Plains but
now named, where the Appennines turn off, they extend to the Sea, and advance
as far as Sienna. The River Po, (so much celibrated by the Poets, who have
given it the Name of Erydanus) has its Source in the Alps, about that part
which makes one Point of the Triangle. This River runs first toward the South,
watering the Country lying under those Hills; and from thence falling into a
level Country, it takes its Course toward the East, and by two Out-lets, runs
into the Adriatic. It is the noblest and most useful River of the whole
Continent of Italy, for the Waters that fall either from the Alps or
Appennines run thither. And as it is the greatest, so it is the most beautiful;
its Streams swelling to their greatest height about the Month of July, when the
Snows, by the excessive Heats are melted, and dissolve from the Mountains.
Vessels navigate up this River, from the Sea, by the Outlet called Olana; from
whence they sail, at least two hundred and fifty Miles into the Country. This
River for many Miles together, preserves its Water in one Chanel; but as it
approaches toward the Sea, by the accession of many other Rivers, it becomes
divided into two Streams; and from the Country of the Trigaboles, it forms two
Channels, bearing two different Names; that of Padua, the other of Olana; where
it makes the safest and most beautiful Port in all the Adriatic. The People of
the Country call this River Bodencus. Other fabulous things spoken of it by the
Greeks, namely, that Phaeton received his Fall into these Waters; of the
Weeping Poplars; of the People going perpetually in Black, who inhabit
thereabout, to Commemorate the loss of Phaeton: And, in a word, the many other
Stories that have been invented, are too Poetical, and in no wise useful to our
present Purpose: Howbeit, we may have occasion to make Recital of them
elsewhere, to be able thereby the better to prove, that Timaeus was not
sufficiently instructed in the History of this Country.

The Tuscans then heretofore possessed all the Champaign Country, and at the
same time were Masters of that which was called Phlaegria, bordering on Capua
and Nola. And as that People had with great Resolution, withstood those who
Invaded them, they grew to have a mighty Name among Strangers, and acquired
much Reputation for their Courage and Virtue. Hence it comes to pass that those
who read the History of the Tyrrhenians, are to be cautious how they judge
concerning that People, by their present Possessions, and the Country they now
Inhabit; but are to consider them by the Rule of those Times of which we now
speak, and by the Authority and Power of which they were then Masters. The
Gauls lived in their Neighborhood, by which means they had Commerce together;
but in process of Time, beholding so beautiful a Country with an avaricious and
envious Eye, taking slight Occasion for their Motive, they raised a numerous
Army, and attacking the Tuscans by Surprise, forced them to abandon all that
Country bordering on the Po, and peopled it themselves. The Laians, and
Lebecians, and those who border on the Insubrians, which at that time composed
a mighty Nation, were the first that inhabited that part of the River, toward
the East. The Cenomans live likewise on the Banks of this River; and all
beyond, as far as the Adriatic, was possessed by an ancient People called the
Veneti, who spoke a different Language from the Gauls, but much resembl'd them
in their Habit and Manners. The Tragic Poets have said many fabulous things
touching this People. Beyond the Po, near the Apennines, inhabit, first, the
Anians, then the Bojans; after these, toward Adria, dwell the Aegones; and
lastly, the Senones, living near the Seacoast.

In a word, these we have recounted, were the principal Nations that possessed
the Country we have described; they dwelt in Villages, open, and without any
Walls; they had few or no Movables, they slept without Beds, they eat Flesh,
and their chief Employments were Husbandry and War, being totally ignorant of
all other Arts and Sciences; their Substance consisted chiefly in Cattle and
Gold; two Commodities that they could easily carry with them, whenever, by
any Accident they should be necessitated to remove: They understand making
their Court, and the Art of acquiring Friends, which they greatly covet; for he
among them, who has most Friends, is most honored; and he who is most
honored, is most feared, and has most Power. Furthermore, they were not only
Masters of this Country, but compelled the neighboring Nations, awed by the
Fame of their Valor, to pay them Obedience. At length they made War on the
Romans, whom, after they had vanquished in Battle, together with those that
took part with them, they pursued three Days together; and took, at last, the
City of Rome itself, all but the Capitol.

But it happening, that some new Adventures calling them home, the Veneti
having marched into their Country with an Army, they Accorded a Peace to the
Romans, and, restoring their City, departed. Then they fell into Civil
Dissentions; those of them who inhabited the foot of the Mountains, beholding
the Prosperity of these, with an Eye of Envy, joined to make War on them. In
the mean time, the Romans recovered strength, and entered into Alliance with
the Latins. Thirty Years after the Taking of Rome, the Gauls made a second
Expedition, marching with their Army as far as Alba; but forasmuch as the
Romans were surprised by those sudden Motions of the Enemy, and had not leisure
to receive Aids from their Allies, they did not adventure to march against
them. Twelve Years after this, the Gauls, with a powerful Army, attacked them
again; but the Romans having now timely notice of their Purposes, and leisure
to summon there Allies to their Assistance, marched out to meet them, and offer
them Battle; when the Gauls, out of Countenance at this their Bravery, began to
waver in their Resolution, and grew, at length, to apprehend the Issue, and did
not only not adventure to engage the Romans, but secretly, by Night, raised
their Camp, and fled as if they had lost a Battle: Then they lay quiet for the
space of thirteen Years, when, observing the Romans Power daily to augment,
they, at length, came to an Agreement with them, and entered into Articles of
Peace.

After thirty Years of Repose, the Trans-Alpine Gauls took Arms again, but
fearing the Success of the War, they composed the Difference by Address and
great Presents, and remonstrating the Evil of making War among themselves, who
were of one and the same Nation; a Pacification thereupon ensued, and they now
labored to turn the joint Edge of their Courage against the Romans. They
marched their Armies, therefore, in one entire Body, through Tuscany (those in
that Country having taken part with them;) and after having ravaged the Roman
Territories, and taken much Booty, they retired home without Molestation; where
they were no sooner arrived, but they fell into Feuds about the Partition of
their Plunder, which went so far, that it cost them the loss of the greatest
part both of their Booty and their Army. And this is a frequent Folly of that
People upon any Success, especially if they happen to have Disputes when they
have drank Wine. Four Years after this, the Gauls and Samnites joined their
Arms, and made War on the Romans, giving them Battle in the Country of the
Clusians, who are likewise called Camartines, where they made great slaughter
of them. But soon after this, the Romans, enraged as it were by their
Misfortunes, marched against them with a fresh Army, and fighting with the same
Enemy (having all their Legions in the Field) in the Country of the Sentinates,
they got a memorable Victory, destroying the greatest part of their Army,
putting the rest to flight, who retired back to their Country. Ten Years were
hardly past, when the Gauls besieged Arrezzo with a mighty Force, whither the
Romans came to the Relief, and fought them in View of the Town, but were
worsted, and retreated. Lucius the Consul was slain; and Manlius succeeding,
sent Ambassadors to the Gauls, to treat about the Redemption of there
Prisoners; which Ambassadors were by them barbarously slain. This base Action
of the Gauls greatly provoked the Romans, who forthwith marched with another
Army against them, giving Battle to the Senones, who had the Assurance to
encounter them singly; but the Romans had the better, killing many of the
Enemy, and compelling the rest totally to abandon the Country; so they took
possession of the Territory of the Senones, and this was the first Colony they
planted in Gaul. It is called Sena-gallia, from the name of those Gauls, who
before had held it: Of this Country we have already spoken, and shown that it
lies near Adria, on the Skirts of the Plains that are watered by the Po.

The Bojans seeing the Senones expelled their Country, and becoming
apprehensive of the like measure, betook themselves to Arms, exempting none who
were able to march; and having drawn the Tuscanes to their Party, they marched
against the Romans: And when their Troops on both sides were drawn together,
near the Lake of Vadimon, a pitched Battle was fought, wherein the greatest
part of the Tuscans fell on the place, and but few of the Bojans escaped by
flight. Nevertheless, the Mind of this People was not subdued, who, making a
new League, united all their Forces, and arming all the Gauls, composed a fresh
Army, with which they gave Battle again to the Romans, but they were entirely
defeated and dispersed; and thus humbl'd, they now send their Ambassadors to
the Romans, and had Conditions granted them. These Adventures preceeded
Pyrrhus's Invasion of Italy about four Years, and happened five Years before
the Destruction of the Gauls at Delphos, as if some fatal Influence, charged
with a Commission of Mortallity against this People only, had then reigned; so
severely were they persecuted from all Quarters of the World. As for the
Romans, they reaped by the Contests they had with them, two mighty Benefits;
namely, first, by a long Exercise of Arms in the many Conflicts they had with
that People, wherein it was hardly possible for them to see or suffer more then
befell them, they became admirably instructed in the Art of War; and this they
made plainly to appear in the ensuing Hostilities with King Pyrrhus.
Furthermore, having thus tamed and reduced this Savage Nation, they had the
more leisure to attend their Affairs with that Prince, having nothing then to
divert their Counsels or Forces; and, in conclusion, they contested, by that
means, afterward, with more Assurance for the Dominion of Sicily with the
Carthaginians.

The Gauls, after having suffered so many Losses and Calamities, remained quiet
for the space of five and forty Years, preserving the Peace unbroken which they
made with the Romans; but after the old Men, and that Generation were extinct
that had tasted the Hardships, and felt the Sufferings of former Wars, the
young Men that succeeded them, who knew nothing of Danger, and feared nothing
from Fortune, had a mind to exercise their Courage, and with a generous kind of
Assurance took to their Arms, and renewed the War against the Romans, upon a
very slender Motive, drawing their Allies into the Confederacy. This Design was
first formed and conceived among their principal Men, who assembled, and
consulted thereon, without imparting it to the People; insomuch, that when the
Army of the Trans-alpine Gauls had marched as far almost as Rimini; the Bojans,
who were not well assured of their Sincerity, mutiny'd against their Officers,
and attacked the Army that had come thus far to join them; and having first
killed their two Kings, Ates and Gallatus, they at length came to a Battle,
wherein they mutually destroyed each other. In the mean time, the Romans, who
were surprised, and astonished, at the News of this new Eruption of the Gauls,
took the Field with their Armies; and when they came to understand, that the
Enemy were defeated by their own Swords, they proceeded no farther, but marched
home. Five Years after this Adventure, during the Consulship of M. Lepidus, the
Romans made Division of the Lands taken from the Senones, in Cis-alpine Gaul,
for Caius Flaminius, to make his Court to the People, had proposed that Law,
and had it received: But it may with good reason be averred, That 'twas this
that first corrupted the Peoples Manners, and was the Cause afterward of Civil
Dessention among them. In short, many of the Gauls, and principally the Bojans,
who had most cause of Fear, as being nearest Neighbors to the Romans,
perceiving, now, that their Designs were not so much for Glory and Empire, as
to subdue, and entirely exterminate their Nation and possess their Country,
readily entered into the League that was now forming against the them.

The Bojans and Insubrians (who were the two greatest People on that side)
pursuant to their Design, sent Ambassadors by common Consent, to the rest of
their Nation, inhabiting on the other side the Alp, about the Rhine; these
People are called Goesates, from their serving in the War for Pay; for so that
word properly imports; and prevailing on their two Kings, Concolitanus and
Aneroestus, by means of great Sums of Money, and by the hopes they gave them of
rich Booty that would be shared by this Enterprise, if they succeeded, engaged
them to join in a War against the Romans, giving them their Faith to assist and
abide firmly by them; but the Goesates were not hard to be persuaded. And now,
farther to incite them, they reminded them of the Glory of their Ancestors; who
had not only vanquished the Romans in Battle, upon the like Expedition, but
subdued and became Masters of their City itself, and that being Lords of all
the Romans held, kept their City seven Months in their Possession, and at
length, freely, and of their own mere Motive, restored it to that conquered
People, as an Effect of their Generosity, and afterward returned to their
Country enriched with infinite Booty, without any Danger, Damage, or
Impediment. These Discourses so animated the Leaders of the Goesates, and
incited them so powerfully to the War, that it may be said, so great an Army
never marched out from among that Nation, nor braver and more warlike Men. In
the mean time, the Romans, who were not without Intelligence of what was
agitated among the Gauls, saw their Danger, and perceived it at hand; and
justly fearing the Consequence, applied themselves to the levying of Troops,
and making Provision of all things necessary for the War, and marched with
their Armies to defend their Frontiers, believing them already invaded, when
the Enemy had not yet moved from their Quarters. These Traverses greatly
availed the Carthaginians, in the prosecuting their Design in Spain; for as we
have already observed, the Romans, who were resolved to put first a Period to
their Disputes with the Gauls, were constrained to yield to their Fears of an
Enemy, whom they thought now in their Neighborhood, and to postpone their
Consideration of Spain, and their Affairs on that side, till they should have
first composed and settled those at home, and secured and established the
Commonwealth against the Danger that then threatened. Accordingly, the Treaty
being ratified, which they made with Asdrubal, their Thoughts were entirely
taken up with the present Enemy, where it was agreed by all, that the safest
course, was to come speedily to a Battle.

In the mean time, the Goesates having passed the Alps, with a magnificent
Army, furnished with all sorts of Arms, came and joined the Cis-alpine Gauls,
making their Rendezvous on the Banks of the Po. The other Gauls also came in
after they had passed the Country that heretofore belonged to the Senones; the
Insubrians likewise, and Bojans, who continued in the same Opinion of
prosecuting the War, joined them; but the Veneti and Cenomani refused to be of
the Confederacy, to whom the Romans had sent their Ambassadors, prevailing
with them, to prefer their Alliance with them, to that of the Gauls; so that
the Bordering Princes of that People, were forced by that means to leave part
of their Forces to secure their Frontiers, and with an Army of fifty Thousand
Foot, twenty Thousand Horse, and as many Chariots, they began their March
toward Tuscany. The Romans having now Intelligence that the Celtae had passed
the Alps, dispatched with all Expedition the Consul L. Emilius, with the
Legions to Rimini, there to make head against the Enemy, if they should chance
to Attack them on that side. They likewise sent one of their Praetors toward
Tuscany, for the other Consul C. Atilius, was gone at that time to Sardinia,
with part of their Troops. But do what they could, their Fears were great at
Rome, where they had Reason to conclude their City was in Danger enough; and
indeed, none will wonder at their Doubts and Apprehensions, who consider what
Reason they had to bear in Mind the Calamities they had heretofore sustained by
the Invasions of this Enemy. They drew together therefore their Armies, and
levied new Forces, directed their Allies to have their Succors in a readiness,
and ordered Muster-rolls to be brought from all parts to the Senate, of all the
young Men capable of serving, to the End they might take a certain Measure of
their Strength; likewise they filled up their Legions with chosen Men, and
ordered them forthwith to March: Furthermore they made so great Provision of
Arms, and all things necessary for the War, that there was no Record of the
like Preparation in any Age past; in a word, every one did his utmost to
prosecute and advance so necessary a Work. For the People of Italy, terrified
at this Approach of the Gauls, did not Act at this time as mere Allies of the
Romans, to aid and further their Designs of Dominion and Glory, but thought of
nothing now but of Fighting, for their own proper Safety, their Families, and
Fortunes, so that they received with Cheerfulness the Orders that were sent
them from Rome.

And here it will not be amiss, to make an Estimate of the Power and Forces of
that Commonwealth, which Hannibal shortly after had the Boldness to attempt,
and what an Empire it was that he made the Object of his Ambition, and wherein
he succeeded so far as to Reduce the Romans to the last Gasp and Extremity of
Fortune. Let us, I say, make a Computation of the Provision they made toward
this War, whereby we shall perceive how far they had improved their Forces.
With the Consuls there marched four Legions, in each Legion were five thousand
two hundred Foot, and three hundred Horse, with them likewise marched the
Succors of the Allies, amounting together to thirty thousand Foot, and two
thousand Horse: Furthermore, there joined them of Sabins, and Tuscans, above
fifty thousand Foot, and about four thousand Horse; these were all conducted to
the Frontiers, under the Command of a Praetor, to oppose the Enemy there. From
the Vmbrians and Sarcinates, who inhabitit the Appennines, there came in to the
Number of twenty thousand; the Veneti and Cenomanei, sent the entire Number
they were ordered, to the utmost Borders of the Gauls Territories, to make
Inroads on the Country of the Bojans, and to force those who were already
departed to retire yet farther, and keep them from joining with the rest. In
this manner, they had disposed their Armies on the Frontiers. But at Rome they
kept a Reserve of Citizens, alwais ready to move, consisting of thirty thousand
Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse, with a Surplus of Troops of their Allies, of
thirty thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse. In the General Muster-rolls that
were brought into the Senate, were found fourscore thousand Foot of the Latins,
and five thousand Horse; of the Samnites seventy thousand Foot, and seven
thousand Horse: The Japyges and Messapyges, who had likewise joined with the
Romans, sent to their Aid in this War, fifty thousand Foot, and sixteen
thousand Horse: The Lucans supplied them with thirty thousand Foot, and three
thousand Horse: The Marsians, Marrucians, Ferentines and Vestines, sent twenty
thousand Foot and four thousand Horse. Furthermore, they had two Legions in
Sicily, and Tarentum, consisting of four thousand two hundred Foot, and two
hundred Horse each; and over and above all these, the ordinary People being
mustered in Rome and Campania, amounted to two hundred and fifty thousand Foot,
and three and twenty thousand Horse; so that the Troops which depended
immediately on the Senate, and were destined to the Guard and Preservation of
the City amounted to an hundred and fifty thousand Foot, and six thousand
Horse, or thereabouts. But the whole Body of their Srength consisted in no less
than seven hundred thousand Foot, and seventy thousand Horse; and though Hannibal
began with an Army of hardly twenty thousend Men, he had nevertheless the
Assurance to Invade and March into Italy, against this stupendous Force of the
Romans: But this Point will be better cleared when we come to Treat of those
Occurrences.

Upon the Arrival of the Gauls in Tuscany, they ravaged and plundered the
Country without Control, and from thence determined to prosecute their Design
on Rome, and were now advanced near Clusium, a Town but three Days March from
the City, when News came, that the Roman Army that had been posted on the
Frontiers of Tuscany, was approaching, and was almost got up with their Rear:
Whereupon they faced about, and marched to meet them, full of Resolution to
come to a Battle. And now toward the Evening, the two Armies drew so near,
that they were forced to incamp on the Ground where they were, leaving but a
very strait Space between their Camps: But when Night was shut in, the Gauls
lighting their Fires in their Camp, departed: Leaving their Horse behind, with
Orders to follow them the same way they took, with command at break of Day to
show themselves to the Enemy. In the mean time, they take their March silently
toward Faesula, where they halted to attend the coming up of their Horse, and
to Attack the Enemy by Surprise, if they should advance after them. In the
Morning the Romans perceiving they were Retreated, and had left only their
Horse, eagerly went on the Pursuit, taking for granted that this Motion of the
Enemy was a sort of Flight. But they were no sooner advanced within distance,
when the Gauls, who lay in ambush, began to appear, and a very sharp Conflict
ensued, wherein the Boldness and Number of the Gauls prevailed: Of the Romans
there fell six thousand on the spot, the greatest part of the rest making good
their Retreat, to a rising piece of Ground well situate for Defense, where they
abode; the Gauls resolved presently to besiege them, but being now weary with
Marching, and harrass'd with the Service of the preceding Day, they only left
for that time a Party of their Horse, on the Guard at the Foot of the Hill,
where the Romans were entrenched, and retired to refresh and repose themselves,
with Resolution the next Morning to attack and take them by Force, if they
refused Conditions.

In the mean while, L. Aemilius who had been sent to Rimini, to Guard the Coast
of the Adriatic, seasonably arrived: Who having received Intelligence that the
Enemy had entered Tuscany; and farther, that they were advanced toward the
City, he immediately marched to join the other Army. And now approaching those
who were entrenched on the Hill discovered them at a distance by their Fires,
wherefore taking Courage, and disguising some of their People, they sent them
privately through the Woods to give them an Account of the present Posture of
their Affairs. The Consul Aemilius, having not now leisure for much
Consultation, ordered the Tribunes to march with the Foot, by break of Day,
while himself at the head of the Horse, speeds away directly towords the Hill;
but the Principal Officers of the Gauls, who judged by the Fires they had seen
over Night, that the Romans were arrived, held a Counsel, to debate, and
determine how they ought to proceed: When the King Aneroestus advised them to
consider, with Caution, what they did; he said, the Plunder they had taken, was
already very great; their Prisoners and the Cattle, and other Booty of all
sorts, was beyond all Computation; that on this Consideration, it seemed to him
that their best course was not to hazard a Battle, which might prove the total
Ruin of their Affairs; that the safest Counsel they could take, was now to
retreat, and march back to their Country, while they might do it with safety;
where, when they had disencumber'd themselves of their Plunder, they might with
ease return and engage the Romans, if it were concluded reasonable. So this
Opinion of Aneroestus, was approved and followed, and the Gauls decamped the
same Night, taking their march along the Coast toward the Frontiers of
Tuscany, Aemilius having received into his Army those Troops that were encamped
on the Hill, after the Defeat of the Romans, did not think it safe to give the
Enemy Battle, but determined to keep in their Rear, and vigilantly take
occasions of advantage upon them, and attempt to recover, at least, part of
their Plunder. But behold, at this very time, the other Consul, C. Atilius,
being returned with the Army out of Sardinia, was leading them along the
Seacoast, toward Rome; who utterly ignorant of what had passed, happening to
take the same way the Gauls did, and was marching not far before them. The
Enemy was now arrived near Telamena, a Promontory of Tuscany, when some of
their Forragers fell into Atilius's hands, who gave him Intelligence of all
that had passed, assuring him, that both the one and the other Army were not
far off, that the Gauls were at hand, and that Aemilius was hard at their Rear.
The Consul was a little perplexed at the News; nevertheless, assured of
Victory, by thus surprising the Enemy, and enclosing them between their two
Armies, he ordered the Tribunes to draw up in Order of Battle, and to enlarge
their Front as wide as the Ground would possibly permit; and now having
observed an Eminence which commanded the Way by which the Enemy must
necessarily pass, he goes himself at the Head of the Horse, and takes
Possession of that Post; designing from thence, to give the first Attack,
conceiving that the Honor of the Victory would thereby be in a great degree
ascribed to him; but the Gauls (who knew nothing of the Arrival of Atilius)
believing that Aemilius's Horse had got before them in the Night, and had
possessed those advantageous Posts, commanded their Horse, and some choice Men
of their Foot, to march, and beat them from that Ground; but receiving
Intelligence, by certain Prisoners, that Atilius was there, they formed their
Battle of Foot in such manner, as to be able to receive the Enemies Charge in
Front and Rear; for they were assured, the one Army pursued them, and the other
would not fail to Attack them in Front. This at least they strongly
conjectured, both by the Intelligence they had received, and by the Countenance
and Actions of the Enemy.

The Consul Aemilius had been informed that the Legions were landed at Pisa,
but he could not hope they were arrived so near; but as soon as he perceived
the Dispute upon the Hill, he took for granted his Colleague was now at hand,
whereupon he sent a Party of Horse to sustain them, and after having formed
their Foot according to the Roman Discipline, they moved toward the Enemy. The
Gauls placed the Goesates in their Rear, believing that Aemilius would find
them Work there; next to them were posted the Insubrians; in the Front were the
Taurisques, and those that inhabit beyond the Po. Thus the two Bodies being
drawn up, Rear to Rear, they faced likewise toward Atilius, to receive his
Charge. All their Chariots and Baggage were disposed on the Wings. Their
Plunder they had carried to a neigbouring Hill, where they left it under a good
Guard. So the Army of the Gauls being drawn up, I say, facing two ways, was not
only terrible to behold, but were in effect formed in the most proper manner,
to receive the Attack. The Insubrians and Bojans engaged, clothed only in thin
and light Garments; But the Goesates (such was their Fool-hardiness, and
Opinion of their Strength) stripping themselves naked, marched in that manner
in the Front of the Battle, brandishing their Swords; conceiving that in that
Equipage they should not be only able to use their Arms with more freedom, but
being eased of their Garments, they should find less Impediment from the Bushes
and Briers that might molest them in time of Action. The first Dispute was on
the Hill we mentioned, where great Bodies of Horse fought and attacked each
other, mingling and fighting without any Order. Here Atilius the Consul,
engaging too far, was slain, whose Head was immediately carried to the Gaulish
King. But this did not at all dishearten the Roman Horse, who maintained their
Post, and repulsed the Enemy.

And now the Foot came to join Battle, where the manner of the Encounter was
not only violent and terrible to those who were engaged, but also, will alwais
appear so, to such as shall hear the Relation; and to whose View the Pen of the
Historian shall Describe it. In a word, where three Armies were thus engaged,
who will not conclude, but the Spectacle of such a Battle, and the Fashion of
the Contest, was wholly new and surprising? Furthermore, who would not at this
Day judge, or, who would not then have concluded, that the Manner and Order
wherein the Gauls were drawn up, would not either prove fatal to them, as being
to receive an Enemy in Front and Rear; or that it ought to contribute to the
Victory, as having two Armies to deal with, they had ordered it so, that
dividing their Army, one part thereof sustained the other, whereby the Enemy
could never attack their Rear? Over and above, all Temptations of Flight were
by that means taken away, for they could neither go forward, nor retire, and in
case they should happen to be vanquished, they were bereft of all means of
Escape, which is an advantage only to be found, when an Army is so formed,
fronting two several ways. The Romans were not however without their Reasons to
expect Success, who had their Enemy surrounded and hemmed in on all sides;
while on the other hand, the formidable Appearance, and the tumultuous Noise of
the Gallick Army, gave them Terror enough: For, besides the mighty Sound of
their Instruments, and other Martial Instruments wherein they abound, the
Shouts and Clamours of their Soldiers was so great, that not only their
Instruments and their Men, but the adjacent Hills that environed them, seemed
to echo and resound the Noise. Moreover, the Countenance and Behavior of
those who marched naked at the Head of their Army, was a Sight entirely new;
those Gyant-like Men, strong and well fashioned, in the prime and strength of
their Age, where you beheld none in their first Ranks, who were not adorned
with Chains, Collers, and Bracelets of Gold: In a word, as this extraordinary
Spectacle could not but give the Romans Terror, so the hope of such a Booty
lent them Assurance also.

When the light armed Troops were advanced after the Roman manner, a good
distance before the Army, had begun the Battle by a shower of Weapons they cast
at the Enemy, the Garments of the Gauls, who were in the second Ranks, did in
some sort defend their Bodies: But it fared otherwise with the Goesates, who
fought naked in the Van; for these finding their Entertainment quite contrary
to what they expected, knew not how to behave themselves, or what course to
take; for the Gauls Bucklers being small, never cover their Bodies entirely, at
best; so that these Men, who were of the largest Size, were by that means the
less defended, insomuch, that few Darts were cast at them without effect; and
now being thus galled, and not able to defend their Bodies against those, who,
at a distance attacked them, they grew, at length, enraged, and despera^e of
their Safety; some threw themselves headlong on the Enemy, where they found
present Death: Others retiring by little and little, as they were able,
manifested their Fear by their Retreat, troubling and disordering the Ranks in
their Rear. So the Roman Javelins were too hard for the Goesates Courage, and
abated that vain Confidence of theirs, which was, indeed, the best part of
their Soldiership. But now the Roman Cohorts advanced, after they had ordered
their light armed Parties to retire into the Intervals, and soon came to the
Swords point with the Insubrians, Tauriscans, and Bojans, who fought it out
with great Resolution; and though they were pressed hard, and the Dispute was
very bloody, nevertheless, they sustained the Shock, and kept their Post, and
may be truly said to be inferior to the Romans, only in their Arms, which were
not, by much, so serviceable in Battle as the others. For the Roman Bucklers
are made so, as to cover their whole Body, and their Swords much more proper
for Service; while those of the Gauls were only barely for cutting. At length,
the Roman Horse, that had been engaged on the Hill, came down, and attacked the
Gauls in Flank, wherein they performed singular Service; in short, the Gauls
were beaten, forty thousand slain, and ten thousond taken Prisoners; among whom
was Concolitanus, one of their Kings, Aneroestus, the other King, with a small
Party, escaped by Flight to a certain Village, where, soon after, he killed
himself, as did the rest who were with him. The Consul, Aemilius, ordered the
Spoils of the Enemy to be secured, which were sent to Rome; but whatsoever had
been taken from the Country, he ordered to be restored: Then he marched the
Army along the Confines of Tuscany, and fell on the Lands of the Bojans, where,
after he had glutted the Soldiers with Plunder, he led the whole Army back to
Rome; where he adorned the Capitol with the Ensigns he had taken, and hung up
their Collars, and Bracelets, and Chains of Gold, reserving the rest of the
Spoils, and the great number of Prisoners, to adorn his Triumph, when he should
make his Entry into the City. Behold, now, the Success of this mighty
Expedition, which had threatened the People of Italy, especially the Romans,
with so dreadful a Storm. After this Victory, the Romans began to be in hopes
they should be able to force the Gauls out of all the Country bordering on the
Po. The two succeeding Consuls, Q. Fulvius, and Titus Manlius, marching against
them, with an Army well provided of all things necessary; whereupon the Bojans,
on their first Attempt, were affrighted into Submission, putting themselves
under the Roman Protection: But it happened to be a Season of great Rains, and
the Plague likewise having infected their Army, nothing afterward memorable
was performed in that Expedition.

The Consuls, who succeeded them, P. Furius, and C. Flaminius, marched with
their Armies into the Territories of the Gauls, by the Frontiers of the
Anamures, a People who inhabit not far from Marseilles, by whose Friendship,
which they had gained, the Consuls had liberty to pass against the Insubrians,
on that part where the River Ada runs into the Po; where being attacked by the
Enemy, both at the Passage of the River, and where they were about to incamp,
they were not able to perform any thing to purpose at that time; entering,
therefore, into Treaty with that People, they retired out of their Territory.
Afterward, having a long time marched too and fro, about the neighboring
Country, they passed the River, and came into the Lands of the Cenomani, who
were their Allies, with whom joining, they fell a second time on the
Insubrians, where they made great Spoil. Whereupon the Princes of that People,
observing there was no end of the Molestation the Romans gave them, determined,
at length, to put all to the hazard of a Battle; accordingly, having assembled
and rendezvous'd all their Troops in one certain place, they possessed
themselves of all the Treasure, Jewels, and Gold belonging to the Temple of
Minerva, and by them called Immoveables, with which they made provision of all
things they needed to further their Design; and being now well provided, they
marched cheerfully against the Romans, and encamped in their view, with an Army
of fifty thousand fighting Men. The Romans plainly saw, the Enemy much exceeded
them in number, and were therefore thinking to reinforce their Army by an
Addition of those Gauls, who were in Amity with them; but when they considered
the Faithlessness of that People in all their Treaties and Negotiations, and
that those, whose Aids they were to use, were of the same Nation with the
others against whom they were to draw their Swords; they could not therefore
determine to trust them in an Affair of so mighty importance. Wherefore, they
found this Expedient; they ordered the Gauls, their Allies, to pass the River,
remaining with their own Army on the other side, then demolishing the Bridge,
the River not being fordable, they kept them, at least from siding with the
Enemy, since they could not resolve to trust them as Friends. By this means
too, their own Army was left without any Hopes, but in Victory, for there was
no Retreat, but by the River, and that was now unpassable; after this was done,
they prepared to receive the Enemy. The Soldiers deserved great Commendations
by the Address and Skill they showed in this Battle, having been instructed, it
seems, how they were to behave themselves singly, or in a Body: For the
Tribunes had remarked in their former Conflicts, that the Gauls were not
formidable, but in the Ardour of the first Attack, that their Swords were of
such a fashion and temper, that they could give but one good out or two; and
then they would stand bent in their Hands, and if they had not time to
streighten them, with their Foot on the Ground, they became of no more use:
Wherefore, the Tribunes distributed among the first Cohorts, the Javelins used
by the Triarians, who were those that marched in the Rear ranks; commanding the
Soldiers, first to make use of those Arms, and then to draw their Swords. And
now, when they came to engage, they attacked the Gauls as they had been
ordered, whose Swords, by the first strokes on the Roman Javelins, became bent
and useless; then the Romans advancing nearer with their Swords, got so within
them, that they had not room to lift their Arm to take a cutting stroke, which
is their manner of Fighting, whose Swords have no point: While those of the
Romans, on the contrary, being fashioned for cutting and thrusting, redoubling
the one after the other, they cut and pierced the Gauls in the Face and Breast,
and made a terrible slaughter among them. Thus the Gauls were beaten, and the
Honor of that Day principally attributed to the Prudence and Ability of the
Tribunes; for the Consul Flaminius was to seek, and had not sufficiently
provided for the Safety of the Army; who drawing up near the River, had so
ordered it, that the Romans were deprived of one great Benefit, which they make
use of in Battle, leaving them not space enough betwixt their Rear and the
River to retire, when occasion should make it necessary: so that, if during the
Battle, the Romans had been pressed never so little, they had no whither to
retire, but into the River; so great an Oversight was the Consul guilty of in
that occasion. But so it happened, as we have related; that the Romans, by
their Resolution, got a signal Victory, returning to Rome laden with Spoil and
Glory.

The following Year the Gauls sent their Ambassadors to the Romans, to treat
of a Peace, on whatsoever Conditions they should please to grant it; but the
Consuls M. Claudius, and Cn. Cornelius, would not yield to treat with them;
whereupon they resolved to make their last Effort, and put it once again to the
hazard of War. They therefore dispatched Orders for levying of Men among the
Goesatae, who inhabit about the Rhone, of which People having taken thirty
Thousand into their Pay, they continued in Arms in expectation of the Enemy.
About the beginning of the Spring, the Consuls lead their Armies into the
Territory of the Insubrians, and besieged the City of Acerras, situate between
the Po and the Alps. In the mean time, the Insubrians were willing to do their
best to raise the Siege, but knew no way how to succor the Besieged, the Enemy
being possessed of all the Avenues; they therefore passed the Po with some of
their Troops, and marching them into the Roman Territories, sat down before
Clastidium. The Consuls receiving this News, M. Claudius Marcellus, taking with
him all the Roman Horse, and a good Body of Foot, marched away with diligence
to the Relief of that Place, of whose coming the Gauls having got Intelligence,
rise from before it, and march in Battalia against him; and coming to engage,
they made for a while a good stand against the Horse, but being at length
charged in Flank and Rear, they were forced to yield the Advantage to the
Romans, betaking them to flight. Many perished in the River, which they
attempted to repass, and more were slain on the Spot. Acerres likewise soon
surrendered, where had been lodged great store of Ammunition, and the Gauls
retired to Milan, which is the Capital City of the Insubrians. But Cornelius
followed them without loss of time, and marched after them thither, where the
Gauls attempted nothing during his stay; but on his marching back toward
Acerres, they followed him, and attacking his Rear, killed many, and put the
rest of the Army to flight; till Cornelius facing about at the Head of the
Vanguard of the Army, commanded those that were flying, to make a stand, and
face toward the Enemy: These Orders being obeyed, the Romans make Head against
them that charged their Rear. But the Gauls, fleshed with Victory, which they
thought now sure, sustained for a time the Charge, but it was not long ever
they gave Ground, and, flying, sought Sanctuary in the neighboring Mountains,
whether Cornelius followed them, and then marched into the Country, which he
spoiled and harrass'd, and advancing to Milan, took it by force. So that after
this Defeat, the Princes of the Insubrians, finding it in vain further to
contend, submitted, and put themselves under the Protection of the Romans.

Behold now the Success of the War, which the Romans waged against the Gauls;
wherein, if we consider the Courage and Obstinacy of the Enemy; the mighty
Battles and the Multitudes that composed their Armies, and the Slaughter of Men
in the Field; we shall be obliged, without doubt, to consent, that History
affords none that may paralled it; while if, on the other hand, we weigh their
Designs and Enterprises, and the blind and shallow Administration of their
Affairs in all things, we shall see nothing therein that does not justly beget
our Contempt; for the Gauls are ever transported by Heat and Fury, never
conducted by Reason and Council, we will not say for the most part, but in all
their Determinations. And now having related how soon after they were beaten
from their Seats in the Neighborhood of the Po, some few places excepted under
the Alps, we therefore held it but reasonable to relate how they came first
into Italy, what they did afterward, and in a word, how they were at length
totally exterminated. For it seems to me to be the Duty of an Historian, to
instruct future Times in these memorable Events, which are no other than the
Sports and Entertainments of Fortune, lest Posterity, through want of due
Information, should be to seek for Examples to fortify their Minds against the
frequent and temerarious Descents of these Barbarians. Furthermore, Instruction
may be gathered by the Example now before us, how certainly they may be
repelled, where they are resisted with Resolution; and that we ought to suffer
every thing, rather than yield to them in any thing. And there is no doubt, but
those who have obliged Posterity with the Relation of the Persians Expedition
into Greece, and the Attempt of the Gauls upon Delphos, gave great Light to the
Greeks in their Designs afterward of rescuing their Countries Liberty. For if
the mighty things performed by them, were duly weighed; what Myriads of Men,
and what wonderful Preparations were lost and defeated, by the single Virtue of
a few, who had a right Knowledge in the Art of War, and were led by the Conduct
of Reason: There would be no Force so great, nor Armies so numerous that might
not be resisted: And who would not run any Hazard, and suffer any Extremity to
win Glory, and redeem his Coutry? In short, the Greeks were not molested, only
in the Days of our Forefathers, but even frequently in our Times; which was in
part my Motive for giving the World this short History of the Acts of that
People, and albeit, it be but an Epitome, it comprehends, at least, their Story
from the beginning of their Enterprises. But it is now time to remember from
whence we have digress'd.

After Asdrubal, the Carthaginian General, had governed in Spain, for the space
of eight Years, he was treacherously murdered in his Tent by a certain Gaul,
provoked by some Injury he had received. This Leader had greatly augmented the
Dominion of the Carthaginians, not only by Force of Arms, but by his Wisdom,
and the Gentleness whereby he gained and attracted the Good Will of many
Princes of that Nation. After his Death, notwithstanding the Youth of Hannibal,
the Carthaginians made him his Successor in the Govenment of Spain; who, among
his other promising Qualities, gave Indications of an extraordinary Courage and
Greatness of Mind; and was no sooner confirmed in his Government, but it was
easy to foresee by his Actions and Councils, that he meditated a War with the
Romans, which, in effect, soon after came to pass. The Romans and Carthaginians
were already on Terms of Jealousy, and Provocations had been mutually given,
by Injuries done on either side. The Carthaginians on their part could not
digest their Loss of Sicily, which they longed to revenge, and secretly laid
their Designs to effect it; while the Romans, who were not without Intelligence
of their Practices, were on their Guard, insomuch as it was now visible to
every Eye, that it could not be long before a War would break out between those
two States. It was likewise about the same Period of Time, that the Achaians
and King Phillip, with the rest of the Confederates, engaged in a War against
the Aetolians, which was called the War of the Allies. But since we have
already treated of the Affairs of Sicily and Africa, and touched what was
memorable therein, and pursuant to the Method we have proposed, are now arrived
at the said Confederate War, and the second that was waged between the Romans
and Carthaginians, called by some the War of Hannibal; where we promised should
be the Commencement of our History, it will therefore be necessary, without
entertaining the Reader with farther Digression, that we come now to set down
the Occurrences of Greece, to the end, that having previously and summarily
made the Way plain before us, by reducing the general Account of Affairs to one
and the same Period of Time, we may thence take the Beginning of the General
History, we have especially undertaken to write, wherein the Causes will be
found very visible, which have produced so wonderful Effects.

Furthermore, in regard our Design is not laid to write the Story and
Adventures, of any one single or particular Nation; as some have done that of
the Greeks, and others of the Persians, but on the contrary, since we have
determined to make a General History of Occurrences in all those Parts of the
World, that have fallen under our Observation, it will not be therefore
unprofitable to Discourse principally of those Places and People, that are most
Eminent and Remarkable; inasmuch, as because the present Age sufficiently
furnishes Materials for that Work, and in case we do not enlarge on that
Subject here, we shall however, supply it elsewhere. Touching the Asiaticks
and the Egyptians, it may suffice to Treat of their Affairs, no higher than
from our own Times; since their Story of remoter Date, has been already the
Subject of diverse Authors, to to which every one may have Recourse. And indeed
they have seen so few Revolutions and Changes of Fortune of late, that there
will be no need to resort to distant Accounts, to be enlightened in their
Affairs. On the other hand, the History of the Achaians, and the Royal Family
of Macedon, will require a necessary Recourse to Antiquity, in regard the
latter is now quite extinguished, and the other by their good Conduct and
Intelligence, risen to a mavelous Height of Prosperity: For though it has been
the Argument of many heretofore, to persuade the Peloponnesians to a Union, for
their common Defense and Safety; which could not, however, be brought to pass,
inasmuch, as those who have seemed to contend therein, could never relinquish
their own Interests and Advancement, while they deliberated for the Public.
Wherefore, this Felicity was reserved for our Days, and is accomplished in such
a manner, as that they are not only United by a firm Alliance, but the better
to fasten the Bond of Union, their Laws are now the same, as also their Money,
Weights and Measures; furthermore, they have the same Magistrates, the same
Council, and the same Judges: So that to comprize all in one Word, Peloponnesus
is not one entire City and Corporation, only because one Wall does not Begirt
and Environ it; every thing else is Uniform throughout all their Cities. And it
would be no fruitless Curiosity, to enquire why, and for what Reason, the
Peloponnesians began to take upon them the Name of Achaians; for those who were
first so called, were a People no more considerable than their Neighbors;
neither for their Riches, the number of their Towns and Cities, nor the Virtue
of their People. In a word, the Arcadians and Lacedaemonians were superior to
the Achaians, both in Numbers and Extent of Dominion. And there was hardly any
Nation through the whole Continent of Greece, that did not think themselves
their Equals, both in Valor and Virtue; how then comes it to pass that the
Achaians, and those who have engaged in that Confederacy, and are become the
same in Government and Name, are risen to that height of Reputation? It were
Blindness and Folly to ascribe it to Accident, or a mere Effect of the
Indulgence of Fortune. It behooves us then, to search out, and determine the
Cause, for without that, nothing can be effected that comes to pass; whether
done by the Guidance of right Reason, or seemingly done without any Reason all.
My Judgment of the Cause then is this: That first it is impossible to find a
Republic, where Liberty and Equality, and in a word, where popular Government
is better preserved, or where more wholesome Laws are to be found, than among the
Achaians, this invited many of the Peloponnesian Cities to embrace, of their
own Accord, their Form of Government; many likewise were won to receive it by
the Force of Reason and Persuasion; and some were constrained by Necessity, and
yielded with a sort of Choice to what they foresaw they should shortly not be
able to refuse. While in the mean time the Founders of this Institution reaped
no Privilege or Advantage by their Change, who no sooner received their Laws,
but they were admitted to the same Fellowship of Right with the rest.

In brief, the Achaians compassed this great Design, principally by two Things,
which seldom fail of Effect; namely, Equality and Benignity; and there is great
appearance of Reason that that was the chief and most likely Motive to this
Concord, which growing and establishing by degrees, acquired to the
Peloponnesians so much Power and Wealth. But this Right is to be done the
Achaians, that it must be confessed, the Form of Government we have mentioned,
was Originally and of Old among them; which appears by manifold Testimonies,
but it shall suffice at this time to exemplify only one or two.

Upon the Burning and Destroying the Assemblies of the Pithagoreans, by a
secret Conspiracy, in that part of Italy called Magnagraecia, there ensued
great Commotious among the Principal Magistrates by that extraordinary
Adventure. All the Greek Towns on that Coast of Italy were filled with
Sedition, Tumult and Murders; so that to recover and establish Union and
Tranquillity among them, Ambassadors were dispatched to them from all parts of
Greece, howbeit, the Council only of the Achaians was chosen to cure those
great Evils, and compose the Dissentions that were grown among them. Nor was it
in this only that the People expressed their Esteem of the Laws and
Institutions of the Achaians; but all those Governments soon after, by common
Consent, agreed to imitate them, and to Form themselves according to the
Example of the Achaian Republic. Whereupon the Crotoniates, the Sybarites, and
the Cauloniates, Uniting in one Body, agreed to build a Temple to Jupiter
Homorius, Decreeing that Place for the Congress of their General Assemblies. In
a word, they received the Achaian Laws, and resolved conformably to Govern
their States. And if any thing therein was afterward altered, it was not out
of Choice, but strong Necessity; for on the one hand Dionysius of Syracuse, and
the Barbarians on the other, who were too powerful for them to contend with,
often compell^d them to change their Methods of Administration.

Afterward, about the time of the Lacedaemonians Defeat in the Battle of
Leuctra, (an Occurrence which surpised all the World) when the Thebans,
contrary to the general Opinion, had acquired the Dominion of Greece, there
grew great Troubles and Commotions everywhere, and principally between the
Lac^demonians and Thebans, for those would not be drawn to consent they had
been Vanquished, and these could not prove they had been Victors. Whereupon the
Achaians, of all the Greeks, were mutually chosen to be the sole Judges of this
Controversy, not by an Argument of their Power and Greatness, there being no
State at that Time in all Greece that was not Superior to them in Strength,
but merely in regard of the Virtue and Probity which they manifested in all
their Negotiations, which had acquired them the good Opinion of the whole
World. But they had nothing else at that time to boast of, but good Counsel,
and a Disposition to improve their Fortune, not having it in their Power to b^
Great or Secure, through the want of such a Head or Leader, whose Virtue and
Abilities might answer the Glory of their Designs; For, they no sooner made
Choice of One in whom any extraordinary Marks of Courage or Greatness of Mind
was discovered, when the Lacedaemonians, and above the rest the Macedonians,
would presently form Obstacles, and raise Impediments to the Course of their
Virtue.

But afterward, when they came to enjoy the Liberty of Choosing such Men, as
knew how to acquit themselves, it was then perceived, how capable they were of
bringing the greatest things to pass. For, what was more glorious than the
Union and Confederacy of the Peloponnesians? Aratus the Sicyonian was the
Author of that Noble Enterprise, and Philopoemen of Megalopolis prosecuted it
and saw it perfected; Father of our Au^^^^.
Lycortas, and those who succeeded, confirmed it, and labored therein so
successfully, as to give some Assurance of its Duration. But we shall show in
the Pursuit of our History, as Occasion shall be given, how, and at what Time,
they respectively contributed to that Work. N^vertheless we shall not have
occasion to enlarge on the Actions of Aratus, in regard he himself has composed
a sort of History, wherein the Truth of Occurrences is plainly delivered. But
as to what may concern the others, we shall diligently, and more accurately,
recount their Actions. In brief, I have, upon good Deliberation, concluded,
that the Work I have undertaken, will be less difficult for me, and more
advantageous for the Reader, to take my Beginning from the time when the
Achaians, (who had been divided by the Power of the Kings of Macedon,) began to
Unite and Incorporate, inasmuch, as from thence may be dated the Birth of that
Power and Greatness, which by a constant Growth and Augmentation, has at
length arrived at that height of Prosperity wherein we now behold them, and
whereof we have already taken notice.

It was in the Hundred and twenty fourth Olympiad, when the Patraeans and
Dimoeans laid the Foundation of the Union; in the same Olympiad, wherein
Ptolomy the Son of Lagus, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolomy, surnamed Ceraunus,
died. And if we would extend our Prospect yet further back, behold the State of
the Achaians: Tisamenus, Son of Orestes, flying from Sparta, upon the return of
the Heraclidoe, governed in Achaia, and was the first King of that People; the
Dominion by him there founded, was continued in a rightful Succession down to
Gyges, whose Sons rendering him odious by their Tyrannical Practices, the first
Form of their Government became changed, and reduced to a popular State, which
lasted to the time of Alexander the Great; and albeit their Affairs were
governed and regulated according to the Diversity of Times, and Occurrences,
nevertheless all possible Endeavors were used to preserve the Form of a
popular State. The Commonwealth was composed of Twelve Cities, which are in
being at this Day, Olenus and Helice only excepted, which were swallowed up by
the Sea, in an Earthquake, that happened not long before the Battle of
Leuctra; which Cities are Patra, Dyma, Phara, Trytoea, Leontium, Aegira,
Pellene, Aegium, Bura, Ceraunia, Olenus, and Helice. After the Death of
Alexander, and since the Olympiad we have mentioned, these Cities fell into
dangerous Dissentions, chiefly by the Artifices of the Macedonian Princes, when
every City apart meditated on nothing but their own private Profit, and Ends,
to the Prejudice and Destruction of their Neighbors; and this gave occasion to
Demetrius, and Cassander, and afterward to Antigonus Gonatus, to put Garrisons
in some of their Cities, and that others were invaded and governed by Tyrants,
who in those Days were very numerous in Greece. But about the Hundred and four
and twentieth Olympiad, when Pyrhus invaded Italy, these People began to see
the Error of their Dissentions, and labored to return to their former Union.
Those who gave the first Example, were the Dymoeans the Patroeans, and the
Pharoeans; Five Years after those of Aegium, having cast out the Garrison that
was placed over them, were received into the Confederacy. Those of Bura,
followed their Example, having first killed the Tyrant; and shortly after,
those of Ceraunia did the like: for Iseas their Tyrant, considering how that
those of Aegium had expelled their Garrison, and he who governed in Bura, was
already slain by the Practices of Marcus, and the Achaians, and that it would
be his Lot to have them all quickly for Enemies, he therefore resigned the
Dominion; after having first stipulated with the Achaians, for his Indemnity
for what was passed, and so incorporated the City into the Union of the
Achaians. But it may be demanded, Why we take so remote a View into Antiquity?
To which we Answer, Because, in the first place, we would show after what
Manner, and at what Time this Commonwealth was founded, and who were the first
of the Ancient Achaians, that laid the Foundation; and to the end it may appear
that we say nothing without Proof, of the Institutions of that People, and that
what we have Recorded is too evident to be confuted, it is manifest they have
all along observed the same Methods of Government. So that consenting to
Equality and Liberty, which is in the utmost Perfection among that People, and
opposing their Arms against those, who by themselves, or by the Assistance of
such Princes as would willingly have had them fallen into Servitude; they have
been able to compass their great Design, partly of themselves, and partly by
their Confederates. In short, we may have recourse to their Laws, and
Institutions, to be satisfied in what afterward succeeded. For, in a word,
though they have been, in many Occasions of greatest moment, serviceable to the
Romans, nevertheless their Success never altered them, or lent them Ambition to
Exalt their Fortune, but they barely contented themselves to be permitted, in
reward of the good Offices they had rendered their Allies, Liberty only to
every one in particular, and a Confirmation of the general Union of
Peloponnesus. But this will be more evidently seen by their Actions.

The Cities, then, we have mentiond continued for the space of five and twenty
Years, to preserve their Form of Government unchanged, choosing in their General
Assembly, two Praetors and a Secretary. Afterward they concluded to have but
one Praetor only, who should be charged with the Management of their Affairs;
and the first who enjoyed that Dignity, was Marcus the Carian, who, after four
Years of his Administration, gave place to Aratus the Sicyonian, who, at the
Age of twenty Years, after he had by his Virtue and Resolution rescued his
Country from Tyranny, joined it to the Commonwealth of the Achaians, so great a
Veneration had he from his Youth for the Manners and Institutions of that
People. Eight Years after, he was a second time chosen Praetor, and won
Acro-corinth, which Antigonus had fortified with a Garrison, whereby Aratus
freed all Greece from no small Apprehension: when he had restored Liberty to
Corinth, he united it to the Achaians, together with the City of Megara, which
he got by Intelligence during his Praetorship. All these things happened about
a Year before the last Battle that was fought between the Romans and
Carthaginians for the Dominion of Sicily, when the latter were obliged to quit
their Claim, and become Tributaries to the Romans. In a word, Aratus, who, in a
short space, brought many and great things to pass, made it manifest by his
Counsels and Actions, that his greatest Aim was the Expulsion of the
Macedonians out of Peloponnesus, to suppress Tyranny, and assert the Liberty of
his Country. So that, during the whole Reign of Antigonus Gonatus, Aratus
constantly opposed all his Designs and Enterprises, as he did the Ambition of
the Aetolians, to raise themselves on the Ruins of their Neighbor States. And
as in all the Transactions of his Administration, he gave singular Evidences of
a steady Mind and firm Resolution, all his Attempts succeeded accordingly,
notwithstanding many States confederated to hinder the Union, and to destroy
the Commonwealth of the Achaians.

After the Death of Antigonus, the Achaians entered into a League with the
Aetolians, and generously assisted them in their War against Demetrius, so that
the ancient Hatred between these two People seemed for the present
extinguish'st, and the Desire of Concord began, by degrees, to grow in the
Minds of the Aetolians; Demetrius reigned ten Years, and died about the time
that the Romans made their first Expedition into Illyria, when many great and
noble Occasions were given to the Achaians of finishing the Project they had
conceived. For the Tyrants who reigned in Peloponnesus, having lost the Support
of Demetrius, who greatly favored them, began now to Despair; and on the other
hand, being awed by Aratus, who admonished them to quit their Governments, on
Promise of great Honors and Rewards to such as voluntary resignd, and
threatening others with Hostility, who refused: Whereupon they resolved to
Despoil themselves of their Dignities, restore their People to Liberty, and
Incorporate them with the Achaians. As to Lysiadas, the Megalapolitan, he
wisely foreseeing what was likely to come to pass, frankly renounced his
Dominion during the Life of Demetrius, and was received into the General
Confederacy of Rights and Privileges with the whole Nation. Aristomachus,
Tyrant of the Argives; Xeno of the Hermionians, and Cleonymus of the
Phliatians, resigning their Authority at the time we mentioned, were likewise
received into the Alliance of the Achaians.

In the mean time, the Aetolians began to conceive Jealousy at the growing
Greatness and extraordinary Success of the Achaians, and according to their
natural Malice and Ambition, but principally in Hopes they should be able to
break the Union of those Cities that were already joined, as it had been
concerted with Antiochus, and was heretofore brought to pass, when they shared
the Acharnanians with Alexander; encouraged, therefore, now by a Prospect of
the like Success, they basely entered into a League with Antigonus, who at that
time governed Macedon, during the Minority of Philip, then a Child; they did
the like also with Cleomenes, King of the L^^edemonians, and incorporated their
Troops with their own. In short, they saw Antigonus now at Leisure, with the
whole Power of Macedon at his Devotion, and were well assured of his Enmity to
the Achaians, on the Occasion of the Surprise of Acro-corinth; so that, making
account, that if the Lacedaemonians, who likewise bore no good Will to the
Achaians, would heartily join with them in their Designs against that People,
it would not be difficult to succeed in their Enterprise, inasmuch as they
should be able to Attack them in earnest, and Invade them on all sides at once:
Nor would the Aetolians have been without Reason to hope some Success in their
Design, had they not omitted one principal Consideration; namely, that they
were to have to do with Aratus, whose great Abilities sufficed to obviate and
prevent all the ill Effects that could be threatened. But making an unjust War
on the Achaians, it came to pass, that it did not only not succeed as they had
proposed; but on the contrary, as by the Wisdom of Aratus, who was then
Praetor, their Designs were broken and defeated; so the Confederacy became
stronger, and the Achaians greater than before; and by what shall be further
related, it will appear how they effected their Purpose.

Aratus, then, considering that the sense of the Benefits the Aetolians had
received by the Friendship of the Achaians, during the War with Demetrius,
withheld them for the present, out of Shame, from openly declaring War against
them, though at the same time, they secretly practiced with the Lacedaemonians,
and manifested so violent an Hatred to the Achaians, that when Cleomenes
fraudulently attacked them, and surpised Tegea, Mantinea and Orchomena, they
were not only not touched or concerned at that Outrage and Violation, but did
their best to confirm him in the Possession of those Cities. And
notwithstanding their natural Avarice, to gratify which Passion, a very slight
Occasion sufficed to provoke them to War, with those who had hardly injured
them; yet could they tamely suffer, not only breach of Faith, but willingly
yielded up great Cities to the Possession of others, in prospect that the
growing Power of Cleomenes, might at length render him a Match for the
Achaians. Aratus, therefore, and the Chiefs of the Confederacy, determined not
to declare War against any one, and to apply themselves only to withstand the
Designs of the Lacedaemonians, at least these were their first Thoughts: But
when they had further penetrated the Counsels of Cleomenes, and saw him
building a Fortress in the Territory of the Megalopolitans, called Athenaeum,
and that the War became by that means manifestly proclaimed against them; they
then called an Assembly of the States, and therein it was declared that the
Lacedaemonians should be reputed Enemies. In this manner, and at that time the
War began, which was called the Cleomenic War.

This War was at first managed and sustained by the single Strength and Forces
of the Achaians, who had the Resolution to march alone against the
Lacedaemonians, concluding it more for their Glory to attempt their Defense,
without borrowing Aids from abroad; but bearing in memory the good Offices
which had been done them, heretofore by Ptolomy, they endeavored to secure his
Friendship, and to possess him with a Belief, that their entire Confidence was
in him. But when the War began to grow upon them, and Cleomenes had destroyed
the Lacedemonian Government, and of a free State had converted it to a Tyranny,
Aratus observing that that Prince managed the War with no less Ability than
Force, began to be in pain for the Event, and being jealous of the Arts and
Infidelity of the Aetolians, he thought it Wisdom to endeavor to Counter-work,
and perplex them in their Enterprises. He therefore considered that, Antigonus,
who governed in Macedon, was a Man of Experience, and of his Word, and that he
was willing enough to make Alliances; and was not without this Consideration
too, That Princes have naturally neither Friends nor Enemies, but measure
Amities and Enmities, by the Rules of Interest; he therefore endeavored after
a good Understanding with that Prince, and determined to propose the joining
the Forces of the Achaians with his. But there were many weighty Reasons that
convinced him, this was an Affair that could not safely be treated openly; for
in a word, he was well aware that Cleomenes and the Aetolians, would not only
oppose it, but the Achaians themselves would have reason to Despair, when they
should see their Praetor applying to their Enemy: Which they would interpret an
Effect of his Doubt of their Forces, which he thought necessary by all means to
prevent. He resolved therefore to prosecute his Purpose with such Caution, as
to leave no room for Suspicion; and the better to bring it to pass, he was
constrained both to do and say many things in the Eye of the People, that to
them bespoke quite other Intentions than those he had harbored; thus he kept
his Design undiscovered, and that indeed seems to be the Reason why he has
made no mention thereof in his Commentaries. Furthermore, Aratus was not
ignorant that the Megalopolitans, by their Neighborhood to the Lacedaemonians;
stood exposed above all others to the Violence and Incommodities of the War,
which they could not without great Repugnance undergo, and that the Achaians
would not be able to yield them effectual Succors, by reason of their own
Straits. He likewise knew their great Inclinations to the House of Macedon, in
Memory of the many Favors done them by Philip Son of Amyntas, so that he
justly collected that whenever they should come to be hard pressed by
Cleomenes, they would resort sort for Succor to Antigonus, and the
Macedonians. There were two principal Citizens in Megalopolis, namely
Nicophanes and Cercidas, with whom Aratus corresponded, who were Men wen well
qualified for Conducting the Enterprise he was meditating; to these he imparted
the Secret, and by their means brought it so about, that the Megalopolitans
decreed to send Ambassadors to the Assembly of the Achaians, to move them to
solicit Succors from Antigonus, by their Ambassadors. So Nichophanes and
Cercidas, were themselves sent to the Achaians, with Orders to proceed on to
Antigonus, if they approved the Proposition; which they did, and consented that
the Ambassadors should pursue their Orders.

When Nichophanes had his Audience of Antigonus, he touched the Affairs of his
own Country, in few words, speaking no more than what was just fit; but he
enlarged, and made him a long Discourse, pursuant to the Instructions of
Aratus, of Affairs in General. Which Instructions imported the mighty
Consequence of the Alliance between Cleomenes and the Aetolians, and whither it
tended; that it was true, the Achaians were likely to feel the first Evils of
it, but the heaviest and most dangerous Effects threatened Antigonus; that it
was not difficult to determine that the Achaians, were not themselves a Match
for those two People, in case they should attack them; and that it was yet
easier to foresee, to those who rightly judged of Affairs, that the Ambition of
Cleomenes, and the Aetolians was not likely to be limited to the single
Conquest of the Achaians; and that they would stop there; that Peloponnesus
would prove but a small Morsel to the Avarice of the Aetolians, when Greece
itself was not thought sufficient; that touching Cleomenes, albeit he made Show
to be satisfied with the Dominion of Peloponnesus, there was no reason to
doubt, but that whenever he should compass so great a share of Authority, he
would extend his Ambition to the Subjection of all Greece, which it would be
impossible to bring to pass, without first destroying the Macedonian Monarchy.
The Ambassadors therefore were to pray him to deliberate maturely which was
likely to be the safest Counsel for him to take; whether to Succor the
Achaians and Beotians, in Opposition to Cleomenes, and to counterplot his
Designs upon Greece in Peloponnesus, or by neglecting the Occasion of
conciliating the Friendship of so great a People, become liable at length to
sustain a War in Thessaly, for the Empire of Macedon, not only with the
Lacedaemonians and Aetolians, but with the Beotians and Achaians themselves.
They were in short, to let Antigonus know, that if the Aetolians continued
their Nutrality, as they yet seemed to do out of shame, to deal ungratefully
with those from whom they had received so many good Offices during their War
with Demetrius: That in such case the Achaians would stand alone against the
Attempts of Cleomenes, and if Fortune favored their Councils, they should not
be driven to resort to any foreign Assistance. But in case other Resolutions
should be taken, and that the Aetolians should join with the Enemy, That he
should then be moved to weigh with his best Wisdom the State of Things, and not
to permit the occasion to be lost of timely succouring, and preventing the
Ruin of the Achaians, of whose Fidelity and Gratitude there could be no Reason
to doubt. In short, the Ambassadors gave him Assurance, That whenever these
Matters should corn in agitation, Aratus would be prepared to give such
Security for their fair Proceeding, as should be pleasing to both Parties, and
that he himself would take upon him to demand it whenever Assistance should
be needful. Antigonus having heard the Ambassadors, acknowledged the Counsel
of Aratus to be very wise and wholesome, and from that time forward kept a more
vigilant Eye on all Occurrences. He likewise writ to the Megalopolitans,
assuring them of his Assistance, whenever the Achaians should declare it
necessary.

Upon the return Home of Nicophanes and Cercidas, they delivered the Letters of
Antigonus, and made known the good Disposition wherein they found that Prince,
whereupon the Megalopolitans took Courage, and forthwith deliberated to go to
the Assembly of the Achaians, and move them to join with Antigonus, and to lose
no time in putting their Affairs into his Management. And now, when Aratus had
been given to understand by the Ambassadors how kind Antigonus had appeared to
the Achaians in general, and to himself in particular; he was not a little
pleased to find his Project succeeed so well, and that Antigonus proved in his
Compliance, so contrary to the Opinion of the Achaians; for he was assured that
the Inclination which the Megalopolitans had shown to commit the Conduct of the
War to Antigonus, by the Consent of the Achaians, could not but greatly
contribute to the Success of his Designs. For, notwithstanding that Aratus, as
we have observed, wished there might happen no Occasion to call in Foreign
Aids, and that he labored all that was possible to prevent it; nevertheless,
he thought it the safest Advice that could be taken, if they should chance to
be straightened, to secure the Friendship of Antigonus, provided the Motion might
proceed merely from the Achaians, and that it might not appear it was compassed
by his Procurement. For, in short, as he could not answer for Antigonus, who
might be tempted to change his Mind, so he was in the right to do his best, to
shun the Blame that might be due to him, for the Mischiefs that might befall his
Country in case, after Antigonus should have come to their Relief, and
succeeded against Cleomenes, he should chance to attempt any thing to the
Detriment of the Republic. And on the other hand, he justly feared, that if
Antigonus should declare himself their Enemy, no Body would arraign him of
Injustice, after the Violation acted by the Achaians against the Kings of
Macedon, in the Surprise of Acro-Corinth.

Wherefore upon the arrival of the Megalopolitans at the Assembly, where they
communicated Antigonus's Letters, and after they had deliberated on the great
Demonstrations of Affection that Prince had made them; and, in a word, had
remonstrated the pressing Occasion of calling him to their Aid, and that the
Megalopolitans wished it above all things: Then Aratus stood up to speak, and,
after he had exaggerated the Benefits of Antigonus's Friendship, and applauded
the Determination of the People, he made a long Exhortation to dispose them by
all means, if it were possible, to compass their Defense and Safety by their
own Forces alone, inasmuch, as nothing could befall them more Glorious, or more
Profitable: And that if after all their Efforts, Fortune should prove averse,
then that they might have recourse to their Friends, but that they ought first
to perform the utmost they were able, by their own single Forces.

This Opinion of Aratus being approved, by a general Vote of the Assembly, they
determined to proceed no further for that Time, and that the Achaians should
attempt at least to sustain the War by themselves. In the mean time, Ptolomy,
who despaired of preserving Friendship with the Achaians, began to manifest his
Good Will to Cleomenes, by supplying him with Necessaries; for, as he believed
the Power of the Lacedaemonians would be likely to go further toward the
Defeating the Designs of the Macedonians than the Achaians, he theretofore did
what he could to irritate Cleomenes against Antigonus; contributing his part
toward the expense of the War. But after the Achaians were worsted by
Cleomenes, first near Licoeum, where they met by accident; and afterward, in a
Battle near Magalopolis. And, in short, after their Defeat, and the loss of
their prime Strength, in the Territory of Dymaja, near a Place called
Hecatombaeum, finding the Circumstances of their Affairs to admit no further
Delay, the present Danger in which they saw themselves, prevailed on the
Achaians unanimously to consent to implore Succors of Antigonus; accordingly
Aratus dispatched away his Son, and ratified the Treaty that had been made with
that Prince, touching the Assistance he was to give them. But now a weighty
Objection appeared, likely to obstruct the Accord, for they took it for
granted, that Antigonus would demur to their Supply till Acro-Corinth, together
with the City, should be restored to his Possession; which he would make to be
the Seat of the War; and the Achaians could not determine to yield up those
Places without the Consent of the Corinthians first obtained; which was the
Occasion of some Delay, and gave them leisure to deliberate about adjusting the
Sureties.

In the mean while, Cleomenes's Successes had given the Alarm on all sides, who
prosecuted his good Fortune now without danger or molestation, taking some
Towns by fair means, and others by force; and having made himself Master of
Caphya, Pellene, Pheneus, Argos, Phliunte, Cleone, Epidaurus, Hermione,
Troezene, and, in short, of Corinth it self; he marched on, and encamped near
the City of Sicyon. The difficulty was now removed, that molested the Achaians,
and Aratus the Praetor, while the Corinthians, who, though they had signified
they were ready to join and march with them, were on the contrary found to have
confederated with Cleomenes, and invited him to receive them. This gave the
Achaians then a Pretext which justified their Determination, and which Aratus
readily improved, who had already given Antigonus some hopes that Acro-corinth
should be put into his Hands; which having now performed, the scense of the
Injury heretofore done to the Kings of of Macedon, became by that means
removed, and the Alliance more firmly ratified for the Time to come; and, what
was farther considerable, Antigonus was by that means, put in Possession of a
proper Fortress, whereby to manage the War with the Lacedaemonians. Cleomenes,
who had already promised himself the Principality of all Peloponnesus,
receiving Intelligence of the Alliance concluded between Antigonus and the
Achaians, forthwith retired from before Sicyon, and marched and encamped his
Army near the Isthmus, and fortified with a Ditch and Rampart, the whole Space
between Acro-Corinth and the Onion Hills. In the mean while Antigonus had been
long in a readiness to enter upon the War, and attended only the Motive from
Aratus; and making a Judgment according to the Advices he received, that
Cleomenes would soon be on his march with his Army, he therefore sent to Aratus
and the Achaians, himself being then in Thessaly, to exhort them to put in
effect the Promises that had been made him, and then marched with his Army
toward the Isthmus, by the way of Euboea. For the Aetolians, who had attempted
all other means before to prevent the Conjunction of Antigonus with the
Achaians, and were still ready to do their utmost to hinder the same, had
intimated to him, that he should not attempt his passage with an Army by the
Streights of Thermopylae, and that if he did, they would oppose him with an
Army. When Antigonus arrived at the Isthmus, he encamped just opposite to
Cleomenes, with design to block up his passage into Peloponnesus.

And now, notwithstanding the Affairs of the Achaians were in a state desperate
enough; nevertheless, they changed not their Purpose, and were not destitute of
Hope; and they no sooner saw Aristotle the Argian, opposing the Partisans of
Cleomenes, when they immediately marched to their Assistance, and by the
Conduct of Timoxenes, they got possession, and became Masters of Argos by
Intelligence; and it is reasonable to believe, that that Success gave Rise to
the Prosperity of their Affairs. For, first of all, this Adventure gave check
to the Impetuosity of Cleomenes, and greatly disheartened his People, as
Occurrences will explain it by and by. For notwithstanding his being possessed
of Posts and Places of more advantage, and being Master of greater Conveniences
for the supply of his Army than Antigonus; and, in a word, at the Head of a
more numerous Army; yet, he no sooner heard, that the Achaians were Masters of
Argos, when he deserted all those Advantages we have enumerated, and that
rendered him Superior to Antigonus, and retired from the Isthmus, in the manner
of a Flight, fearing to be surrounded by the Enemy. Afterward he managed an
Intelligence in Argos, and got into the Town, but after all he could do to keep
Possession, he was driven out again by the Achaians, with the Assistance of the
Inhabitants themselves, who having first promised him their Concurrence, they
afterward refused it: So he re^^rn'd to Sparta by the way of Mantinoea.

Thus Antigonus got his passage into Pelo^onnesus without hazard, and
Acro-Corinth ^as put into his Hands, where he remained ^ot long, but hasted
away to Argos; where, after he had praised and encouraged the Inhabitants, and
settled their Affairs, he returned ^o his Camp, and bent his March toward
Arcadia. In short, after he had reduced seve^al new Garrisons that had been
lately erected by the Enemy, and put them into the Hands of the Megalopolitans;
he proceeded ^o Aegium to be present at the Assemblies of ^he Achaians, where
he set forth the Motives ^f his coming among them, and advised how they were to
proceed, and there he was cho^^n General of the Confederate Army; and (...)
being now Winter, he remained some time (...) Sicyon and Corinth, but early in
the Spring ^rew his Army out of their Winter-quar^ers, and took the Field; and
in three Days after his departure, arrived before Tegea, where the Achaians
joined him. Antigonus ^eing encamped before the Town, forthwith besieged it,
which being hardly pressed by the Macedonians, who attacked them by all the
Methods that are put in practice in the like Attempts; especially, by Mines,
which they had made on all Quarters; insomuch, that the Inhabitants, dispairing
of Safety, yielded up the Place; which Antigonus having strengthened with a
Garrison, proceeded on further Expeditions, and marched his Troops with speed
into Laconia; and being advanced near Cleomenes, who, with his Army, lay on the
Frontiers; he began some small Engagements with him by Parties, the better to
sound his Designs: But learning by his Spies, that Cleomenes's Army had been
re-inforc'd by fresh Troops from Orchomenus, he forthwith marched away toward
those Quarters, where he took Orchomenus by force; from whence he marched
against Mantinoea, which place, terrified at the approach of the Macedonians,
submitted; then he advanced toward Heroea and Telphussa; whereupon, in regard
these two Places voluntarily came into his Party, and Winter was now at hand,
he returned to Egium, to be at the Assembly of the Achaians; and sending his
Troops home, to pass the Winter, he remained Deliberating and Consulting with
the Achaians, how farther to prosecute their Affairs.

Cleomenes receiving Intelligence, that Antigonus had sent home his Army, and
that himself, with a small Guard only of Mercenaries, remained at Aegium, which
is not above three Days Journey from Megalopolis; and knowing that City to be of
great Circuit, and but thinly peopled, which, to defend it as it ought, would
require a great Garrison; and furthermore, having notice, that by reason of
their present Neighborhood to Antigonus, they kept very negligent Guard; and
what was yet a farther Inducement, he knew, that the greatest part of the
Inhabitants, able to bear Arms, had been lost in the two Battles that had been
fought, the one near Lycoeum, and the other near Laodicia, as was noted; upon
these Motives then, he gets by Night into the Town, without giving the least
Suspicion, conducted by certain Messenians, who had been bannish'd their
Country, and had taken Sanctuary in Megalopolis. But in the Morning, when the
Alarm was taken, it wanted but little, that the Inhabitants had not driven him
out again, both his Person and his People being brought into manifest danger,
as it happened to him about three Months before, when he secretly got into the
same Town, at a place called Colaeus. But he being now the Stronger, and
possessed of all the advantageous Posts, succeeded in his Attempt; and, in
short, having vanquished the Inhabitants, became Master of the Place; and was
no sooner in possession, when he put in practice so many Outrages and Cruelties
of War, that he left not so much as any Appearance, that it had ever been a
peopled Place. In my Judgment, Cleomenes gave himself up to that degree of
Inhumanity, out of Revenge, that he could not prevail at any time (how
difficult soever) to engage any one of the Clitorians, Megalopolitans, or
Stymphalians to be of his Faction, depend on his Fortune, or betray their
Country to him; yet was the Generosity and love of Liberty amongst the
Clitorians stained by the Wickedness of one Man, namely, Thearces, though they
justly deny him to be a Native, but that he was the Son of an Orchomenian
Soldier residing among them. And, though there be extant Aratus's History of
those Times, there are some who give greator Credit to Clearchus, who dissents
from him in many Particulars; the safest and wisest course, therefore,
especially while we follow Aratus touching the Atchievments of Cleomenes, will
be to sift and examine things narrowly, to the end, it may not be our Fault, if
Falsehood prevail over Truth. In short, Clearchus has delivered many things
without Judgment or Consideration, but we are not to make his Process, and
detect his Errors in this place; we shall barely content ourselves, to relate
nakedly, the Occurrences of those Times, and the Transactions of the Cleomenic
War, and that will suffice to expose the Weakness of the Author, and show, what
we are to gather from his History. When Clearchus then would set forth the
Cruelties of Antigonus, and the Macedonians, and even of Aratus himself, and
the Achaians, he relates, That when the Matinoeans fell into the Hands of the
Enemy, they were subjected to unspeakable Calamities; and that their City,
which was the most considerable and ancient of all Arcadia, was reduced to so
great Misery, as it drew Tears of Compassion from the whole Body of the
Grecians.

In brief, when he has a mind to move Pity in the Minds of his Readers, and
touch them by his Discourse, he represents Women embracing each other with
melting Lamentations in their Mouths; he exposes them with disheveled Hair, and
naked Breasts, and adds Tears and Complaints of Men, Women, and Children, Young
and Old dragged away promiscuously: In a word, it is his manner thus to paint
and describe things, when he would give us an Image of Sorrow and Adversity.
Whereupon I observe it is beneath the Dignity of solid Minds to be taken with
such Entertainments, wherein Women only can receive Diversion. Behold then what
is proper and specific to History, and wherein consists the Benefit that we
receive by that Study; It is not the Business of an Historian to affect the
Reader with recounting of Prodigies, and relating things for the sake of the
Novelty and Oddness of the Matter, nor to wander after Subjects, that with
difficulty may be allowed to have a resemblance of Truth; nor to aggravate
things; all which is properly the Poets Theme; but to set down plain Truth, and
report punctually what was said or done to the least Circumstance. In short,
Poetry and History have two different Ends, or are rather totally incompatible:
The Art of Poetry is to strike the Heart, and move the Passions, and to beget a
present Pleasure, by a Discourse that has nothing but a likeness of Truth to
recommend it: But the Design of History is to instruct the present and future
Ages, in the exact Verity both of Words and Actions. Probability, though false,
predominates in Poetry, inasmuch as the Spectators there come to be deceived;
but Truth is to govern in History, for its End is Profit and Instruction. And
yet there are Historians who give us Relatitions of the most important
Occurrences, without reporting to us either the Causes, the Beginning or the
Reason of Things; whereof, if we are left ignorant, what just Motive will their
be either for Compassion or Indignation? In a word, who would not be affected
to see a Man of free Condition beaten and severely treated? And yet if this
Man's Guilt has begot his Sufferings, no Body will wonder. If Correction, and
the Preservation of good Discipline, be the Motives of his hard Treatment, the
Authors deserve Thanks and Praise. Is it not held likewise a heavy Crime to
kill a Citizen? And yet we may kill a Citizen, destroy a Thief or an Adulterer,
and the Law saves us harmeless. And if we kill a Traitor or a Tyrant; instead
of Punishment; Honors and Rewards are allotted for such Actions: so true it
is, that the Justice or Iniquity of what we do, depends not on the Fact, but on
the Causes and Motives, the Purpose of the Actors, and the Difference that is
found between them.

The Mantinoeans then having withdrawn from the Confederacy of the Achaians,
with whom they were once in Alliance, gave up themselves, their Town and
Territory to the Aetolians. And not long after they made the same Present to
Cleomenes, and while they were incorporated with the Lacedaemonians, Aratus
gaining Intelligence with certain of the Inhabitants, the Achaians took it by
force, four Years before the arrival of Antigonus; and, in a word, they were so
far from receiving Punishment for the Fault of their Desertion, that on the
contrary, the Union and Reconciliation of those two People was as strange, as
the Revolution was sudden, and unlooked for: For Aratus was no sooner in
possession of the Place, when he expressly forbad all manner of Plunder and
Hostility, but causing the Inhabitants to assemble, he exhorted them to take
Assurance, and fear nothing, and to apply themselves to their respective
Business and Callings, and that no manner of hardship should be offered them,
while they continued Members of the Achaian Republic. Whereupon, those of
Mantinoea, who could not have hoped such gentle Treatment on so sudden a
Change, soon altered their Sentiments; and they who but now were Enemies to the
Achaians, and fighting against them, had lost many Friends and Fellow-citizens;
received now the same Achaians as Inmates into their Houses, and as they would
their nearest Friends; performing mutually all Offices of Friendship and
Courtesy one to another. Nor was it indeed other than Justice, for I believe
it may be with Truth averred, that there are but few Examples of such Lenity in
an Enemy; and that scarce any People ever had so light a Feeling of a
Misfortune, accounted among the greatest that befall us, as the Mantinoeans, did
through the Humanity of the Achaians and Aratus.

Afterward by their own Importunity, pressed by the seditious Practices of
some of their Citizens, who kept Intelligence with the Aetolians and
Lacedaemonians; Ambssadours were sent to the Achaians, to demand a Garrison for
their better safety. Whereupon the Achaians appointed three Hundred of their
Citizens to be chosen by Lot for that Service; and those whose chance it was to
go, left their Fortunes and their Country, to take up their abode in Mantinoea,
to assert and defend the Liberties of the Inhabitants. These were accompanied
with two Hundred Mercenaries, who jointly contributed to the Conservation of
the Established Form of Government: But not long after, instigated by the
seditious Practices of the Disaffected, they called in the Lacedaemonians, to
whom they gave up themselves and their Town, and put all the Achaians to the
Sword, who had been sent thither to succor and defend them; than which, could
there be a more perfidious Act? For, in a word, since they had determined to
change their Party, and to forget the good Offices they had received from the
Achaians, and the Friendship that had been cultivated between them; they might,
one would think, have spared the Lives of these poor People, and dismissed them
at least in safety to their Country, as not being liable to any Conditions
which might arise by any new Treaty; for according to the Right of Nations,
that Favor is afforded to Enemies in the like adventures. But the Mantinoeans,
of their own mere Motion, acted that criminal Part, and violated an Universal
Law, to give an Earnest to Cleomenes, and the Lacedaemonians, of their Readiness
to Engage in any thing they should require of them. In this manner, then having
with their own Hands slain those who had restored them their Town and their
Liberty, after they had taken it by force, and who were then actually guarding
them; what degree of Indignation seems due to such Treachery? Or rather let me
say, what degree of Punishment can be conceived equivalent to their Crime?
Perhaps it may be urged, That upon reducing the Town, themselves, their Wives,
and Children ought to be fold into Captivity. To which I answer, That by the
Rules of War, that is no worse Treatment than is practiced toward those who
have no Crime for which to account. They merited therefore certainly the most
rigorous Punishment that could be thought on. But if their Usage was no other
than Phylarchus reports it, it would have seemed just, not only that the Greeks
should have abstained from the Compassion he mentions, but rather that they
should proclaim the Praises of those who could not endure to punish so vile and
criminal a Proceeding with the Rigor it deserved. And now, albeit the
Mantinoeans smarted no more for their Misdeeds than the Pillage of their Goods,
and the selling all of free Condition; this excellent Historian refines beyond
the Rules of Truth, and labors to render every Passage strange and
extraordinary, superadding such Falsehoods as want even the least resemblance of
Probability; and such was the blindness of his Folly, that he could not see to
set down what was done under his Eye; for the Achaians, at the same time taking
Tegea by force, proceeded in no wise with the Tegeans as they had done with the
Mantinoeans.

Now, if it had been out of the native Cruelty of the Achaians, that the
Mantinoeans were so hardly dealt with, how comes it to pass, the Tegeans
escaped so easily, who fell into their Hands about the same time? If the
Mantinoeans were then the only People that suffered such Severity at the Hands
of the Achaians, it may be fairly inferred that they had merited, by their
extaordinary Crimes, that extraordinary Punishment. Our Historian further says,
That when Aristomachus of Argos, who had been Tyrant there, and whose Ancestors
had been Tyrants, fell into the Hands of Antigonus and the Aachains, they
carried him to Cenchrea, where they put him to so cruel a Death, that there is
scarce an Example of so great Inhumanity. Furthermore, he feigns, according to
his Custom, that his Cries amidst his Torments were heard into the Streets,
insomuch that the People pressed into the Prison, where they were affrighted at
the Barbarity of his Usage, which they could not behold without Horror and
Detestation. But let us not dwell too long on this Pomp of Tragedy, whereof we
have spoken sufficiently. For my own particular, I take for granted, that though
Aristomachus had never injured the Achaians, there could have been no Death too
severe for his manner of Life, and the Crimes he had committed against his
Country.

But our Author, to exalt the Glory of Aristomachus, and excite greater
Compassion for what befell him, says, That he was not only a Tyrant, but
descended of Tyrant Ancestors. Now, I pray, what more detested or infamous
Character could he have given him? For most sure I am, that the Name only of
Tyrant, contains the height of all Impiety, and comprehends all that Man's
Imagination can compass or conceive of criminal outrageous Wickedness.

But as to Aristomachus, if he should have suffered greater Torments than are
set forth by our Historian, they would have been found short of his Due, for
one only merciless Act of his, on the occasion of Aratus's secretly getting
into Argos at the head of a Party of Achaians, where being exposed to manifest
Danger, fighting for the Liberty of the Argians, he was at length compelled to
retire, for that through the terror People were under of the Tyrant, none had
Resolution to succor or side with him in the Attempt. Upon this Adventure,
Aristomachus forms a Design to gratify his Cruelty, pretending there were
Conspirators in the City, who held Intelligence with the Achaians; whereupon,
in cold Blood, and in the presence of his Friends, he causes no less then
fourscore innocent Persons, of the principal Citizens, at once to lose their
Heads. I forbear to make mention of the Vileness and Inhumanities of his Life,
and of his Ancestors, which would engage me in too long a Discourse.

But what I have said may suffice to witness, that it was no Injustice to award
him the same Measure he had dealt to others; we rather ought to conclude, it
would have been Injustice, if his Death should have happened without some sense
of Torment, after he had acted so many criminal Parts.

It will not therefore be found a just Imputation of Cruelty in Antigonus or
Aratus, if, being taken in the heat of War, Aristomachus was condemned to die
by Torments, if in times of Peace he deserved no less; and that those who
should have compassed his Death, would have merited Applause and Rewards, from
every honest Man. But over and above what we have observed, having violated his
Faith, and broken his Trust, with the Achaians; what Punishment could they
think too great? In short, Aristomachus a little before the Death of Demetrius,
being in great Danger, and reduced to the utmost Extremity, forlorn and
despoiled of his Dominion, found an Asylum among the Achaians, who received him
with all possible Gentleness. They not only forgot and forgave the Crimes and
Outrages of his Tyranny, but admitted him to a Share of the Administration of
the State, and conferred on him the Trust of Commanding and Conducting their
Army, and did him other great Honors; while he, notwithstanding all this, upon
the first Shadow of Advantage tendered him by Cleomenes, forgot all these
Obligations, and Deserting the Achaians, at a time of their greatest Distress,
joined with their Enemies: So that falling at last into their Hands; what hard
Measure would it have been, to carry him to Cenchrea, and there to put him
privately to Death, and in the Night as our Author reports; when, in Justice,
he should have been led through all the Country of Peloponnesus, and after he
had been made a Spectacle to the World, he ought to have been publicly
tormented to Death, to rende^ him the greater Example. Though, in a word, the
severest Treatment that befell this vile Man, was no other, than to be cast into
the Sea, for certain Barbarities committed by him at Cenchrea.

Furthermore* Philarchus exaggerates, with Passion, the Calamities of the
Mantinoeans; as if he thought it the Business of an Historian, to pick out and
enlarge most on the Subject of our Vices; but is silent when he should have
Recorded the Memorable and Glorious Behavior of the Megalopolitans, which
occurred at the same time, falsely conceiving that to Register the Flaws and
Frailties of Human Nature, were more Eligible, than to Publish the Merit of
Noble and Generous Actions; while, who knows not, that the Fame and Glory of
Noble Deeds, does more urge us to Virtue, and reform our Manners better than
the Recital of Criminal Adventures.

Our Author indeed laboring to set forth the Courage of Cleomenes, and his
Gentleness to his Enemies, tells us how he took Megalopolis, and preserved it
from Destruction, till he had sent to Messene, whither the Inhabitants were
retired, to invite them back to their Habitations, and take part with him; nor
does he omit to tell us, that the Megalopolitans had hardly the Patience to
hear his Letters read, after they knew the Subject, and that they were with
difficulty restrained from stoneing the Messengers to Death. But he totally
neglects to publish what in Justice, and according to the Rules of History,
should not have been omitted; namely, to Celebrate the Praises of their Virtue,
and the generous Resolution they had taken, which he might fairly have done:
For, if we reckon, those Men of Honor and Virtue, who Succor and Defend their
Friends and Confederates in Distress, both in Word and Deed; and if we think it
not only Praiseworthy, but the Subject of great Rewards, and Concessions of
remarkable Privileges to those who suffer on that Score, to yield to be
spoiled in their Fortunes, to abide the Calamities of Sieges, and endure all
the wastful Effects of Hostility; what may be then said to be due to the
Megalopolitans? Shall we not reckon them Men of Honor? Can we praise them too
much? First, they endured with unspeakable Constancy, to behold Cleomenes
Burning and Ravaging all their Territory abroad; then they chose to abandon
their Native City and Soil, rather than their Friendship, and the Ties of
Honor they were under to the Achaians. In a word, though contrary to their
Hopes, Overtures were made them, to return to their Possessions; they could
better brook to be deprived of their Fortunes, their Sepulchers, their Temples,
their Country, their whole Sudstance, and, in short, to lose all that was
valuable and dear to them, than to Violate their Faith to their Confederates.
Could any Man do more? or is it in the Power of any Mortal at any time to
acquire a more Glorious and Illustrious Character? When, if not here, could an
Historian hope to find a Theme fit to Charm the Attention of the Reader! And
what more noble Example could be inculcated to Mankind, to excite them to
Constancy and Fidelity to their Treaties and Alliances with their Neighboring
States! Nevertheless Philarchus has committed all this to Oblivion; and
therefore I think one may safely accuse him of Stupidity and want of Judgment,
in the Choice of such Matter as became the Dignity of History, since he could
neglect the Recording Occurrences of that importance, that lay so plainly in
his View.

We are farther told by our Author, That the Lacedaemonians took in Booty from
the Megalopolitans, to the value of six thousand Talents, whereof two thousand,
according to ancient Custom, fell to the share of Cleomenes. Now, who does not
perceive the remarkable Ignorance of this Man, touching the Strength and
Possessions of the Greek Towns! which is a matter, wherein, of all things, an
Historian ought to be most punctually instructed; while I will be bold to aver,
without Exaggeration, That it would have been impossible to find the amount of
that Sum in all Peloponnesus, setting the Slaves only aside; nor do I assert it
from the Poverty of the Country, that had been robbed and ruined by the
Macedonian Kings, and more by the mighty Devastations of their own Civil
Dissentions; but I am bold to descend to the Times wherein we now behold it,
flourishing in Union, and raised to the greatest height of Prosperity. In a
word, it may be calculated by what I am about to say, whether what I undertake
to prove be without-book or no. There is scarce any Man so ignorant, that does
not know, that when the Achaians and Thebans joined in War against the
Lacedaemonians, and formed a Land-army of ten thousand Men, and a Naval one of
one hundred Vessels, they came to a Resolution, each one to contribute to the
Charge of the War, in proportion to his Riches and Possessions, and that
thereupon an Estimate and Valuation was made of all that was appraisable
throughout the Attick Territory, comprehending Lands, Buildings, Goods,
Treasure, etc. and upon that Calculation, the whole Value amounted to two
hundred and fifty Talents short of six Thousand; from whence it may be
inferred, whether we have reason or no to say what has been observed touching
Peloponnesus. To conclude, whosoever should undertake to say, that the Pillage
and Booty of Megalopolis could exceed, at that time, the Sum of three hundred
Talents, would surpass the Truth of the Account: For we are well assured, there
was a great number, both of People of Free-condition and Slaves, who escaped to
Messene; and what farther confirms this Opinion, that there was no People in
all Arcadia, the Mantinoeans excepted, that surpassed the Megalopolitans,
either in the number of Inhabitants, Strength, or Riches, which Phylarchus
himself grants: and upon the taking the Town after the Siege, out of which no
Body could escape, or secure any thing from the Enemy, there was not raised
three hundred Talents of the Booty, adding the Sale of the Prisoners to the
Account.

And who will not yet farther wonder, at what Phylarchus reports; namely, that
about ten Days before the Battle, there arrived an Ambassador from Ptolomy to
Cleomenes, to let him know, That he could expect no farther Supplies of Money
from him; with Advice moreover to come to a speedy Accord with Antigonus; and
that thereupon Cleomenes determined to come the more speedily to a Battle,
before his Army should have notice of this News, as despairing to be able to
pay them out of his own Treasure. Now it is remarkable, that if it were true,
that about that very time Cleomenes was Master of six thousand Talents, he had
been in no need of Ptolomy's Assistance, being a much wealthier Prince than
himself: and, as to what concerned his Affairs with Antigonus, if it were
likewise probable, that Cleomenes had made but the Sum of three thousand
Talents of the Booty, it would have amounted to more than enough to prosecute
the War without danger or difficulty. Is not this then a farther Instance of
the Weakness and want of Judgment of our Historian, to say, that Cleomenes
depended entirely on the Aids and Liberality of Ptolomy, and to report him at
the same time Master of so plentiful a Treasure! He runs into many the like
Errors, in the course of his History, but what we have already noted may
suffice for our present Purpose.

Megalopolis being taken while Antigonus was at Argos, where he made his Winter
abode; Cleomenes assembled his Troops early in the Spring, and after he had
encouraged them sutably to the Time and the Occasion, he took the Field, and
fell on the Frontiers of the Argians, with a Resolution, by the Vulgar
accounted temerarious, by reason of the Strength and difficult Situation of
many Places that commanded his passage; but according to the Judgment of those
who could best discern, with Wisdom and Conduct enough; for, in short, he knew
that the Macedonians, were yet at home, and from them there was no danger to be
apprehended in his Enterprise. Furthermore, he wisely considered, that as soon
as he should have made any Progress upon the Argians, and had spoiled and
ravaged their Country up to the Walls of the City, that People would not be
able, with any Patience, to suffer it, but would soon trouble Antigonus with
their Complaints and Remonstrances; and in case that Prince should be moved by
their Applications, to take the Field, with those few Troops he had with him,
and attempt a Battle, that it was then odds but he would be beaten; or, if he
did not yield to their Importunity, but kept within the Walls, that then
Cleomenes would have the opportunity of terrifying and doing damage to the
Enemy, of heartning, and giving Assurance to his Soldiers, and so to return
home again with Impunity. And, in short, it happened as he had forecast, for
the Argians could not behold their Country wasted and plundered, without
pressing Antigonus with their Complaints; who, notwihstanding, departed not
from the Dignity of a great Prince, and the Rules of a wise General. He was not
therefore moved to take the Field out of fear of present Blame, but kept
himself in Covert, to avoid future Censure, and only employed his time in
exposing and inculcating his Reasons for all his Proceedings.

After Cleomenes had wasted and pillaged the Country as he had proposed;
disheartened the Enemy, and confirmed the Courage of his own People against the
Danger that threatened them, he returned home in safety. In the beginning of
Summer, Antigonus with the Mecedonians, Achaians, and the rest of the
Confederates, led their Troops into Laconia; their Army consisting of ten
thousand Macedonians which composed the Phalanx, three thousand with Bucklers,
three hundred Horse, and three thousand choice Achaian Foot, three hundred
Achaian Horse, and a thousand Megalopolitans armed after the Macedonian manner,
led by Cercidas of the same Country. There were further Succors of the Allies,
consisting of two thousand Foot, and two hundred Horse of the Beotians, and of
the Epirots a thousand Foot and fifty Horse, and the like number of
Acarnanians, besides sixteen hundred Illyrians, commanded by Demetrius the
Pharian: So that the Army consisted of Twenty eight thousand Foot, and twelve
hundred Horse.

Cleomenes, not doubting but the Enemy would soon visit him, took care to
strengthen all the Passes with good Garrisons, fortifying all the Avenues with
Ditches and Ramparts; and filling up, and barricadoing the Ways with great
Trees laid across, felled for that purpose. As for Cleomenes himself, he
marched with an Army of twenty thousand Men, and encamped at a certain place
called Selasia, having reason to suspect, that the Enemy purposed to pass that
way, and he was not deceived in his Conjecture. Here are situate two Mountains,
the one called Eva, the other Olympus; between these runs the River Oenus,
along the Banks whereof there is a narrow Way or Defile, that leads to the City
of Sparta. Cleomenes ordered a good Ditch to be made at the Foot of these two
Hills, with strong Ramparts behind them; on the Mountain Eva he posted the
Forces of the Confederates, under the Command of Euclidas his Brother, and he
himself possessed Olympus with the Spartan Troops and the Mercenaries In short,
his Horse he appointad to be drawn up in plain Ground near the River on each
side, sustained by a Body of Mercenary Foot.

When Antigonus arrived, and had well considered the Situation of the Ground,
the Fortifications and Defenses that were made, and had remarked with how much
Judgment Cleomenes had provided for all things, having distributed his Troops
and posted them so properly, and that he had so Soldier-like possessed the
Place, and was encamped in such excellent Order, the Form thereof bearing the
resemblance of an Army drawn up in Order of Battle; for he had omitted no Skill
or Forecast, either with respect to giving the Attack, or receiving the Enemy,
his People being in a Posture for either, and his Camp well secured against any
Insult or Surprise.

When Antigonus, I say, had observed all this, he could not determine to give
Cleomenes Battle, but contented himself for the present to retire some small
distance off, and incamp his Army on the the River Gorgylus, which fortified
one part of his Camp. Here he remained some Days, the better to acquaint
himself with the Ground and Situation of the Country, and the Disposition of
the Enemy; feigning to Attack them now in one place, now in another, marching
round them to give them the greater Terror. But perceiving every Post to be
well-gaurded, and not being able to find any one place, that might encourage
him to attempt them; Cleomenes being vigilant: and warily watching his Motions,
and always present at every place of importance; he then changed his Purpose,
till at length the two Generals came to agree to join Battle: For it was
bruited about, That Fortune had made choice of these two Great Men, equal in
Skill and Bravery, to try the Mastery one against the other. Antigonus ordered
the Macedonians, who carried Bucklers of Brass (mingling among them the
Illyrian Cohorts) to march against those on Mount Eva; these were commanded by
Alexander Son of Acmetus, and Demetrius the Pharian, in the Rear of these he
ranged the Cretians and Acarnanians, who were followed by a Body of Reserve
consisting of two thousand Achaians. Toward the River he ordered the Horse,
who were to engage those of the Enemy, under the Command of Alexander, and on
the Wings of the Horse he appointed a thousand Achaians, and as many
Megalopolitans, while he himself resolved to attack Olympus at the Head of the
Macedonians and Mercinaries, knowing that Cleomenes was there; he ordered the
Mercenaries to have the Van, and the Macedonian Phalanx to sustain them,
following-by Platton's, whereunto they were compelled through the difficulties
of the Ground; the Illyrians who passed the River Gorgylus over Night, and were
posted at the Foot of the Mountain, were ordered to begin the Battle, for which
they were to receive a Signal by a White Flag, that should be spread from the
nearest Post they had to Olympus; and the Signal that was to be given to the
Megalopolitans and the Horse, was a Purple Cassock or Coat, which was to be
waved in the Air, where Antigonus himself was posted.

When all things were in a readiness, the Signal was given to the Illyrians,
and after they had encouraged each other, they advanced toward the Enemy, and
began to ascend the Mountain, while the Foot which Cleomenes had mingled with
the Horse, observing that the Achaian Cohorts were followed with no Reserve, or
Troops to sustain them, advanced presently upon them, and charged them in
Flank, and much galled those who were endeavoring to gain the Mountain; at the
same time Euclidas, who was posted on the top of the Hill, pressed them in
Front, and the Mercinaries warmly attacked their Rear. Philopoemen a
Megalopolitan, observing this Disorder, presently conceived what would be the
Issue, accordingly he told his Opinion to the Commanders in Chief, of the
Danger these Troops were in, but observing they gave no heed to his Advice,
being then but Young, and having never yet born any Command; he therefore,
after he had encouraged his Country Men, attacked with incredible Bravery the
Enemies Horse. This Action forced the Mercinaries, who had fallen on the
Illyrians Flank to retire to their Relief, which was their proper Post; who
observing them to be now engaged, and retreating from those whom they had
before attacked, hastened to sustain them; by which means the Illyrians and
Macedonians, and all those who were marching up the Mountain, were delivered
from the Obstacle that retarded their Motion, and now resolutely advanced on
the Enemy; and it afterward appeared, that their Success against Euclidas, was
owing to Philopoemen. And it is reported, that after the Battle, Antigonus, the
better to try Alexander, asked him, How it came to pass, that he adventured to
Engage before he received the Signal? and that Alexander should reply, It was
not by his Order, but that a certain young Man of Megalopolis had been the
occasion, without any Direction from him. And that Antigonus replied thereupon,
That that young Man had judged rightly of the occasion of Victory, and had done
the part of a good Captain, and that Alexander had acted like a young Soldier.
And now Euclidas observing the Illyrian Cohorts to approach, forgot as one may
say the advantage of the Ground where he was posted; for it is the Rule of
experienced Leaders, when they are posted on superior Ground to the Enemy, to
move toward them, and improve the advantage of the Shock, that the descent of
the Hill lends them, thereby to give the greater Terror to the Enemy, and
then, if Necessity obliges them, slowly to retire and gain the summet of the
Hill; for by disordering thus the Enemy, and depriving them of the advantage
they promised themselves by their different sort of Arms, and the Order in
which they marched, it would not have been hard for him to have forced them
down the Hill, so commodiously posted as he was. But Euclidas performed nothing
of all this, but acted rather directly contrary; and as if to do nothing at all
would conduce to the Victory, he remained on the top of the Hill where he was
first posted; imagining it to be his Duty there to attend the coming of the
Enemy, to the end, that when he should have defeated them, they might be the
more entangled and obstructed in their Flight, by reason of the Precipices and
the broken Ground of the Mountain. But it happened quite otherwise than he had
conjectured, for while he had so placed himself that he had left no room behind
him to retire, he found himself obliged to fight and defend himself on the top
of the Hill against the entire unbroken Body of the Illyrian Cohorts, whom he
had permitted to gain the top, and were now advancing toward him on level
Ground, so that he became an easy Conquest to the Illyrians, having no Ground
whereon to make an orderly Retreat, all behind him being Rocks and Precipices.

In the mean time, the Horse were warmly engaged, where the Achaians performed
all that could be looked for in the like occasion, for they knew this Battle
did as it were decide their Liberty; but Philopoemen was remarkable above all
the rest, whose Horse being first killed under him, and afterward fighting
among the Foot, he was there struck through both his thighs at one stroke. On
the other-side, the two Princes began the Battle on Mount Olympus, with their
light-armed Soldiers and their Mercenaries, consisting of about five Thousand
on each part. Sometimes they fought by Parties, and then again encountered with
gross Bodies, but with great Resolution on both sides, the Action being under
the Eye of their Masters, and in View of both Armies; sometimes they mingled
and fought Man to Man, and then Troop against Troop, but howsoever it happened,
they fought with wonderful Resolution.

During this variety of Action, Cleomenes received notice, that his Brother was
beaten out of the Field, and that the Horse that fought in the Plain began to
give Ground, so that fearing to be encompassed by the Enemy on all sides, he
was constrained to level and open his Retrenchments before his Camp, and to
order all his Troops to march out in Front. And the Trumpets sounding to the
Charge on both sides, he ordered his light armed Soldiers to retire, and now
the Phalanxes on either side moved to the Encounter with their Pikes charged;
and one while the Macedonians seemed inferior in Courage to the Lacedemoniaus,
and appeared disposed to fly; then again the Lacedaemonians seemed too weak to
sustain the Shock of the Macedonian Phalanx, and were giving Ground. In
conclusion, Antigonus now advancing against them with an Impetuosity peculiar
to the double Phalanx, forced the Lacedaemonians at length off their Ground; the
rest of the Army either fell in Battle, or saved themselves by Flight, and
Cleomines with a small Party of Horse, escaped unhurt to Sparta; from whence he
departed the Night following to Gythia, where he embarked on certain Vessels
prepared for such an Incident, and sailed to Alexindria, accompanied with some
few only of his intimate Friends.

Afterward, Antigonus made his Entry into Sparta without resistance, where he
treated the Lacedaemonians with all possible Humanity, and as soon as he had
Reestablished their Ancient Form of Government, he marched away with his Army;
having received Intelligence, That the Illyrians had Invaded Macedonia, and
made great Spoils upon the Country. Thus it is true, that Fortune is pleased
sometimes to permit Actions of highest Consequence, to move and determine on
the slendrest Accidents, and Occasions least expected. For, if Cleomenes had
respited coming to a Battle but a few Days only; or when he had retired to the
City after the Fight, had he but stood upon his Guard, and temporis'd never so
little, he most certainly had preserved his Dominion. In short, Antigonus took
his way by Tegea, and after he had restored that Republic, he came two Days
after to Argos, at the time of the Namoean Games, where he obtained by an
Ordinance of the Achaians, and by the Suffrage of every City, all those Honors
that are done to Great Men to render their Fame immortal: From thence he
proceeded by long Journies to Macedon, where encountering with the Illyrians,
who were wasting the Country, he gave them Battle, and wan a Victory, but in
that occasion straining his Voice to Animate his People, he broke some Vein in
his Lungs, whereby voiding Blood at his Mouth, he fell into a Languor, and evil
Habit of Health, which soon after took him out of the World. This Prince had
ma^velously gained on the Good Will of the People of Greece, not only by his
perfect Skill in Millitary Matters, but more particularly for his Probity, and
the exact Discipline he always observed. His Death left Philip Son of Demetrius
to enjoy his Right to the Kingdom of Macedon.

And now, if it be asked, why we have remained thus long on the History of the
Cleomenic War? I answer, Because it occurred in a Period of Time, that confines
on the Beginning of the Affairs and Adventures, that are to be the Subject of
our History; and we conceived it was not useful only, but necessary, to set
down the then State of Macedonia and the Greek Affairs, especially since we
have resolved to perform punctually what we have promised. About the same time
died Ptolomy, to whom succeeded that other Ptolomy Surnamed Philopater.
Seleucus who was Surnamed Pogon, Son to Seleucus, and Grandson to Calinychus,
died likewise near that Time, whose Successor in the Government of Syria, was
his Brother Antiochus; thus died those who succeeded Alexander, namely,
Seleucus, Ptolomy and Lysimachus, all within the Hundred and twenty fourth
Olympiad, as did the others in the Hundred and thirty ninth.

Having now laid the Foundation of our Work, and made it visible in what Times,
and in what Manner, and by what Means, the Romans took Assurance to extend
their Empire beyond the Bounds of Italy, after they had completed their
Conquests in that Country, and had made their first Essay, with the
Carthaginians, for the Dominion of the Sea: After having likewise spoken of the
Affairs of the Greeks, the Macedonians and the Carthaginians, and given a
Summary of the State of these Governments, in those Times; we are arrived, I
think, at a proper Place, to put an End to this our Second Book; which we
Conclude with the Wars we have treated, and with the Death of the Actors, and
according as we have laid our Design, we are come at length to that Period of
Time, wherein the Greeks deliberated about the War of the Confederates; the
Romans touching the Second Punick War; and the Kings of Asia, about that which
was waged for the Dominion of Syria.

The End of the Second Book.
POLYBIUS'S General History OF THE TRANSACTIONS OF THE WORLD.
VOL. I. BOOK III.
WE promised in our First Book to begin our History at the Second Punick War;
the War of the Confederates; and that which was waged for the Dominion of
Syria. We have likewise delivered our Reasons, why in our two preceding Books
we deduced and brought down our Story from so remote Times. Now we are come to
treat of the Wars themselves, and the Causes that begat and prolonged them, and
that rendered them so terrible. But first it will be necessary that we preface
something farther touching our purpose, for since what we have determined to
deliver, is proposed to center in one and the same End, being to be but one
entire Work, and as one may say one Spectacle or Representation, where will be
seen how, when, and by what means, all the known Parts of the World, became
reduced under the Dominion of the Romans; we have therefore concluded it not
impertinent to our Method, to give a previous Draught, as it were in little, of
what occurred of Importance during so many and great Wars; conceiving the
Reader will be thereby more enlightened, and better instructed in our main
Design. For as the knowledge of the whole cannot but yield some conception of
the Parts; and that to be rightly informed of the parts, must necessarily
enable us to judge better of the whole; we shall therefore pursue this course,
which we have judged the most proper for Instruction, in opening what might
else seem obscure; and shall produce a Table, as it were, or Index, of our
whole History, where will be reviewed what we have related. We have indeed
already given a kind of Summary of our entire Work, and have prescribed its
bounds; but for the particular Occurrences, as the Wars, (whereof we have
already made recital) will be the beginning; so we shall prescribe its Period
with the desolation and extinction of the Royal House of Macedon. In brief, it
will be the Adventures only of Three and fifty Years, in which space will be
sound Occurrences so numerous and extraordinary, that no Age within the same
compass of Time has shown the like. Our beginning shall be at the hundred and
fortieth Olympiad, and the Order we purpose to observe will be as follows.

When we have opened the Reasons that gave original to the War between the
Romans and Carthaginians, called the War of Hannibal, we shall show how, and by
what means, the Carthaginians, after their Invasion of Italy, and the
Suppression almost of the Roman Dominion there, reduced them at length to that
low ebb of Fortune, as to raise their hopes of becoming Masters of Rome it
self: Then we shall endeavor to explain how at the same time Philip King of
Macedon, when he had ended his Wars with the Aetolians, and established
afterward Peace among the Greeks, entered into Confederacy with the
Carthaginians. About the same time began the Contest between Antiochus and
Ptolemy Philopater, touching the Dominion of the Lower Syria, which came at
length to a War. The Rhodians and Prusias were likewise at that time in
Hostility with those of Byzantium, and hindered the levying the customary Duty
that was paid them by those who traded into the Pontick Sea. Here we shall
respite our Discourse, to begin our relation of the Romans; of whom we shall
endeavor to show by the Events, that their Form of Government did not only
greatly avail toward their recovery of Italy, and the Island of Sicily,
together with the reducing the Gauls and Spaniards under their Dominion; but
(after they had subdued the Carthaginians) to inspire them with Ambition enough
to atchieve the Conquest of the World. We shall likewise by a short digression
relate how the Dominion of Hieron of Syracuse was lost. Then we shall say
something of the Disorders that fell out in Egypt, wherein mention shall be
made of the Conspiracy that happened on the Death of Ptolemy to divide that
Kingdom, which was left to his Son, then a Child. And shall further observe
after what manner Philip, between Craft and Force, attempted at once the
Kingdoms of Egypt and Caria; and Antiochus the Lower Syria and Phaenicia.

In short, we shall then give an Abridgment of what passed between the Romans
and Carthaginians in Spain, Africa, and Sicily; and then we shall treat of
Occurrences among the Greeks, and make mention of such Transactions as have any
regard to that People. But after we shall have discoursed of the Naval War
between Attalus, in conjunction with the Rhodians, and Philip, and that which
was waged between Philip and the Romans, and shall have shown after what manner
the War was conducted, and by whose management, and what the Success was; we
shall then pursue the Relation, according to the succession of Occurrences, and
shall make mention of the Motives the Aetolians had to invite and draw
Antiochus out of Asia, whereby they became the Authors of the War that followed
between the Romans and Achaians; whereof when we have observed what were the
Causes, and have seen Antiochus landed in Europe, we shall then first show how
he was driven out of Greece, and afterward (being vanquished in Battle) how he
deserted all he possessed in Asia on this side Mount Taurus; and then, how the
Romans, having repressed the Insolence of the Galatians, acquired to themselves
the Dominion, but delivered however the People of the Lesser Asia, from the
frequent Terrors and Injuries of those Barbarians. Then shall be related the
Calamities of the Aetolians, and those of Cephalenia, to which will succeed the
Account of the War between Eumenes and Prusias, in conjunction with the
Gollo-Graecians; to which shall be added, that which the same Eumenes, joined
with Ariarathes, waged against Pharnaces. And after we have made mention of the
union of those of Peloponnesus, and of the growth of the Rhodian Commonwealth,
we shall then make a recapitulation of our whole History, as we have already
proposed. Nor shall we omit to relate the Expedition of Antiochus Epiphanes
into Egypt; nor the Persian War; nor the Destruction of the Royal House of
Macedon. In a word, These Occurrences when duly weighed, will evidence by what
Order and Method of Conduct, the Romans have acquired the Universal Dominion.

For if the good or evil Success of Affairs, may be the measure whereby to make
a Judgment of things laudable or worthy of blame, whether it be with respect to
Persons, or States; we must finish our History with the Adventures we last
recited, which terminates the Three and fifty Years we mentioned, and shows us
the Roman Empire at its utmost growth of Greatness: For after this, none were
ignorant, and the whole World was compelled to confess, that all submission was
due to the Romans, and subjection to their Laws.

But forasmuch as we cannot make a clear Judgment either of the Victors or the
Vanquished, by a bare Account of Events, in regard sometimes things have become
hurtful, which had they been rightly improved, might have been profitable; and,
on the other hand, some by their Virtue and Constancy, have turned even their
Misfortunes to a Benefit; we have therefore judged it not unprofitable to
subjoin to what we have proposed to deliver, an Account of the Manners and
Discipline of the Conquerors, after what sort they improved their Victories,
what consideration the World had of them, and of their Laws and Customs in the
Administration of the Government. Furthermore, we shall make enquiry into the
Passions and Inclinations which prevailed among each People respectively, with
regard to public and private Ends; so that those of the present Age will be
able thereby to discern, whether they ought to shun or choose subjection to the
Romans; and Posterity to judge, whether their Government were worthy of praise
and imitation, or to be rejected as vicious and blameable; for in that we
propose especially to consist the Utility of our History to the present and
future Ages.

In short, this we ought to believe, that those who have the Conduct in
Transactions of War, and those who are concerned otherwise in the
Administration of public Affairs, do not propose Victory, and the surmounting
the Difficulties that occurr in their Attempts, as the single and ultimate end
of their Designs: For no wise Man ever made War barely for the sake of
vanquishing his Enemy; nor did any ever embark upon the Ocean, because he would
be able to say he had crossed the Seas; nor do Men study the Arts and Sciences,
for the single motive of being thought skilful therein; but every one has his
prospect, either of Pleasure, Honor, or Profit, as the Reward of his Pains and
Study: So the principal end we have proposed in this our Work, is to explain
and demonstrate to the World the State and Condition of Mankind, after all the
Nations of the Earth being vanquished by the Romans, were become subject to
their Laws, till those new Commotions that afterward fell out. I had also a
yet further motive which pressed me to this Undertaking, and which affords, as
it were, a new beginning; namely, the stupendous Occurrences and mavelous
Adventures whereby those times were distinguished, and to which moreover I am
the more willingly disposed, from my having been a Witness and Spectator of
many of those great Actions, having contributed in the execution of some, and
conducted and principally advised in the performance of others. They were those
Commotions I mentioned, that obliged the Romans to make War on the Vaccoeans
and Celtiberians; which moved the Carthaginians in Africa to take Arms against
Massanissa, and Attalus and Prusias to declare War with each other in Asia. At
the same time Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, who had been expelled his Kingdom
by Orofernes, was, by the assistance of Demetrius and his sole Forces, restored
to his Government; and then it was that Seleucus, Son of Demetrius, having
reigned twelve Years in Syria, lost his Kingdom and his Life by a Conspiracy of
the neighboring Princes: The Greeks, who stood accused of having been Authors
of the Persian War, were about the same time absolved of that Blemish, with
liberty granted them by the Romans to return from Banishment to their Country.
Shortly after these Adventures, the Romans attempted to compel the
Carthaginians first to remove and change their Habitations, and afterward
totally to ruin and exterminate them. But we shall report in its proper place
the motives of that Enterprise. About the same time likewise the Macedonians
departing from their Confederacy with the Romans, and the Lacedaemonians from
theirs with the Achaians, will present us, in one prospect, with the beginning
and end of the common Calamities of Greece, where will occurr ample matter for
the Historian's Skill to describe; and it behooves us to implore the favor of
Fortune, to lend us life to conduct us through so difficult and important a
Task: Nevertheless, though Death should chance to prevent us, we should not
however depart without some assurance that our Design will survive us, and that
there will not want some excellent Hand, who, charmed with the Beauty of so
incomparable a Subject, will successfully finish what we have begun. And now
that we have prefac'd the most remarkable things, which we thought necessary
toward the improvement of the Reader's Understanding of our History, both in
the parts and the whole, it is high time we proceed to our Discourse.

Whereas those Authors, for the most part, who have writ the Acts of Hannibal,
have undertaken to give us an account of the Causes which begat the War that
broke out between the Romans and Carthaginians, whereof mention has been
already made, and have rendered the Siege of Saguntum to have been the first
occasion, and the second to be the Carthaginians passing the River Eber,
contrary to the Articles of Agreement: For my own part, I do frankly agree with
them, That these were the beginnings of the War, but can never accord with
those who reckon them for the Causes, no more than it can be conceived, that
Alexander's transporting his Army into Asia, was the cause of the Persian War;
or that the Voyage of Antiochus to Demetrias with his Army, was likewise cause
of the War with that Prince: For who can be drawn easily to conceive, that that
was Alexander's motive for the mighty Preparations he made, and of those things
which Philip in his Lifetime put in execution before him, in order to the
Persian War? Furthermore, who will take the beginning of the War, which the
Aetolians made upon the Romans, before the arrival of Antiochus, to have been
the cause? Those who reason at this rate, seem not to distinguish of the
difference between the Beginnings, the Causes, and the Pretexts. The Causes
always precede the Beginnings, which are ever subsequent, and as it were a
Consequence.

I hold therefore the Beginnings to be the first efforts or effects of
Deliberation; namely, of what has been with mature Reason debated and decreed
to be put in execution; but this will be more evident by what I am about to
say, whereby it will plainly appear, what the Causes were which produced the
Persian War, and where it took beginning. The principal Cause was, the retreat
the Greeks made, by the Conduct of Xenophon, through so many diverse Nations of
the Upper Asia, where none of all those barbarous People, who were all Enemies,
had the Courage to oppose his passage in his march through so vast a Continent.
Another cause was the Voyage of Agesilaus, King of the Lacedaemonians, into
Asia, where he found no Enemy so hardy as to withstand his Enterprises, from
whence he was recalled by reason of some Commotions that happened in his
absence among the Greeks.

Hence Philip took his measures of the Persian weakness, and being not ignorant
that both himself and his People were Masters in the Art of War, was incited by
the glory and magnificence of the Reward to engage in that Enterprise; so that
after he had acquired the general Good Will and Concurrence of the Greeks, he
proceeded to form his Design for the Invasion of Persia; publishing his Motives
to be no other, than to revenge the Injuries done to the Greeks, by those of
that Nation, and accordingly proceeded to make provision of all things
necessary to sustain and carry on that vast Undertaking. So that we are thus to
reckon, that the Causes of the Persian-War were no others than those we first
mentioned, the Pretexts what we have recited, and the Beginning to be
Alexander's transporting his Troops into Asia.

It is likewise past dispute, that the distaste the Aetolians had conceived
against the Romans, was the cause of the War that broke out betwixt Antiochus
and Them. For the Aetolians, toward the end of the War with Philip, beginning
to perceive themselves slighted by the Romans, did not only invite over
Antiochus, as we have noted, but determined to do and suffer any thing to
compass their Revenge. The Pretext for that War was the Liberty of Greece, to
the defense whereof the Aetolians drew the Greeks from all parts to join with
Antiochus; and the arrival of that Prince at the head of an Army to Demetrias,
was the beginning of the War.

I have rested the longer on this subject, of showing the difference between
these three Points, not only to detect the Errors of some Historians; but to
the end the studious may be instructed and set right, in case they should be
mislead by their false Lights. For to what end is the Physician called to the
sick Patient, if he should be ignorant of the Causes of our Diseases? In like
manner, it would be in vain to call such to the administration of Public
Affairs, who want Judgment to distinguish of the Causes, and Reasons, and
Events of things.

And there can be no dispute but both the Physician and Minister of State will
miscarry, while the one is to seek for the Causes of our Infirmities, and the
other not duly instructed in those necessary Points we have noted. There is
nothing then that calls for more of our care and study to acquire, than a right
knowledge of the Springs and Causes of Events, for very often it fortunes, that
the greatest things are bred out of slight beginnings, and Remedies may be
found with case for Evils in their infancy and first approaches.

Fabius the Historian reports, that not only the Injuries done to the
Saguntines, but the Avarice and Ambition of Asdrubal, were the cause of the War
with Hannibal. That after Asdrubal had strengthened himself by his great Power
and Acquisitions in Spain, he made a Voyage into Africa, where he attempted
with all his Might to subvert and abolish the Laws and Constitutions of his
Country, and to change the Republic of Carthage into a Monarchy; but that the
principal Citizens suspecting his Design, opposed and totally abandoned him,
who, after he had vainly urged his Project, returned at length into Spain,
where he governed absolutely without any regard to the Authority of the Senate
of Carthage; and that Hannibal, who took part in all his Adventures, and
pursued his steps in every thing, did both succeed and imitate Asdrubal in the
Design he had formed; and soon after he of his own head declared War against
the Romans, contrary to the inclination of the Senate; and that there was not
one of any Condition or Authority among the Carthaginians, who did not
disapprove his proceedings against the Saguntines. He further adds, That after
the taking of that Town, the Romans dispatched Ambassadors to Carthage, to
require the delivering up of Hannibal, or on refusal to declare War against
them. But now if it should be demanded of Fabius, whether the Carthaginians
could have done a juster or wiser thing, than to have complied with the demand
of the Romans in yielding up Hannibal; for if, as he says, his Proceedings
displeased them, what safer or more profitable course could they have taken to
be rid of one who stood tainted with the Character of a common Enemy to his
Country? They had thereby established the Security of the State, and by a
single Decree of the Senate, delivered themselves from the War which threatened
them: What now would our Historian be able to say to all this? certainly he
would be greatly to seek for an answer. But the Carthaginians were so far from
such Deliberations, that on the contrary they steadfastly prosecuted the War,
which was begun by the Opinion of Hannibal, for the space of seventeen Years
together; and did not yield to relinquish it, till they were quite hopeless of
success, and beheld both their Fortune and Country sinking

But why have I thus enlarged on Fabius and his History? It Is not because I
conceive it to be written with such a fashion of Truth, as to fear that some
one or other might be persuaded to believe it. For in short, all that he has
delivered has so little show of Reason or Probability, that without any
Remarks of mine, it is very easy to perceive him a faithless Author by the
Matter he delivers: I would therefore only barely advertise the Readers of his
History, not so much to consult the Title of the Book, as the Verity of things;
for there are those who are more biased by the Character of a Speaker, than
the Matter he delivers; and while they reflect that Fabius was a Senator of
Rome, and lived in these times, they conclude that all he says, has the stamp
of Truth: For my own part, as I will not affirm he ought in every thing to be
rejected; so I will take the liberty to think we are not to trust him before
our own Eyes. To return therefore to our Discourse; It was the indignation of
Hamilcar Barcas, Father of Hannibal, that ought to be esteemed the first cause
of that War between the Romans and Carthaginians. For after the Sicilian War,
as it was visible he lost nothing of his greatness of Mind, and firmness of
Resolution, by his preserving the Legions under his Command at Erix unbroken;
and that albeit after the Carthaginians defeat at Sea, he was compelled to
dissemble his Resentments, and yield to a treaty of Peace with the Romans; his
Anger was not however extinguished, and he labored after nothing more than to
find an occasion of renewing the War; and had soon brought his purpose to
effect, had not the Carthaginians been diverted by the Sedition of their
Mercenaries, so great was his Authority; but being prevented by by those
Commotions, he was constrained to apply himself first to compose the Disorders
that happened in his own Country.

After these Tumults were over, the Romans declared War against the
Carthaginians, who readily at first embraced the occasion, hoping for Victory
from the justice of their Cause, as we have already shown. But as the Romans
has no regard to the Argument of the Quarrel; so the Carthaginians finding at
length it would be their safest course to yield to necessity, submitted with
great reluctance to deliver up Sardinia; and further, to buy off the danger of
a War, they yielded to a Stipulation, over and above the first Tribute, to pay
yearly the sum of twelve hundred Talents; whereupon it may be safely reckoned,
that this Disgrace became a second, and the greatest cause of the War that
ensued. In short, Hamilcar perceiving now the Indignation of his
Fellow-Citizens to concur with his own, that he had appeased the Disorders of
his Country, which was now in Tranquillity, and the Government established,
turned his Thoughts toward Spain, from whence he proposed to derive Succors,
and all sorts of Assistance to further his Project of War upon the Romans. We
are to reckon for the third cause of that War, the great success of the
Carthaginians in Spain, by which being reinforced by so many Helps and
Advantages, they cheerfully prosecuted the Design. In short, it may be
collected by manifold Instances, that Hamilcar was the Author of the second
Punick War, albeit he lived not to the beginning of the enterprise by eight
Years, which will be better understood by what follows.

After Hannibal's Defeat by the Romans, being constrained to fly his Country,
he made his retreat to the Court of Antiochus; the Romans, who foresaw the
purposes of the Aetolians, dispatched Ambassadors to Antiochus, the better to
pry into the Designs of that Prince; and after they had discovered that
Antiochus was determined to take part with the Aetolians, and consequently to
engage in a War with the Romans, they thereupon began to visit and hold
Conferences with Hannibal, with no other intention than to render him susp^^^^d
to Antiochus; which Plot succeeded to their wish. And as Antiochus's Jealousies
grew every Day greater, they came at length to a mutual opening of each others
Mind on the subject of the Diffidence that was grown between them, and though
Hannibal said much to purge himself of the Imputation he lay under; yet
perceiving it availed little, he came at length to impart to Antiochus, that
when Hamilcar went into Spain at the head of an Army, he being then about nine
Years old, his Father sacrificing for the success of the Voyage, after the
Ceremony was ended, and he had performed all the customary Rites practiced on
those occasions, he caused the rest of the Company to withdraw; and making him
approach to the Altar, he there gently demanded of him, If he were inclined to
accompany him in his Voyage to Spain? To which he joyfully replied, That he
would go most willingly: And after he had besought him with all the moving
Reasons which a Child was capable to urge, that he would take him with him, his
Father then taking him by the Hand, led him to the Altar; where he made him
swear on the same Altar, That he would never be in Friendship with the Romans.
Wherefore he besought Antiochus to rest assured, That he could never change his
Sentiments toward that People; and that if he had determined any thing against
them, that he would make no difficulty to rely on his Secrecy and Fidelity;
and that he would serve him with joy and sincerity: But that if he should enter
into Terms of Friendship and Alliance with the Romans, there should be no need
of suggesting Accusations against him, who would himself be the first that
should declare his Aversion to Antiochus, who in such case would have reason to
hold him as an Enemy; forasmuch as he could never be other than a mortal Foe to
the Romans, against whom he would attempt all things to the utmost of his power.

By this Discourse of Hannibal, Antiochus perceiving he spoke from his Heart,
was cured of the Jealousy he had conceived of him.

Behold here a singular Instance of the Hatred of Hamilcar, and of the
Determination he had taken, which was yet made more visible by the effects: For
he bequeathed two such Enemies to the Romans, in Asdrubal his Son-in-Law, and
Hannibal his Son, as nothing could be thought to surmount their Hatred. But
Asdrubal lived not to put his Purposes in execution, while Hannibal survived to
wreak abundantly the Aversion he had inherited from his Father. Which furnishes
safe Advice to those who have the Administration of Public Affairs, to consult
carefully the Minds and Motives of those with whom they treat a Reconciliation,
or with whom they make a new Friendship; whether it be by force or necessity of
the Times, or an effect of Good Will, as weary of Hostility: For against the
one we are to be carefully on our guard, as being such who only attend the
Advantage of a new Occasion, while we may rely with assurance on the others,
and treat them with the sincerity of Subjects or of Friends.

We may justly then esteem these for the Causes of the War made by Hannibal;
and the Beginnings to be what we shall now further deliver. The Carthaginians
had deeply resented their loss of Sicily; but after they had been compelled to
part with Sardinia, and to pay the heavy Tribute they had contracted, their
Hatred grew to excess, insomuch that when they had augmented their Dominion, by
the Conquest of so great a part of Spain, they began to lend a more willing ear
to the Clamours every where uttered against the Romans. In the mean time they
lost Asdrubal, to whom, after the Death of Hamilcar, they had given the
Government of Spain. The Carthaginians, upon the death of Asdrubal, remained a
while in suspense, touching their choice of a new General, being willing to
sound first the Inclinations of the Army; but they no sooner understood that
the Soldiers had unanimously made choice of Hannibal for their Leader, when
they forthwith called an Assembly, and ratified with one Voice the Suffrages of
the Soldiers. Soon after Hannibal's confirmation in his Government, he
deliberated on reducing the Olcades under the Dominion of the Carthaginians;
pursuant to which Design, he marched against the City of Althaea, a rich and
well-fortify'd Place, and sat down before it; in which Siege he gave so many
Marks of his Bravery and Ability, that he soon became Master of the Place;
where his Success so terrified the neighboring Towns, that they readily
yielded themselves up to the Carthaginians. After he had amassed much Treasure,
by the sale of the Booty he had taken in the several Towns, he marched to
New-Carthage, which he made his Winter Quarters; where he expressed great
Generosity to those who had served under him; and paying the Soldiers their
Arrears, and promising further Marks of his Bounty, he so won upon the
Affections of the Army, that they had already conceived extraordinary hopes of
his Government.

Early the next Spring he marched against the Vaccoeans, and soon became Master
of Salmantica: Then he besieged Arbucala; which Place being great,
well-peopl'd, and the Inhabitants obstinate in their defense, gave him much
trouble; but in the end tho Town was surrendered; but on his return being
attacked by the Carpetanians, a People reckoned among the most powerful of
those Nations, he became on the sudden reduced to very great straits; for these
being joined by those of the neighboring Provinces, whom the O^^ades (being
driven out of their Country) had incensed against the Carthaginians; with whom
came likewise those who had fled from Salmantica, insomuch as if they could
have compelled Hannibal to a pitched Field, he had doubtless been driven to
great extremity. But he, who was singular both in Prudence and Dexterity, so
artfully made his retreat (covering himself by the Tagus) and contrived so to
attack them in their passage over that River, that what by the help thereof,
and the service of forty Elephants he had with him, he happily effected what he
had designed, when every body was in despair. In short, the Enemy being
determined to attempt their utmost, resolved to pass the River by several Fords
at once; but being encountered by the Elephants, which were posted along the
Banks for that service, great numbers were slain as they came to Land, before
any could come in to their succor; many were likewise cut off by the Horse,
who mingled in the River with the Enemy, where, by the strength of their
Horses, which better resisted the Current than the Foot, and sighting from a
higher place, they had much the advantage. In a word, Hannibal at length passed
the River himself; and vigorously pursuing his success, routed an Army of above
an hundred thousand of these Barbarians; who being thus defeated, there
remained none on that side the River Eber, except the Saguntines, that could
give him any molestation. But Hannibal cautiously abstained from any the least
Hostility against that People, pursuant to the Advice of Asdrubal; which was,
To make himself first Master of the rest of the Country, and insure his
Conquests there, before he gave occasion openly to the Romans to declare War
against the Carthaginians.

In the mean time, the Saguntines dispatched frequent Advices to the Romans,
led thereunto partly out of fear and foresight of their own impending Danger,
partly likewise out of Good Will, to the end the Romans might be perfectly
instructed in the Successes of the Carthaginians in Spain. In short, after a
cold reception of many of these Intimations, they determined at length to
dispatch Ambassadors into Spain, to be eyewitnesses of those things whereof
they had been informed. About which time Hannibal, having subdued all those
People which he had purposed to reduce, was marched to New-Carthage to his
Winter Quarters, that Place being as it were the Capital City of those
Countries, that yielded Obedience to the Carthaginians: There he found the
Roman Ambassadors; and giving them audience, was by them cautioned to attempt
nothing against the Saguntines, who were received into the protection of the
Romans; and that pursuant to the Treaty made with Asdrubal, they should not
pass their Troops beyond the River Eber. To this Hannibal (who was yet but
young, and ardently ambitious of military Glory, fortunate in his Enterprises,
and mortally hating the Romans) replied by way of complaint against them,
feigning to favor those of Saguntum, and telling the Ambassadors, That upon a
certain Sedition that happened some time ago in the said City, that the Romans
being chosen to arbitrate their Differences, and to reduce the Citizens to
Peace and Union, had unjustly animadverted on certain of the principal
Inhabitants; which perfidious Action of theirs, he held himself obliged to see
revenged; and that the Carthaginians inherited that Custom from their
Ancestors, to procure Justice to be done to the Oppressed. At the same time he
sent to Carthage for Instructions how to proceed, while the Saguntines,
encouraged by their Alliance with the Romans, acted many Outrages against those
who were now under the Carthaginian subjection. Thus Hannibal, transported by a
violent Hatred, acted in every thing without consulting his Reason, and never
troubling himself with the truth of Matters, founded Pretexts on false
Suggestions; after the manner of those, who, prepossessed by their Passion, do
what they have determined, without regard to Equity, or consideration of
Honor: Otherwise, had it not been more plausible to have demanded of the
Romans the restitution of Sardinia, and the Money so long paid them by the
Carthaginians, which they had wrung from them during the Weakness and
Calamities of the Republic; and in case of refusal, to declare War against
them? But as he concealed the true Cause, and had recourse to false Reasons for
his Motive, it may be very justly suspected he entered into that War, not only
without Reason, but against the Common Right of Nations.

Wherefore the Ambassadors departing, went to Carthage, there to expostulate
about what had already past; albeit, now well assured, that War would ensue,
though without any jealousy it would break out in Italy, but in Spain rather,
and that Saguntum would be as it were the Seat of Action; which they proposed
as a proper Fortress and Place of Arms: This being the subject of the Senate's
Deliberations, who concluding it would be a War likely to be drawn out at
length, and being in a remote Country, they resolved therefore to give first a
Period to their Affairs in Illyria. For at that time Demetrius the Pharian
forgetting his Obligations to the Romans his Benefactors, had given them some
Marks of his Ingratitude, and understanding how they were molested by the
Incursions of the Gauls, and were likely to have to do with the Carthaginians,
made now little account of their Friendship, and placed his greatest hopes in
the King of Macedon, and during the Cleomenick War had joined with Antigonus.
Demetrius then resolved to pillage and reduce the Towns of Illyria under his
Dominion, which were now in possession of the Romans; and having sailed beyond
Lissa with a Fleet of fifty Ships, contrary to the Articles of the Treaty, he
ravaged most of the Islands of the Cyclades. So that the Romans having notice
of these Infractions, and being over and above well informed of the present
Prosperity of the Macedonians, concluded that it behooved them to have a careful
Eye to their Affairs in the Provinces Eastward of Italy: Nor were they without
hopes of defeating the Designs of Hannibal, of making the Illyrians to repent
their Folly, and punishing the Perfidy and rash Behavior of Demetrius. But
these proved vain Deliberations, for Hannibal was too much in earnest and
prevented them, and in the mean time became Master of Saguntum, which Success
was the cause that they were not only obliged to make War in Spain, but in
Italy, for the defense of Rome it self. Howbeit the Romans, pursuant to their
first Project, sent Lucius Aemilius into Illyria with an Army early in the
Spring, being in the first Year of the hundred and fortieth Olympiad, at which
time Hannibal parted with his Army from New Carthage toward Saguntum.

This City is situate about a Mile from the Sea, at the foot of those Mountains
which part Spain from Celtiberia. The Territory of Saguntum is very fertile,
abounding in all sorts of excellent Fruits, wherein no part of Spain exceeds
it. Hannibal sits down before it, and attacks it with so much the more
diligence, by how much he judged the reducing such a Place by plain force,
would greatly avail toward his compassing those Ends he had further meditated.
In a word, he conceived he should by that means deprive the Romans of all hope
of making War in Spain; and further, made account, that terrified by his
Success, those he had already vanquished, would be thereby held in better
Obedience, and preserve their Faith unbroken; that those who were yet
unconquered would stand in greater awe of his Power; and what was yet of
greater consequence, he should be able to advance his Enterprises with more
security, having no Enemy at his back. Furthermore he calculated, that the
taking of this Town would yield him great Supplies of Treasure for carrying on
the War; that his Army would be more at his Devotion, when he had enriched them
with Booty; and that he should be enabled the better to purchase and establish
his Interest among the Carthaginians, by distributing among them the Spoils of
the Vanquished. These Reflections incited his Industry to press the Besieged
with greater Application; so that becoming himself an Example to the Army, by
working in the Trenches among the Soldiers, animating them in Person, mingling
with them in all Hazards, and incessantly attending the Labors of the Siege,
he became in the space of eight Months, Master of the Place. Great Booty was
there taken both in Money, Prisoners, and rich Movables. The Treasure he took
to himself for the Service of the War he had projected against the Romans; the
Prisoners he distributed to the Army in proportion to their Merit; and the rest
he dispatched in Presents to his Friends in Carthage. Nor did Hannibal make a
wrong reckoning; for the Soldiers were obliged, and became more hardy in
danger, and the Carthaginians were won to consent more readily to all his
Propositions; and being himself now supplied and furnished with whatever he
wanted, he prosecuted his Enterprises with greater promptitude.

About the same time Demetrius, having Intelligence of the Romans purpose, put
with expedition a Garrison into Dimalus, which Place he supplied with Stores of
War and all things necessary; and after he had destroyed in the other Towns all
those that were of the contrary Faction, and bestowed the Governments on his
Creatures, he selected five thousand of the ablest Men from among his own
Subjects, and placed them in Garrison in Pharus. In the mean time the Roman
Consul led his Legions into Illyria, where receiving intimation of the
confidence the Enemy was in of the Safety and Strength of Dimalus, and being
further advised, that the Place had the Reputation of having never yet been
taken, he therefore resolved to begin his Campaign there, the better to
terrify and discourage the Enemy. After therefore he had exhorted his Army to
behave themselves as they ought, and caused his Engines and Machines to
approach in several places, he began the Siege, and in seven Days space took
the Town. This Celerity of the Romans possessed the Enemy with so much Fear,
that they lost their Courage, and Deputies were immediately dispatched from all
the Towns round about with Tenders of Submission to the Romans; which the
Consul received respectively under certain Stipulations, and then made sail
toward Pharus, where Demetrius then was. But being informed that the Place was
strongly fortified, and that there was a numerous Garrison of able Men within
it, and the Town plentifully furnished with all things needful, he therefore
judging the Siege was likely to be a difficult and tedious Work, bethought
himself of this Stratagem; Arriving with his Army by Night on the Coast, he
landed most of his Troops, with direction to conceal themselves in Woods, and
Places proper to hide them from the view of the Enemy, and in the Morning makes
sail toward the next Port with twenty Galleys only, in sight of the Town;
Demetrius thereupon observing and contemning their number, marches out of the
Town with part of the Garrison to oppose their landing; so the Battle began,
which was prosecuted with great obstinacy, Supplies of Men being constantly
sent from the Town to sustain their Fellows, insomuch that at length by degrees
the whole Garrison marched out; in the mean while the Romans, who had landed in
the Night, advanced, covering themselves all they could in their march, and
possessed themselves of an Eminence so situate, that it defended it self,
between the Town and the Port, whereby they cut off the Enemies retreat to the
Town. This being observed by Demetrius, he soon disengaged himself from those
who attempted to land, and after he had rallied and animated his Men, marches
to attack the others, who had posted themselves on the Mountain.

The Romans therefore, seeing the Illyrians advancing toward them, met and
charged them with unspeakable Resolution, while those that were landed attacked
them in the Rear. Insomuch as finding themselves thus hard pressed on all
sides, the Army of Demetrius, no longer able to sustain the shock of the
Romans, was put to flight; some of them escaped to the Town, but the greatest
part dispersed themselves about the Island, covering themselves among the Rocks
and inaccessible Places. Demetrius himself got aboard certain Vessels which he
had placed in a neighboring Creek to serve him in such an exigent, and
departing by Night, retired to the Court of King Philip, (when every Body gave
him for lost) in whose Service he ended his days. A hardy Man he was, but
without Judgment, which appeared by the manner of his Death; for endeavoring,
pursuant to the King's Orders, to put himself into Messena, hazarding too far
in that Attempt, he perished, as shall be shown in its proper place. As to the
Consul, he forthwith got possession of Pharus, which Town he presently
demolished. In short, after he had reduced the whole Kingdom of Illyria to
Obedience, and performed all things in that Expedition to his own Mind, he
returned toward the end of the Summer to Rome, where he obtained a magnificent
Triumph, and acquired the Reputation of a wise and gallant Leader.

The Romans now receiving News of the loss of Saguntum, deliberated no longer
about entering into the War, as some Authors have said, who pretend to have
recorded the Opinions of both Parties, and have most absurdly reasoned
thereupon; for what likelihood was there that the Romans should now be
undetermined about the War, when but the Year before they had stipulated to
declare Hostility whenever the Carthaginians should attempt any Violence
against the Saguntines, whose City they had now destroyed? And can there be any
thing more like Untruth than to tell us, That the Senate was in great
Consternation; adding, that twelve Youths, not exceeding the Age of twelve
Years, being introduced into the Senate by their Fathers, and being privy to
what had been there resolved, discovered not the least tittle of what was
decreed to be kept secret? This too certainly has a great appearance of
Falsehood, unless it can be made appear, that over and above their many other
Advantages, Fortune had endu'd the Childhood of the Romans with the Sagacity of
Counselors.

But we have remarked enough of these sort of Writings; namely, such as have
been published by Chaereas and Sosilus, who, according to the Judgment I am
able to make, have delivered nothing that merits the name of History; but ought
to be held as Fables and Tales, such as are vulgarly told to entertain the
People. The Romans then receiving Intelligence of what had been done at
Saguntum, in violation of the Treaty, made choice of Ambassadors for that
Service, and dispatched them to Carthage, with Instructions to propose two
Conditions; whereof the one menaced the Carthaginians with loss and dishonor,
the other with a dangerous and doubtful War: For they demanded, either that
Hannibal and his Abettors should be delivered up to the discretion of the
Romans; or in case of refusal, a War to be forthwith declared. When the
Ambassadors were come to Carthage, and had audience of the Senate, they
delivered their Message, which was but coldly received by the Carthaginians:
Nevertheless, one of their Senators who was best qualified, was commanded to
set forth the equity and unblameableness of their Proceedings; but he therein
mentions nothing of the Treaty of Asdrubal, no more than if such a Treaty had
never been; at least he told them, That if such an Agreement had been made, it
was of no validity, as being transacted without the privity or consent of the
People and Senate of Carthage. And an Example was produced of the like practice
of the Romans, touching the Peace made by the Consul Lutatius during the
Sicilian War; which, in a word, Lutatius had ratified, when notwithstanding it
was rejected by the People of Rome, as not having been done by their allowance.
They insisted warmly on the Conditions of that Treaty of Peace, and referred
particularly to that which was made at the end of the Sicilian War; wherein
they maintained, That no mention was made of Spain, but reservation only of the
Allies of either Party, which were the precise Conditions of that Treaty. They
further proceeded to show, that Saguntum was not at that time in alliance with
the Romans; which the better to prove, they caused the Articles of that Treaty
to be publicly read. As to the Romans, they replied, That the Argument was not
a dispute about Words, and that regard was to be had only to the truth of Fact;
namely, whether Saguntum had been attacked and taken, or no? For if Matters had
remained in the posture wherein they were, Words might suffice to finish the
Dispute; but that City being now taken, whereby the Treaty was become violated,
they were obliged either to deliver up the Authors of that Infraction, which
would witness to the World, That the Carthaginians were guiltless of the Fault
that had been committed, and that Hannibal had of his own head, without their
privity, acte^ that violence; or in case they refused, and, on the contrary,
were disposed to own themselves Accessaries with Hannibal; that they then would
do well in one word to explain themselves, and put an issue to the Dispute.
Thus the Romans ended their Discourse, speaking nothing but in general Terms.
And here I cannot well omit what I am about to say, to the end those whom it
imports to be rightly instructed in Occurrences, may not be kept in ignorance
of the Truth in deliberations of Moment; and that the Lovers of History, misled
by the Errors or Passions of Historians, may not lose themselves through want
of light into the Treaties, which have been made between the Romans and
Carthaginians, since the first Punick War.

The first Treaty that was made between them, was concluded during the
Consulship of Junius Brutus, and Marcus Horatius, who were the first Roman
Consuls after the expulsion of their Kings, at the time of the Consecration of
the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, which was eight and twenty Years before the
Voyage of Xerxes into Greece. We shall here record the very Words of the said
Treaty, which we have interpreted with all the Fidelity we are able; for in
truth the ancient Roman Language is so different from what is now spoken, that
those who are most conversant therein, find difficulty enough to explain
certain hard Places, after the expense of much Time and Study. The said first
Treaty is conceived in the following Terms:

There shall be Peace and Friendship between the Romans, and the Allies of the
Romans, and between the Carthaginians, and the Allies of the Carthaginians, on
the following Conditions; viz. That the Romans, and the Allies of the Romans,
shall not navigate beyond the Fair Promontory, unless constrained by Tempest,
or an Enemy. If at any time they shall chance to be forced a-shoar, they shall
not be permitted to buy any thing, nor take any thing but what they need for
repairing their Vessels, and for their Sacrifices. That none shall make longer
stay a-shoar than five Days. That those who shall come as Merchants, shall pay
no other Duty than what is allowed to the Common Crier and Register: That these
two Officers shall make Affidavit of what shall be bought and sold in their
presence, as well in Africa as Sardinia. If the Romans shall chance at any time
to visit such Places in Sicily, a^ are in subjection to the Carthaginians, they
shall not suffer any molestation whatsoever, but shall have Justice done them
in all things. That the Carthaginians shall attempt nothing against the
Ardiates, the Antiates, the Aretines, those of Laurentum, of Circe, and of
Tarracina; nor, in a word, any of the Latins whomsoever that shall be in
subjection to the Romans; nor shall they attempt any of their Towns, that are
under the Roman Protection; and in case they should at any time make seizure of
any Town, they shall restore the same to the Romans without any damage. That
they shall not build either Fort or Citadel in the Country of the Latins; and
in case they should at any time invade their Lands in hostile manner, they
shall not remain a Night among them. The Promontory, here called the Fair
Promontory, is near Carthage, tending toward the North; the Carthaginians not
permitting the Romans to navigate to the Southwards of that, unwilling, I
believe, that they should obtain any knowledge of the Places and Country about
Byzaces, or the Lesser Syrtis, where that Territory is called the Empories, by
reason of the great Fertility of these Parts; that if any one, compelled by
Tempest, or the Enemy, should chance to touch there, and should want
Necessaries for the resitting of their Vessels, or for their Sacrifices, these
were permitted them, but nothing was to be taken by force; and that those who
should so land, should be obliged to depart in five Days. But the Romans were
permitted to have Trade and Commerce with Carthage, and the rest of Africa on
this side the said Promontory, as likewise in Sardinia, and in those Places in
Sicily, that were under the Dominion of the Carthaginians: In which
Intercourse, the Carthaginians promise to do Justice to all, and not to violate
the Rights of any. Nay, it appears by this Treaty, that the Carthaginians spoke
of Sardinia, and of Africa, as of their own Dominions; but they speak
differently of Sicily, distinguishing plainly between what was, and what was
not in subjection to them in that Island: In like manner the Romans, in the
same Treaty, speak of the Country of the Latins, not making mention of the rest
of Italy, as not being then under their Dominion.

In short, these two People came after to another Treaty, wherein the
Carthaginians comprised the Tyrians, and those of Vtica; but with adding to the
Fair Promontory Mastia and Tarseius, not permitting the Romans to build Towns,
nor ravage the Country beyond it. See the Treaty it self.

That the Romans, and their Allies, shall have Friendship and Confederacy with
the People of Carthage, together with the Tyrians; and those of Utica, and
their Allies, on condition that they exercise no Hostility, nor manage any
Commerce or Traffic, nor build any Towns beyond the Fair Promontory, Mastia,
or Tarseius: That if the Carthaginians shall take any Town in the Territory of
the Latins that is not in the Roman Protection, they shall enjoy the Pillage
thereof; but the Town shall be restored, and put into the hands of the Romans.
That if the Carthaginians shall at any time take any Prisoners with whom the
Romans are in Amity by any Treaty; and albeit they are not in subjection to the
Romans, they shall not bring the said Persons into any Port of the Romans; and
that in case any such Prisoner should be so brought and discovered, he shall,
upon being challenged, be forthwith released and set at liberty. That the
Romans shall be treated in the same manner, in the Ports depending on the
Carthaginians. That if the Romans shall put in at any Port of the Carthaginians
Dependants to take in Water and Refreshment, not any of those who are comprised
in this Treaty of Friendship, shall offer them any Injury or Molestation; if
otherwise, the Crime shall be understood to be a Public Breach of the Treaty.
As to Sardinia and Africa, the Romans shall have no Commerce there, where they
shall neither traffic, build Towns; nor, in a word, so much as attempt to land
on these Coasts, unless it be to supply their Necessities, and refit their
Ships. That if in case any shall be compelled by Tempest, or otherwise, to take
Refuge in their Ports, they shall depart in five Days; but that the Romans
shall have free intercourse to traffic; buy, and sell in any of the Towns in
Sicily, under the Dominion of the Carthaginians, and in the City of Carthage it
self; where they shall enjoy the same Rights and Privileges with the Citizens
of Carthage; and the Carthaginians shall have right to the like Treatment in
Rome.

The Carthaginians seem by this Treaty to make it yet more evident, that they
accounted of Sardinia and Africa as their own, and so it was no injury to the
Romans to be by them forbidden any intercourse there. On the other hand, when
they make mention of Sicily, they use another Style, speaking of the Places
only in that Island that paid Obedience to the Carthaginians. The Romans
explaining themselves after the same manner, when they speak of the Territory
of the Latins, stipulating that no Injury shall be done to the Ardiates,
Antiates, those of Circe and Tarracina, which are Maritime Towns on the Coast
of the Latins, and were comprehended in that Treaty.

The last Treaty, that was entered into by these two People, was made about the
time that Pyrrhus invaded Italy, before the Carthaginians entered into the War,
which they waged for the Dominion of Sicily. The Articles were transcribed from
those that went before, saving that they added these that follow: That if the
People of Rome, or the Carthaginians, shall chance to enter into Alliance with
Pyrrhus, they shall however mutually assist each other in case of eithers being
invaded by the Enemy; and whichsoever of them shall stand in need of Succors,
the Carthaginians shall furnish Vessels of Transport for that Service, as
likewise for the War: That each Party shall pay their own Troops respectively:
That the Carthaginians shall lend Aid to the Romans by Sea, if they shall need
it; but that neither Party shall at any time compel the other to put to Sea
with their Vessels.

In short, the Oath of Ratification was made after this manner: The
Carthaginians first swore by the Gods of their Country; and the Romans, after
their own ancient Custom, swore by a Stone, and then by Mars. Behold how they
swore by the Stone: The Herald who took the Oath, after having sworn in behalf
of the Public, takes up a Stone, and then pronounces these words: If I keep my
Faith, may the Gods vouchsafe their Assistance, and give me success: If on the
contrary I violate it, then may the other Party be entirely safe, and preserved
in their Country, in their Laws, in their Possessions; and in a word, in all
their Rights and Liberties; and may I perish and fall alone, as now this Stone
does. And then he lets the Stone fall out of his Hand.

If such Treaties were then usual, and that the Aediles had them in their
keeping in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, engraved in Plates of Copper, is
it not strange that not only Philinus the Historian should be ignorant of this
Custom, but that many of the ancient Romans and Carthaginians, (otherwise
esteemed well versed in Public Affairs) should be likewise totally to seek
therein? But for him with confidence to affirm, that it was agreed in that
Treaty between the Romans and Carthaginians, that the Romans should entirely
abandon Sicily, and the Carthaginians Italy, and that this Treaty was violated
by the Romans, when they passed over into Sicily, though it be most certain that
such a Stipulation never was, and that there be not the least shadow of ground
to believe there ever was any such Treaty; yet our Historian fairly records it,
as may be seen in his Second Book, whereof having already said something in the
beginning of this our Work, we forbore then to enlarge thereon, and now observe
that many having been misled by this Author, have been paid with Falsehoods
instead of Truth. And certainly whosoever condemns the Voyage of the Romans
into Sicily, let it be covered with never so fair Pretexts, their making
Alliance with the Mamertines, and shortly after yielding them the Succors they
demanded, notwithstanding they had criminally surpised Rhegium and Messina,
they may perhaps herein have reason to blame their proceeding. But when they
believe the Romans passed into Sicily, contrary to their Oath, and in violation
of the Treaty, they are manifestly deceived.

Another Treaty was made at the determination of the War in Sicily, the
principal Conditions whereof being as follows: That the Carthaginians shall
retire out of Sicily, and out of all the Islands betwixt that and Italy: That
the Allies of neither Party shall be injured or molested by either of them:
That the one shall have no Authority in the others Dominions, where they shall
neither build any Fortress, nor levy Soldiers for the War: That neither shall
enter into Confederacy with those with whom the other is in Alliance? That the
Carthaginians shall pay, within the space of ten Tears, the sum of two thousand
two hundred Talents, whereof one thousand in hand, and shall enlarge all the
Roman Prisoners Ranson-free.

Upon the Romans decreeing War against them, after their misfortunes with their
Mercenaries in Africa, these Articles were added to the above Treaty: That the
Carthaginians shall abandon the Island of Sardinia, and shall further pay the
sum of one thousand two hundred Talents, as we have already noted. All these
Treaties preceded that which was made with Asdrubal in Spain, which was the
very last wherein it was stipulated, That the Carthaginians should not pass
their Arms beyond the River Eber. These are the sum of all the Treaties that
were made between the Romans and Carthaginians, from the first Punick War to
that of Hannibal.

And now since no Proof appears, that the Romans violated their Faith by their
Voyage into Sicily; so in their Acquisition of Sardinia, according to the
Articles of Peace, no Pretext or shadow of any Cause can be discovered of the
Second Punick War. While no Body questions but the Carthaginians deserted
Sardinia, and parted with those vast sums of Money, being unrighteously
compelled thereunto during the Calamity of their Affairs. In short, the Romans
do but trifle when they tell us for a Reason, that many of their Poople who
held Commerce in Africa had been ill treated by the Carthaginians; that
difference having been amicably composed upon the Carthaginians setting all
those at liberty, who had been detained in their Ports; in acknowledgment
whereof the Romans also quitted all their Carthaginian Prisoners without
Ransom, as has been observed in our First Book. Matters then standing thus, it
will behove us to inquire, which of these two People gave occasion for the War
of Hannibal.

We have already recited the Carthaginians Reasons, and shall now observe what
the Romans have to say for themselves. True it is, that albeit the Romans were
highly provoked at the destruction of Saguntum, nevertheless they did not then
show their Resentments. Afterward indeed, they and many others besides would
often say, That they ought not to understand the TTreaty of Asdrubal to be
void, as the Carthaginians are bold to say; for this Clause was added in that
made by Lutatius: That it should be firm and inviolable if the People of Rome
ratified it. But Asdrubal's Peace was confirmed by an ample and plenary
Authority, wherein it was accorded, That the Carthaginians should not make War
on the other side the Eber. Now as to the Treaty that was made touching Sicily,
that was conceived as they themselves confess in these terms, -- That the
Allies of the one and the other Party should not be attacked or molested by
either. -- Not only those who were at that time in the Confederacy, as the
Carthaginians would understand it, for these terms were added, -- That it shall
not be permitted to make new Alliances, or to exclude from the Treaty, those
who were received into their Alliance, after that Peace was concluded. But
forasmuch as neither the one, nor the other Article was added to the Treaty,
it is but just to believe, that all the Confederates of one and the other
People, those who were at that time Allied, and those who were afterward
received into the Confederacy were comprehended therein, and that neither the
one nor the other Party ought to molest them. For, in short, who would enter
into terms of such restraint whereby they became bound up from making choice of
such for Friends and Allies, whose Friendship and Alliance should be found
profitable, or by which they should be obliged to relinquish their new
Confederates upon any Outrage acted on them by the other Party? My Opinion
therefore is, that the intention both of the one and other People in that
Treaty is to be understood, that the one should not injure the Allies of the
other; and that by no means the one Party was permitted to contract Alliance
with the Confederates of the other; and in a word, that which follows ought to
be interpreted of any new Alliances that should be made in times succeeding --
That the one Party shall not levy Men for the War, nor exercise any Authority
in any of the Provinces of the others Dominions, or those of their Allies, who
shall not be disturbed by the one or the other Party.

This being so, it is likewise manifest, that the Saguntines were in Alliance
with the Romans long before Hannibal's time, whereof the Carthaginians afford
us good testimony: For upon a Sedition which happened in the City of Saguntum,
they refused to make the Carthaginians Judges and Umpires of their Differences,
albeit they were their Neighbors; for they had at that time established their
Authority in Spain, but made choice of the Romans, by whose Arbitration their
Disorders were composed. And now if it be alleged, That the Destruction of
Saguntum was the cause of that War, we must then necessarily determine, That
the Carthaginians began a very unjust War, whether regard be had either to the
Treaty of Lutatius, whereby both Parties became mutually bound to offer no
violence to their respective Allies; or whether in regard to that of Asdrubal,
wherein it was not permitted to the Carthaginians to pass the River Eber. But
then, on the other hand, if the cause of the War shall be attributed to the
business of Sardinia, which was violently wrested by the Romans from the
Carthaginians, together with the Money which was forcibly drawn from them, it
will then be but justice to confess, That the Carthaginians did not
unrighteously in entering on the War made by Hannibal: For as the Romans
improved the occasion of the Carthaginians Distresses whereby to molest them,
they did no more than lay hold on the like Opportunity against the Romans, when
it served their purpose.

It is not unlikely but that those who read not History with due Judgment, will
be apt to tell me, That it seems a superfluous Work, to tarry thus long on the
Subject we have been treating: If therefore such a one there be, whose
Abilities can arm him against all Accidents, and who by the light of his own
Understanding can penetrate every thing; to such I grant indeed, That the
recounting of past Adventures may entertain him, though it ministers little or
nothing to his Instruction. But while we may safely doubt whether there be any
such Man, as can with assurance so determine in his own private Affairs, or in
what regards the Public; inasmuch as let the present state of his Fortune be
never so prosperous, if he be a Man of sound Sense, he will not over-boldly
pronounce touching the future. I will therefore take upon me to say, That a
right knowledge of Things past, is not only delightful, but necessary: For
whether we are invaded either in our private Capacity, or in our Country, How
shall we be able to have recourse for succor, and acquire and obtain Friends
at need, if we have never contemplated any thing but the present? Or how shall
we be enabled to add to what we have already conceived, or propose to enter
into War? How shall we be qualified to engage others to take part with us, and
favor our Enterprises? And how, in a word, while we amuse our selves with
present things, shall we be qualified to engage our own Subjects to acquiesce
roadily to such new Forms and Establishments in the State, as we shall suggest,
while we remain ignorant of past Times, whence we are to derive our Arguments?
For Mankind, for the most part, is governed by the nearest Objects; and we are
aptest to be led to imitate present Examples, not reflecting how hard it is to
judge of Men's Minds by their present Words and Comportments, modern Truth
being for the most part disguised and wrapped in Clouds, while the Actions of
our Ancestors declare manifestly, and conduct us to the knowledge of their
Thoughts and Purposes, and tells and informs us from whom we ought to expect
good Offices and Succors in our Distresses, and of whom we ought to suspect
the contrary; who are likeliest to be touched with our Misfortunes, who will be
likeliest to resent the Injuries we may receive, and engage to do us right.
These are Points, without Controversy, of mighty importance in the Conduct of
our Life, whether with regard to our private Fortune, or the Administration of
the Public. Therefore it is, that neither those who write History, nor those
who read it, should so much rest on the account of the Actions themselves, as
the things that preceded, or that occurred at the same time, or succeeded them.
For if History be defective in the Causes and Original of the Things we
contemplate, the means by which they were brought to pass, and the end for
which they were executed; and that if it be not made evident to our
Understanding, how and in what proportion Events hold and bear with the Actions
that have been performed, all beside this will be found it may be a delightful
Entertainment; but no Profit or Instruction can result from it for our future
guidance.

And if perchance any one should be of Opinion, That this our Work will find
but few Readers, or such as will give it entertainment, by reason of the number
and bulk of the Books it contains; yet this would happen only to those, who
want discernment in the difference between purchasing and studying forty Books
digested in order, and which regularly instruct the Reader by one continued
Thread of Discourse in the Transactions of Sicily and Africa, from the time
when Timaeus puts an end to his History of Pyrrhus, down to the taking of
Carthage; and of all Occurrences in other Quarters of the World, from the
flight of Cleomenes King of Sparta, to the time wherein the Battle was fought
between the Romans and Achaians, on the Borders of Peloponnesus. I say, they do
not rightly consider the difference betwixt reading such a General History, and
the searching after the several Books of other Authors, who have treated the
same things distinctly and apart; for over and above that these Writings exceed
what we have delivered both in number and measure, the fruit they yield for our
Instruction will be less: For first, those Authors, do not always agree in
their Accounts of the same matters of Fact; and then they touch not on any
contemporary Occurrences: And, after all, when you come to conferr them
together, you shall be obliged to make another Judgment of what they rereport
so compared, than when you study and consider them singly and distinctly one
from the other. Furthermore, that sort of History never arrives at the
principal point of Utility; namely, to show (as we but now observed) what was
the issue of such and such Actions, what was contemporary and principally the
Causes of Events, which is that which animates the Body of History.

For to exemplify in our History, it will appear how the War of Philip gave
occasion to that of Antiochus; and that of Hannibal, to the War of Philip; and
the War of Sicily, to the Hanniballick, or second Punick War. In a word, by the
study of General History, we easily arrive at the knowledge of many important
Things that come to pass during such Wars, which contribute to the War
themselves, and which by no means is attainable by the study of particular
History; as namely, in the Macedonian War against Perseus or Philip; unless we
can imagine it possible to be entirely instructed in the Art. of War, upon
reading only in History the description of Battles. But since this cannot be, I
may presume to say, That this our Undertaking may be justly reckoned as much
superior to Relations of single or particular Occurrences, as certain
Knowledge is more noble than merely to discourse by hearsay.

But to proceed: The Roman Ambassadors having heard the Carthaginians Reasons,
made no other Answer than this: The gravest among them, pointing to his Bosom,
told those of the Senate who were present, That they had brought with them both
Peace and War; and, That it was left to the Carthaginians election to take
which they pleased. To which the principal Senators replied, That they were
willing to give the Romans the preference in the Choice. Whereupon the
Ambassadors replied, That they then made War their Choice: Which the majority
of the Senate accepted with Acclamations; whereupon they were dismissed.

In the mean while Hannibal, who held his Winter Quarters at New-Carthage, gave
leave to his Spanish Soldiers to retire to their respective Habitations, the
better to dispose them to his service, when he should have occasion to call
upon them. In short, he furnished Asdrubal his Brother with Instructions how to
comport himself in his Government of Spain, in his absence; and in what manner
he was to defend himself against the Romans, in case they should chance to
separate. After this, his next chief care was to provide for the safety of
Africa; and by a singular foresight and sagacity of Judgment, he supplied Spain
with Soldiers from Africa, and Africa with the like from Spain, the better to
engage and tie those two People, as it were, by mutual Bonds, together. Those
that were transported into Africa, were the Thersites, the Mastians, and the
Olcades, and some Spaniards of the Mountains, composing altogether an Army of
twelve hundred Horse, and thirteen thousand Foot. There were likewise Soldiers
from the Baleares, who were a sort of Slingers; to whom, together with their
Island, the Greeks gave that Name from the kind of Sling they used. It was
found expedient to place the greatest part of these Troops in Metagonia, a
Country and Promontory of Africa; and some were received into the City of
Carthage it self. They likewise drew out of the Metagonian Territory three
thousand Foot, who were sent to keep Garrison in New-Carthage, and to remain
likewise as Hostages, But with Asdrubal in Spain he left fifty Quinque-reme
Galleys, two Quadriremes, and five of Three Banks; of which number there were
two and thirty of the Quinque-remes, and two Triremes that were equipped for
War. He likewise left him four hundred and fifty African Horse, and of
Liby-Phoenicians, a People mixed of Africans and Phoenicians; three hundred
Lorgites; eighteen hundred Numidians; Massyles, Massaesyles, Macians and
Mauritanians who inhabit the Seacoast, eleven thousand eight hundred Foot;
three hundred Ligurians, five hundred Balearians, and one and twenty Elephants.
And here let it not seem a Wonder, that we have undertaken to treat of
Hannibal's proceeding at that time in Spain; thus minutely descending to so
many particulars, that even those who had a share in the Conduct of those
Affairs could not be thought to observe things more narrowly: Nor let me be
condemned, if herein I imitate those, who to gain Belief and Credit with their
Readers mingle their Falsehoods with the like Particularities: For it being my
lot at Lacinium to peruse there the engraved Tables, or Records of Copper, left
by Hannibal during his abode in Italy, I made no difficulty to copy the
Contents, since there was no reason to doubt the verity thereof.

When Hannibal had well provided for the safety of Spain and Africa, he then
turned his Mind wholly to the business of some new Enterprises, while he
attended the return of his Ambassadors, who had been dispatched to the Gauls,
for he well knew that the Country at the foot of the Alps, and about the River
Po was very fertile, and abounding in brave People given to War; and what was
yet more to his wish, implacable haters of the Romans ever since the War they
made on them. But of this we have expressly treated in our preceding Book, to
the end to help the Reader to a clearer conception of what was to follow.
Hannibal then used his utmost Diligence, and employed all his Forces to advance
his purpose; he promised every thing liberally; he sent frequent Dispatches to
the several Princes of the Gauls, inhabiting on this side the Alps, and in the
Mountains themselves; conceiving it would be a main step toward a happy issue
of the War against the Romans, to compass his passage through those Countries
we have named; and that after having surmounted the many difficulties of a long
march, to be able to engage the Gauls to take part with him and join in the
Enterprise, as he had labored to bring to pass. In short, after he had
received an account by his Messengers, that the Gauls accorded to his Proposal,
and expected him with impatience; and after they had informed him, that though
the Passage of those Mountains was difficult, yet that it was not insuperable;
he began to move his Army out of their Winter Quarters early in the Spring. And
having received intelligence of what had been determined at Carthage, his Hopes
were greatly augmented, and beholding now his Purposes fortified by the
concurrence of his Fellow-Citizens, he began openly to discourse of making War
upon the Romans; and to exhort the Soldiers cheerfully to engage therein, he
told them, that the Romans had the Impudence publicly to demand, that both he
and his Chief Officers should be delivered up to them; he laid before them
likewise the Fertility of the Country into which he would lead them, the
Good Will of the Gauls, and the Confederacy he had made with them; and when the
Army had loudly proclaimed their readiness to march whithersoever he was
disposed to command them, and he had gratefully applauded their cheerful
Behavior, and had prefixed the Day for their march, he dismissed the Assembly.

After he had duly provided for the security of Africa and Spain, and had spent
the Winter in all necessary Deliberations, upon the Day he had appointed, the
Army took the Field, consisting of fourscore and ten thousand Foot, and twelve
thousand Horse. After he had passed the River Eber he reduced the Illyrgeti and
Bargusians, the Aerenosians, and the Andosins or Ausetans, People that inhabit
and spread as far as to the Pyraeneans. He took likewise sundry Towns by force,
which he effected in a short time, and even beyond his hopes; but these
Successes cost him some hard Conflicts, wherein he lost many Men. In short, he
established Hanno Governor of the Country on this side the Eber, and ordered
that he should have likewise the Government of the Bargusians, of which People
he had the greatest Jealousy, as having been in Amity with the Romans; and
appointed ten thousand Foot and one thousand Horse to be drawn out of the Army,
to be left under his Command; committing likewise to his keeping the weighty
Baggage of the whole Army that marched with him; the like number he sent to
their own Home, that by that means he might confirm the Affections of those to
whom he gave that License, and afford hopes to the others, who adventured with
him to return one day to their Native Country; and that those, who were already
in Arms, as such of the Natives who remained hitherto at ease in their Houses,
might yield readier obedience to his Summons into Italy, if there should happen
any occasion to call upon them to recruit his Forces. So the Army marched
light, and disincumber'd of Baggage to the number of Fifty thousand Foot, and
Nine thousand Horse, which he lead over the Pyrenaeans, in order to their
passing the Rhosne. This was no very numerous Army, but they were good Men, and
had been long trained, and in continual Action during the Wars in Spain.

But forasmuch as our History will be in danger of obscurity, should we omit
the necessary description of Places; it seems therefore behoveful that we here
describe, from the place of Hannibal's departure, the vast extent of ground he
traversed, and what Countries and Nations he visited in his march into Italy.
For I hold it not enough barely to set down the names of Rivers and Cities, as
is the method of some Writers, who imagine there is nothing more required; and
that the knowledge of things is attained merely by their Names: While, for my
own part, I conceive it sit to observe, that as it is true, that with respect to
places and things we already know, the naming only may suffice to renew the
Notices of them in the Memory; yet where we are totally in the dark, I reckon
it equally as useless to insist barely on the Names, as to rehearse a certain
number of Words that have no signification: For while the Mind is destitute of
the means to conceive rightly of what is the Subject of our Contemplation, and
is not enabled to apply what we hear to something that we know, we gather no
more Fruit from such a Discourse, than if it were spoken to a deaf Ear. It will
import us then to propose some certain method whereby we may be able to give
right and easy Images of things, when we deliver Matter whereof the
Understanding has not yet taken the least Impression. The first and most
general received Notion, and that which (as one may say) is common to Mankind,
is the repartition that we have made of the Heavens, whereby we assign the seat
and position of the respective Climates and Regions: For who, the most stupid,
does not know, East and West, North and South? The next Notion is, that by
assigning to those repartitions in the Heavens certain divisions of such a
position here on Earth, as are subjected to those above, whereby we arrive at a
sort of Science of those Places and Countries, which we have never seen, and
otherwise know nothing of. This Proposition is only touching the Earth in
general: What is next to be done, is to instruct the Reader to make the same
division (as far as we know) of the Earth, which is understood to be
distributed into the principal Parts; as namely, Asia, Africa, and Europe;
then, that these three are bounded by the Tanais, the Nile, and the Straight of
Hercules. Asia extends from the River Nile, Eastward and Southward. Africa
stretches from the Nile toward Hercules Pillars, then extends Southward, and
South-westward to the Equinoctial. In short, these two Parts, with respect to
the whole Globe, contain that entire proportion of Continent to the Southward
of Mediterranean Sea, stretching from East to West.

As to Europe, its situation is Northward, in opposite position to the other
two, and is continued, as it were, in a Line from East to West. The principal
and greatest part thereof has Northerly Situation, lying between the River
Tanais, and that of Narbona, which, on the Western part is not far from
Marseilles, and the Mouth of the Rhosne, near which that River empties it self
into the Sardinian Sea.

The Celtae inhabit all the Country in the Neighborhood of Narbona, and spread
from thence to the Pyrenaeans, which are a Chain of Mountains, continued from
our Sea quite to the great Ocean: The other parts of Europe running from those
Hills to the utmost West, and to the Pillars of Hercules, are in a great
measure bounded by our Sea, and that of the Ocean; that Portion thereof which
borders on our Sea, to Hercules-Pillars, is called Iberia; but that which is
washed by the main Ocean remains yet without a Name; it being not long since
any discovery has been made thereof, and found to be inhabited by many
barbarous Nations, whereof we shall have occasion to speak in particular, in
the pursuit of our History.

In short, as it is not yet known whether Aethiopia, Africa, and Asia are
joined, and in one continued Continent, extending to the South, or be environed
by the Sea; so likewise all that Tract of Land, contained between the Tanais
and Narbona, toward the North, is to us at this day totally unknown. And those
who speak or write otherwise, are to be held only as Reporters of Fables,
amusing us with the Effects of their own Dreams and Visions.

Thus much I have thought needful to say, the better to qualify those who are
not over conversant in Geography, to study our History with greater Profit; and
to the end they may arrive with more Facility at the knowledge of what they are
yet to know, by conferring them with things whereof they are already informed;
and as to what relates, at least, to the general distribution of the Parts,
they may be taught to apprehend rightly of the Regions below from the position
of the Climates above. For as it is ordinary with us to turn our Eyes toward
the Object that is pointed to us to observe; so in proportion to the evidence,
whereby things are set before the Understanding, by Words or Discourse, the
Mind conceives and becomes enlightened.

But to return from our digression: The Carthaginians were, in those times,
Masters of all that tract of Country in Africa, that runs along the Coast of
our Sea, from the Philaenian Altars, which are by the great Syrtis, to the
Straight of Hercules Pillars; which Dominion contains above six hundred Leagues
in length. They had now likewise carried their Conquests into Spain, being on
the other side the Straight, which divides the two Continents, having subdued
that Country entirely, as far as the Promontory or Rock in our Sea, which
terminates the Pyrenaean Hills, that are the boundaries between the Gauls and
Spaniards: This Acquisition extending at least three hundred Leagues in length,
from Hercules Pillars to New Carthage, from whence Hannibal set out on his
Expedition to Italy, is computed about one hundred and twenty Leagues. This
Town we call, according to some, New Carthage; it being, by others, called
Cainopolis, or the New Town. From thence, to the River Eber, it is at least one
hundred Leagues; from the Eber to Emporium, about sixty Leagues; and thence to
the Passage of the Rhosne, near the same distance: but these distances the
Romans have set down in their Miles, each Mile containing eight Stades or
Furlongs.

It is computed from the Passage of the Rhosne, up toward the head of the
River, to the beginning of the Alps, which lead into Italy, about seventy
Leagues, without taking in the way in the Mountains, which is reckoned fifty
Leagues; from whence you descend into Italy, coming into a Campaigne Country,
watered by the River Po; so the March of Hannibal from New Carthage into Italy,
will amount to about three hundred and forty Leagues. And now, if we take only
the length of the way into our consideration, Hannibal had already performed
half his Journey; but when the difficulties yet behind come to be weighed, the
worst, by much, will be found yet remaining.

Hannibal therefore labored his utmost to get the Pyrenaeans at his back,
being not without suspicion of the fidelity of the Gauls, doubting lest they
should block up his passage which he found difficult enough without encountering
other Impediments. In the mean time, after the Romans were informed by their
Ambassadors, whom they had sent to Carthage, of all that had passed, and had
been determined there; and receiving notice earlier than they expected, of
Hannibal's passing the Eber, they decreed that Publius Cornelius Scipio should
be dispatched into Spain, and Tiberius Sempronius into Africa. But while they
were busied about their Levies, and the necessary Preparations for the War,
they le^t not, however, to prosecute another design they had before in hand;
namely, to dispatch Colonies to the Country of the Cis-Alpine Gauls. They
proceeded likewise, with great diligence to begirt their Towns with Walls,
ordering those who were ordained for the Colonies, which amounted to about six
thousand, who were to People the two Towns, that were to be built, to be at the
Rendezvouse within the space of thirty days. One of which Towns they placed on
this side the Po, and gave it the name of Placentia; the other beyond the
River, which they called Cremona. These Colonies were hardly arrived; when the
Boians (who endeavored nothing more ardently than to break with the Romans;
but for want of a proper conjuncture, had not yet attempted any thing) hearing
of the approach of the Carthaginians, began to conceive new hopes; and
abandoning their Hostages, which had been given to the Romans at the end of the
War (which was observed in our preceding Book) revolted, and took Arms against
them. These drew likewise to their side the Insubrians, who were easily lead to
take part with them, out of an ancient hatred they bare to the Romans. So they
marched out, and fell to spoil the new planted Territories, and advancing after
those, who had fled to Modena for Succor, pursued them thither, and there
besieged them; where likewise were shut up the three Commissioners, who had
been sent to conduct the Colonies, and set out the Lands, Men of great account;
the one Caius Lutatius, who had been Consul, and the two others Praetors: These
proposed to come to some Treaty, which the Boians seemed to accept; but when
they adventured out to debate about the Terms, they brake their word, and
seized their Persons, persuading themselves that with such a gauge, they should
be able to preserve their Hostages. Upon notice of these Stirs, Lucius Manlius
the Praetor, who then commanded an Army in those Parts, marched to their Relief
with all the speed he could. But the Enemy getting notice of his approach, laid
an Ambush in a certain Forest in his way, where the Romans had no sooner
entered, when the Boians fell upon them, attacking them on all sides, and
putting the greatest part to the Sword, the rest ^led, and having gained the
Hills, there made a stand, and with difficulty enough defended themselves, but
at length made a good Retreat. Though the Boians left not the pursuit till they
had chased them into a Town called Tanetus, which some call Canetus, where they
blocked them up. When the news came to Rome, that the fourth Legion was thus
besieged by the Boians, they ordered the Roman Legion that had been appointed
to Publius to march to their Relief, giving the Command thereof to the Praetor
Lucius Atilius, with orders to raise more Troops among their Allies. This is
the account of what was transacted in Gaul, after the War broke out, to the
arrival of Hannibal; the state of Matters in that Province being such as was
before related, and as we but now delivered.

Early in the Spring the Roman Consuls, having made due provision of all things
necessary to put their Purposes in execution, embarked for their respective
Governments, Publius steering toward Spain with sixty Vessels, and Tiberius
Sempronius with a Fleet of one hundred and sixty; whose Mind was so inflamed
with desire of Action, and exalted with the provision he had made at Lilybaeum,
that he thought on nothing more than laying siege forthwith to Carthage it
self. Publius kept along the Coast of Liguria, and in six Days arrived from
Pisa at Marseilles; and coming to the hither mouth of the River Rhosne, which
they call the Marseillian, he began to land his Troops; and notwithstanding he
had received notice of Hannibal's having passed the Pyrenaeans, he concluded
however that he could not be so near as he was; the difficulties of the Way,
and the many diverse Nations of the Gauls, by whom the Enemy was to make his
Passage, made him of that Judgment. But Hannibal had surmounted all these
Difficulties, having bought his passage of some, and won it by force of Arms
from others, and was now got with his Army to the Pass over the Rhosne, having
the Sea of Sardinia on his right. When Publius received the news of the Enemy's
approach, he did not at first believe it, as seeming to him incredible, that he
should be able to perform so difficult a march in so short a space:
Nevertheless, he thought it advisable to endeavor after such intelligence as
he might rely upon; accordingly, while his Army lay to refresh themselves, and
recover from the Toils of their Voyage, consulting with his Officers what Posts
would be most proper to possess, and what way to take that he might get before
the Enemy, he commanded out three hundred choice Horse to discover; to whom,
for their Guides, and farther to sustain them, he appointed the Gauls to be
joined, who were in pay to those of Marseilles.

Hannibal being now on the Banks of the Rhosne, within four Days march of the
Sea, at a certain place where the Channel of that River was not very large,
determined speedily to pass his Army, after he had bought the Good Will of the
People of the Country, and purchased all their Canoes and Boats, whereof there
were great numbers; forasmuch as those who live on that River Trassick on the
Sea. Furthermore he amassed great quantities of Materials proper for the making
of Floats, whereof the Soldiers in the space of two Days had made abundant
provision, every one laboring his utmost to excuse the necessity of other Aid,
being resolved to owe their passage over the River to their own single
Industry. In the mean time, the Barbarians, on the opposite side, assembled in
great numbers to oppose their Landing; which Hannibal no sooner perceived, but
he concluded it impossible to compass his Intent by force, having so numerous
an Enemy to oppose him; and that he could no longer remain where he was,
without danger of being encompassed by the Enemy, unless he speedily attempted
something. Whereupon, after three Days debate, about the first Watch of the
Night, he detached a Party of his Army (with the Gauls of the Country for their
Guides) under the leading of Hanno the Son of Bomilcar. After these had marched
about five and twenty Miles up the River, they came to a place where the Water
makes a small Island, and there halted. In this place they felled great
quantities of Timber in the neighboring Woods, and in a short time made a
sufficient number of Floats to wast them; and so got a safe passage over the
Rhosne, none appearing to oppose them: And having gained a piece of Ground,
whose situation fortified it self, they there reposed that Day, not only to
refresh themselves after so toilsome an Expedition, but likewise to prepare for
the farther prosecution of what had been given them in Orders. In the mean
while, Hannibal essayed by all means possible to pass over the River with that
part of the Army that remained with him; and nothing now so much troubled him,
as how to imbark his Elephants, which were to the number of forty eight.

The fifth Night, after the Detachment had passed the River, they drew near the
Barbarians, who were assembled to oppose Hannibal's Landing; who, at the same
time having his Troops in readiness, ordered his Horse to imbark in the great
Vessels, and the best of his Foot in small Boat, prepared to pass over. But to
the end his Floats and small Boats might go with more security, he ordered the
greater Vessels to keep above the Stream, thereby to check the Current of the
River. Another invention they had likewise to transport their Horses; they did
not imbark them, but swam in a Tow after their small Boats, one Man holding
three or four by the Bridle on each side the Boat: Thus many were carried over
at the first essay.

The Barbarians beholding all this Preparation ran in haste and disorder out of
their Camp, conceiving they should have no great difficulty to repulse the
Carthaginians: But as soon as Hannibal perceived the Party on the other side to
approach, (for according to the Orders Hanno had received, they made the signs
of their drawing near by Smoke in several places as they marched) he ordered
his People to move, the great Vessels to keep above, with Directions to those
that governed them to stem the Current, keeping the Vessels with their bow upon
the Stream, the better to cover the others from danger. So each one animating
his Companion with auspicious Words, Labored with incredible Industry to stem
the violence of the Current. In the mean time, the Enemy, on the other side,
gave them to understand by their Cries, not unlike to Howlings, that they
expected them with resolution, insomuch that the prospect every where was
terrible, and held the Spectators in great perplexity.

The Enemy having now wholly abandoned their Tents, those with Hanno fell in
pell-mell among them unperceived: Some attack and set fire on their Camp, while
the greatest part march to charge those that guarded the Passage. The
Barbarians thus surpised, some hastened to preserve their Tents, others
remained to make head and sustain the (...) Hannibal now perceiving the Success
to ^^swer his Design, ranged and drew his People up in Battalia as they Landed,
and encouraging them in few words, they soon came to Blows with the Enemy; who
fighting in disorder, by reason of the surprise, were soon vanquished and
dispersed.

The Carthaginians having thus at once gained the Victory and their Passage,
used all possible dispatch in the transporting what was yet remaining on the
other side the River; and when that Work was over, they encamped that Night on
the Bank. The next Morning, having received Intelligence that the Roman Army,
with their Fleet, was arrived at the mouth of the Rhosne, Hannibal detached
five hundred Numidian Horse, with order to discover and bring an account of the
Enemy. And directed those who best understood that Affair, to take care for the
transporting the Elephants, while he assembled the Army, where he produced
Magilus, who was come to visit him from the Countries that lie about the Po,
accompanied with other Princes of the Gauls, making known to them, by an
Interpreter, the Resolution that People had taken; but what most animated the
Soldiers, was the Presents which those Princes had brought with them, the
tender of their Service, and offers to engage with them, as their Companions,
in the War against the Romans.

In short, after Magilus had assured them he would be their Conductor through
all those Passages by which they were to march, and that they should shortly
arrive in safety in Italy, and want for nothing in their Journey, they thought
it reasonable to yield entire belief to what he said; they were likewise
greatly encouraged by what they heard of the abundance and fertility of the
Country they were to invade, and with the cheerful and frank Behavior of those
who were to join with them in their Conflicts with the Romans. The Gauls being
now retired out of the Assembly, Hannibal returned, where he represented to his
People, first, the important Actions they had already achieved; how many
notable Services by his Counsel and Leading they had already performed; how
many hazardous Adventures they had gone through, whereof not any Man there had
cause to repent: Then he exhorted them to continue firm in their Resolutions,
inasmuch as they were of themselves convinced, that the most difficult part of
the Work was now passed, their Passage over the River succeeding to their own
Wishes; nor could there be any remaining doubt of the Fidelity and Goodwill of
their Allies; he required, in short, that they would entertain no anxious
Thoughts about the future; but rely firmly on his Care and Circumspection;
telling them, that by an entire resignation to his Conduct and Commands, they
would give the best and surest Marks of their Resolution, and ascertain their
Title to the Glory they had already won. And now, after the Soldiers, by their
Words and Actions had unanimously signified their approbation and readiness to
obey him, and their willingness to engage in all Dangers. Hannibal praising
their forwardness, and imploring the assistance of the Gods for their
Preservation, commanded them to retire to their repose, and to be in a
readiness to march, for that he determined to decamp the next Day; so they
departed.

The Assembly was no sooner dismissed when the Numidians returned, who had been
sent abroad to discover; of whom a great part were cut off, and those who
escaped had saved themselves by slight. For having incountred it seems, not far
from the Camp, with certain Horsemen of the Romans, whom Publius had sent
abroad on the same Errand, they had engaged so roughly, that on the part of the
Romans and Gauls, an hundred and fifty were killed on the spot, and of the
Numidians above two hundred, the Romans pursuing the rest to their Camp; by
which means they got knowledge of what had passed with the Carthaginians, and
so retired to their own Army with all the expedition they were able, to assure
the Consul of the Enemies arrival. Whereupon the Romans decamped, imbarking all
their Baggage on board the Fleet, and eagerly wishing to come to action with
the Enemy, they took their march up the River.

The Day after Hannibal had made his Oration to the Army, he ordered all the
Horse to move and march toward the Seacoast, to intercept any sudden Danger
that might threaten from that Quarter; then he commanded the Foot to follow,
while himself attended the coming of the Elephants, and those whom he had left
to conduct them. And here it will not be amiss that we give an account how they
embarked those mighty Beasts. They made many Floats of Timber, whereof they
joined two and two together; these Floats were fifty Foot long each, and were
placed pointing out into the River, their inmost ends resting on the Bank, and
all well united together; then they fastened others to the ends of those,
reaching yet farther out into the River; these Machines so framed (resembling
in some sort a Bridge) were well sustained and fastened with Cordage on all
parts, and defended from the violence of the Stream. They moored or fastened
this Platform to the Trees which grew on the Bank, whereof there were good
store; after having enlarged and run out this Work to about two hundred Foot in
length, they joined to the end thereof two other large substantial Floats well
fastened together, which they so joined to the six'd Platform with Ropes, as to
be able easily to disjoyn them from the other; to these moveable Floats they
fastened Ropes whereby to tow and draw them, with Boats appointed for that
purpose, to the other side the River, and to hold them up against the Current,
that it might not drive down the Stream when the Machine should be loosened
from the fixed Stage; then they covered the surface of it with Earth, to make
it appear firm Ground, like that on the Bank, for the Elephants were taught an
exact Obedience to their Governors, and were so in all things, passing over the
Water only excepted, whereof they stood in great fear: Wherefore, the better to
prevail on the rest, they led two gentle Female Elephants foremost, the others
following. They being brought to the outermost moveable Floats, they then
untied the Ropes by which they were fastened, and towed the said Float with the
Cargo of Elephants to the other side. The Beasts were terrified at first, and
ran from one side to the other of the Float, but beholding nothing but Water on
all sides, their sear then kept them in order. Thus by several Voyages they
wafted over all their Elephants, some few excepted, which leaped through fear
into the Water, when they were in the middle of the Stream; but these were
likewise preserved, though their Guides perished, for by the help of their great
Trunks, which they held above Water, they thereby discharged their Stomachs of
the Water, they had taken in, and breathed with freedom. By this Artifice they
transported their Elephants to the other side the River.

And now Hannibal posting his Horse and his Elephants in the Rear of the Army,
continued his march down the Stream toward the East. The source or head of the
Rhosne is situate far up in the Country, above the Gulf of the Adriatick-Sea
toward the West; in those parts of the Alps which regard the North, tending
in its passage toward the Southwest, and discharging it self into the
Sardinian-Sea. In short, this River for the most part makes its passage through
a Champaign Country, environed on both sides with Mountains, whose North-side
is inhabited by the Gauls-Ardienses, the other is bounded by the North-side of
the Alps. That part of the Alps which runs from Marseilles to the bottom of
the Adriatic, separates the plain Country in the neighborhood of the Po,
whereof we have already spoken, from the Plain where the Rhosne has its
passage. Hannibal then took his march through that Country where the River has
its source, to come into Italy.

Some Authors, who have writ of Hannibal's passage over the Alps, entertain us
with astonishing and incredible Tales of that Voyage, without heeding that they
have thereby committed two Errors, which History of all things will not permit,
for they are constrained thereby to coin Falsehoods of their own, and often
become liable to contradict themselves. For as they give to Hannibal all the
Encomiums of a great and valiant Leader; so at the same time they make him act
with the greatest Imprudence imaginable. Then when they are taken in their own
fabulous Snares, they are forced to bring down the Gods and Demigods to their
Aid, who should not be named but in matters of Truth. Furthermore, they feign
that the Alps are so desert and inaccessible, that far from being passable by
Armies, Horses, and Elephants, Men cannot, without unspeakable travel, pass
them on foot. They tell us farther, that some parts thereof are so waste and
destitute of all Succor, that without the Aid of some Divinity, who led
Hannibal, as it were by the Hand, through those wild Labyrinths he and his Army
had inevitably perished; these, I say, are two Faults in an Historian, which
Men of common Sense easily discover and dislike.

For, in short, were there Truth in what they deliver, where could there be
found in Story a more imprudent General, or Leader worse qualified than
Hannibal, who being at the head of so numerous an Army, in the prosperity of
which all his Hopes were placed, neither knowing any thing of the Country
through which he was to march, nor the course he was to take, nor whither he
went, nor with whom he was to have to do; and what fourth he fell into much
danger. Folly, had engaged in an Enterprise, which, by the common Rules of
Reason, yielded no prospect of Success; but on the contrary, to all appearance,
pursued an Attempt totally unfeisible? For these Authors make Hannibal in the
spring of his Hopes at the head of a flourishing victorious Army, perform such
things as are not likely would be acted by a People already vanquished and
undone, and reduced to the last extremity; namely, to engage their Troops in
Countries and Places totally unknown. For while they tell us all was waste and
desert, and the Country no where passable, do they not plainly accuse their own
Forgeries? But they knew not that the Gauls, who inhabit about the Rhosne, had
often passed the Alps with numerous Armies, long before Hannibal's time; and
not only heretofore, but of late days, they had marched to the relief of those
Gauls who dwell about the Po, during their Wars with the Romans. Furthermore,
they were to learn that even the Alps themselves are inhabited by numerous
Nations; but it was their Ignorance indeed that brought the Demi-God down to
show Hannibal his way. Wherein they follow the Poets, who in their Tragedies,
having for the most part nothing but Fiction and extravagant Adventures for the
subject of their Plays, are able to bring nothing handsomely to pass without a
God or a Machine. After this manner our Historians have proceeded, being forced
to implore some Divinity or other to yield them assistance, and disintangle
them from the Falsehoods and Improbabilities they themselves have made. For how
can a fabulous beginning have other than a fabulous Issue? Most certain it is
that Hannibal did not conduct his Affairs at the rate these Authors would
persuade, but like a wise and able Captain. And there is no doubt, but he well
knew that the Country into which he was leading his Army, was fertile and
abounding in all things, and the Inhabitants alien'd in their Inclinations to
the Romans; that he had with him for Guides the very People of the Country, who
had engaged to partake with him in all his Fortunes. For my own particular, I
speak of these things with so much the more assurance, by how much I have not
only been instructed therein by those who lived in those Days; but that I might
be less liable to Error, I made my self a Journey into the Alps for my better
Information.

To proceed, Publius the Roman General arrived with his Army at the Passage of
the Rhosne, three days after Hannibal's departure, who perceiving the Enemy
gone, was much surpised, and without doubt with good reason, for he could
scarce be persuaded, that the Carthaginian would ever have been drawn to
attempt that way into Italy; especially having to deal with so many barbarous
Nations in his March, incapable of Friendship or keeping their Faith. But after
he had a while reflected on the boldness of the undertaking, he marched back to
the Fleet; where embarking his Army with all expedition, and dispatching his
Brother to carry on the War in Spain, he resolved himself to return by Sea into
Italy, to make head against the Enemy.

In the mean space, after four days march Hannibal arrives at a place called
the Isle, where the Country is rich and well Peopled. It is so called, because
the Soane environs it on one side, and the Rhosne on the other, giving it the
sigure of a Triangle. This Island, both for form and magnitude, much resembles
another in Egypt, which is called Delta; and if there be any difference in the
comparison, it is that Delta is (...), the one side encompassed by the Sea, and
the Rivers that there discharge themselves, and (...) the other with rough and
almost inaccessible Mountains. Here Hannibal found two Princes, that were
Brethren, in Arms against each other, for the Dominion of the Country, their
Armies being drawn up ready to engage. The elder of these two made his
addresses to Hannibal, praying his aid to re-establish him in his Inheritance,
to which he lent a willing ear, foreseeing the Profit he might reap thereby;
wherefore, after he had entered into Friendship with him, and compelled the
other to retire, he received many singular benefits of the said Prince, who did
not only supply his Army with refreshments, and whatever they stood in need of;
but exchanging Hannibal's old worn-out Arms for new ones, which he delivered
him; he did in some sort recruit his Army. He further supplied them with what
Clothes they wanted, and greatly assisted them in their Passage over the
Mountains. But the most remarkable service he did them, was, that forasmuch as
they were in some jealousy in passing the Frontiers of the Gauls, called
Allobroges, he conducted Hannibal by another way more safe, and brought him to
the place where they begin to ascend the Alps.

Hannibal having marched near an hundred Miles in ten days along the River
Rhosne, met with mighty difficulties after his Army had entered on the
Mountains; and in truth the Allobroges had no purpose to attack them, while
they held their March in the Plains, fearing both their Horse, and the Gauls
that accompanied the Army. But these were no sooner gone, and that Hannibal
began to ascend the Mountains, when they drew together in great numbers, and
possessed themselves of the Posts where Hannibal must unavoidably March; and
most assuredly, had they but kept themselves longer concealed, the Carthaginian
Army had run a mighty hazard; but being discovered by Hannibal, though they did
him some Mischief, they were requited with equal loss. For Hannibal was no
sooner informed, that the Barbarians were Masters of the Passes, when he made
his Army halt, and take their Quarters that Night among the Rocks and
Fastnesses. In the mean while he dispatched a Party of Gauls, who served him
for Guides, to discover the Posture of the Enemy, and learn what they could of
their purpose. And having understood that they kept Guard in those places only
by Day, but that in the Night they retired to a Town not far off; he found this
Expedient to obviate the present Inconvenience: He decamped in broad Day, and
by slow Motions advanced with his Army; till arriving not far from the
Streights, he then encamped not far from the Enemy; and causing Fires to be
made in the Camp about the first Watch of the Night, where he left the greatest
part of his Troops, himself, in the mean while, with a Detachment of his best
Men, passed the Streights in the Night; and while the Enemy was retired to the
Town, according to their Custom, took possession of those Posts, where they
were wont before to keep their Guard.

When Day discovered to the Enemy what had passed, they did not presently
determine what to do; but when they observed the great quantity of Baggage that
appeared, and perceived that the Horse could afford them no succor, which by
reason of the narrow, stony, and broken ways, could not march but in defiles,
they then resolved on the Attack. And now as the Barbarians thus fell on them
from all Quarters at once, the Way it self being almost as terrible as the
Enemy, the Carthaginians received great loss, especially in their Horses and
Beasts of Carriage; for the Way being straight, stony, and broken, the Beasts
of Burden were easily thrown down, and disordered, falling into Precipices. But
the Horses that were wounded gave them the greatest trouble; for falling by
their Wounds among the other Beasts, and laboring to rise and recover their
Feet in so narrow a Way, so crowded, they cast down others by their striving to
save themselves; which was the occasion of great Labor and Tumult. This being
observed and considered by Hannibal, who well knew the Army could not subsist
without their Beasts of Burden, which carried their Necessaries, he
immediately left the Posts he had taken, and came to the relief of those who
were thus hard pressed in their passage; when falling on the Enemy from higher
Ground, he did not fail of doing them great Damage: But the evil was, that his
own People were thereby equal Sufferers; for the fear increasing everywhere by
this new Tumult, many miscarried and were lost in the Crowd; but, in the end,
most of the Allobroges were slain on the place, and the rest saved themselves
by Flight. And now their Horses and other Beasts, after some time of rest, were
led with great trouble and difficulty through the Straight; but Hannibal, after
he had escaped this Danger, marched himself with a good Detachment against the
Town, that had harbored the Enemy, which he took without resistance, finding
it almost quite deserted, the Inhabitants being all gone out in hopes of Booty.
This adventure proved very useful to his Affairs, both with respect to the
present and the future: For he here recovered many, both Men and Horses, and
other Beasts, which had fallen into the Enemy's hands, and Cattle and Corn
sufficient to sustain the Army for three Days. But, above all, the Terror he
had given by this success to the circumjacent places was such, that none of the
Gauls inhabiting the Towns near which he was to pass, gave him the least
molestation in his Passage. In this Town Hannibal took up his Quarters, where
he remained a Day to rest and refresh his Army, and then prosecuted his
Journey. For three Days together he marched without Trouble or Alarm, but the
fourth he fell into much danger. The People inhabiting in the Towns on the way
he was to pass, having secretly conspired against him, met him however, with
Olive-branches, and Garlands of Flowers, Signs among the Barbarians of Peace
and Friendship, as the Caduceus is among the Greeks, Hannibal, who had now
learned how far he was to trust these People, endeavored by Questions to
inform himself of their Purposes. They told him, That they had received notice
of his Success against the Town, and of the loss and defeat of those who had
attacked him in his march; but as to themselves, they came to give him
assurance, That they were resolved to do him no Injury, nor suffer any to be
done to him by others: And that they were ready to give him Hostages for their
Fidelity. Hannibal remained long undetermined what to do, having no great
Opinion of their Sincerity; but, in the end, weighing that to make a show of
believing them, might work on their Goodnature, and by degrees win them to his
Friendship, if he seemed to accept their Tenders; and that in case of refusal,
they might presently become his Enemies he feigned to consent to their
Proposal; and seemed, as they did, disposed to enter into terms of Friendship
with them. In short, after these Barbarians had given him security for their
peaceable Behavior, supplied his Army with Provisions, and that they conversed
among the Carthaginians with all manner of freedom and confidence, Hannibal
began to have a better Opinion of their Sincerity, and accepted their Service
for his Guides through the many remaining difficult Ways by which they were to
pass. Howbeit, after they had thus conducted the Army for two Days together,
they assembled at length all into one Body, and attacked the Rear at a Defile,
or straight Passage, as they were marching in a Valley full of Rocks and broken
Ground.

Great likelihood there was that the Carthaginian Army had here run the hazard
of being entirely destroyed, had not their General, who reserved a secret doubt
of the well-meaning of this People, obviated the mischief of this treasonable
Purpose of theirs, by ordering his Horse and Baggage to march in the Van of the
Army, and his choicest Foot to sustain the Rear. But having disposed matters
after this manner, his loss became less grievous; for his Foot in the
Arrear-guard proved sufficient to put a stop to the violence of the Attempt.
Nevertheless, they were not without great loss both of Men and Horses; and the
Enemy, who was possessed of the Ground above them, brought such terror into the
Army, by rolling down mighty Stones and Rocks from the Precipices upon them,
and showring Vollies of Stones on their Heads, that Hannibal was compelled to
take up his Quarters for that Night on the top of an Eminence, exposed to the
open Sky, with that part of the Army that was with him, remote from the Horse
and the rest of the Troops, and the Baggage, the better to cover and defend,
them from danger; who were hardly able, in all that Night, with great labor,
to compass their passage through the Valley. In the Morning, the Enemy being
now retired, Hannibal joined his Army and Baggage, and advanced toward the top
of the Alps. After this the Gauls attempted no more to attack them in Bodies,
but in smaller Parties, and with less ardour than before; nevertheless falling
sometimes on the Van, sometimes on the Rear of the Army, they seldom failed of
making some spoil of the Baggage. The Elephants happened to be of great use to
the Carthaginians in these Conflicts; for wheresoever they chanced to appear,
they so terrified the Enemy, that the Army marched by that means with much less
molestation. In nine Days after this, Hannibal gained the top of the Mountains,
where he halted two Days, being willing to give some repose to such of his Army
as were come thus far without Wound or Sickness, and to attend the coming of
the rest of his Troops that were yet behind. During this stay, many Horses and
Beasts of Carriage, which had fallen and strayed out of the way, came in of
their own accord, following the Track of the Army to the great wonder of the
Beholders.

But whereas the Snows were yet great in the Mountains, (Winter not being there
quite over) Hannibal perceiving his Soldiers to be somewhat discouraged by
reason of the Sufferings they had already felt, and out of apprehension of what
yet threatened them, caused the Army to be assembled, to the end he might speak
to them, and inspire them with new Resolution; which he could no way better
effect, than by giving them a view and prospect of Italy; which, in a word,
lies so fairly to the Eye, spreading and extending it self at the foot of those
Mountains, that Nature seems to have designed them as a Rampart to cover and
defend it. So he gave them a survey of the Champaign Country that spreads it
self all about the River Po; and gave them to understand how welcome they
should be to the People that Inhabited it. He pointed out likewise to them
whereabout the City of Rome stood; and by this Artifice animated his harassed
Army. The Day following he decamped, and began to descend the Mountains; and
now saw no more of the Enemy to molest them in their march, saving some small
scattered Parties, who rather awaited occasions how to steal than to fight.
Howbeit, Hannibal's Losses were not lessened, by reason of the great Snows and
the exceeding bad march they had had, which much weakened the Army. Nor was
their passage much better in the descent; for what with the straight, steep,
and slippery ways, and the depth of the Snow, the Soldier knew not where to set
his Foot with safety; for whenever they slipped, they were in danger of being
lost, and swallowed up in the depths and precipices which lay hid and covered
by the Snow. Nevertheless, the long practice in those Hardships and Dangers,
taught them to suffer all with Constancy: But at length coming to a place where
neither their Elephants nor Horses could pass, the Way, which was very steep
before, being now, by the falling away of some of the Earth, become more
difficult, renewed their Fears; which was manifest over the whole Army. Upon
this accident, Hannibal took a resolution to attempt another way, by taking a
compass about those Mountains, though there was no appearance of any passage; but
forasmuch as the great Snows rendered that Resolution too hazardous, all places
being covered and hid from the view, he therefore changed his purpose.

In the interim, there having fallen much new Snow on that which remained of
the Winter before; this last being loose, and not yet deep, yielded firm
footing enough to the Soldiers; but this was no sooner trampled on, but it
dissolved into Dirt and Mire; whereby the Snow of last Year being frozen under
it, it became impossible to march thereon any more than on Ice it self, none
being able to keep their Feet; and when they endeavored to sustain themselves
on their Hands and Knees, they often slid and were lost in Pits and Precipices.
When their Horses at any time slipped, they by their weight and laboring broke
the Ice under them, and so became buried and frozen to Death. Whereupon
Hannibal now desperate of obtaining his passage that way, encamped his Army at
the entrance of this Pass, after he had first ordered the Snow to be removed
which covered all the Ground; and then by the labor of his Soldiers he wrought
into the Hill it self, and by unspeakable Pains made his Passage at length
through it: So in one Day he made way for his Horses and other Beasts to pass,
which immediately marched on. And now decamping the Army, he sent his Horse and
other Beasts to forage and recruit themselves, as they could come at Pasture,
where the Ground was not covered with Snow. In the mean time he ordered the
Numidians to make a passage for the Elephants, which cost them three Days
labor with great difficulty to effect; but at length they made way for those
Animals, which had suffered much, and were almost dead with Hunger. For there
was neither Forage nor Tree to be found on that part of the Alps, nor in the
neighborhood; the Ground lying ever covered with Snow Winter and Summer, but
the lower Grounds on all sides produce Woods and Covert, and there is no place
thereabout that is not habitable.

After Hannibal had united his Troops, he prosecuted his march, and in the
space of three Days got past these difficult and incommodious Places, whereof
we have given an account, and recovered the Plains, howbeit with the loss of
great numbers of his People; for many fell by the Enemy, many were drowned in
passing the Rivers, and many of Sickness, and the Hardships of their march to
and over the Alps. And as he lost many Men, so his loss of Horses and other
Beasts of Burden, was yet much greater. In a word, after a march of five
Months, from his departure from New-Carthage, and fifteen Days passage over the
Alps, he boldly advanced into the Champaign Country, lying about the River Po,
and the Frontiers of the Insubrians. Of the Troops that marched out with him,
there now remained, of Africans about twelve Thousand; eight Thousand
Spaniards, and six Thousand Horse, according to his own Register, left by him,
engraved on the Column at Lacinium, which specified that number. About this
time Publius Cornelius, who had left his Troops with Cneius his Brother, to
prosecute the War against Asdrubal in Spain. embarked for Pisa, and from thence
passing through Tuscany, joined the Armies of the Praetors, who were in service
in that Country against the Boians; with these he took his march toward the
Po, where he encamped with design to come speedily to a Battle with Hannibal.
And now that we are arrived in Italy, and have translated the War, Armies and
Leaders on both sides thither; it seems necessary that we preface something to
the Reader, as the order of our History requires, before we enter on the
account of the Battles and Transactions that occurred in that Province. For
some may possibly be apt to remark and inquire, why, having spoken so copiously
of Spain, we should have yet said nothing touching other Points of Geography;
namely, of the Straight that parts the two Continents of Europe and Africa, nor
of the great neighboring Sea and its qualities, nor of the Islands of Britany,
nor of their Lead-Mines, their Gold and Silver in Spain, whereof Historians
have said so much that they contradict one another? But we have not spoken of
these matters, not only because it serves to little purpose in the use of
History; but first, because such digressions at every turn are apt to perplex
the course of our Work, and to divert the Reader's attention from the genuine
purpose and thread of our Story. Furthermore, our purpose being not to
discourse superficially, and by the bye, of things, but to take them up when
they fairly and regularly present themselves, and then seasonably and duly to
deliver the Truth copiously and plainly as far as we shall be able. Let it not
appear strange then, that neither in this place, nor heretofore, we have
^orborn to touch on many Points as we have said. For if any one fancies it to
be the Duty of an Historian to be taken with every hint that falls in his way,
and to touch promiscuously on all Subjects on the least motive; let such take
care lest they be justly compared to the Glutton at a Feast, who, while his
Appetite tempts him to taste of every Dish, he receives neither present
Pleasure nor future Profit; on the contrary, he contracts only ill Digestion
and worse Nourishment. People of that Humor, I say, in the study of History,
have neither present Diversion in the Reading, nor Fruit in the Application for
the time to come.

There are many Vices in History, whereof we shall mention some that ought
carefully to be reformed, whereof this we have now named is among the greatest.
Do not all, or most part of Historians, affect to entertain their Readers with
Descriptions of the remotest parts of the known World, setting down the
situation of Places and Countries, and describing their Nature and the like?
Where it is odds, but the greatest part of them are deceived in many
particulars they deliver, it will be but just therefore to show them their
Faults, and endeavor solidly, not superficially, to refute them, not taking up
the Argument, as it were, by chance. The course we shall take to correct these
Errors, shall not be to blame and inveigh against the Authors, but rather in a
manner of compassion to show heartily wherein they have failed through
Ignorance. For most certain it is, that had they arrived at our times, they
themselves would have seen things by a better Light, and reformed much of their
own Failures. For there were sew Greeks to be found heretofore, who had
over-diligently visited remote Nations, not having the means to gratify their
desires therein; it not being to be compassed in those days, without running
extreme dangers both by Sea and Land. Furthermore, if any one by chance, at any
time, happened of necessity to visit distant Countries, even the remotest
Provinces of the known World, what would the Remarks of a single Traveller
amount to? Since it could not be possible those Places should be known as they
ought, for the greatest part of those People are Barbarous and Savage, and many
parts Desert, and Inhospitable. In short, another difficulty would spring
through the diversity of strange Languages, whereby it would hardly be possible
to be rightly informed in any thing they saw. And albeit People should happen
to see and learn the situation of those Regions, there would be few found whose
Candor might be trusted, and Men would doubt that much of what they deliver is
fabulous, and of their own coining. So hard it is in such cases not to mingle
with Truth, the Tales of their own Invention.

Since it seems then impossible, that our Forefathers could be thoroughly
instructed in all the Subjects of History, Authors therefore who have been
silent in matters, which it may be conceived they ought to have better opened;
and even those, who have said more than we find they ought, are however without
much blame, though they do not deserve our praise, since they were not without
some tincture of Knowledge, and farther'd in some degree the Curiosity of
others. But now, in our days, that Asia by the Victories of Alexander has been
traveled and discovered, and the Armies of the Romans have opened a passage
both by Sea and Land, whereby to arrive at the certain knowledge of the rest of
the World; our Informations come with more certainty of those things, which
heretofore we could not speak of with assurance. Especially in this Age, when
many who have been employed in the administration of Public Affairs, are now
released from the cares of both Military and Civil Applications, and have
leisure and means to apply their studies in other curious Speculations. I shall
strive to do my part at least, when occasion shall seasonably serve, to bring
things to a better light; and mingle in these my Labors such proper Matter as
may, to those who delight in this Subject, minister to their better
Information. And since I have been at the cost of so much time and peril in my
Travels into Gaul, Africa, Spain, and on the Ocean that borders on these
Countries, spent in the acquisition of Knowledge, I hold it not a vain design
to detect and reform the Mistakes of ancient Authors, by enlarging my Accounts
and Descriptions of these Parts of the World. But it is now time we return to
prosecute our Story, and prepare to relate the Battles and Transactions of the
Romans and Carthaginians in Italy.

We have already set down the number of Hannibal's Troops, when he made his
entry into Italy. Who at the end of his march, first encamped at the foot of
the Mountains, to recruit and refresh his Army, which was not only greatly
harrass'd in their passage over the Alps, but much spent through the great
scarcity of Provisions in their way, and the Diseases they contracted thereby;
many in despair neglected their own Preservation, through the continual
Hardships and Calamities to which they were exposed: For it was an insuperable
difficulty to find Victuals that might suffice for so numerous an Army, where
many, who were commanded out to provide and bring what they wanted, miscarried,
both Men and Beasts, in their Journey. So that Hannibal, who passed the Rhosne
at the head of eight and thirty Thousand Foot, and above eight Thousand Horse,
mustered not half that number at his arrival in Italy, as has been already
noted. And those who remained so changed from what they were, that both in
Cloths and Countenance they appeared more like Savages than Soldiers. Wherefore
his first and chief care was, to restore Health and Strength to their Bodies,
and Vigor to their Minds, and to recruit and strengthen his Horse. When his
Army was refreshed, his next business was to endeavor an Alliance with the
Taurinians, who inhabit at the foot of the Alps, and who at that time had War
with the Insubrians; but they would not be drawn to trust the Carthaginians.
Wherefore, after having long solicited them to Friendship in vain, he sat down
before their Capital Town, which in three Days he took, and all that made
resistance he put to the Sword; which struck the neighboring Barbarians with
such terror, that they came all afterward in to him as one Man, giving
themselves up to his discretion. These indeed were constrained; but the other
Gauls, who possessed the Country about the Po, cheerfully took part with
Hannibal, as was lately observed. But in regard now that the Roman Army was
advanced so near, they adventured not presently to show their Goodwill; but
some of them were constrained to take part with them. Whereupon Hannibal
thought it the wisest way not to deferr longer, but to take his March into
their Country; to the end, that by some notable Action he might establish the
Courage, and renew the Hopes of those who were disposed to engage with him.

During these Motions, he receives Intelligence, That the Consul had passed the
Po with all the Legions, and was not now far off. But this News he did not
presently believe, inasmuch as he knew he had left Scipio about the Rhosne, and
that the Passage by Sea from Marseilles to Tuscany was tedious and difficult.
Furthermore, he was informed, that the March from Tuscany to the Alps was not
only long, but hardly to be surmounted by an Army. But, in the end, fresh
Advices coming daily to him of the truth thereof, he became greatly surpised
at the Diligence of the Roman General, who was no less astonished at the
Expedition of the Carthaginian: For he was of Opinion, That Hannibal would not
have attempted to adventure over the Alps, at the head of an Army composed of
so many diverse Nations; or that if he was so hardy, he must have miserably
perished by the way. But when he became assured, that they were got over those
Difficulties, and were now in Italy; and farther, that they had already
besieged and taken Towns; he admired the intrepid Boldness of their Leader,
whose Attempt had exceeded the Power of Imagination it self. This News was
likewise heard at Rome with terror enough; where, after they had been informed
of the taking of Saguntum by the Carthaginians; and while they were, as it
were, deliberating to send one of their Consuls into Africa to attack Carthage,
and the other into Spain to make War on Hannibal, they received notice that
Hannibal himself was in Italy besieging of Towns. This was so surprising to the
Romans, that the dread thereof made them send an express to Tiberius now at
Lilybaeum, to acquaint him with the arrival of the Enemy, and to enjoin him to
postpone all other Affairs whatsoever, and repair with all the expedition he
could to the rescue of his Country. Whereupon Tiberius assembles his Maritime
Forces, and embarks forthwith for Rome, leaving his Orders with the respective
Tribunes, to draw together what Troops they could out of their several
Garrisons, and set them a Day to rendezvous at Rimini, a Town standing on the
Coast of the Adriatic, on the edge of the Plains that are watered by the River
Po toward the South. So that great trouble and tumult was spread all over the
Country; which being alarmed on all Quarters with evil Tidings, the Romans were
in great suspense about the issue of the War.

And now Hannibal and Scipio drew near each other; and mutually animating their
Soldiers, spoke to them in such terms as the time and the occasion required.
Hannibal incited his Troops after this, or the like manner: He caused to be
brought to the head of the Army, which he had assembled for that purpose,
certain young Men who were Prisoners, of the number of those that had been
taken vexing and plundering the Army in their march over the Alps, whom he had
therefore kept in very hard durance. In short, they appeared laden with Irons,
starved almost to death, bearing on their naked Bodies the marks of the ill
treatment they had suffered. In this state these Wretches were presented to the
view of the Army; where Arms were brought and laid before them, such as were
used among the Gauls, and not unlike those the Princes of that Nation make use
of in their single Combats: Besides these, there were produced Horses, and rich
Habits and Furniture. Then it was demanded, If any among them were willing to
engage and fight one with the other to the death, on condition the Vanquisher
should have the Prize and the Reward there proposed, while the Vanquished
thereby put an end to his Misfortunes, by laying down his Life on the place?
Which Proposition they all unanimously cried out they were most willing to
accept. Whereupon Hannibal ordered a certain number to be chosen by lot to
enter the Lists, two and two, each imploring Fortune's favor. Those to whom
the Lots ^ell manifested great joy, while the others, on the contrary,
exceeding Grief. So they fought it out, while the rest of the Prisoners looked
on the Vanquished, as hardly less fortunate than the Victors, having by their
death put a period to the Miseries they endured. Nor had the Carthaginians
themselves other Sentiments; who comparing the Life of those that survived,
with the Circumstances of those they saw slain, their Pity seemed to incline to
the Survivers, conceiving the Dead to be of the two the least unfortunate.

After Hannibal had entertained his Army with this Spectacle, he told them,
That his purpose in so treating those Prisoners, was to instruct them, by an
Example of the Calamities of others, in the Contingences of Human Life, and to
the end to mind them of the State and Circumstances wherein they now were; for
that, in a word, Fortune had now put them under the very same choice, and held
out the same Prize and Rewards: That they were tied up to the same necessity of
vanquishing, dying, or being made Captives to their Enemies: That if they
obtained Victory, not fine Horses only magnificently furnished, would be their
Lot, but, by subduing the Romans, they would be the richest and happiest of all
that ever had born Arms: That if they chanced to die doing their Duty bravely,
such a Death was a Dignity full of Glory and Renown; a Death without pain or
fear, and purchased in pursuit of the greatest Good that can happen to Mankind:
But should they chance to be vanquished, and that the fear of Death or Danger
should betray them to a base Flight; or if they had entertained any Thought
otherwise to be safe, they must then determine to endure the last effects of
Misery and Misfortune. He said, There could be none among them so weak or
stupid, who, reflecting on the tedious and terrible March they had had from
their Native Homes thither, the many Perils, Combats, and dangerous Rencounters
they had passed, the fearful Rivers they had Forded, and the like Dangers in
their passage, can have the least shadow of expectation by slight, ever to
return back: And that since that Hope was totally extinguished, they would do
well to have the same Motions of Compassion of their own Fortune, as they
entertained but now for that of others. For as they esteemed the Condition of
the Victors and the Vanquished equal, or rather saw cause to pity the
Survivers, they could do no less for themselves than fight bravely; chiefly
indeed to Conquer, but to die rather than not Overcome: For should it be their
hap to be Vanquished, there would be no hopes of living; but if they could with
determination imprint these Reslections in their Minds, there would be no doubt
of Success, nor fear but they should live to enjoy the Fruits of it. That, in a
word, none ever brought such Thoughts about them into the Field, whether out of
their own Temper or Necessity, that were not crowned with Victory. That the
Romans hitherto had to deal with Enemies otherwise than so inspired, who, for
the most part, placed their Safety in flight, by reason they ^ought in the
neighborhood of their Country, which was their refuge; and by which means they
wanted Resolution to sustain the shock of Danger like an Enemy strengthened by
Despair. Hannibal's Army heard with cheerfulness the discourse he made them,
and manifested their Minds to be such as their Captain himself desired. He
therefore highly applauded their generous Behavior, and after he had told
them, they should be in a readiness to march early on the Morrow, he dismissed
the Assembly.

Cornelius Scipio had now passed the Po, and because he designed to advance
further, he caused a Bridge to be made over the Tesin. And drawing the Army
together, he told them many things touching the Dignity and Glory of the
Roman-State, and of the memorable Actions of their Ancestors. But take the
relation (a little more or less) of what he delivered on that occasion. He told
them, That though it might have so happened, that they had never yet tried the
Enemy they had now to deal with, they should nevertheless have reason to rely
on Victory; but since they were to fight against Carthaginians, they ought to
hold it an insupportable Indignity to the Name of a Roman, that People so often
by them beaten, and who had been so long their Tributaries, and bred to
Servitude, should presume to look with an angry Eye on a Roman. But, says he,
since we have learned by many glorious Experiments, that this Enemy will never
have assurance to endure our approach; What ought we not to hope, if things are
rightly weighed? How lately was it proved, that their Horse is inferior to
ours? which beat them at the Rhosne, and, after killing many, pursued the rest
to their Camp. He told them, That the General, and the rest of the Army, having
had News of the approach of the Roman Legions, had retreated as if they sled,
and the Terror they were in had compelled them sore against their Wills to
attempt passing the Alps back again. He farther told them, That Hannibal was
come with but an handful of Men, having lost the greatest part of his Army in
his March; and that those he had with him were so harrass'd and weakened with
Diseases, and the Hardships they had suffered, that they were totally disabled
for Service. He farther told them, That the greatest part of their Horse were
lost and made unserviceable by the broken and stony ways they had marched
through. He endeavored, by the like suggestions to persuade the Army, that the
showing themselves only would be enough to obtain the Victory; and that
furthermore, barely to behold the Enemy they had to deal with, would inspire
them with Contempt. He said, in short, That he would not have quitted the
Fleet, nor his Spanish Expedition, whither he had been commanded to go, nor
would have taken his March so willingly, had he not been firmly convine'd, by
many Arguments and Reasons, that the Journey he had undertaken was greatly for
the Good of his Country, and that the Victory was certain. And now, being a Man
of great Account and Authority, and it seeming to them that what he said was
true, the Army with great Ardour and Resolution, demanded to be led against the
Enemy. So after having commended their Cheerfulness, and made them an
Exhortation to be always in a Posture to receive his farther Commands, he
dismissed them.

On the Morrow these two Captains began their March along the River, toward
that part which regards the Mountains: The Romans on the Left, the others on
the Right. The next Day, receiving News by their respective Foragers, that the
Armies drew near, they both thought good to encamp where they were, and
entrench themselves. But the next Morning Hannibal, at the head of his whole
Body of Horse, and Scipio with his, to whom they joined their Archers, took the
Field; both wishing to see each other. And they no sooner perceived by the Dust
that was raised, that the Gross on each side drew near, when they began to
range themselves in order of Battle. Scipio put his Darters in the Van, and
mixed the Gaulish Horse among them, and having ordered the rest Front-wise,
moved slowly on. As for Hannibal, he placed his Horse that went with a single
Bridle in the Vanguard, together with all the other chosen Horse he had, and
so advanced against the Romans. He had likewise placed his Numidians on the
Wings, to the end he might be able to come to attack the Romans Flank, and so
surround them. And as the Leaders on both sides, and the Troops they commanded,
were eager to engage, they soon came to Blows. But scarce had the Roman Darters
delivered their first Volley, when terrified with the Violence of the Enemies
Charge, and fearing to be trod and run down by the Horse which advane'd, they
retired in haste through the Intervals of their Battle, among their Horse.
Those Bodies that came to engage hand to hand fought with Resolution on both
sides, and equal Bravery a good space, and the dispute seemed no other than
between Horse and Foot mingled, for many in the heat of the Battle alighted and
fought on Foot. But when the Numidians, by taking a compass had got on the
Romans Flank, the Darters, who had retreated thither, as was observed, were
sorely streighten'd and soon defeated, the Numidians having in' compassed the
greatest part of them. And now, at length, those in the Van, on the part of the
Romans, who before stood so firm, having lost many Men, who had sold themselves
at a good Price, were likewise driven to give ground upon the Numidians,
charging their Flank.

Many made their escape, some one way, some another; some rallied about the
Consul, who forthwith decamped from about the Tesin, and led his Troops toward
the Bridge over the Po, with intention to pass there; for as the Champaign
Country in those Parts is of great extent, and that Hannibal was stronger in
Horse, Scipio for that reason labored to lead the Legions into some safer and
more proper Country; and the rather, for that he was himself indisposed of a
Wound he received in the Battle. Hannibal staid some time in expectation the
Legions would have appeared; but after he understood that the Romans had
abandoned their Camp, he followed them in the Rear as far as the Bridge, which
he found broken, where he took about six hundred Prisoners of those that were
left there on the Guard. And being told that the rest of the Army were now
marched a good distance off, he led his Troops up along the River in search of
a proper place where he might make a Bridge; and, after two Days march, having
found means to make one of Boats, he ordered Asdrubal to lead over the Army,
passing himself likewise; there he gave Audience to sundry Ambassadors, who
came to him from several places. For the bruit of his Victory was no sooner
spread, when all the neighboring Gauls became disposed to declare for the
Carthaginians; and, as it had been before suggested, they now courted their
Friendship, supplying them with whatever they wanted, and offering frankly to
join their Forces, and take part in their Adventures. Hannibal gave courteous
Reception to those who were come with these Tenders, and after the Army had
passed the River, he led them back down the Stream, and marched with great
Diligence to intercept the Enemy. But Publius Scipio, after he had passed the
Po, marched directly to Placentia, a Colony of the Romans, where he staid among
the rest who were hurt in the Battle, to attend the cure of his Wounds, and
believing the Army to be now in Safety, he there remained without further
attempting any thing. But Hannibal arriving in two Days after he had passed the
River, drew out his Army the next Day in Battalia in view of the Enemy; but the
Romans not offering to stir, he retired and encamped about ten Miles off.

In the mean time the Gauls, who bore Arms under the Romans, beholding Fortune
now to declare in favor of the Carthaginians, deliberated by common Consent to
desert their Service, but continued quiet in their Tents, waiting the time to
put their purpose in execution. And now, when the Army was reposing in their
Quarters, about the fourth Watch they put themselves into Arms, and falling on
the Romans that were nearest at hand, killed many, and wounded many more, and
cutting off the Heads of those they had murdered, marched to the Carthaginians
to the number of two Thousand Foot, and two Hundred Horse. Hannibal, by the
kind reception he gave them, manifested how welcome the Action was to him; and,
after he had with great gentleness invited them into his Service, and with
ample Promises to every one according to his degree, he gave them leave to
retire for the present to their respective Habitations, thereby to spread the
Fame of his Actions, and to win over others to the Service and Friendship of
the Carthaginians. And he had reason to conclude, they would now be constrained
for the most part to come in to him, after so persidious an act done by their
Countrymen. At the same time Ambassadors came to him from the Boians, bringing
with them a Present of the three Roman Commissioners they had taken (as was
observed) on the breaking out of the War, who had been deputed for the dividing
and setting out the Lands in their Colonies. Hannibal gratefully received their
Message, and their Offer, and entered into Confederacy with them; but restored
back the Prisoners to their keeping, advising them to secure them under a safe
Guard, whereby to redeem their Hostages, as they had formerly proposed. Sciplo
much lamented the loss of his People, who had been cut off by so vile an Act of
Treachery; and rightly judging that the Gauls, who of a long time had nourished
an inbred Aversion to the Romans, would (especially those of the neighboring
Countries, after having acted so criminal a Part) go over to the Carthaginians;
he therefore thought it Wisdom, for the time to come, to be more on his guard
touching that People. Wherefore he decamped about the fourth Watch of the Night
following, and marched and encamped near the River Trebia, upon certain
Eminences not far off, resting pretty well assured of the strength of the
situation, it being in the neighborhood of many of their Allies. Hannibal
getting intelligence of the motions of the Romans, sent his Numidians in
pursuit of them; after these marched the whole Horse of the Army, and himself
with the Gross soon followed them. The Numidians coming to the Romans Camp, and
finding it empty, stayed to set it on fire, which greatly availed the Romans in
their retreat: For the Horse, but for this delay caused by the Numidians, had
certainly overtaken the Romans before they had passed the Plains; in which case
they undoubtedly had been very much exposed. But forasmuch as the Roman Army
had now time to pass over the Trebia, the Enemy coming short, had only the
occasion left them of attacking their Rear-guard, whereof some were slain, and
others made Prisoners. Scipio then having thus compassed his Passage over the
River, encamped, I say, on high ground not far from it; and intrenching himself
there, attended the coming of Tiberius, and the Legions that were with him,
using all possible care and skill to get well of his Wounds, that he might be
in a state to give the Enemy speedy Battle. But Hannibal, arriving two Days
after he had passed the River, drew up his Army in view of the Romans; who not
being disposed to engage him, he marched away, and encamped six Miles off; the
Gauls (who had now recovered Courage by the hopes he had given them) supplying
him with Provisions in abundance, and all things else of which he stood in
need, being determined to share with the Carthaginians in all that should befall
them. When the News came to Rome of the Battle of the Horse, they were
astonished at the account of the issue, as expecting quite other success; but
they comforted themselves with many Reasons to conclude, that at least they
were not quite vanquished in that occasion. Some took leave to blame the
Temerity of their Leader; and others raged against the perfidious Gauls: But,
in a word, while they were assured that their Legions were entire, and had
suffered nothing, they were resolved to abate nothing of their Hopes. And when
Tiberius Sempronius arrived, and they beheld his Troops pass through the City,
they were persuaded, That such an Army by barely showing themselves to the
Enemy, would do enough to vanquish them. When the Troops were rendezvous'd at
Rimini, pursuant to the Orders they had received, and that they had taken the
customary Oath, the Consul marched forthwith in quest of Scipio; and as soon as
he arrived, he encamped by him, taking care to refresh his Soldiers, who had
had a tedious Voyage of forty Days betwixt Lilybaeum and Rimini. In the mean
space, Preparations were making to fight the Enemy; during which time, Tiberius
never departed from Scipio, informing himself of every thing that had passed,
and deliberating with him about what was best farther to be done.

About the same time Hannibal became possessed of Clastidium, which he got by
Intelligence, the Town being delivered up to him by one Publius a Brundusian,
who had received the Government from the Romans. Here Hannibal found store of
Corn, which he now stood in great need of: The Prisoners he took with him, whom
he treated with lenity enough; endeavoring to make show by that Action, of the
gentle usage those might hope from him; who though they had taken part with the
Romans, should so deliver themselves up to his discretion, and to the end they
might with less apprehension resign themselves to his Clemency. He treated
likewise the treacherous Governor with great respect, and rewarded him
magnificently, the better to work upon others to do the like, who had any
charge under the Romans. And now receiving Intelligence, That certain Gauls his
Confederates, inhabiting between the Po and the Trebia, held secret Commerce
with the Romans, (who, it seems, conceived, that by covertly favoring both
Parties, they should be able to insure their Safety either way) against those
he sent a Detachment of about two thousand Foot, and a thousand Numidian and
Gaulish Horse, who punctually performed their Orders, ravaging the Country, and
taking much Booty. Whereupon the Gauls so treated, applied to the Romans to
succor and secure them. Sempronius, who had long thirsted after an occasion to
come to action; having now found it, forthwith orders the major part of his
Horse, and about a thousand Darters to march, who fall on the Numidians and
Gauls, that were still pillaging the Country on the other side the Trebia,
taking them by surprise, and without any order, and while they were in contest
among themselves about sharing their Plunder; and being too hard for them, beat
and pursued them to their Camp. But they were no sooner discovered from the
Rampart, when the Carthaginians taking the Alarm, sallied to their relief, and
made the Romans in their turn to show their Backs, and hasten to their Camp.
Which being observed by Sempronius, he commanded out all the Cavalry and
Darters he had, who obliged the Carthaginians to return as hastily as they
came, and cover themselves in their Retrenchments. Hannibal, who was not yet
ready to come to a Battle, and believed that he ought not to hazard all at one
hasty Cast, and without mature Deliberation, behaved himself in this Rencounter
in such manner, as that all the World must own, became a Great General: For
contenting himself barely to make those who had sled into the Camp, to face
about and make head against the Enemy, he then sounded a retreat, not
permitting them to pursue the Romans, or longer to engage. The Romans stood
their ground for a space; and after they had sustained some loss themselves,
but done greater execution on the Enemy, they retired.

Sempronius being inflamed by this success, his Passion grew yet greater to
come to a Battle, and decide at once the Fortune of the War. And albeit he was
determined to attempt his utmost, by his single Authority, during Scipio's
Indisposition; yet because it would be a mighty pleasure to him to have his
Colleague's Concurrence, he imparted his Design to him; but found him not of
his Opinion. Scipio told him, That the new untrain'd Soldiers would be better
in the Spring, if care were taken to exercise them during the Winter, and
accustom them to Military Duties: And if the Carthaginians attempted nothing
further, and were driven to be quiet for a while, the Gauls, who were naturally
an inconstant People, it was likely would once again desert them. Furthermore
he told him, That as soon as Strength would enable him, he had something to put
in execution, which would much redound to the Service of his Country. With
these and suchlike Reasons it was, that Publius sought to prevail on Sempronius
not to engage in any hazardous Enterprise. And Sempronius himself could not but
see, that the Counsel was wholesome which Scipio propounded; but, blinded with
Ambition, and a good Opinion of his own Sufficiency, he resolved to do his
utmost to be at the head of some Action, before his Colleague could be able to
appear in the Field, and the new Election of Consuls should be made, which now
drew near. Forasmuch then as since he found he could not accommodate the
Occasion to his purpose, and was yet resolved to bend it to his Will, he soon
made it visible, that nothing was likely to be prudently done under his
Direction, and that things would run a mighty hazard. On the other hand,
Hannibal thought as Scipio did, touching the present posture of Affairs, and
therefore sought all occasions to come to a Battle. For as he was willing to
make use of the forwardness the Gauls manifested, while there Minds were yet
unshaken; so he well knew, that the sooner he fought, the rawer his Enemy would
be with whom he was to engage, the Army being, for the most part, composed of
young new-raised Men. Furthermore, Scipio he knew continued indisposed of his
Wounds: And, in a word, what was yet of greater weight, he thought it not safe
to remain long without Action. For who so enters with an Army into a Foreign
Country, and has great Designs to execute, has but one way to succeed and be
secure; namely, by incessantly engaging in new and signal Enterprises, whereby
to renew and support the Courage and Hopes of his Friends. Hannibal then
observing Sempronius's precipitate forwardness to come to a Battle, did all he
could on his part to gratify him.

When he had carefully surveyed the Plain that lay between the two Camps, though
he found it for the most part very level, nevertheless he discovered certain
Places proper enough for laying of Ambushes. In short, there was a Brook hard
by, the Banks whereof were somewhat raised above the level of the Plain, and
overgrown with Bushes and Brambles, which place he resolved to make use of to
execute what he had in his Mind to do; and he concluded his Design was the more
promising by how much the Romans were only jealous of the Woods and Forest, and
Places of Covert, which the Gauls for the most part made choice of for their
Ambushes, but thought themselves safe from that danger in bare and open
Countries; not considering that such situations often yield better and safer
means to form such Designs than the thickest Woods. For, in short, those who
are so lodged are better able to look about them, and discover from far all
that passes, and there is often sound in such Plains rising Ground and
Eminences sit to cover and conceal Men; nor is there hardly any River or Brook
so small that has not some kind of selter on the Banks, that are for the most
part covered too with Shrubs and Brambles, and the like Under-wood, where Foot
may be very easily concealed, and even Horse also with a little care, by
grounding their Arms, which are otherwise discovered at a distance. After
Hannibal then had held a Council of War, where his Brother Mago, and the rest
of his Principal Officers were present, to deliberate about the Battle which
they expected would be speedily sought, where they all approved of what he had
therein proposed; and, while the Army refreshed themselves, he took his Brother
to conferr with apart, (who was a gallant young Man, and trained from his
Childhood to Arms) to whom he first appointed an hundred chosen Horse, and the
like number of select Foot, for his Guard; then he ordered him, before it was
dark, to pick out a certain number of the bravest Men he could find in the
whole Army, whom he should direct to assemble, and attend at his Tent after
Supper for further Orders. At the time appointed they appear, where, after he
had exhorted them to the well-performance of their Duty, and observed their
cheerful Behavior, he commanded them to sort themselves by two and two, each
one to choose for his Companion the Man he best loved, and most trusted: These
he commanded to draw together, and assemble in a certain place he appointed in
the Camp. After these Orders were executed, Hannibal out of these drew out a
thousand Horse, and the like number of Foot, with Instruction to Mago how to
put his Orders in execution, and then privily dispatched them away during the
Night, accompanied with proper Guides to the Place of Ambush. Early in the
Morning Hannibal assembled all his Numidians, a hardy and indesatigable People;
these, after he had well encouraged and fairly promised to each one Rewards in
proportion to his Merit, he commanded to march out, and brave the Enemy in the
Camp, with Directions, that as soon as they should draw out to engage them, and
they had began to Pickeer, that they should then retire back over the River.
His design being laid to surprise the Romans into a Battle fasting, and not so
well prepared for the business as they ought. Then he directed the rest of the
Army (after his usual Exhortation) to take a good repast, and be ready under
their Arms, and with their Horses ready to march.

Sempronius the next Morning no sooner saw the Numidians approach when he
commanded out the Roman Horse, with Orders to attack them; to sustain these he
ordered out six thousand Darters, and at length marched the whole Army out of
the Camp: For he had conceived such an assurance in the Numbers he had, and was
become so bold by his late Success, that he reckoned, the show only of such a
Body of Men would go far toward a Victory. And now it may be noted, that as
the Winter was not yet quite past, so the Day was snowy and very cold.
Furthermore, the Romans, both Horse and Foot, had been made to march out of
their Camp most of them fasting; insomuch as the same Army that took the Field
so forwardly began soon to shrink: For when they came to ford the River which
was much swelled with the Rain of the Night before, the Water was Breast-high,
so that the Romans thus contending at once with Hunger and Cold, (for the Day
was now well advanced) began to sink in their Courage, and abate in their
Strength; while the Carthaginians on the contrary had taken a plentiful repast
in their Tents, and were well fortified with Meat and Drink, and had anointed
their Bodies before they put on their Arms.

Hannibal, who had long waited the occasion, seeing the Enemy now over the
River, ordered the Baleares to advance with the rest of the light-armed Troops,
to the number of eight thousand Men, to sustain them. And having marched about
a Mile from his Camp, he drew up his Army in Battalia; his Line of Foot
consisting of Spaniards, Gauls and Africans, amounted to about twenty thousand;
his Horse, which he placed on the Wings, to above ten thousand, comprehending
those which had been sent by the Gauls, his Confederates; his Elephants he
placed advanced before the two Points of the Battle. In the mean time
Sempronius ordered a Retreat to be founded to draw off his Horse, who were
totally to seek how to behave themselves against this new Enemy, with whom they
had to do: For they engaged against Numidians, whose way was to retreat in
haste, and to break and disperse themselves, and to rally again with ease, and
return boldly to the Charge when they were least expected, which is the
Numidian manner of sighting. As to the Foot, Tiberius had drawn them up after
the Roman Order. There marched in this Expedition sixteen thousand Roman Foot,
and twenty thousand of the Allies. For when ever their Armies represented (as
one may say) the Body of the Republic, and that both the Consuls joined their
Troops on any pressing occasion, the Roman Army consisted of that number. In
short, Sempromus posted his Horse on the Wings, amounting to about four
Thousand, and with a proud Port and slow motion advanced in good order against
the Enemy.

The two Armies now drawing near, the light-armed Troops, who were advanced a
good distance before the Lines of Battle, began the fight. It was visible from
the beginning, that the Romans fought with disadvantage; and that on the other
hand the Carthaginians had every thing conspiring in their Favor. For the
Roman Darters who had been harrass'd all the Morning till then, had spent
almost all their Ammunition against the Numidians, and what remained was now
wet and spoiled. Their Horse and the rest of their Army was not in a much
better condition, while the Enemy was in every thing superior; for, coming into
the Battle fresh and vigorous, they performed their Duty more cheerfully, and
with greater readiness obeyed the Orders of their Leaders. Wherefore, as soon
as they had secured the retreat of their light-armed Troops, and the advanced
Parties that began the Battle, and their gross and heavy-arm'd Troops came to
engage, the Romans, not able to sustain the first Charge of the Enemy's Horse,
which not only outnumber'd theirs, but were likewise in better plight (as was
noted) beat them from their Post; so that leaving the Flanks of their Foot now
uncovered, the Carthaginian Pikes, and a Party of Numidians, who were posted
near their Companions, and had out-march'd the rest of the Body, fell on the
Points of the Romans Battle, whom they so hard pressed, that they disabled them
from making head against those who charged them in Front: Nevertheless, their
heavy-arm'd Troops every where, in the first and second Ranks, fought it at
hand for a while with doubtful Bravery.

But the Ambush of Numidians now rising, and falling unlooked for on the backs
of the Romans who were got beyond them, put them into great disorder. And those
on the two Points of the Roman Battle, finding themselves pressed in Front by
the Elephants, and in Flank by the light-armed Troops, no longer able to
sustain it, forsook their Ground, and flying were pursued by the Carthaginians
to the River. In a word, the Numidian Ambush coming to Charge the Rear of the
Roman Battle, slew many of them: While those in the first Ranks, animated by
necessity, charged the Gauls and some Africans, with whom they had to deal,
with great Resolution, and killing many, broke the Carthaginian Battalion.
Nevertheless, when they beheld the two Points naked, and defeated, being now
without hope of succouring them, or of being able to gain their Camp, by reason
of the multitude of the Carthaginian Horse, which greatly terrified them, and
the Rivers being also much risen by the Rains that had fallen; by which
Impediments despairing to gain their Camp, they safely retreated to the number
of ten Thousand to Placentia; the greatest part of the rest being slain on the
Banks of the River Trebia, partly by the Elephants, and partly by the Enemies
Horse; some few Foot only, and a good Party of Horse escaping; who following
the rest, got likewise into Placentia. As to the Carthaginians, after they had
pursued the Enemy to the River, not being able for excessive cold to follow
them further, they retired to their Camp. There was great joy in the
Carthaginian Army on the occasion of this Success; for their loss fell not
heavy either on the Spaniards or Africans, but mostly on the Gauls: Howbeit,
they had suffered so much by the Snow, and the extreme rigor of the Weather,
that many Men and Horses died afterward of Cold, and all their Elephants save
one.

Sempronius was not ignorant of the great consequence of this Defeat, but was
willing however to hide it all he could from the Senate; accordingly, he sent
his Dispatches to Rome, wherein he gave them to understand, that the severity
of the Weather had snatched the Victory out of his hands. This the Romans were
at first willing to believe; but when they understood soon after, That the
Carthaginians were possessed of their Camp; That the Gauls from all Quarters
had revolted to them; and, That the Roman Soldiers were scattered here and
there after the Battle, securing themselves in the neighboring Towns, and that
they had no subsistence but what was conveyed to them by Water up the Po; they
then became better instructed how to reckon of the issue of that Battle.
Nevertheless, though their Affairs had so ill succeeded, contrary to the
expectation of all the World, they proceeded to new Preparations for the War;
they consulted how to secure such Places as were in the neighborhood of the
Enemy; they determined to dispatch Forces into Sardinia and Sicily, and
supplied Tarentum and other proper places with good Garrisons. Furthermore,
they equipped and sent to Sea a Fleet of sixty Ships. Cn. Servilius and C.
Flaminius also, who were the new Consuls, raised Levies among their Allies, and
made provision of Victual, which they sent to Rimini and into Tuscany, with
show of purposing to send Troops into those Parts. They likewise demanded
Supplies of Hieron, who sent them five Hundred Candiots, and a Thousand
Buckler-men. Thus with mighty providence they proceeded in all necessary
Preparations; and it must be confessed of the Romans, that they are every way a
terrible Enemy, even when they are most terrified and menaced with Danger.

During these Transactions in Italy, Cn. Cornelius Scipio, to whom his Brother
had given the Command of the Naval Army, (as we have elsewhere noted) landed on
the Coast of Spain, somewhere not far from the Empories; where showing his
Army, he coasted along as far as the Eber, reducing such by force as made
resistance, and receiving with singular Humanity into his protection, such as
voluntarily came in; and took care, above all things, that the Army offered
violence to none. And after he had secured, by good Garrisons, such Places as
he had brought under the Obedience of the Romans, he marched further up into
the Country with his whole Army, having been reinforced with new Auxiliaries,
which he levied among the Spaniards, taking in all Places by force that lay in
the way of his march. In the mean time, Hanno, who Commanded for the
Carthaginians in these Parts, observing the progress Scipio made, presently
marched his Army, and came and encamped close by him, not far from the City of
Cissa. Whereupon they came to a Battle, and the Carthaginians were beaten, the
Romans taking very much Plunder, those who had marched with Hannibal having (as
we noted) left the greatest part of their Substance in their keeping. He made
Alliance also, Offensive and Defensive, with all those on this side the River
Eber. Hanno the Carthaginian General. was taken Prisoner, together with
Indibilis the Spaniard, who had usurped Kingly Authority over those who
inhabited the inland Country, and had preserved a particular and fast Affection
for the Carthaginians. As soon as Asdrubal had notice of this Adventure, he
passed the Eber to come to the succor of his Party; but in the interim
receiving advice, That the Roman Seamen belonging to the Fleet behaved
themselves negligently, being grown careless and presumptuous on the success of
their Landforces, he marched first against them, taking with him eight
Thousand of his best Foot, and a Thousand Horse; and finding the Romans
dispersed and scattered about the Country, he fell upon them, killing the
greatest part, and pursuing the rest to their Fleet. But he attempted nothing
further, but marched back the way he came; and repassing the Eber, remained the
Winter at New-Carthage, where he made all necessary provision to sustain the
War, and for the defense of the Towns on that side the River. As to Cn. Scipio,
as soon as he was come back to the Fleet, he there animadverted on those,
according to the Roman Law of Discipline, who he found had been guilty of the
occasion of that Defeat: And after he had drawn together and embodied all his
Forces by Sea and Land, he marched, and kept his Winter Quarters at Tarracona.
He divided the Booty that had been taken among the Soldiers, by which he
greatly gained their Good Will, and established in them a more cheerful
Disposition of Obedience to such future Orders as the Service should make
necessary. Thus we have set down the state of Affairs at that time in Spain.

Early the following Spring, Cn. Flaminius led the Legions through Tuscany, and
came to Arezzo, where he encamped. But Cn. Servilius marched to Rimini, to do
his best to shut up the Enemy's passage that way. As to Hannibal, he held his
Winter Quarters in the Cisalpine Gaul, where he used his Roman Prisoners with
great rigor; for over and above their being under severe restraint, their
Sustenance was dispensed to them very parcimoniously; while, on the other hand,
their Allies, who, though they were likewise Prisoners, were used however with
all possible Humanity: These he caused to be assembled, where he told them,
That he had undertaken a Voyage into Italy, not to molest or make War on them,
but to fight their Battles against the Romans; and remonstrated to them, That
if they knew how to consult their own Good, they would do well to court his
Friendship: That his chief end was to restore Liberty to the Italians, and to
re-establish the Inhabitants in the Towns and Villages, whom the Romans had
injuriously dispossessed. After this, he dismissed them, and ordered them all
to be enlarged Ransom-free, the better thereby to engage the People of Italy to
his Party, and to alienate them from the Romans, and to animate such against
them to whom the Romans had done any late violence, by seizing any Town or
Seaport.

He had likewise meditated during the Winter, another piece of African-Craft;
for being well instructed in the Gaulish Levity, and apprehensive lest they
should form any secret Design on his Life, his Friendship with them being yet
but new, he caused Peruques to be made of sundry sorts, and for diverse Ages;
than which nothing disguiseth more, even to a degree of rendering People totally
Strangers to one another; of these, sometimes he used one sort, sometimes
another, providing Habits likewise sorted to every kind of Disguise, insomuch
as those who but now departed from his Presence, could not know him a moment
after; nor could his most intimate Friends, without difficulty, distinguish
him. And now Hannibal taking notice that the rest of the Gauls were not very
well satisfied that their Country should continue to be the Seat of War, and
that the Army was disposed to follow him everywhere, and impatiently desired
to march into the Enemy's Country, for the Hatred they pretended to the Romans
(while in truth their thirst of Booty was at the bottom) thought it time to
move out of his Winter Quarters, to gratify the Desire of the Army.
Accordingly, as soon as the Weather favored his Design, and he had been
thoroughly instructed in the way he proposed to march, resolving to shun the
common Road, as being too long, and too well known to the Enemy; and
concluding, that though the way through the low Fenny Country into Tuscany was
the most difficult, yet being the shortest cut, and that Flaminius would be
astonished at so hardy an Attempt; he therefore (who was ever inclined to
suchlike Enterprises) determined to take his passage that way. But it was no
sooner bruited in the Army, that the General had taken that Resolution, when
every one showed his own share of fear for so hazardous a March, through a
Country lying for the most part under-water. and full of concealed Pits and
Precipices.

Nevertheless, Hannibal, after he had well informed himself of the Nature of
the Soil through which he was to march, being now satisfied, that albeit the
way was wet and marshy, yet that it was hard at bottom, caused the Army to
march. The Van he gave to the Spaniards and Africans, and appointed the care of
the Baggage to the best and most useful Men in the Army, to the end that if
they should be obliged to encamp, they might have every thing at hand of which
they could stand in need: For in their other Marches, he took little or no care
for the transporting of Provisions along with him; taking for granted, That if
they were vanquished, they should need none; and, That if they overcame and
made themselves Masters of the Country, wherever they came all things would
be provided for them. The Gauls marched in the Rear of the Spaniards and
Africans, and the Horse in the Rear of all. Hannibal ordered Mago to have a
vigilant are to keep the Soldiers from straggling, and to march the Army in
their order, apprehensive least the Gauls especially, whose sloth and
impatience of Labor he very well knew, should through the travail of so hard a
march, be tempted to return back by the way they came; wherefore he Horse were
so posted, that they might compel those to march, who otherwise might be
disposed to desert the Service. The Spaniards and Africans then advane'd into
the Fens, where none before had ever adventured to go, and bore their part with
cheerfulness, they being a robust People, and hardened to the like toilsome
Exercises; but it fared not so with the Gauls, who marched not but with great
difficulty, for the Ground having been potch'd and broken by those who marched
in the Van, they often sell, and were not able to keep their Legs. It being
very difficult fort them to support that kind of Travel, to which they bad
never been accustomed, nor had they any hopes of remedy by returning back, the
Horse being posted to hinder them. In a word; the whole Army suffered
unspeakable Hardships in this march, and what was most troublesome, they were
fore'd to pass four Days and Nights without sleep, marching constantly in
Water; but to the Gauls it was most grievous, the greatest part of their Horse
and other Beasts were lost by the way, falling and sticking, in the Mud and
Mire, which yet proved in some sort a relief to the Soldiers; for lying with
their Burdens in the way above Water, they passed over them dry-shod, and
often made use of them to repose on for some short space. The Hooss of many of
their Horses that escaped dropped off through so long a Journey in the Water and
Fenny Ground. Hannibal himself, who was earry'd by the only Elephant that was
left, shared a severe part of the Hardship of the Journey; for being before
much afflicted with a defluxion in his Eyes, his Malady grew to that height
that he lost one entirely by the way, for want of time and convenient place to
attend his Cure.

After the Army (to the wonder of all the World) had passed the Fens, Hannibal
being informed that Flaminius was posted near Arrezzo, he led his Army as soon
as possibly he could into the Upland Country, as well to refresh and repose his
Men, as to inform himself of the Enemies Purposes, and of the course and
situation of the Country. And after he had been told, that the Territory was
rich, and that there was much Plunder to be got; that Flaminius was more an
Orator than a Soldier; that though he had the Gift of Persuasion, he was totally
to seek in Military Matters; and that furthermore, he was proud and grown
confident of his numbers, and the strength of his Army; he therefore concluded,
that if he could by any means march by him, and get into the Country beyond
him, that this Consul not able to suffer the Clamours and Reproaches of the
Country People, would be drawn to do his utmost to hinder him from spoiling and
ravaging the Country; and that, in short, he would be drawn into greater
Assurance and Negligence, and endeavor to Attack the Carthaginians at any
rate, and follow them whithersoever they should lead him; and that impatient to
share the sole Honor of the Victory, he would not be persuaded to attend the
coming of his Colleague. In short, he collected by all these Circumstances,
that Flaminius was likely to afford him many occasions to sur-prize him, and
lay Ambushes in his way to gall and molest him. And in truth he was not
mistaken in the judgment he had made of this Consul. And most certain it is,
that they think very wide of the Truth, who conceive, that to acquire a right
Knowledge, and take just Measures of the Humor and Character of the Enemy he
is to deal with, is not among the prime Qualities and Duties of a General. For
as not only when we fight Man to Man, but when one Rank charge another, he
who thinks of Victory ought with exact care to observe, what naked or weak part
the Enemy discovers, whereby to compass his End; in like manner, those who have
the Leading of Armies in time of War, ought with skill and address to penetrate
and discover the weak side of the Mind of that Captain with whom he has to do.
For there are those, who by an unaccountable kind of Imbecility and a
Thoughtfulness which infects all the Actions of Life, are not only remiss in
their Public Administrations, but forget what belongs to the Duty of their
Private Affairs.

Some are so abandoned to the use of Wine, that neglecting Nature's invitations
to repose, they become at length unable to sleep, otherwise than by the Fumes
of excessive Drinking; others are captivated by Love, who have not only thereby
sacrificed the Safety of Cities and great States, but have themselves paid down
their own Lives with Infamy. Cowardice, and a base Mind are Faults throughout
the World, but most capital in a General; they are Blemishes to every private
Man, wherever they are found, and mark him with Reproach; but in the Leader
of an Army, they are a public Curse and Calamity. For, in short, they are not
only the cause of Armies languishing in Sloth and Idleness, without ever
entering on Action; but they themselves, who rely on such Leaders, are often led
into Precipices and inextricable Dangers. Rashness, Passion, Pride, and
Vainglory, are all so many inlets to the Enemies Success, leading Men as it
were, and subjecting them to the Triumph of their Foes, and hurrying their
Friends, and those who trust them, to Perdition: For such Men are always
exposed to the Trains and Stratagems of their Enemies. Wherefore he who wisely
studies and attains a right Knowledge of the Frailties and Weak-side of an
Enemy, and Attacks him there, by vanquishing the Leader, will soon be Master
both of the General and his Army. For as a Vessel that has once lost her
Pilot, is not long able to dispute it with an Enemy, and by taking him we soon
become Masters of all that was under his Charge; so in War, where the one
General is superior in Cunning or Military Abilities to the other, he shall
also render his Army superior to his Enemies. Thus, in a word, our wise
African, having taken a scantling of the Roman General's Capacity, came at
length to gain his Point.

After Hannibal had decamped from about Fesule, and had marched by, and got
some distance beyond the Roman Camp, he sell on their Frontiers; whereupon the
Consul became enraged to be thus contemned, as he conceived. But Hannibal had
no sooner began to spoil and ravage the Country, and the Smoke which appeared
every where from far, made it manifest that he was burning and destroying all
before him: Flaminius could not then abstain from Tears. Nevertheless, when any
undertook to advise, that it would be the safest course however not to follow
and engage temerariously with the Enemy, nor to come too hastily, and without
mature deliberation, ration, to a Battle with an Army so much superior to them
in Horse; and above all, that he ought to attend the coming of the other
Consul, and not adventure on Action till all their Troops were incorporated; he
lent so deaf an Ear to these Counsels, that he had not Patience so much as to
hear them; demanding of those who thus advised him, What they thought the
People of Rome would say of him, should he permit the Carthaginians to burn and
destroy the Country with Fire and Sword up to the Walls of the City, while he
remained in Tuscany an idle Spectator of the Desolation of his Country, and in
the Rear of the Enemy, without attempting any thing? Wherefore he decamped, and
caused the Army to march, and without regard to season or situation, thought on
nothing but how he might come speedily to a Battle, as if Victory were the
thing of all others he least doubted. And, in a word, he had possessed the Army
with so strong an expectation of Success, that there were see more
Camp-Wenches, and the rake holly Equipage of Boys an Vagabonds following the
Army, than there were Soldiers who bare Arms; and all this Rabble bringing with
them Chains and Shackles to secure the Prisoners. In the mean time Hannibal led
his Army through Tuscany, on that Quarter that lies toward Rome, leaving the
City of Corone and the neighboring Mountains on his left hand, and on his
right the Lake Thrasimene; and, the more to provoke the Romans, he sacked and
destroyed all the Towns that lay in his march, and did them all the other
mischiefs that are the product of the cruellest War. But as soon as he had
notice of the approach of Flaminius, and had made choice of Ground proper to
put his Designs in execution, he resolved to delay sighting no longer.

The Ground he had chosen lay thus: There was a tract of plain even Ground,
stretching out in length a good distance. This Level or Vale lay between, and
was enclosed on both sides with high Mountains, the farther end thereof being
bounded by an inaccessible Eminence, and the entrance bordered on a Lake,
between which and the said Mountain there is a very narrow Way or Defile which
leads into the Plain. Hannibal then having passed into the Plain by that
Straight, takes first possession of the high Ground, he had in Front, where he
lodged his Spaniards and Africans; behind the Mountains on the right, he posted
the Baleares, and the rest of his light-armed Troops, ordered in one deep File,
and posted the Gaulish Horse in the like order behind the Mountains on his
left, in such manner that they reached as far as the Defile we mentioned
between the Lake and the Mountains, which is the Inlet to the Plain. These
Orders being executed in the Night, and Hannibal having thus surrounded the
Plain, he remained quiet, making show of a Desire to sit still and attempt
nothing. In the mean time, Flaminius follows close at his Rear, eagerly
pursuing his Determination to attack him; and arriving in the Evening near the
Lake Thrasimene, he there encamped, and early the next Morning marched with his
Vanguard along the Vale by the side of the Lake, with determination to fall on
the Enemy. The Day proved very dark and lowering, by reason of a great Fogg that
was risen; nevertheless, Hannibal, upon notice that the better part of the
Roman Army was now entered on the Plain, and that their Vanguard was hard at
hand, gave the Signal of Battle, dispatching his Orders to those who were in
ambush to do their Duty; so that the Enemy was on the sudden surrounded, and at
once attacked on all sides.

Flaminius and the whole Army with him, were struck with astonishment at this
surprising shock of the Enemy; for the Fogg was so thick, that they were not
able to see about them; and the Enemy falling among them from the Hills in all
Quarters at once, the Tribunes and Captains of the Romans could not discern
which way to lead their Men, nor how to bring Succors and Relief where 'twas
wanted, and were, in a word, totally to seek how to behave themselves; for they
were charged at one and the same time in Front, Flank, and Rear, by which means
great numbers were slain, not as Men, sighting like Soldiers in Battle, but
taken as it were by stealth in their march, e're they were able to put
themselves in a posture of defense, being, as one may say, betrayed and
ensnared by the Imprudence of their General. Flaminius himself, now destitute
both of Hope and Resolution, falling among a Party of Gauls, was by them
environed and slain. In this Battle there fell, on the part of the Romans, to
the number of fifteen Thousand; who were so beset, that they could neither
fight nor sly; for it is religiously observed in the Roman Discipline, never to
abandon their Ranks, or break their Order by flight. Those who were surpised
in the Passage between the Lake and the Mountain died miserably; for being
pushed by the Enemy into the Lake, some being forced into the Water with their
Arms, not having leisure to think what they did, were unfortunately drowned;
others, being the greater part, entered the Lake, as far as they were able,
leaving nothing above Water but their Heads, where they remained a while, till
the Horse coming in, attacked them there: Whereupon seeing there was now no
other Remedy, they demanded quarter in vain, being all cut off, those who were
not slain by the Enemy killing one another. About six Thousand, who were well
advanced in the Plain, chanced to have the better of the Enemy, whom they
fought with in Front; but in regard they could not discover how the Battle
went, they knew not whither to move, or whom to relieve, though it had been in
their Power to have done much toward a Victory. Wherefore, believing they might
light on some further occasion of Action, they held on their march, advancing
till they had gained the top of the Hills; where, after they had remained a
while, and the Fogg began to clear up, beholding the lamentable state of their
Army, and it being now out of their power to perform any Service to purpose,
(the Enemy being Masters of the Field) they made good their Retreat to a
certain Town in Tuscany. But the Battle was no sooner over, when Hannibal sent
a Detachment of Spaniards, and his light-armed Troops after them, under the
Command of Maherbal, who besieged them in the Place; and after he had reduced
them to extremity, they yielded to his discretion, who gave them their Lives.
Thus have we given the Narrative of this Battle that was sought in Tuscany,
between the Romans and Carthaginians. Hannibal causing Maherbal's Prisoners, to
whom quarter had been given, to be brought before him, together with the rest
that had fallen into their hands, to the number of fifteen Thousand: After he
had told them, That it was by his Orders that Maherbal had given them their
Lives, he distributed the Roman Prisoners to the Army, to secure them under a
good Guard; but he sent home all the Latins gratis, telling them only, (what
has been elsewhere noted) That he was not come to invade or molest the
Italians, but to rescue their Liberty out of the hands of the Romans. After
this, he led his Army into Quarters of Refreshment, and solemnly buried thirty
of his Officers, who had been slain in the Battle: His other Losses were
inconsiderable, the Victory not costing him above fifteen Hundred Men, whereof
the major part were Gauls.

And now his Hopes being thus justly raised, he deliberated with his Brother,
and the rest of his Friends, about the future Methods they were to take, for
improving the Victories they had gained. In the mean time, when the news came
to Rome of this Defeat, the Magistrates, who could neither soften nor diminish
it, the Stroke had fallen so heavy, assembled the People, to whom they reported
the naked truth of their Case. And when at the same time the Praetor, ascending
the Tribunal, pronounced these words, We are Overcome, they were struck with
such terror, that those who were then present, and had been in the Battle,
thought they had cause to believe the Defeat was greater in Rome than in the
Field. Nor indeed was this surprise without reason; for the Romans, who had
held so long a possession of Victory, and were to learn the mournful Language
of Vanquished and Oppressed, knew not how with Constancy to support an
Affliction so new and unexpected. The Senate only preserved their Temper with
decency, and omitted nothing that belonged to their Function, holding frequent
Assemblies to deliberate about a Remedy for the Disease of which they were so
sick.

During these Transactions, the other Consul, who was at Rimini near Adria, on
the Skirts of the Gauls, and Confines of Italy, not far from the mouth of the
Po, receiving intelligence that Hannibal was advanced into Tuscany, and had
besieged Flaminius in his Camp, had therefore resolved to march to his Relief,
and join their Troops: But in regard his Army was too numerous to march all in
one Body, he therefore picked out four Thousand Horse from the whole number of
their Cavalry; and giving the Command of these to C. Centronius, ordered him to
march before with expedition, in order to the relief of Flaminius, in case he
should chance to be pressed before he could arrive. But when Hannibal got
intelligence that they were now sending those Succors after the Battle was
lost, he ordered out Maherbal, with the lightarm'd Troops, and a Body of Horse,
to encounter them. Accordingly they met with Centronius, fought with him, and
beat him, killing almost half his Men on the place, and forcing the rest to
take Sanctuary on a neighboring Hill, and the next Day they fell alive into
their hands. It was but three Days ago that the news of their Misfortunes at
the Battle of Thrasimene came to Rome, and their Sorrow in the utmost ferment,
when, to fill up the measure of their Affliction, the news of this their last
Defeat arrives; when behold now not only the People in consternation, but the
Senate it self became sensibly touched. Whereupon they thought it needful,
without deliberating on the Election of their Annual Magistrates, to resolve on
the choice of some one single Person, in whom the sole Authority should center.
In the mean time, Hannibal, who by the success of his Arms, grew to believe he
should be more than a Match for the Romans, did not think it convenient to
approach presently nearer Rome. Wherefore he continued to harrass and spoil the
Country, destroying all by Fire and Sword wherever he came, taking his march
toward Adria, where he arrived in ten Days, passing by the Frontiers of the
Insubrians and Picentines. The Country in his march being rich, the Plunder of
the Army grew so great and cumbersom, that they could neither carry nor
otherwise transport it. The People wherever he came, he used with great
Cruelty, and, according to the common manner of Treatment of Towns that are
taken by force, ordered all to be slain that they could find of Age to bear
Arms; such merciless impression had Hannibal's Hatred to the Romans given him.

Incamping now not far from Adria, in a pleasant and fruitful Country,
abounding in all things, he there gave order for the curing of his sick and
infirm Soldiers and Horses; for in his Winter-Incampments, in the hither Gaul,
where he lay exposed to all the rigours of the open Air, incommoded by the
stench of the filth and ordure of the Camp, that what by their unwholesome
Incampments, what by their march through the Fens, both Men and Horses (the
whole Army over) were generally infected with a Disease called by the Greeks
Lemopsoron; but with us, the Scurf or Scab, which comes by Unwholesome Diet and
hard Usage: Wherefore happening into this place, so commodious for every thing,
he was willing they should want for nothing that might advance their Recovery,
renew the Strength, and recruit the Spirits of the Soldiers. Hannibal being now
possessed of great quantities of Roman Arms, of those he had either slain or
taken, he therefore armed his Africans after the Roman manner: He also
dispatched Letters by Sea to Carthage, giving an account of his Successes,
having never since his coming into Italy till now approached the Seacoast. The
Carthaginians received the News with great acclamations of Joy, and deliberated
how best to reinforce and supply their Armies both in Spain and Italy, with
all things of which they might stand in need.

The Romans, in the mean time, created Fabius Maximus Dictator, a Person of a
noble House, and of so exemplary Virtue, that his single Merit acquired to his
Family the Title of Maximi, from the great Actions he so happily
WP2787achieved. There is this difference among others betwixt a Dictator and a
Consul; the Consul has but twelve Axes carried before him, the Dictator twenty
four: Furthermore, the Consuls cannot act in many things without the Authority
of the Senate; but the Power of the Dictator is absolute and independent; and,
during that Magistracy, the Authority of all others become superseded, that of
the Tribunes of the People only excepted. But we shall treat more particularly
hereof in its proper place. After Fabius had been named for Dictator, he chose
M. Minutius for his Master of the Horse, which is a Charge depending entirely
on the Dictator, and supplies his place in the Army when absent.

Hannibal, after he had refreshed his Army, moved by easy marches along the
Coast of the Adriatic, thereby to gain time till he had filled his Troops;
here, by washing his Horses with old Wine, whereof the Country abounded, he
cured them of the Scratches and the Farcy. Neither did he omit any care for the
cure and recovery of his wounded Men, by which means the rest were hearten'd.
and became the more cheerfully disposed to go on such future hazardous
Services, as he should have further occasion to use them in. Thus he continued
his March, and after he had plundered and forag'd the Territory of Pretutium,
Adria, and that of the Marrucians, and Ferentines, he took his way toward
Apulia, which is distinguished by three Divisions, each having its peculiar
name. One part is inhabited by the Daunians, and another by the Messapians.
Hannibal first attacked the Daunians, and made spoil about Luceria, a Colony of
the Romans, where he put all to Fire and Sword. Then he encamped near Ibona,
from whence he sent his Troops to ravage the Lands of the Arpians; and, in
short, overran the whole Country of Apulia.

About this time Fabius entered on his Charge, who, after he had sacrificed to
the Gods, marched out of the City with his Master of the Horse, at the head of
four newrais'd Legions, which had been sevied according to Custom. And, after
he had joined his Troops near the Frontiers of the Dannians, with those that
had been sent to Rimini, he sent the Consul back to Rome, with Orders to
Command the Fleet, and have an Eye to the Enemies Motions by Sea; while himself
and the General of the Horse, after he had taken possession of the Legions,
marched and encamped near Aegas, in view of the Enemy, and not above six Miles
from their Camp.

The Carthaginian, as soon as he had notice of the arrival of Fabius, led his
Army out of the Camp, and marching, drew them up in Battalia near the Romans,
to amuse and terrify them: Where having remained some time, and none appearing
to oppose him, he marched back to his Quarters. For Fabius, who had determined
to do nothing rashly, and not to come presently to a Battle, but to labor by
all Arts and Means to secure the Interest of his Country, held firm to his
first Resolution. By which means he soon grew into Contempt, was reckoned a
Coward by his Countrymen, and one who out of poorness of Spirit shunned all
occasions of having to do with the Enemy. But in the end his Actions taught
them better how to value him; and to confess, That they could never have chosen
a Leader, who better knew his Business, or could proceed with more Judgment and
good Conduct, which shortly after, the issue of his Administiation abundantly
manifested. Hannibal's Troops who had been bred and broken to their Trade from
their Childhood, and he himself brought up among them, and a perfect Master in
Military Knowledge, who had fought many Battles with Success in Spain, and
gained two important Victories already against the Romans and their Allies: And
what out-weigh'd all we have said, and which to him was of greatest importance,
was that his Troops had no hopes or prospect of Safety, but what they carried
on the Points of their Swords; which was Fabius's Motive to work with so much
Cantion and Circumspection, being well assured the Enemy would be superior to
him in Battle. Wherefore, by singular Prudence and Address, he had recourse
only to those Advantages, wherein he was sure the Romans were the stronger.

In a word, the Benefits the Romans enjoyed, and of which the Enemy could not
deprive them, were Provisions of Victuals, and Stores of War in great
abundance, and plenty of good Men to recruit their Armies. Fabius therefore
held on his March in the Enemies Rear, and kept always near him, ever encamping
on proper Ground for his purpose, which he very well knew how to choose, having
a perfect knowledge of the Country: And being supplied from the places behind
him with what he stood in need of, he never adventured his Soldiers abroad to
Forage, nor permitted them so much as to be seen out of the Camp. Wherefore
being enclosed continually within their Ramparts, and perpetually on the watch
to spy any advantage, by the means he surpised and cut off great numbers of
the Enemy, who chane'd to straggle any distance from their Camp, or who, out of
contempt of the Romans, forrag'd near them. By this means he diminished his
Enemies numbers, and bred Courage and Assurance in his own Soldiers; and by
these little Combats and Rencounters, taught them to recover their Spirits,
which were much sunk by their late Calamities, whereby those who had been
hitherto vanquished, might begin not to despair of Victory. But nothing could
draw him to come to a pitched Field. While, on the other hand, Minutius, his
Master of the Horse, was neither of his Judgment nor Humor. For he leaning
constantly to the Opinion of the Multitude, made a little too bold with the
Dictator in his Discourse, representing him as a flow and bashful Man, while
he, for his part, was of another Temper, ready to enterprise any thing, and
willing to come speedily to a Battle. After the Carthaginians had wasted the
Country round about, as we but now mentioned, they passed the Apennines, and
entered into the Territory of the Sannites, a fertile Soil, and where for a
long time they had felt nothing of the desolations of War.

Here they met with such abundance of all things, that it was not possible for
them to consume the store, either by their Expense or their Malice. They
plundered likewise the Lands of the Beneventines, where there was a Colony of
Romans, and took the City of Venosa, albeit a strong Town and furnished for
defense. In the mean time the Romans followed their steps, keeping within a
Days march or two at most of them, but approached not nearer, being in no wise
disposed to come to a Battle. Whereupon, when Hannibal found that Fabius would
not be persuaded to fight, he resolved to take his march toward Falernum, a
Town in the Territory of Capua; concluding that one of these two things would
thereby be brought to pass; namely, that either he should compel the Enemy to
give him Battle; or, in case of refusal, it would be made manifest to all the
World he was their superior, and that the Romans wanted Resolution to come to a
Decision. And by this means he reckoned that the Towns and Cities would be
terrified into submission, and to abandon the Romans. For, notwithstanding
Hannibal's two Victories, there was not yet one Italian Town that had taken
part with him, but preserved their Faith entire to the Romans, though some were
hard pressed and streighten'd by the Enemy; from whence may be gathered what
deference and veneration they had for the Roman Government. Nor did Hannibal
take this Resolution rashly, and without ripe Deliberation; for the Champaign
Country about Capua is the best part of the richest and most beautiful Soil in
the World. Furthermore, it borders on the Sea by which Italy holds intercourse
with all Foreign Countries. Over and above these Encouragements, the noblest
and most beautiful Towns of all Italy are found here; namely (on the Seacoast)
Sinuessa, Cuma, Puzzola, Naples, and Nuceria: On the Frontiers, toward the
West, Calenum and Theano; toward the South-East, Apulia and Nola. Capua is
situate in the heart of the Country, and surpassed heretofore in Riches and
Luxury all other Cities; so much like the Truth are the Fables that are
recorded of this delicious Territory, known likewise by the name of the
Phlegraean-Fields, with those sam'd in Greece for their Beauty and Amoenity. In
short, it may be said, That it was principally for this happy Country, that the
Gods once contended. Furthermore, this Country is fortified by Nature, and the
Accesses to it difficult: For on the one hand it is defended by the Sea, and on
the other by a Chain of continued Mountains. In a word, there are but three
Avenues to it, and these very straight and difficult over the said Mountains.
The first is that which leads to Samnium; the second to Eribanus; and the third
from the Country of the Hirpins. Wherefore the Carthaginian was not without
hopes, that if he could compass the Conquest of this part of Italy, he should
be able from thence to awe all the World beside, and bring a Contempt on his
fluggish Enemy, who had not the Courage to forbid him; and that no body would
then doubt, but he was in effect Master of all without the Roman Retrenchments.

Hannibal wrought on by these Reasons, having left Samnium, and gained his
passage by the way of the Mountain called Eribanus, he encamped on the Banks of
the River Athurnus, which divides and runs through that part of Campania that
regards Italy; and from hence forag'd and made Devastations in the Country
round about, none appearing to impeach him, while Fabius, though wondering at the
temerity of his Project, held the faster to his first Determination. But
Minutius, on the contrary, and the rest of the prime Officers of the Army,
persuaded they had now coop'd-up the Enemy, became very instant that they might
hasten their march into Campania; and that it was not to be supported, that
Hannibal should, without control, pillage and destroy the best and most
flourishing part of Italy. Whereupon Fabius made show of being reasoned into
their Opinion, and feigned to be as forward to find out the Enemy and give him
Battle as they were, till he had got into the Country, whither he marched the
Army with great expedition. But when he drew near the Territory of the
Falernians, he contented himself with barely making an appearance with his Army
along the Mountains, and to keep pace with the Enemy, fearing lest their Allies
should think that the Romans, out of dread of the Carthaginian Army, confined
themselves entirely to their Camp. Nevertheless, he adventured not into the
plain Country, but continued to shun all occasions of coming to a Battle, for
the Reasons already rendered, and for that the Carthaginians much out-number'd
them in Horse. Wherefore, after Hannibal had challenged the Romans by all sorts
of Provocations and Indignities, plundered all Campania, and amassed a mighty
Booty, he began to consult about decamping, resolving by no means to part with
his Spoil, but to convey it to some fase place, where he should keep his
Winter Quarters; to the end his Army might not only have a present enjoyment of
the fruit of their Travail, but a prospect of plenty of every good thing for
the time to come. Fabius then collecting, that the Enemy had a mind to return
by the way he came, concluded to waylay him by an Ambush in the Desile or Pass
over the Mountains. He therefore ordered a Detachment of four Thousand Men, to
advance and take possession of the said Pass, exhorting them to make good use
of the occaslion, and the advantage of the Post, when they came to the
Engagement, which they so earnestly and so long desired to see. This done, he
marched himself with the Gross of the Army, and possessed the Mountains that
commanded the said Passage by which the Enemy was to march.

And now the Carthaginians advancing, encamped at the foot of the Mountains,
while Fabius was not in hopes only of making them part with their Plunder; but
that if Fortune proved never so little his Friend, to be able at one stroke to
put a period to the War. Thus favored as he was by the advantage of the
Ground, Fabius then had nothing so much in his Thoughts, as how best to post
and destribute his Troops; to lay his Ambush with most advantage; whom
principally to make choice of for their several Parts they were to execute, and
where first to begin the Attack. But while he thus stood deliberating,
deserring the execution to the next Morning, Hannibal, who had got intelligence
of his Design, gave him not time to put it in effect. First then, he gave his
Orders to Asdrubal (who had the general charge of the Pioneers and Workmen of
the Army) to provide as many Faggots of dry combustible Matter as he possibly
could procure; to make choice of two Thousand of the best and strongest Oxen,
as could be picked out of the whole Herd of Plunder, and to bring them to a
certain place near the Camp, there to attend his further Commands. This done,
he caused the Grooms and Rabble of the Army to be assembled, and pointing to
them a piece of Ground at a distance, that lay between the Camp and the Pass by
which he was to march, ordered them, That as soon as they should receive the
Signal that should be given, to drive and force the said Herd of Cattle by that
way up to the top of the Mountains. This done, he bad the Army to take their
Supper, and retire to their repose; and about the third Watch of the Night, he
commanded the said Rabble to bind and fasten the Faggots they had provided, to
the Horns of the two Thousand Oxen. This being soon done, by reason of the
great number of Hands that were employed, he then ordering the Faggots to be
lighted, gave them the Signal to march, and drive them up as he had appointed.
He ordered likewise his light-armed Troops to march in the Rear of these, and a
while to encourage and sustain them; but that as soon as the Cattle began to
run and disperse, they should with shoutings and great clamor take possession
of all the advantageous Posts, and gain the top of the Mountains, to the end
thereby to cover and defend the Army in their passage through the Defile, and
amuse and divert the Enemy, in case they found them there. In the mean time
Hannibal decamps, leading his Army toward the Straight by which they were to
march. The Vanguard consisted of his heavy-arm'd Troops; these were followed
by the Horse; after them went the Baggage and Booty, and the Spaniards and
Gauls in the Rear of all.

The Romans, who had been posted at the entry of the Pass, beholding so many
Fires wandering about the Mountains, took it for granted, that Hannibal had
taken his March that way: Whereupon quitting their Posts in the Straight, they
marched with expedition up the Mountains; but when they arrived, and saw
nothing but the Cattle carrying Fire on their Heads, they grew greatly
astonished, and were struck with greater apprehension of Danger than they
needed. But now beholding Hannibal on his March, who had already gained the
Pass, they made some small attempt upon them; but the Cattle carrying Fire on
their Heads, covering the Mountain, and mingling everywhere among them, so
distracted them, that they concluded it to be their safest course to keep the
tops of the Hills, and remain there on their guard till Morning, when they
might be better able to discern what it was that had so perplexed them.

In the mean time, Fabius was in trouble to understand the mystery of so many
Fires, and began to suspect it to be no other than what it really was, namely,
a Carthaginian Stratagem. Nevertheless, mindful of the Resolution he had taken
to hazard nothing, he kept his Army within their Works, and resolved not to
stir till Morning; while Hannibal, observing that his Project succeeded to his
wish, and that the Defile remained totally unguarded, passed safely with his
Army and his Plunder. But early in the Morning, observing that the Party which
had advanced to the tops of the Mountains, were in danger, the Romans, who had
marched thither in the Night, out-numbring them; he therefore sent a Party of
Spaniards to sustain and bring them off; who, falling on the Romans, slew about
a Thousand of them, and with difficulty made good their Companions retreat.

Hannibal having now gained his passage out of the Territory of Falernum, and
seeing himself in safety, began to consider upon Winter Quarters, and
deliberated thereof among his Friends: For he had now so terrified Italy
throughout all Quarters, that the whole Country stood astonished and
undetermined what Counsels to take; insomuch, that Fabius was held in great
Contempt, as having, through want of Resolution, permitted the Enemy to make
his escape, when he had enclosed him in places of so great advantage; yet all
could not move him a jot to depart from the Methods he had proposed to pursue,
contemning all those vain Reports, and the Opinion which the People had
conceived of him.

Sometime after Fabius being called to Rome, to officiate at their Sacrifices,
he committed the Legions to the Conduct of Minutius, injoyning him above all
things at his departure, to have a more vigilant Eye to the Preservation of the
Army, than how to Attack the Enemy. But Minutius was so deaf to his Advice,
that even while Fabius was urging those safe Counsels, he was meditating how by
all means possible he might bring it about to give the Enemy Battle. This was
the posture of Affairs in Italy, while Asdrubal at the head of an Army in
Spain, having equipped a Fleet of thirty Vessels (during the Winter) which had
been left him by his Brother, and adding to them ten more, with all their
Equipage that had been sent him from other parts, he departed in the beginning
of Summer from New-Carthage; his Fleet, consisting of forty Ships, he committed
to the care of Hamilcar, with Orders to coast it along the Shore, while he with
his Land-Army marched at the same time, keeping near the Sea, with intention to
join both Armies near the mouth of the River Eber. Cn. Scipio coming to the
knowledge of the Carthaginians purpose, determined forthwith to march out of
his Winter Quarters, and endeavor to get before them. But, after he had been
informed of their great Strength, both in numbers of Men, and all sorts of
provision of War, he declined his Purpose of dealing with them by Land, and
equipped a Naval Army, consisting of five and thirty Ships, and putting on
Board the best Men of the Land-Army, made Sail and got before the Enemy. Two
Days after his departure from Tarragona he arrived near the mouth of the Eber,
and about ten Miles from the Carthaginian Fleet; from whence he dispatched two
Scout-Vessels of Marseilles, to discover the Motions and Intentions of the
Enemy; these Vessels were the foremost in all Dangers, and kept always a head
of the Fleet, with a forwardness that proved very useful to the Romans. For the
Marseillians had always taken part with the Romans, and espoused their Cause
more conspicuously in this Adventure. The Scouts that had been sent out brought
advice, that the Enemies Fleet was at an Anchor in the mouth of the Eber:
Whereupon Scipio forthwith got under Sail, resolving to make the best of his
way to surprise them, as they lay.

But Asdrubal receiving timely notice of the Enemies approach by certain
Beacons that he ordered to be provided on the Hills, put his Landforces in
order of Battle on the Shore, and ordered the Marine Army forthwith to imbark.
As the Romans drew near the Enemy, they caused their Trumpets to sound, and
came to Blows with them out of hand. But the Carthaginians, after they had
stubbornly disputed the Victory for a while, at length began to retire. But
their (...)-Army that was drawn up on the Shore, proved as it fortuned rather a
Mischief than a Benefit, by how much their presence so near at hand gave the
Seamen a more certain prospect of Safety by slight, than by fighting;
wherefore, perceiving the Romans likely to prove superior to them, they stood
about and fled as fast as they could toward the Shore, after they had sustained
the loss both of Men and Galleys. But the Romans vigorously pursuing the
Advantage, forced them at last quite ashore, where deserting their Vessels,
they saved themselves by escaping to their Landforces that were drawn up hard
by; the Romans following them to the Shore, and taking as many of their Vessels
as they could carry off, well-pleased to have beaten the Enemy at their first
essay, taking thirty five of their Vessels, and making themselves Masters of
those Seas. After this Victory the Affairs of the Romans began to have a better
face in those Parts.

In the mean time the Carthaginians receiving Intelligence of this loss, fitted
out a Fleet with all Expedition, consisting of seventy Sail equipped for War,
well knowing of what moment it was to them to preserve their Dominion of the
Sea. This Fleet first touched in Sardinia, and then called at Pisa in Italy,
hoping they might have found Hannibal, to have consulted and concerted Matters
with him. But the Romans coming after them with a Fleet of an hundred and
twenty Sail of Galleys, the Carthaginians terrified with their numbers returned
directly back to Sardinia, and from thence to Carthage. Cn. Servilius, General
of the Roman Fleet, made chase after them for a while, in hopes of coming to an
Engagement, but finding they had got too much the start of him, he left off the
pursuit. Then he made Sail for Lilybaeum with the whole Fleet; from thence he
steered his course to a certain Island in the African Sea called Cercina, where
he levied Money on the Inhabitants, to purchase exemption of their Country from
Plunder. From thence he held on his way and came to an Island called Cossyrus,
which he took, and after he had put a Garrison into the Town, he returned back
to Lilybaeum, where, leaving the Fleet in Harbor he went himself to find out
their Landforces.

The Senate of Rome receiving Intelligence of Scipio's Sea-Victory, concluded
that it was not only convenient, but necessary to the Commonwealth, that they
should not neglect their Assairs in Spain; wherefore to quicken the War on that
side, and press the Carthaginians the more in these Parts, they sitted out a
Squadron of twenty Galleys, and forthwith gave them into the Charge of Pub.
Scipio, dispatching him to his Brother, to the end they might jointly manage
the War in Spain. For the Senate justly apprehended, that if the Carthaginians
should once be permitted to conquer and possess at their pleasure that.
Province, they would soon recover their Dominion of the Sea, attack and make
Descents in Italy with ease, and be enabled to reinforce and supply Hannibal
both with Men and Money. Wherefore, I say, the Romans, concluding that keeping
the War on foot in Spain was of great utility to their Assairs, dispatched Pub.
Scipio with a Naval Army to join his Brother; who, after his Arrival, when they
came to unite their Strength, proceeded with great Success. For albeit the
Romans had never yet attempted to pass the Eber, but thought it a great deal
for them, that the People on this side the River were disposed to enter into
Friendship and Confederacy with them; yet now they adventured to pass those
Bounds, making War on remoter Nations, and Fortune approved their Enterprise:
For, after they had terrified the People that inhabit on the Banks of the Eber,
they advanced toward Saguntum, and encamped within five Miles thereof, in the
neighborhood of the Temple of Venus, and so posted themselves, that they were
every way covered from Attempts of an Enemy, and where whatever they wanted
might with case be supplied them, for their Fleet by Sea kept pace with them on
Land, coasting it along the Shore at the same rate they marched.

But in the mean time there happened an occurrence which availed further toward
the Prosperity of the Roman Assairs. Upon Hannibal's departure on his
Expedition to Italy, he took Hostages of all the Towns of whose Affection he
was not well assured; making choice for that purpose of the Children of the
principal Inhabitants, and sending them to be carefully kept under a good Guard
at Saguntum; that place being not only well fortified, but the Garrison he had
left in it well disposed to his Service. Among those there was one Abilyx a
Spaniard, a Man of the first Rank in his Country, both for his Authority and
Manners; and, above all, reckoned among the most faithful Friends of the
Carthaginians. This Man, taking the present posture of Affairs into
Consideration, and observing the Romans likely to prosper, took a Resolution
worthy of a Spaniard and a Barbarian, which was to bring it about that the said
Hostages might be delivered up, believing that by compassing some remarkable
Service to the Romans, he should become very Popular, and be well received
among them.

Asdrubal had committed the Government of that Province to Bostar, a Man of
Authority among the Carthaginians, with Orders to oppose the Romans, when at
any time they should attempt passing the River Eber; but he, wanting Resolution
to withstand them, had retired from his Post, and marched and encamped near
Saguntum toward the Sea. Now Abilyx well knew, that Bostar was a plain well
meaning Man, of easy Faith, unpracticed in subtle Arts, and had a good
Opinion of him: He therefore imparts to him what he seign'd was the best
Counsel he could take; namely, that since the Romans had now gained their
passage over the River, the Carthaginians would be no longer able to hold the
Spaniards in subjection by fear; but that it imported them, in the present evil
Conjuncture of their Assairs, to acquire by some extraordinary means the
Affection and Goodwill of the Natives: That the Romans were already under the
Walls of Saguntum, which was in a manner besieged, and would be soon
straightened: That therefore if he would give a check to their Ambition and
Success, he could not take a wifer or more safe course, than presently to
resolve on the restoring all the Hostages to their Parents and Relations: For
that the Enemy coveted nothing with more passion, than to be able to get them
into their hands; to the end, that by delivering them up, they might acquire
and conciliate thereby the good Opinion of the Spaniards: That, in a word, it
would be an act of great Wisdom in him to obviate this Inconvenience, by
restoring the Hostages himself, which would bind the Spaniards to him for ever;
and that he, for his part, would labor his utmost, that the Carthaginians
might reap the best fruit of so fair a proceeding, if they should think sit to
commit the Conduct thereof to his management: For if it were transacted by him,
he should be both able and willing to negotiate the Affair, with such regard to
the Interest of the Carthaginians, in the respective Towns concerned, that
their Relations should not only be made sensible of the Benefit, but the People
in general disposed to acknowledge their Good Will, when they beheld such
remarkable Instances of the Carthaginians Friendship. He likewise gave Bostar
himself hopes of a valuable Reward, from those whose Children should be so
delivered; and that, in short, by his restoring in so generous a manner, and
contrary to all expectation, what was so dear to them, every one would emulate
the other in their Expressions of Gratitude to such a Benefactor. In a word, he
dealt with Bostar by all the fair Arguments he was able to urge, to win him
over to his purpose. After this Conference, matters being concluded between
them, and a Day set when he should return with all necessary Preparations to
receive and conduct the Hostages, Abilyx returned home. The following Night he
went to the Roman Camp, where after some Discourse with certain Spaniards that
served in the Army, he was by them conducted to the Scipio's; to whom he made
it appear by many Reasons, That the whole Body of the Spaniards would come in
to them, were it but once known that their Hostages were in their Possession;
and thereupon gave them his Word to deliver them into their hands. Publius
list'ned with great pleasure to the Proposition; and after solemn promise of a
noble Recompense, and the time when, and the place where they should attend to
execute the Design, agreed on, he dismissed them, who returned back to
Sagunrum. And now Abilyx, having provided Persons proper for his Enterprise,
came to Bostar; and after the Hostages were put into his hands, he departed by
Night from Saguntum, as feigning thereby to be able to go more concealed from
the Enemy's Sentinels. But having passed their Camp, he then took another way,
and led them at the time agreed on, to the place appointed, where he delivered
them to those who had been ordered to take charge of them. This was so great an
Instance of Abilyx's Good Will to the Romans, that Scipio held him ever after
in great esteem, making use of him in conjunction with People of his own, to
see the Hostages restored to their Parents and their Country: who went
accordingly from Town to Town; where he negotiated so well for the Romans,
giving the People such Impressions of their Generosity and Humanity, and
declaiming so justly against the Carthaginians Cruelty and Insidelity, and
producing himself as an Example of deserting them, that he wrought many Towns
over to the Romans, who entered into Confederacy with them. Bostar, who had
committed these Children to the Faith of Abilyx, acted a very Child's Part
himself, and not like an Officer of his Age and Experience, becoming afterward
thereby liable to many and great Dangers. But forasmuch as the Season of the
Year forbad any further present action, they withdrew on both sides into
Winter Quarters. Afterward the Romans (Fortune changing in favor of their
Affairs) received manifold Advantages by means of the Hostages they had so
given up, being thereby greatly assisted in their future Enterprises. Thus have
we delivered a state of the Occurrences in Spain.

But to return to our History of Hannibal: He receiving intelligence by his
Spies, That there was much Corn at Luceria and Gerunium, and that Gerunium was
a commodious place wherein to make his Magazines; thereupon resolved to make
that Country his Winter Quarters, and so lead his Army by the way of the
Mountains of Liburnum, to the said Towns. When he arrived at Gerunium, which
stands about twenty five Miles from Luceria, he sought by all fair Means and
large Promises, to win them to take part with the Carthaginians, offering to
bind himself by Oath to the punctual execution of the Conditions that should be
accorded to. But seeing he could not so prevail, he sat down before the Town;
and laying siege to it soon (...) it, putting all the Inhabitants to the
^^word, reserving the greatest part of the Buildings undemolish'd, whereof to
make Granaries; and lodging his Troops under the Walls, fortified his Camp with
a good Retrenchment. From thence he sent two third parts of his Army to gather
in Corn, ordering them by turns to supply daily the other third part that
remained with him, with a certain quantity for their Expense, he continuing
with them constantly in Battalia, as well for the guard of the Camp, as to
prevent any sudden attempt on those who were employed in gathering in the Corn.
In short, the Country being very fertile, and the time of Harvest at the
height, they daily brought in very great quantities.

As soon as Minutius had received the Command of the Army from Fabius, as we
noted, he lost no time, but marched by the tops of the Mountains to find out
the Enemy, hoping for an occasion to deal with Hannibal there. But when he came
to understand, That he was already Master of Gerunium; that the Carthaginians
were spread all over the Country gathering in Corn, and that the Army was
encamped under the Walls of the Town, he forthwith descended from the Hills
into the Champaign Country, and encamped in the Territory of Larinam, on a high
Ground called Calela, with a full determination to do his utmost to come by any
means speedily to a Battle. Hannibal having notice of the approach of the
Romans, permitted only one part of his Army to pursue their Harvest-work, while
he with the other two thirds advanced toward the Enemy, posting himself on an
Eminence about two Miles distant from Gerunium, to try if he could from thence
awe them, and also to be in a better Post to succor his Foragers, in case they
should chance to be pressed. But there happening to be a piece of high Ground
between the two Armies, which commanded near the Roman Camp, he sent thither in
the Night two Thousand of his light-armed Troops to take possession thereof.
This being observed in the Morning by Minutius, he immediately ordered out his
light-armed Soldiers likewise against them, who attacked them in their Post.
The Dispute was very warm for a while; but in the end the Romans prevailed; and
dislodging the Enemy, came and posted themselves there.

Hannibal after this, remained quiet in his Camp for some Days with all his
Troops, for that they had the Romans now so near Neighbors; but after a while
he was necessitated to send abroad for Forage for his Horse, and to fetch in
Corn for the supply of his Camp; for that he was unwilling not only to spend
out of the Store they had laid up, but sollicitous to add to what they had
already gathered, to the end they might live in plenty during Winter, both
Horse and Man, placing his greatest hopes of success in the Service of his
Horse.

In the mean time Minutius, being informed that the Enemy was abroad in great
numbers, dispersed here and there about the Country, for the Services
abovementioned, ordered his Troops to march at an Hour he thought most proper;
and, being not far from the Enemies Camp, drew up his Army in Battalia, and
ordering his Horse and light-armed Troops to be drawn up in Parties and small
Divisions, commanded them to march and attack the Foragers, and to give no
Quarter. This Action did not a little perplex Hannibal, who had not then
Strength enough at hand to make head against the Enemy, nor to succor those
who were scattered straggling about the Country.

Those of the Romans, who were commanded out against the Foragers, killed many
as they found them wandering to and again; and those, who stood drawn up in
Battalia, began so to contemn the Carthaginians, that not satisfied to confine
them to their Camp, they were hardly withheld from attempting their Works;
insomuch that Hannibal seemed to be greatly streight^ed: Yet albeit he was
reduced to that extremity, that it was all he could do to keep his Ground and
defend the Camp, yet he deserted not his Post. In short, Asdrubal receiving
those into the Camp under the Walls of Gerunium, that had escaped thither from
the Enemy, marched at the head of four Thousand Men to the relief of Hannibal,
who, being now in some sort reinsorc'd, advanced against the Romans, and stood
some time in Battalia, not far distant from their Camp, so that in the end he
came fairly off of the Danger that threatened him, though with difficulty enough;
but, in a word, he came off. Minutius having slain many of the Enemy in this
Rencounter, and more of the Foragers, retired to his Camp full of assurance of
future Success; and on the Morrow, upon the Carthaginians marching out of their
Works, he followed them and took possession of their Camp: For Hannibal fearful
lest the Romans should by surprise in the Night attempt and assault his Camp at
Gerunium, which was not in a very good state of Defense, and might thereby
become Masters of their Baggage, their Plunder, and all the Stores they had
there laid up, was therefore determined to return and abide in those Quarters.
In the mean time the Carthaginians forag'd for the furture with more caution,
and the Romans manifested less apprehension of the Enemy.

The news of this Action being brought to Rome, and published with more Vanity
than Truth, there was great Joy in the City. For, after the Consternation they
had been in, they reckoned it a Change greatly for the better, and as an Omen
of their future good Fortune; and, that if their Armies had not of a long time
performed any thing to the purpose, it was not at least through the Cowardice
of the Soldiers, but the pusillanimity of the Dictator, who apprehended every
thing. So that all the World began now to reproach Fabius, and blame his
Conduct, for having lost so many fair occasions plainly through want of
Resolution. But they heaped so many Praises on Minutius, that in the end they
decreed him an Honor that was without any example in the Republic. For they
invested him with absolute Authority; imagining that by that act, they should
put it in his Power to give a speedy Period to the War; and now by this Decree
they came to have two Dictators at one and the same time to Conduct their
Affairs, which never happened at any time before among the Romans. When
Minutius came to understand how highly he was exalted in the Opinion of the
People, and that they had given him full Power, he grew more determined and
forward to attempt every thing how hazardous soever.

In the mean time Fabius returns to the Army, without any change of Judgment
through the Injuries which had been done him; but rather more confirmed in the
Rules he had laid down to himself; and observing that Minutius was now become
insolent, and uneasy to him, by his new Authority and Successes, and that he
opposed him in every thing through a kind of Jealousy he had conceived, and
that he was likely to push Matters to a decisive Battle, he therefore put it to
his choice whether they should command the Army by Days alternately, or divide
the Army and command the distinct Bodies apart, and have two separate Camps,
and act as each of them saw good? Minutius thereupon inclined to divide the
Army, whereupon the Legions were divided, and encamped apart, about a Mile and
an half asunder.

Hannibal, as well by the Prisoners he had taken, as by their Proceedings, had
now learned there was an ill understanding between the two Generals, and well
knew too the Mind of Minutius; wherefore rightly judging that this posture of
their Affairs would in the end work more Mischief to them than to him, he began
to contrive how to lay Baits for Minutius, that he might a little restrain his
Insolence and confound his Designs. And observing a small rising Ground between
his and Minutius's Camp, by which either might incommode the other, Hannibal
therefore resolved to possess it; and for that he was well assured, the Roman
emboldened by his late Success would oppose him, he therefore devised this
Stratagem. The Country round about, near this piece of Ground, was, in truth,
plain and Champaign, no part thereof seeming in any wise capable of Ambushes;
but, forasmuch as in the plainest Countries there are little insensible Risings
and Fallings, Turnings and Windings, Rocks and Caverns, where Men may be
concealed, as here there was, wherefore in these places he hid five Hundred
Horse, and five Thousand Foot, divided into Parties of two and three Hundred in
a Division, according to the capacity of the places where they were to lodge;
and to be so disposed that the Enemies Foragers might not discover them: This
done, he ordered his light-armed Troops to march, and take possession of the
Ground we mentioned; whereupon Minutius, who concluded the Enemy had given him
a new occasion of Victory, orders out his light-armed Troops to attack them,
and after these his Horse, while he himself followed with the gross of the Army
in Battalia, keeping their Order.

The Sun was now risen, and while every Bodies Eyes were fixed on the place of
Action, Hannibal's Ambush rises, and advances by degrees unobserved by the
Romans. While Hannibal in the mean while was not slack to send Succors
constantly to the Charge, and at length advancing himself at the head of his
Horse, and the rest of the Army, the Horse on both sides came soon to engage.
Whereupon the light-armed Romans, not being a match for the Carthaginian Horse,
were beaten, and retreated to their Body, putting them in great disorder.
Hitherto the Ambush remained expecting the Signal to fall on, which being now
given, they come boldly to the Charge, and attack the Romans on all sides, as
well on the gross as the light-armed Troops, so that the dispute was very warm
and bloody. And now Fabius, who saw how things went, and feared lest Minutius
and his Army should be lost, marched out of his Works, and came in to his
relief, who was at his last stake; whereupon the Romans, who before were broken
and disordered, observing his approach, took Heart and rallied about their
Ensigns, and made a stand, after their having lost many of their light-armed
Men, and more of the best and bravest of their Legionary Soldiers. Upon the
coming in of the fresh Legions that advanced to the Relief boldly and in firm
order, Hannibal began to be in doubt, and therefore founded a Retreat, and
commanded his People from the Pursuit. And now all Men justly judged, who were
engaged in the dangers of this Action, and in a word concluded, that the Romans
had been beaten by the rashness of Minutius, and that the Commonwealth had
been at this time, and always heretofore, preserved and rescued through the
wise and slow Temper of Fabius. And they were soon satisfied in Rome of the
wide disserence there was between the Prudence of a good General of an Army,
and a rash hotheaded Soldier. Wherefore the Romans now taught by sharp
Experience, thought it Wisdom for the time to come to abide in a Body, and in
one Camp, and that none was sit to be obeyed but Fabius. As for the
Carthaginians, after they had made a Retrenchment between their Camp and this
piece of Ground, and had Garrisoned and well Fortified the Post, and performed
what was necessary to secure it from any further danger, they betook themselves
to their Winter Quarters.

And now the time for election of their Consuls at Rome was come, where L.
Aemilius and C. Terentius were chosen, and the Dictator's Authority thereby
superseded. As to the last Years Consuls, Cn. Servilius and M. Regulus, who had
filled the place of Flaminius, they were invested by Aemilius with Pro-consular
Power, and having the Camp committed to their Charge, had the entire present
Conduct of the War. In the mean time Aemilius took care to make new Levies,
after he had imparted his Counsels to the Senate, and sent Recruits likewise to
fill up the Legions. Orders were also dispatched to Servilius to be careful not
to engage in a general Battle, but to exercise the Troops as often as occasion
served in Skirmishes and Rencounters, to acquaint the young Soldiers with
Danger and their Duty, and qualify them for more important Occasions. For they
were persuaded that much of their misfortune in the War hitherto, was owing to
the rawness and inexperience of their Troops, who had not for the most part
seen any Action of weight. The Senate likewise dispatched the Praetor
Posthumous into Gaul, to endeavor to bring over those who had taken Arms under
Hannibal to another Mind; furthermore, it was committed to his Care to Conduct
over the Army that had wintered at Lilybaeum.

They likewise supplied the Scipio's, who conducted the War in Spain, with
whatsoever they could be thought to need. In a word, both Consuls and Senate
acted with great attention in all things that might avail toward a vigorous
prosecution of the War. As soon as Servilius had received the Consuls Orders,
he carefully put them in execution, performing every other thing that related
to his Charge; but for Occurrences, there happened nothing memorable enough to
be related; whether it was that his Instructions were too much limited, or
that the Season of the Year permitted him not to enter on any considerable
Action, but little was done toward the advancement of their Affairs. What was
performed was by Pickeering, and small and frequent Skirmishes and Rencounters,
wherein the Leaders were not without their share of some Praise, acting in
their Posts always with singular Temper and Prudence.

Thus then the two Armies remained encamped in view of each other all the
Winter, and a good part of the Spring. But as soon as Hannibal saw there was
Forage to be had, he decamped from under Gerunium, concluding there was nothing
so advantageous for his Affairs, as to labor by all ways possible to compel
the Enemy to come to a Battle. In the mean time, he besieged and took the
Citadel of Cannae, where the Romans had laid up their Corn and Provisions of
War for the Service of the Army. The Town had been demolished the Year before;
and having now lost the Fortress, with all their Provision and Stores within
it, the Roman Army became greatly streighten'd; and were not only pressed
through want of Provisions, which they could not now obtain but with great
difficulty, the Enemy being possessed of their Magazine; but also because the
Fortress of Cannoe commanded the whole Country round about.

They therefore dispatched Messenger on Messenger to Rome, for Instructions how
to comport themselves; letting them understand, That if the Enemy approached
and pressed them, there would be no means left to avoid coming to a Battle; and
that the Country being everywhere wasted and destroyed, their Allies began to
grow jealous of their Safety, and seemed only at present to stand in a sort of
doubtful Neutrality, to take their measures as the success of a Battle should
determine them. Whereupon the Senate came to a Resolution that they should give
the Enemy Battle: Howbeit, they admonished Cneius to deferr it, if possible, to
the coming of the Consuls, whom they now dispatched away. All People's Eyes
were now on Aemilius, their Hopes being in him, as well on account of his
Virtue, as for that he had not long before conducted the War in Illyria, much
to the Honor of the Republic. It was decreed, That the Roman Army should
consist of eight Legions; which was what the People of Rome had never before
done; and that each Legion should consist of five Thousand, over and above the
Succors of the Confederates. For, as we have hitherto observed, the Roman
Custom was to march out every Year with four Legions, each containing four
Thousand Foot, and two Hundred Horse; but now that they were thus threatened,
they thought sit to compose their Legions of five Thousand Foot, and three
Hundred Horse, to which was added an equal number of Latin Auxiliary Foot, and
for the most part thrice the number of Horse. It was the custom to assign to
each Consul the one half of these Auxiliary Troops, with two Legions, when they
marched on any Expedition; but they seldom employed more than one of their
Consuls to manage any one War, with two Legions and the Auxiliaries, as we have
observed; and but very rarely it happened, that the Romans were driven to
employ all their Forces to finish any one War. Nevertheless, they were now so
terrified, that they conceived eight Legions to be little enough.

After the Senate then had exhorted Aemilius to comport himself in that
occasion as became the Majesty of the Commonwealth, and had remonstrated to
him of what mighty importance a Battle at that conjuncture was, they dismissed
him. As soon as the Consuls arrived at their Camp, they caused the Army to be
drawn together, imparting to them the Pleasure of the Senate, and exhorting
them to behave themselves as became them. It was Aemilius who spoke to them;
whose Discourse principally tended to Apologize for past Failures; for the
Soldiers had been so dispirited by so many calamitous Adventures, that they
stood in need enough of good Admonition. He therefore did his best to persuade
them, That if they had been vanquished in former Occasions, it was not one or
two, but manifold Reasons that might be rendered for their Misfortunes; but
that now if they had the Hearts of Romans, there was not one which he could
foresee, that might debarr them of Victory, and triumphing over their Enemy:
That their two Consuls never were joined before, to conduct their Affairs with
their joint Legions, all assembled in one Body: That the Soldiers till now were
not fit for Service, the State being served by an Army of Novices, raw and
untrain'd to their Business, and unused to the Toils and Perils of War; and
what was of greater moment, they had to do with a strange Enemy, whom they had
hardly ever seen, before they came to engage with him: That, in short, those
who had been defeated near the River Trebia, were hurried to a Battle, within
two Days after their arrival from a wearisome Voyage from Sicily: That the
others, who lost the Day in Tuscany, did not so much as see the Enemy that beat
them; not only before the Battle, but during the Action it self, the Mist and
Darkness so hid them; but that now at this time, there was not room to allege
one of these Reasons: For first, they had with them both the Consuls, who were
not only themselves equally exposed to the Dangers with them; but they had so
prevailed, that the last Year's Consuls themselves, whose Magistracy was now
expired, did not refuse to stay and partake the Fortune of the Battle: That as
to the Soldiers, they had now had time to acquaint themselves with the Enemy,
their Arms, Order, Numbers, and manner of Fighting, it having been near two
Years that they had been in continual action against them; so that
Circumstances being totally changed from what they were, they ought likewise to
expect a change of Fortune. And further, That it was not to be doubted, nor
scarce possible to come to pass, that having vanquished the Enemy in so many
late Combats and Rencounters, without any odds in their numbers, they should
fail of Victory in a Battle, while they were to fight with an Army surmounting
the Carthaginians by at least one half. In a word (Fellow Soldiers, says the
Consul) since every thing seems to promise Victory, it only rests that you
should carry your Hearts with you into the Field, and a Determination to
Vanquish; and yet when I have said all, it is not you that stand in need of
Exhortation; such Methods are only proper for Mercenaries, who sight merely for
Pay, or Allies who are constrained by Stipulations to hazard themselves for
their Confederates, and without any prospect of bettering their Fortune, let
the Success happen which way it will: But you who come not into the Field to
sight a foreign Cause, but for your selves, your Country, your Wives and
Children, who are at present in a doubtful case through the many Dangers that
threaten them, and whose Condition the Success of a Battle will greatly change:
You (I say) need but only to be minded, not admonished of these things: For who
is he among you, who had not rather vanquish by Fighting, or otherwise die in
the Dispute, than lead a wretched Life, beholding these dearest Pledges I
named, a Prey to a merciless Enemy. In a word then, resolve without Incitements
from any thing I can utter, and take Counsel from your own Reflections, of the
difference between the Vanquished and the Victor, what Recompenses you are to
hope, and what Calamities to fear: And draw your Swords inspired with such
Thoughts, and bear in mind that you sight not now only for the Honor and
Preservation of an Army, but for your Country and the Roman Empire; and in such
case, what use can there be of Persuasions? If you sight unsuccessfully, and
chance to be Vanquished, your Country will be left wholly without Succor; she
has deposited all her Strength in your hands, all her Power, all her Hopes of
Safety; you will do well therefore, Fellow Soldiers, to determine not to
violate so great a Trust, in an Occasion of such mighty moment; act then
correspondent to such an Obligation, and express your Gratitude as becomes you.
In a word, behave your selves so, that it may appear to the whole World, that
if heretofore the Commonwealth has sustained Damage and Reproach, it was not
because the Roman Virtue gave place to the Carthaginian, but merely to be
attributed to the Inexperience of our Armies in those times, unlucky
Conjunctures, and ill choice of Ground to fight in. After this Discourse, and
others of the like Contents, to animate the Soldiers, he dismissed the Assembly.

The next Day the Consuls marched the Army toward the Enemy, and the Day after
came within six Miles of their Camp. Aemilius, who observed the Country to be
all plain and champaign Ground, declared his Opinion against coming there to a
Battle, forasmuch as the Enemy much over-match'd them in Horse, and that it
therefore concerned them to draw the Carthaginians, if possible, into such
Ground as gave the advantage to Foot; but, in regard Terentius, who knew no
better, would not be won to his Opinion, it came to pass, which seldom fails in
Military Affairs, that the two Leaders sell at variance.

The next Day then, when Terentius had the Command, (for it is the Custom of
the People of Rome, for the Consuls to Command in their turns) decamped the
Army much against Aemilius's liking, and advanced toward the Enemy. Whereupon
Hannibal, seeing them approach, moved toward them with his light-armed Troops,
and his Horse, and boldly attacked them: But the Romans sustained the first
shock by mingling some of their heavy-arm'd Troops among their light-armed
Soldiers, and re-inforc'd these with their Archers and their Horse, and in the
end had the better of the Dispute. The reason whereof was, that the Body of the
Carthaginian Troops did little or nothing to sustain those that fought, while
the Romans had mingled, I say, certain Cohorts with their light-armed Soldiers,
who fought at the same time. In short, the Night parted them, but in truth with
other Success than what the Carthaginian expected when he engaged: And the next
Day Aemilius, who approved not the Resolution of coming then to a Battle, and
saw he could not now retreat from the Ground where he was, without great
Hazard, entrenched himself near the River Aufidus, with about two third parts
of the Army. This River only, of all the rest in Italy, takes its course
through the Apennines, for all the other Italian Rivers are dispersed, some
emptying themselves into the Sea of Tuscany, others toward the Adriatic Sea;
but the Aufidus, which crosses the Apennines, has its source in that part of
Italy that borders on the Tuscan-Sea, and runs into the Adriatic. Aemilius
then posted the rest of his Army on the other side the River, toward that part
that is Fordable, somewhat more than a Miles distance from his other Camp, and
a further space from the Enemies; in this place he ordered them to entrench, to
the end he might be the better able to succor and sustain his Foragers that
went from either Camp, and to attack with more ease the Enemies, whenever
they ventured abroad on the same Errand.

And now Hannibal, perceiving the time of Battle to approach, and fearing lest
his ill Success in the last Engagement, should have blunted the Mettle of his
Soldiers, thought it therefore advisable to speak to the Army, and thereupon
Orders them to be drawn together to that purpose; and when they were assembled,
^he bid them behold and survey the Country round about, and then demanded, what
they could wish more, if the Gods themselves had left them at liberty to choose
a place to fight in, than that wherein they now stood, surpassing (as they did)
the Enemy so much in Horse? We ought first then (says he) to acknowledge it a
Blessing from Heaven, that in order to Victory has conducted the Enemy hither.
In the next place, you are to allow me a share of your Thanks, by whose
management they are at length driven to a necessity of giving us Battle; for
they cannot choose now but fight, in a place which of all others they would
refuse, were it left to their choice. In short, I see no necessity to entertain
you with many Words to animate you to go on cheerfully. I might perhaps speak
to you on that Subject, and labor to incite you to do Gallantly were you now
to learn what the Romans can do, for then indeed it might concern us to
endeavor, both by Words and Examples to inspire you with Thoughts worthy of
you; but at this time of Day, after we have thrice vanquished them in three
successive pitched Battles, what Speech, or what Eloquence can so well persuade
you, as the Success of your own Actions? By the Battles you have already won,
you have subdued the Country, and by that means reaped the Harvest of plenty of
every good and needful thing, and my Promise to you therein made good; and the
Effects have proved, that I meant what I said. It now only remains, that we
make our selves Masters of their Cities and Towns, and the Riches and Treasure
they contain: If we compass that, Italy it self is ours. This single Battle
will finish all our Labors; and by giving us the Empire, and all that the
Romans call theirs, we become Masters and Lords of the Universe. There is no
need then of Language but of Hearts and Hands, and I trust, by the Favor of
the Gods, you will soon see the happy accomplishment of all I have promised you.

After Hannibal had thus spoken, and the Army had given evidence both by their
Voice and their Actions, that they approved what he had said, he remanded them
to their Posts; having first praised their. Forwardness, and the Resolution
they had manifested, and presently marched and encamped on the other side the
River, where the gross of the Roman Army lay. The next Day, after having
ordered the Army to take their repast, he bid them prepare for Action; and, the
Day following, drawing up his Troops along the River, he presented Battle to
the Romans. But Aemilius not liking the Ground, and believing that want of
Provision would soon constrain Hannibal to decamp, he therefore moved not, but
took care only to have the two Camps well fortified; Whereupon Hannibal marched
back to his own, after having stood a while drawn up in Battalia in expectation
of the Enemy. After this he sent out his Numidians to molest those of the
lesser Camp as they came to their watering place; but Terentius not enduring
they should thus dare him so near his Works, and hinder his Soldiers from
supplying their Necessities, became the more provoked by such Bravado's to come
to blows, nor were the Soldiers less impatient; so true it is, that no time
seems so tedious, as the space between Resolving and Executing, when once we
have determined to abide the Dangers and Difficulties that lie in the way to
our Purposes.

When the News came to Rome that the Armies drew near each other, and that they
were daily Pickeering and Engaging by Parties, the People were every where in
great fear and suspense, and the memory of so many late Defeats terrified them
with the apprehension of the issue of the approaching Battle; it being easy to
foresee the deplorable state of the Republic in case of a Defeat. Nothing was
talked of in Rome but menaces out of their Sibyl's Books, and scarce any thing
was seen in Temples and Houses, but Specter and ill-boding Prodigies, so that
all their time was spent in Vows, Sacrifices and Supplications. For it is a
Custom among the Romans, in any Extremities or Streights in their Affairs, to
omit nothing that they conceive may be of use to avert the Anger or Danger that
threatens them either from the Gods or Men; and, in a word, there is nothing on
such occasions done or said among them, that is held either Superstitious or
unbecoming the Dignity of the Government.

The Day being now come when Terentius had the Authority, he took the Fasces,
and the Sun was hardly risen, when he ordered the Army to move out of their
Camps, ranging those in the greater Camp in order of Battle as they marched
out; those of the lesser Camp he drew up in a long Line, joining them at the
extremity with the others, possessing all that side of the Ground that looked
toward the South. In the Right-Wing he posted the Roman Horse, filling with
them the space between the rest and the River The Foot he disposed in the same
manner, but in closer Order in the Rear than in the Front, in regard the number
of the Cohorts was doubled. On the left Wing was placed the Horse of the
Consederates, the light-armed Troops were advanced some distance before the
Line of Battle; the whole Roman Army (taking in the Troops of the Allies)
consisting of fourscore Thousand Foot, and six Thousand Horse.

In the mean time, Hannibal ordered the Baleares and light-armed Troops to pass
the River, posting them advanced before the Ensigns. Then commanding the Gross
of the Army to march, he passed the River likewise in two places, and ranged
them in order of Battle fronting the Enemy. On the left point, being the part
nearest the River, he posted his Spanish and Gaulish Horse, opposed to that of
the Romans; next these he placed the one half of his African Foot, who bare
weighty Armor, their Flank being likewise secured by the rest of the Africans.
His Numidian Horse he posted on the Right Wing; and after having thus formed
his Line of Battle, drawn out in length, and of equal depth, he made the
Center, or middle Battalions, which was composed of Spanish and Gaulish
Legionaries, to move a little forward, in such manner as that the Figure, when
they had so done, with the two Wings, might be liken'd to a Yoke, Crescent-wise
or convex'd in the midst; for having proposed that the Gauls and Spaniards
should first engage, the Africans were posted at hand so as to fortify and
sustain them.

His Africans were armed after the Roman manner, being well furnished for that
Service out of the Spoils of the Enemy in former Battles. The Spanish and
Gaulish Bucklers were of one sort, but their Swords were not alike. The
Spaniards wear Swords short, stiff, and pointed, fit both for cutting and
thrusting; but the Gauls were only for cutting-strokes. In a word, it was a
surprising Sight to behold them; for the Gauls were stripped naked from the
Waste upward; and the Spaniards clad in white Linen-Cassocks, bordered with
Purple, after the fashion of their Country. In Hannibal's Army there were ten
Thousand Horse; but the Foot, taking in the Auxiliaries and all, did not exceed
forty Thousand. In the Roman Battle, Aemilius was posted in the Right,
Terentius in the Left, and the last Year's Consuls, Marcus Attilius and Cn.
Servilius led the Body. On the part of the Carthaginians, Asdrubal was posted
on the Right Wing, Hanno on the Left, and Hannibal led the Body, accompanied by
his Brother Mago. The Roman Army faced toward the South, and the Carthaginians
consequently toward the North; so that the rising Sun molested neither.

The Forlorn, or advanced Parties began the Day, and these light-armed Troops
contended for a while with equal Courage and Success; but as soon as the
Spanish and Gaulish Horse on the Left Wing advanced against the Romans, the
Battle grew hot and bloody: For they fought not now, as had been the custom in
other Battles, by charging and wheeling off, and then returning to the Charge:
But here, when once they came to join, the Horsemen mingling, and often
disengaging from their Horses, fought it out Man to Man on Foot. But the
Carthaginian Horse in the end prevailed, killing the greatest part of the
Romans on the place, though their Behavior was without blame. Those who
endeavored to escape, took along the River, but were most of them cut off,
Asdrubal giving no Quarter. And now the Cohorts taking place of the light-armed
Troops, it was there likewise hotly disputed for a space; but the Spaniards and
Gauls, who did not presently lose their Order, were at length broken, and
forced to give ground to the superior number of the Romans; and retreating
back, the Crescent, or unequal Part of the Figure, which was formed by this Body
of Men, and who first engaged, sunk back into the void space in the Rear. The
Roman Cohorts eagerly pursuing the advantage, easily pierced the Body of the
Enemy's Battle, which was but weak, and composed only of Gauls, to the place
where the Battalions stood in close order ^^at had been drawn thither for that
purpose, during the Fight from the Right and Left Wings, where all the Danger
was. In short, the Romans thus pressing the Enemy, who opened to the Right and
Left to give them passage, advanced so far into the void space, that they had
now the African Foot, who bare weighty Armor on their Flank both ways; who
moving from the Right and Left Wings inwards, charged the Romans on both their
Flanks at once, each acting as the present occasion advised.

In short, every thing came to pass as Hannibal had skilfully devised; for the
Romans pursuing the Gauls, whom he well knew were not their match, became at
length encompassed by the Africans: By which means they were so enclosed, that
they were not able to fight in a Body, but, as it were, Man to Man, or by small
Parties against strong Bodies that pressed them from all Parts. And now
forasmuch as Aemilius, who was posted in the Right Wing, and had his share in
the Conflict with Asdrubal and the Horse; yet being hitherto unhurt, and
willing to equal his Actions with his Words, by which he had encouraged the
Army, seeing that all the Hopes they had left was in their Foot, he charged
through the Enemy's Battle, killing and forcing all that stood in his way,
where he did his utmost to encourage his People; Hannibal acting the same Part
in the same Post, having from the beginning conducted that part of his Army in
Person.

As to the Numidians, who fought in the Righ: Wing against Varro, and the Horse
that were posted in the Left Wing of the Romans, neither they nor the others
acted any thing memorable on that side, saving that the Numidians so amused the
Romans, by beating about them, now offering to charge in one place, now in
another, that they were thereby prevented from succouring those that were
elsewhere distressed. But now that Asdrubal had completed his Victory, and
destroyed the greatest part of the Horse whom he had followed along the River,
and was returned to re-enforce the Numidians; then the Horse of the Roman
Allies beholding their Danger, turned their backs. It Is said that Asdrubal in
this occasion performed an artful and prudent part; who well knowing that the
Numidians were singular at the pursuit of a slying Enemy, he therefore ordered
them to follow hard after the running Romans, while he, heading a Body of Foot,
advanced to re-enforce the Africans; and coming in, fell on the Rear of the
Romans Battle, and charged them likewise elsewhere with certain Squadrons of
Horse, which greatly hearten'd the Africans, and as much terrified the Romans.
L. Aemilius, having received many Wounds, died in the Battle, after he had
lived to act in every thing the part of an able and virtuous Citizen, and
especially in this occasion. The Romans resisted yet: a while; but as their Men
fell, their Ground by degrees became more and more straightened, till at length
they were so huddled up, that they had not space to move and weild their Arms;
so they were all put to the Sword. The two Consuls of the preceding Year
likewise fell in this occasion, Men of great Reputation for their Wisdom and
Probity, and who in this Action gave noble Proofs of the power and extent of
Roman Virtue. While matters passed thus here, the Numidians, who went in
pursuit of the Roman Horse, killed the greatest part of them, and took some
Prisoners. A few got into Venusia, and among these the Consul Terentius Varro,
a Person every way unworthy, and who was chosen into the Magistracy for a Curse
to his Country.

This issue had the Field of Cannae, famous for the number of illustrious Men
there present on both sides, as well on the part of the Vanquished, as the
Victors. And certainly the Action it self witnesses its own Greatness; for of
six Thousand Roman Horse, there escaped no more than Seventy, who got with the
Consul into Venusia; and about three Hundred of the Allies, some by one means,
some by another. As to the Foot, ten Thousand were made Prisoners, who were not
in the Action: Of the rest, not above three Thousand escaped, all the rest
dying bravely with their Swords in their Hands, to the number of Seventy
Thousand. In a word, the great advantage the Enemy had in Horse, mainly
contributed to their Success; and prositable Instruction may be gathered by
remarking from hence, That it is more safe to Fight with one hals the number of
Foot less, while you exceed the Enercy in Horse, than to have both sides equal
in Foot and Horse in a Battle. But this Victory came not cheap to the
Carthaginians; for there died in Battle on their part, four Thousand Gauls,
fifteen Hundred Spaniards and Africans, and about two Hundred of their Horse.

The Romans who were taken Prisoners were not in the Battle, for Aemilius had
left then in the Camp with Orders to march and attack that of the Enemy after
the Battle should begin, thereby to become Masters of their Stores and
Ammunition, in case Hannibal should chance to leave his Camp without a good
Guard, and in case he did, he was sure to find his Army thereby diminished, and
the Romans with less business on their hands. These then were taken much after
this manner. Though Hannibal left not his Camp without a good Guard,
nevertheless, as soon as the Battle began, the Romans, pursuant to their
Orders, marched to the Attack; the Carthaginians for a while gallantly opposing
them, but at length, when they were on the point of yielding to the superior
force of the Enemy, Hannibal, who was by that time Master of the Field, came in
to their Relief, and routing the Romans, forced them to take Refuge in their
own Camp; of these were killed about two Thousand, the rest were taken alive.
Such as were scattered and dispersed about the Country, and had got into
Fortified Places, shared no better Fortune, for the Numidians attacked them
wherever they went, taking to the number of two Thousand of their Horse
Prisoners, as we before noted. The issue of this Battle proved in effect what
either Party foresaw; for the Carthaginians thereby became soon possessed, in a
manner at least, of all that part of Italy called the Ancient Province, and
Magna-Graecia. Those of Tarentum, the Arpinates, and some Capuans, putting
themselves presently into their hands, and all the rest giving manifest signs
of their good Inclinations toward them. Nor was Hannibal in doubt, but that
Rome it self would be his on the first Attempt; while the Romans became now
desperate (after this Defeat) of preserving their Dominion of Italy. And under
these Agitations, terrified at once at their own and Countries Danger, expected
every moment to see Hannibal at their Gates. And, as if Fortune had a mind to
make them drink the Dreggs of this bitter Cup, they received news shortly after
(while the City was sinking under the weight of their Adversity) that their
Praetor, whom they had sent to the Cisalpine Gauls, was himself with his whole
Army routed and cut off, by an Ambush they had laid in his way. Howbeit, the
Senate deserted not their Duty in this exigent. They called on the Inhabitants
to strengthen the Works of the City, and gave all those needful Orders which
their Circumstances would permit, as by the success soon appeared. And though in
truth the whole World was now witness, that the Romans at this time were
vanquished, and gave place in Military Reputation to their Enemy; nevertheless,
it will also be confessed, That what by their Constancy of Mind, and the Wisdom
of their Counsels, they overcame at length these their Conquerors, and not only
rescued their Country, but added not long after to their recovery of Italy, the
Conquest of the World.

Here then we have thought it proper to sinish this Book, which contains so
many memorable Tranfactions, as well in Spain as Italy, during the hundred and
fortieth Olympiad. And when we shall have spoken of the Occurrences of Greece,
during the same Olympiad, we shall then return to Rome, and discourse at large
on the subject of that Commonwealth; being persuaded that such Remarks as may
be thence collected, will not only be found worthy the Pen of an Historian, but
of excellent use both to those, who would improve their Minds in such
Contemplations, as others who are actually in the Ministry of Public Affairs;
as well for the correcting the Errors of present Governments, as the forming
and founding of new Commonwealths.

The End of the First Volume.
A Catalogue of BOOKS Printed for Rich. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and Sam. Briscoe, near Covent Garden.
THE Italian Voyage; or a complete Journey through Italy: In two Parts; being
an exact Character of the People, and a Description of the chief Towns,
Churches, Monasteries, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Villa's, Gardens, Pictures,
Statues, Antiquities; as also of the Interest, Government, Rules, Force, etc.
of all the Princes. By Richard Laswell, Gent, the second Edition, with large
Additions; by a modern Name.

A Discourse of the Nature and Faculties of Man in several Essays, with some
Considerations on the Occurrences of Humane Life. By Tim. Nourse, Gent.

Familiar Letters: Written by John, late Earl of Rochester, to the Honorable
Henry Savile, Esquire and several other Persons of Quality; with Love Letters; writ
by the ingenuous Mr. Otway, with several other Letters writ by his Grace the
Duke of Buckingham, Sir George Etheridge, and Mr. Tho Brown. In 2 Vol. Each may
be had singly.

The Histories and Novels of the late ingenuous Mrs. Anne Behn, Vol. I. viz.
Oroonoko, or the Royal Slave: The fair Gilt; or Prince Tarquin, Agnes de
Castro, or the Force of generous Love. The Lovers Watch; or the Art of making
Love, being Rules for Courtship for every Hour in the Day: The Ladies
Lookinglass to dress themselves by; or the whole Art of charming Mankind: The
lucky Mistake: Memoirs of the Court of the King of Bantam: The Nun; or the
perjured Beauty: The Adventures of the Black Lady. These three never before
published; with the Life and Memoirs of Mrs. Bohn; written by one of the fair
Sex; with Love Letters written between her and Mine heir Van Brain a Dutch
Merchant. Next Week will be published the second and last Volume of Mrs. Br^^'s
Histories and Novels; which make her Works Complete.

The whole Works of that excellent practical Physician Dr. Tho. Sydenham;
wherein not only the History and Cures of acute Diseases are treated of, after
a new and safest way of curing most chronical Diseases; the second Edition,
corrected from the Original Latin. By John Pechey of the College of Physicians.

Reflections on ancient and modern Learning; by William Wotton, Chaplain to the
Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham, the second Edition enlarged; to which
is added, A Dissertation on the Epistles of Phalaris Themistocles, Socrates,
etc. By Dr. Bentley. Printed for Richard Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard, where you may be furnished with most Plays.

THE HISTORY OF POLYBIUS The MEGALOPOLITAN: CONTAINING A General Account OF THE
TRANSACTIONS OF THE WORLD.

And Principally of the ROMAN PEOPLE. During the First and Second Punick Wars,
etc.

Translated by Sir H. S.

VOL. II. III.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Briscoe, at the Corner of Charles-Street, in
Covent Garden. MDCXCVIII.

The Mapp of Ancient GREECE Expressing especially the Places mentioned in
Polybious by Sr H. S. Vol: II.

map of Greece

POLYBIUS'S General History OF THE TRANSACTIONS OF THE WORLD.
VOL. II. BOOK IV.
IN our foregoing Book we have related the Causes of the Second War that fell
out between the Romans and Carthaginians: We have delivered the Particulars of
Hannibal's March, and Invasion of Italy; and have recounted the Adventures of
the two Armies, to the time of the Battle that was sought on the Banks of the
River. Anfidus, near Cannae. Now the Occurrences of Greece, during the same
Period of time, shall be the Subject of our Pains. But we have thought it
necessary to remind the Reader briefly: First, Of what has been already
observed of the Greeks in our Second Book, and principally of the Achaians.
Inasmuch as it has so come to pass, that in the short space of ours and our
Fathers Days, that Republic has grown to a mavelous Greatness. For being
founded by Tisamenes, one of the Sons of Orestes, we have observed that the
Achaians were first governed by Kings, who sprang from him in a continued Line
of Succession to the Reign of Ogyges: From whose time, the Supreme Power being
translated to the People, became established in an excellent form of
Government: Which was afterward first broken and dissolved by the Kings of
Macedon, when the Cities and Towns thereof became independent; each governing
according to their own Rules, without any common Subjection to a Supreme
General Tribunal, to which they might have recourse. After this Revolution, we
showed how they came to Unite and Incorporate into one Body; at what time it
was that they came to this Resolution; and who they were that gave the
Occasion. In short, we have related by what Means and Counsels the Towns being
drawn to Unite, the whole People of Peloponnesus grew to have one common
Appellation, and to be under one and the same Form of Commonwealth. After
having treated in general of that Enterprise, and said something in particular
touching the Actions of the Achaians, we pursued the Story down to the time,
that Cleomenes King of the Lacedaemonians was despoiled of his Government. Then
we gave a brief Recapitulation of general Occurrences to the Death of
Antigonus, Seleucus and Ptolemy, who all died about the same time; having
promised to begin our History at that Period, which gave an end to those
Matters we have now last recited.

In conclusion, I determined, that I could not any where better begin than from
thence: First, In regard that there Aratus finisheth his Commentaries, so that
by continuing the Thread of his Discourse, we shall thereby make the relation
of the Greek Affairs, as far as we propose to touch them, all of a piece; and
then it will come to pass, that the time succeeding, and that which shall
compose our History, will be so united to the foregoing Period, that in part
what shall be related of our own, and the Transactions of our Fathers Days,
will be comprised in one Body. For as I have been a Witness to a good part of
what shall be delivered, and composed the rest from the Relations of such as
could yield me the like certain Testimony; so I have shunned the delivering of
remoter Occurrences, through the doubts to which they are subjected: And have
thought nothing worthy of an Historian's Pen beyond that Period. Nor indeed can
Truth farther fairly be shown, nor Men consequently safely judge of any thing
they hear otherwise delivered. A farther particular Motive we had for taking
our beginning from thence was, that Fortune seemed at that time to have made an
universal Revolution, and given a new Face to the Affairs of the World.

Though Philip, Son of Demetrius, were yet a Child, nevertheless he soon came to
sway the Scepter of Macedon. Achaeus, who governed the Countries of Asia on
this side Mount Taurus, did not only bear the Port of a Prince, but was in
effect vested with Sovereign Authority. Antiochus, sirnam'd the Great, a little
before, succeeded his Brother in the Kingdom of Syria; being then but very
young. And Ariarathes took possession at the same time of the Kingdom of
Cappadocia, which was delivered into his hands. About the same time Ptolemy
Philopater reduced Egypt to his Obedience. And a little after Lycurgus became
established King of the Lacedaemonians. The Carthaginians on that side had
newly made Hannibal their General, in order to those Attempts we have already
recounted. So that the Government, as one may say, of the World being put into
new hands, it could not by the Law of Nature but beget new Counsels, and
produce new Things. The Romans then entered upon the War we have related.
Antiochus and Ptolemy were soon in Hostility one against the other, for the
Dominion of the Lower Syria: And the Achaians and Philip joined in a War
against the Lacedaemonians, and those of Aetolia: The reasons of which War we
shall now deliver.

The Aetolians had been long weary of Peace, which obliged them to live
Honestly at their own Expense, who had been used heretofore to subsist on Spoil
and Rapine. And whosoever has lead that sort of Life, without prospect of
other Profit, than what arises by the Damage of another, after the manner of
Savage Beasts, are without any sense of Friendship or Alliance; reckon all
their Enemies they can prey on; and believe they have a right to any thing they
can take away. Nevertheless, during the Life of Antigonus, the sear the
Aetolians were under of the Lacedaemonians, withheld them a while from
Violence; but he was no sooner dead, and Philip, then very young, come to the
Crown, when setting little by his Youth, they meditated by what means or
pretexts they might make War on the Peloponnesians; whom after their ancient
Custom they had a mind to plunder; and believed they had a better right to make
War on the Achaians, than any other People whatsoever. While they were thus
consulting, there happened an accident that furthered their purpose, and which,
in short, they made use of to color it. Dorimachus of Trichonia was Son of
Nichostratus, who had acted so perfidious a part in the Assembly of the
Baeotians. This Dorimachus, a turbulent young Man, and every way an Aetolian,
(and after their manner) looking with a covetous Eye on other Men's Possessions,
was employed by Public Authority to Phigalia, a Town of Peloponnesus, under a
show of taking care for the Security and Defense of the Town and Territory; but
indeed his Commission was to make Observations from thence of the Transactions
of Peloponnesus. Soon after his arrival there drew a numerous confluence
thither from sundry Quarters, of loose piratical People, who resorted to him,
then residing in that Town, which was a Confederate of the? Aetolians, and
situate on the Frontiers of the Messenians; and he, not being able to gratisie
these Robbers with the Prey they hunted after, (the Peace of Antigonus as yet
subsisting among the Greeks) and, in short, having no better way to entertain
them, permitted them to spoil the Messenians of their Cattle, who were also
Friends and Confederates of the Aetolians. Who beginning on the Skirts of their
Frontiers, driving away their Herds from thence, their Insolence grew at length
to attempt such of their Habitations by Night, as lay at any distance dispersed
about the Country. The Messenians were thereupon urged to dispatch their
Deputies with Complaints of those Outrages to Dorimachus, and to demand
reparation of the wrongs they had received; who did not only not incline to
redress them, but seemed rather to encourage those who bare Arms under him, and
indeed to enrich himself by sharing a good proportion of all their Booty. But
at length being pressed by new and frequent Importunities, his People
continuing to act every day new Villainies, he told the Deputies he would come
himself to Messina, and do right to those, who had complained of Injuries done
them by the Aetolians. But upon his coming, and the Application of those who
had been thus molested, some he dismissed with Scoffs, others by adding further
Injuries to those they had sustained, and terrifying others with hard and
menacing Language. In short, it so happened, that while Dorimachus remained at
Messina, this lewd Rabble approaching near the Town in the Night, rifled a
certain Country House called Chyron, where killing all that made resistance,
they bound the rest in Chains, and carried them away, together with the Cattle.
Whereupon the Messenians, who had long lain under the resentment of this
barbarous Treatment, and the little account Dorimachus seemed to make of their
Complaints, cited him to appear before their Assembly. Sciron happened to be at
this time their Chief Magistrate, of whom so his Virtue his fellow Citizens had
a singular esteem. He was of Opinion that Dorimachus should be held under
restraint till reparation were made of the Damages they had suffered, and the
Authors of the Slaughter that had been committed were delivered into their
hands; which Counsel was thought but just, and had the ready concurrence of the
Assembly. Dorimachus enraged at this proceeding, angrily told them, That they
showed themselves but weak in such a Determination, if they could not
distinguish that thereby they did not affront him, but the whole Aetolian
People; that their Proceeding was unaccountable; and that it would not be long
ere it were revenged. There was at this time a certain ridiculous Fellow in
Messina called Babyrtas, who was every way so like Dorimachus, that had he been
habited like him, the resemblance both in Person, Countenance, and Voice was so
great, that it would have been difficult to know them afunder. Hereof too
Dorimachus had been informed: Who, on occasion, treating the Messenians after
his insolent and menacing manner, Sciron a little transported; How now
Babyrtas, says he, do you think that you or your Threats can awe the
Messenians? To this Affront Dorimachus made no Reply, and not able now
otherwise to avoid it, yielded that the Messenians should pursue the Reparation
of the Injuries that had been done them, and the Punishment of those who were
sound Guilty. But he was no sooner returned to his Country, when this Ou^rage
they had done him, so wrought in his Mind that without any other known Motive,
he prevailed with the Aetolians to make War on the Messenians.

Ariston was at that time Praetor of the Aetolians; whose Infirmities did not
permit him to be at the Head of their Army; to him Dorimachus was allied, as
likewise one Scopas; to Dorimachus then he committed, in a manner, the entire
Execution of his Authority; who nevertheless did not adventure in their Public
Assemblies to persuade them to this War with the Messenians, not being
furnished with Matter sufficient to determine them to such a Resolution; and he
knew moreover, that his meaning would be too well understood; and that his
Revenge and his Profit were the true Motives to such Counsels. So that
forbearing to press it publicly, he labored to win Scopas to assist him in
his Designs against the Messenians. Telling him, there was nothing to be feared
from the Macedonians, while the Authority was in such raw hands; Philip not
having attained the Age of Seventeen Years; he further added, that the Eleans
were the Aetolians fast Friends, and in Alliance with them, and concluded there
could be no hazard from thence, in breaking the Peace with the Messenians. But
the Argument that weighed most with Scopas, as an Aetolian, was the great
Profit and Plunder that would arise thereby. For that their Country was rich,
naked, and unguarded, and might be easily surpised; and in a word, he promised
himself greater Advantage by how much that in the Cleomenic War, that Territory
alone had escaped the Rapine and Violence of the Soldiers; and had felt none of
those Evils of War by which the whole Country beside had been wasted. He
further, and above all things, endeavored to persuade him, that nothing could
fall out more agreeable to the Aetolians. And for what could happen with
respect to the Achaians, if they should chance to oppose their march, they
could have no just subject of Complaint, while they did no other than barely
repel Force by Force; and in case they attempted nothing, that then the
execution of what they had projected would be so much the more feasible. That
after all that had been said, there were not wanting fair Pretexts to take up
Arms against the Messenians, who had long given occasion enough, by their
entering into Security to the Macedonians and Achaians, to take part with them
in all their Enterprises. Thus he prevailed with Scopas, and his Friends, and
wrought so far upon them, that without attending the Resolution of a general
Convention of the Aetolians; or so much as imparting their Purpose to the
Magistrates in being; or making any one step according to ancient Custom; they
did at once, and of their own Heads, in effect, declare War against the
Messenians, Epirots, Achaians, Acarnanians, and Macedonians.

At the same time they sent out their Fleet of Pilserers to infest the adjacent
Seas; who meeting with a Ship of the Kings of Macedon off of Cythera, made
Prize of her, and carrying her into Port, sold both the Ship and her Company.
In short, they proceeded to plunder all along the Coast of Epirus, employing
for that service Vessels of Cephallania, and made an attempt on Thyrea, a Town
of Acarnania. Afterward dispatching Troops by secret ways into Peloponnesus,
they surpised and kept possession of a Fortress called Clarium, in the heart
of the Megalopolitan Territory; which they made use of for a Retreat, and place
of Refuge, and to lodge and secure their Plunder: But some time after they lost
it again to Timoxenus, Praetor of the Achaians, assisted by Taurion; who had
been left by Antigonus on his departure out of Peloponnesus, to administer the
Affairs of the Kings of Macedon in those Parts. For Antigonus was in possession
of Corinth, which he took and held by the consent of the Achains, during the
Reign of Cleomenes; and had not restored Orchomenus, which be had taken by
force, but on the contrary kept it still in his Hands, and held it for his own.
His Motive it may be presumed for so doing, being not only to preserve by that
means, an easy ingress into Peloponnesus; but to be able by keeping a Garrison
in Orchomenus to secure and awe the neighboring Territory to better Obedience.

Dorimachus and Scopas then choosing their time, when the Praetor Timoxenus was
upon resigning up his Charge, and Aratus who was to succeed him not yet
invested in the Authority, called an Assembly of the Aetolians in Rhium, and
having given their Orders to have the Cephallenian Vessels in a readiness, they
embarked their Troops, and transported them into Peloponnesus, taking their
march toward Messina, and passing through the Territories of Patroe, Pharoe,
and Tritoea, they made show to the Achaians of having no design to molest them
in their Passage. Howbeit the covetous Soldiers withheld not their Hands, but
plundered and spoiled the Country every where as they went, till they came to
Phigalea. This Town they made their place of Arms, and the Seat of the War, and
from hence made their Inroads on the Lands of the Messenians, without any
regard to the right of Nations, and the ancient Friendship and Alliance that
had been made and continued between them; but led by their Avarice against all
Rules of Honor or Equity, robbed and spoiled the Country with impunity, the
Messenians not finding themselves of strength sufficient to adventure out
against them.

The Achaians, in the mean time, according to Custom, assembled at Aegium,
where the Patroeans and Pharoeans preserr'd their Complaints of the Damages
that had been done them by the Aetolians in their march through their Country.
The Messenians likewise complained of their Outrages and perfidious Dealing,
and sent their Deputies to pray speedy Succors. After the Assembly had
deliberated on these Matters, it was concluded, That the resentment of those of
Patroe and Pharoe was just, and ought to be prosecuted; and that the case of
the Messenians was to be commiserated: And it was especially agreed, That the
State in general had been affronted by this insolent proceeding of the
Aetolians, who had presumed in hostile manner to enter upon Achaia, not only
without their permission, but against the Treaty of Peace. Whereupon, justly
provoked by these Infractions, they resolved to send Succors to the
Messenians; and that as soon as the Praetor should have put them in Arms, they
would then proceed further to execute what should be thought expedient by the
Assembly. Timoxenus, who was yet in the Praetorship, was not very well pleased
with the Expodition, no^ consequently with the Decree of the Assembly; for his
Authority being not yet expired, he had no mind to the Command, as having but a
doubtful Opinion of the Achaian Militia, which had been long unexercis'd in
Arms. For after the expulsion of Cleomenes, the Peloponnesians weary of former
Wars, and believing the present peaceable posture of their Affairs was likely
to endure, had totally relinquished the Trade of Warfare, and neglected the use
of Arms. But Aratus provoked at the Indignities they had suffered by the
audacious Aetolians, pursued the matter with another Spirit; nor was this the
first occasion he had conveiv'd of aversion to that People. Wherefore he lost
no time in putting the Achaians under Arms, but determined to come speedily to
a Battle with the Aetolians. In a word, five Days before he was to enter on his
Charge, ( Timoxenus delivering up the Seal) he dispatched his Orders to all the
Towns and Cities, assigning them a Day when all their young Men, fit to carry
Arms, should assemble at Megalopolis. And here we have thought it a Debt due to
the Merit of Aratus to say something of him in particular.

Aratus was endu'd with almost all the good Qualities, that could be wished, to
compose a Man for great and public Employments: He was able in the Art of
Persuasion; conceived rightly, and readily executed; and when it was prudent to
be silent, he very well knew how to hold his peace. He had not his Equal in
supporting with constancy the Dissentions of his fellow Citizens; second to
none in composing them, and artful in acquiring Friends and Confederates. He
was subtle to contrive and conceal his secret Practices, and none better at
devising Stratagems, and laying Ambushes against an Enemy. And in a word, he
compassed the most difficult Enterprises by Patience and Application: Whereof
manifold Instances may be enumerated; namely and principally, his surprising of
Sicyon and Mantinoea; his expelling the Aetolians out of Pellene; and his
getting possession of Acro Corinth by intelligence. And yet after all, it is as
true, that at the Head of an Army in the Field he was quite another Man; for as
he was too slow in his Resolutions, so was he too backward in Danger; and
wanted assurance to look on any Attempt, that bore the least appearance of
Terror; which were defects that gave occasion of great advantage to the Enemy,
who spoiled and pillaged the whole Country of Peloponnesus; and coming once to
know his unguarded part, they never failed of succeeding when they attacked him
there. So true it is that Nature has not only diversified Men in their Bodies
and Minds; but triumphs in dissimilitude of Mind in one and the same Man, who
will be found not only capable and insufficient in things that are diverse, but
in the self-same things; we shall see him Wise and Weak; Brave and a Coward by
fits. Nor is there any thing new in what we remark on this Subject; or remote
from common Observation and Experience, if we but consider with attention. Some
Men in heat of the Chase will boldly attack a wild Beast, and do as bravely in
single Combats, yet cannot endure the dangers of a Battle, and are not to be
trusted in any Solemn Occasion in the Field. Thus the Thessalian Horse are not
to be broken or resisted, when formed into a Body in a Line of Battle; but
singly and Man to Man they are but a slight People. The contrary whereof is
found of the Aetolians. The Candiots are wonderful in their way, by Sea and
Land; their Dexterity in Ambushes, Piracies, Surprises, attempts by Night, and
beating up of Quarters; and, in short, in every thing that requires Subtilty
and Address, wherein they are superior to all others: But in a pitched Field,
they are hardly to be brought to look an Enemy in the Face. While it is found
quite otherwise with the Achaians and Macedonians.

We have taken occasion of this Digression, to the end the Credit of our
History may undergo no blemish with the Reader, when he shall chance to find
the Characters of the same Men so inconsistent with themselves, and see them
acting different Parts on the same Subject. After the Achaians, pursuant to the
Decree, had assembled all their able Men for the Service of the War; the
Messenians repeated their Supplications by their Deputies, that they might not
be abandoned to the Mercy of the Enemy, and declared their willingness to be
admitted into the League; but the Achaian Ministers demurred to the receiving
them into the Confederacy, without the Concurrence first obtained of King
Philip, and the rest of the Allies. For the general Treaty that was made by the
procurement of Antigonus, during the Reign of Cleomenes, between the Achaians,
Epirots, Phocians, and Macedonians, Boeotians, Arcadians, and Thessalians; had
been continued yet without infraction. Nevertheless the Messenians had leave to
hope, that as soon as their Troops were formed, a supply of Succors should be
given them; on condition they sent the Sons of their Principal Citizens to be
kept as Hostages at Lacedaemon, whereby to give Security to the Allies, that
they should not come to any Accord with the Aetolians without their
Concurrence. The Lacedaemonians were at this time with an Army on the Frontiers
of the Megalopolitans, pursuant to the Conditions of the Treaty, but in effect
more to observe from thence the Event of these Agitations, than to act the part
of honest Allies. And now the Affairs of the Messenians being concluded, Aratus
sent to the Aetolians to let them know what had been determined; to require
them to depart out of the Territory of Messenia, and not to march into Achaia
on peril of being treated as Enemies. When Scopas and Dorimachus had received
this Resolution of the Achaians, and understood they were now in Arms, and
drawn together at the place of Rendezvous; they concluded together, that it was
their best course to yield to their Demands, and thereupon dispatched
Messengers to Cyllene, and to Ariston the Aetolian Praetor, desiring them to
take up all the Merchant Vessels they could procure in those parts, and send
them with expedition to the Island of Phlias, where they were to attend further
Orders. In the mean time the Aetolian Army (two days after) took their march
with their Plunder, taking their way toward the Eleans. For with that People
they had preserved a fast Friendship, thereby to keep their Passage open to
invade and spoil the Peloponnesians. Aratus confiding too easily on the
Aetolians, so quickly executing what they seemed to promise, dismissed the
Achaians and Lacedaemonians, and marched himself toward Patroea with only
three Thousand Foot and three Hundred Horse; to whom were joined the Troops of
Taurion. Dorimachus and Scopas receiving intelligence in the mean time that
Aratus was in their Neighborhood with an Army, and fearing lest they should be
attacked at their Embarking, and being well enough disposed to have the War
continue; dispatched away their Booty to the Fleet under a good Guard, with
Orders to make Sail to Rhium with their Cargo, and there to attend, as if it
had been their purpose to Embark there. When they themselves, after they had a
while marched after their Plunder, the better to secure it; and observing every
where as they went the disposition of the Country, turned off and marched
toward Olympia. As soon as they had the news of Aratus and Taurion's being in
the Territory of Clitoria, with the Troops we mentioned, they then concluded
they should not be able to Embark at Rhium without Danger or a Battle: And
therefore were of Opinion, that their best course was to endeavor to come to
Action as soon as they could, before the Enemy should be reinforced with more
Troops; and while they continued secure, and without any apprehension of a
surprise. For they reckoned that if they could be able to put them into the
least disorder, they should then compass their Retreat without difficulty, with
the Spoils and Plunder they had taken; and before the States of Aetolia could
come to the Assembly; or in case the Enemy, terrified with the suddenness of
the Attempt, should refuse Battle, they should then likewise not fail of
gaining their Passage according to their own desire. With these Thoughts they
held on their march till they arrived near Methydrium, in the Territory of
Megalopolis, where they encamped.

And now albeit the Achaian Generals were well aware of the Enemies approach;
yet they conducted their Affairs with so little forecast, that they may be said
to have neglected no one thing that might avail to perfect the Character of
Folly and Insufficiency. For, in short, as soon as they had quitted the
Frontiers of the Clitorians, they came and encamped near Caphya; and when the
Enemy on their moving from Methydrium, took their March by Orchomenus, the
Achaians drew out and appeared in Battle in the Fields of Caphya; being
defended on one side by the River that runs through that Country. After the
Aetolians had well considered the Ground; that the Enemy was advantageously
posted; that they had cut many. Trenches along the Bank of the River, whereby
it was hardly any where passable; and after they had farther remarked a strong
desire in them to come to Blows; they upon deliberate Thoughts concluded it
their safest course to avoid a Battle; contrary to their first Determination;
continuing therefore in good Order, they marched on, taking their way toward
Oligyrtus, keeping the high Grounds: And thought they should gain a great Point
at that time, if they could compass their Passage without molestation, or being
obliged to give the Enemy Battle. After Aratus and Taurion had staid till they
saw the Van of the Aetolian Army to have now gained the Hills; and the Horse in
the Plains bringing up and sustaining the Rear; and who now drew near an
Eminence called Propus: They sent out their Horse after them, to whom they
joined their light-armed Troops under the leading of Epistratus the Acarnanian;
these had order to fall on their Rear-guard to make some proof of the mettle of
the Enemy. Now, if it were reasonable to come to a Battle, they could not have
made a worse choice than to attack the Enemy in the Rear, for their Gross had
already passed the Plains; but to have done as they ought, would have been to
have engaged their Van, as soon as they had entered on the Champaign Ground. In
which case they had had the benefit of fighting with the Advantage, both in the
nature of their Arms, and the strength of their Order, wherein in plain Ground
they were in both superior to the Enemy, who could not possibly have then
fought without great odds against them. But while they committed this
oversight, and attacked not the Aetolians till they had gained the Advantage
of Ground, it was no wonder that the Success fell out accordingly. For the
light-armed Troops no sooner came to the Charge, when the Aetolian Horse had
gained the Mountain, firm and in good order, keeping a good round march,
whereby to come up and Join their Foot.

Aratus, who could not very well discover how the Affair went, and not rightly
judging of the Danger to which he was going to expose himself; imagining the
Enemies hasty Motion to be no other than Flight, detached his Curiassiers from
the Wings, and commanded them to advance to the Charge, to reinforce and
sustain the light-armed Soldiers. In the mean time drawing up the rest of his
Troops into one Battalion, he marched himself at the Head of them, and hastily
advanced toward the Enemy; doing every thing with precipitation. But the
Aetolian Horse had no sooner passed the Plain, and joined the Foot who had the
Rear-guard, and had now gained the Mountain; when they immediately made a halt,
and ordering their Foot on the Flanks, encouraged one another to fear nothing:
And now facing about, the Shouts they made caused those who were at a distance
to return and hasten to their assistance; so that their number increasing, in
confidence of their superior Strength, and the benefit of charging from higher
Ground, they boldly attacked the Enemies Horse, and their lightarm'd Troops,
and after a long and obstinate Dispute the Achaians were worsted: Who flying,
so terrified those who were coming in no very good order to their Relief, that
they likewise retreated as fast as they came; partly out of ignorance of the
state of the Battle, partly by meeting those of their Party, who were flying
for Safety from the Enemy. This was the reason why it came to pass, that this
Party only of five Hundred of their Men was beaten; and above two Thousand
betook themselves to flight without engaging. And now the Aetolians, who took
Counsel of the present posture of the Field, followed them hard in the Rear
with great Shouts and Acclamations. In short, while the Achaian Troops were
retreating back to the Gross, as they thought of the Army, which they hoped
would afford them a safe reception; their Retreat was Soldier-like, in good and
safe order; but as soon as they perceived them to have quitted the advantageous
Post they had taken; that their Order was broken and confused; marching in a
Defilee, then they sell into Confusion likewise, and scattering and dispersing
themselves here and there, some got into neighboring Towns, others meeting a
Battalion of their own Troops, that advanced to their Succor, so terrified
each other, though no Enemy were near, that they both broke and dispersed. Of
those that shifted for themselves, as we observed, some got into the Towns
round about, and a good Party escaped to Orchomenus and Caphya, which were not
far off. For had they not had those safe Retreats at hand, they had been
entirely ruined.

Thus have we related the Story of this Battle, which was fought near Caphya.

As soon as the Megalopolitans came to understand that the Aetolians were
encamped in the Territory of Methydrium, they drew their whole Forces together,
and marched to the Assistance of the Achaians; but they arrived not till the
Day after the Battle, and their coming proved of no other use, than to take
care of burying the dead Bodies of those with whom they expected to have
joined, and hoped to have relieved. So that digging a great Ditch in the
Territory of the Caphyans, they there buried the dead, performing the Obsequies
of those unfortunate Men with great Honor and Solemnity. And now the Aetolians
having obtained a Victory so contrary to their Hopes, by the single service of
their Horse, and light-armed Soldiers, took their march thereupon, without fear
or danger, quite cross the Country of Peloponnesus. And after making an attempt
on Pellene, and harrassing the Territory of Sicyon, they took their way by the
Isthmus. These matters then which we have now related were the cause of the
Confederate War; and the Decree that was conceived thereupon, and confirmed in
a general Assembly of the Allies at Corinth; (where King Philip, who procured
the same, and was present) was the beginning of the said War.

In the mean time the Achaians soon after this Defeat call an Assembly; where
Aratus was severely prosecuted with Complaints on all hands: As having been
manifestly the occasion of the loss and dishonor they had sustained. And by
how much his Enemies pressed him with Accusations, and with strong Reasons laid
open his mismanagement; by so much did the Hatred and Indignation of the People
increase against him. First, there was no dispute but that Aratus had greatly
erred; in having, as one may say, usurped the Magistracy, by taking it upon him
before he was regularly elected into his Charge: And he could not deny, but
that what he had enterpriz'd thereupon had very ill succeeded. Furthermore they
blamed him, for that seeing the Aetolians yet in the heart of Peloponnesus, he
had been prevailed with to dismiss the Achaian Troops, notwithstanding he had
been before well assured that Scopas and Dorimachus were sirmly determined to
embroil their Affairs; and to do all they could to engage them in a War. The
third Article against him was, His adventuring to engage with so few Troops,
when he might with ease have made a good Retreat to the neighboring Towns,
where he might at leisure have reinforced his Army; and then given the Enemy
Battle, if he had seen cause. The last and heaviest Charge against him was,
That after he had resolved to give the Enemy Battle, he did not make one
Soldier-like step in the whole Conduct of the Action. For it had been in his
choice to have sought on plain Ground, which would have been much to his
advantage; for there the heavy-arm'd Troops could have engaged, from whose
service he could hardly have sailed of Success: While on the contrary he chose
to fight on the skirts of the Hills, where his light-armed Soldiers only were
brought to fight, than which nothing could have been contrived more to the
advantage of the Enemy. But as soon as Aratus appeared in the Assembly, and had
first spoken of the many Services he had rendered the Commonwealth, he then
replied to the Reproaches that had been uttered against him. And made it appear
that the loss they had sustained was not through his Default; nevertheless he
besought their Pardon; if he had been found wanting in any thing in that
occasion; and prayed they would not censure him with more Rigor than Humanity.
In short, he so wrought with the People, that they grew enraged against those
who had so violently prosecuted him, and it was long ever they forgave them;
and in the mean time renewing their good Opinion of Aratus, they gave
themselves entirely up to his Counsel and Conduct, in all their future
Enterprises. These things came to pass, in the hundred and forty ninth
Olympiad: While what we have now further to deliver, happened during that which
followed.

The Assembly then proceeded to decree, That Ambassadors should be dispatched
to the Epirots, Boeotians, Acarnanians, and to King Philip; to remonstrate to
them that the Aetolians having now the second time violated the general Treaty,
had in Hostile manner invaded Achaia; and further to demand Succors according
to the Covenants of the Treaty, and to move that the Messenians might be taken
into the Confederacy. Moreover, they decreed, That their Praetor should raise
an Army of five Thousand Foot, and five Hundred Horse; that he should march to
the Relief of the Messenians, in case the Aetolians should return to Invade
them: And in conclusion, came to a determination with the Lacedaemonians and
Messenians, about the proportion of Horse and Foot which they were to furnish
respectively toward the Forces that were to be raised for the general Service
of the War. These things being concluded, the Achaians (who could not forget
their late disgrace) would not abandon the Messenians, nor the Enterprise they
had projected. The Ambassadors therefore acquitted themselves of their
Commission. The Praetor levied Troops among the Achaians, pursuant to the
Decree of the States, and concluded with the Lacedoemonians and Messenians,
that they should each of them bring into the Field two Thousand five Hundred
Foot, and two Hundred and Fifty Horse; to the end they might have an Army on
foot to answer any present occasion, consisting of ten Thousand Foot and a
Thousand Horse.

The Aetolians in the mean time were not wanting to themselves, who (the day of
their assembly now approaching) resolved to do their best to deal with the
Confederates of the Achaians; and not only to endeavor a Peace with the
Lacedaemonians and the Allies, but even with the Achaians themselves, on
condition they would exclude the Messenians; and came to a Resolution, That in
case they would not abandon them, that then War should be declared against
them; than which nothing could be a more manifest Injustice. For being
themselves in League with the Achaians and Messenians, they denounced War
against those in case they held Friendship with the others; and on the contrary
would enter into Friendship with the Achaians, provided they would become
Enemies to the Messenians. But they made no difficulty to act such irregular
Parts as these.

The Epirots and King Philip, having understood the case of the Messenians,
yielded to their being received into the Confederacy. And while they condemned
the Proceedings of the Aetolians, they were not surpised at the Relation; it
being nothing new or contrary to the practice of that People. They concluded
however to give no further Proofs of their Resentment, but resolved to continue
at Peace with them. So much easier it is to pass by the Injuries done by those
who have by a custom of transgressing taught us to forgive, than of such as
take us by surprise, and from whom we could not have expected foul play.

Thus the Aetolians, who were held for the common Outlaws and Robbers of
Greece, and whose manner it was to strike without warning, and make War without
any previous or public declaration, disdained to make any Apology for their
Doings to those who had charged them with their injurious Dealing: On the
contrary, they treated their Accusers with mockery and contempt. As to the
Lacedaemonians, who though they had been but lately rescued from the Tyranny of
Cleomenes, by the Favor of Antigonus, and the Affection of the Achaians,
nevertheless forgetting what they owed for that good Office, and the Assurances
they had given to King Philip and the Macedonians to enter into no Engagements
prejudicial to the Interests of the Achaians; they secretly, notwithstanding
sent their Ambassadors to the Aetolians, and became their Confederates.

And now when the Achaians had formed an Army of their ablest Men, and the
Lacedoemonians and Messenians had promised to bring in their quota of Succors,
behold a Naval Army arrives, consisting of Ninety Sail of Ships from Illyria,
under the Command of Scerdilaidas and Demetrius of Pharus; who passing by the
Island, which was the Bounds prescribed by the Treaty with the Romans, made
their first descent near Pylus, which they attacked, and after many fruitless
Attempts were repulsed. Afterward Demetrius with a Fleet of fourscore Sail
proceeded as far as the Cyclades, where he got Money from some, and plundered
others of those Islands. As to Scerdilaidas, he made Sail directly for the
Coast of Illyria, and came to Naupactus with a Fleet of forty Ships, favored
and encouraged by Amina King of the Athamenes, with whom he was in Alliance.
And afterward by the procurement of Agesilaus entering into Conditions
touching the distribution of the Plunder, he engaged to march against the
Achaians. As soon as Agesilaus, Dorimachus and Scopas had finished this Treaty
with Scerdilaidas, and had given him the Town of Cynoetha for Caution, they
marched with the Illyrians into Achaia, the Aetolians being at the Head of an
Army as good as they could possibly raise.

Ariston Praetor of the Aetolians, during these Agitations, remained at home,
not only without acting in any thing, but seeming ignorant of all that was
done, professed to be in Amity with the Achaians; wherein he showed himself a
weak Man, and a slight Minister. For which way could he hope to conceal by
words, what was made by deeds so public and notorious? But in short, he was
held by all the World for one of little worth. Dorimachus, taking his march
through the Territory of the Achaians, came to Cynaetha. The Inhabitants of
this Town, who are of Arcadian Extraction, had been long vexed with civil
Dissentions; and had expressed their hatred one to another by Murders,
Banishments, and all kinds of Violence: And had come to a Resolution of making
a Division once again of their Lands; and, in short, the Faction that favored
the Achaians being at that time uppermost, the Power was in their hands; and
the Governor himself was an Achaian. This being the Posture of Affairs in that
Town, those who were under sentence of Bunishment, had a little before the
arrival of the Aetolian Army, labored about a Reconciliation, and besought the
Government, that they might be restored to their Country. Upon which Overtures
the Citizens were prevailed with to yield to their admittance; but to the end
they might not transact any thing without the concurrence of the Achaians, they
first dispatched their Deputies to them, to obtain their Approbation. The
Achaians readily accorded to the request of the banished Persons, conceiving
they should thereby ingratiate themselves and gain the good will of both
Parties; of those in whose Hands the Magistracy was then lodged, for their
greatest hopes was in the Achaians; and of the others who were restored to
their Country, as owing the benefit to their Favor. So that these Differences
being composed, the Cynoethians dismissed their Garrison and their Governor,
and being now reconciled to their Exiles, who were to the number of about three
Hundred, received them to their Friendship; who gave them all the evidences of
Fidelity and fair Dealing, that could possibly be interchang'd between People
firmly disposed to love and oblige one another. But without the least
appearance of any new Motive of Dissension, they were no sooner received into
the Town, when they conspired together to betray their Country, and destroy
those who but just before, had been the Authors of so great a Benefit. So that
it may be said, That while they were protesting Fidelity by the Victims on the
Altar, they were meditating the most horrible Crime, that could be conceived
against God or Man. For they had scarce made an end of swearing Fidelity on
their being received into the Town, when they called in the Aetolians, and
delivered it into their Hands, proud of being the Authors of their Countries
ruin, that had given them Being, and of inslaving those who had redeemed them.

Behold the manner how this piece of Treachery was contrived. Some of the
Exiles had been Polymarchs (that is) they had been in command in the Army:
Which sort of Magistrates (it seems) had a right to take charge of the Gates of
the Town; had the custody of the Keys, and by Night the Command of the Guard.
Now the Aetolians, who were not far off, having Ladders and all proper
Provision with them, lay concealed waiting the occasion, when the Polymarchs,
who had been banished (after having dispatched their Companions of the Guard,
who were not partakers of the Villainy) presently threw open the Gates.
Whereupon one Party of the Aetolians entered that way, and another scaled the
Walls. In the mean time, the Inhabitants, terrified at an attempt so
surprising, were confounded in their Judgments what to do, or which way first
to go; for, in short, they no sooner advanced against those who had entered by
the Gate, when they were alarmed by the others who were scaling their Walls;
but those who entered by the Gate being the greater number, found them more
than work enough. So that in the end the Aetolians became Masters of the Place,
and amidst the many Crimes they committed, performed this one act of Justice,
namely, to cut those in pieces first, who had betrayed the Town into their
Hands; making Booty of their Goods. Howbeit the rest afterward fared no
better, their Houses being exposed to Plunder, and many of the Inhabitants put
to Torment, on suspicion they might have concealed their Goods of greatest
value. After this severe treatment of the Cynoethians, they placed a Garrison
in the Town, and marched with their Army toward Lussi, when arriving near a
Temple of Diana, between Clytoria and Cynoetha, a place of great Devotion, and
a Sanctuary among the Greeks, they were about to rob the Goddess of the sacred
Cattle, and all that was near the Temple. But to prevent this Violence, and
withold them from greater Crimes, the Lussiatoe freely bestowed part of what
appertained to the Goddess upon them. Whereupon they dislodged from thence, and
went and encamped before Clytoria.

In the mean time, Aratus, Praetor of the Achaians, having sent to demand Aids
of King Philip, proceeded to make extraordinary Levies of Men, and called on
the Lacedaemonians and Messenians for the Succors they were obliged to
contribute, pursuant to the Treaty. The Aetolians likewise pressed the
Clytorians to renounce their Alliance with the Achaians, and take part with
them. Which being refused, they endeavored to reduce them by force, scaling
the Walls of the Town. But being resolutely opposed by the Inhabitants, they
were compelled to retire. From thence they returned to Cynaetha, pillaging the
Country all about, and carrying away the sacred Cattle of the Goddess. Then
they proposed to put the Town into the hands of the Eleans; which not being
accepted, they resolved to keep it for themselves, putting in Euripides for
their Governor. But shortly after being alarmed, at the news of the approach
of the Macedonians, they burnt the Town, and retired; taking their march
toward Rhium, with purpose to pass that way into Aetolia.

In the mean time, Taurion having notice of the Success of the Aetolians, and
of what they had done at Cynaetha, and hearing that Demetrius of Pharus was
arrived from the Cyclades to Cenchrea, he importuned him to come to the
Assistance of the Achaians; to draw his Vessels over the Isthmus, and fall on
the Aetolians in their passage. Demetrius, who had fled from the Rhodians, that
were in pursuit of him, and had brought with him no less Shame than Plunder
from the Cyclades, readily yielded to the Demand; especially in regard Taurion
was to be at the expense of transporting over the Vessels. But that Work was no
sooner over, when they understood that the Aetolians had gained their Passage
two Days before; whereupon Demetrius, contenting himself to make Inroads on
them here and there, near the Seacoast, retired to the Port of Corinth. In
conclusion, the Lacedoemonians, industriously and with evil intent, deferred
sending those Aids, to which by the accord they were obliged; covering their
malicious Purpose, however, with dispatching an inconsiderable Supply of Horse
and Foot. While the Achaian Troops rendezvous'd about Aratus, who in short
governed his Affairs in such sort in that occasion, as rendered him rather a
cautious and wise Citizen, than an able General of an Army. For indeed the
reflection on his late Disasters had so warned him, that he remained long
undetermined how to proceed, till at length Dorimachus and Scopas, having
leisure given them to act the Part for which they came, returned home without
molestation: While Aratus in the mean time well knew, they must of necessity
take their March by such Ways and Passes, so difficult and dangerous, that as
one may say, they might have been beaten by the Sound only of a Trumpet. As for
the Cynaethians, though their usage from the Aetolians was barbarous enough, yet
so it was that all the World looked on their Misfortunes as a Punishment justly
inflicted.

But forasmuch as the Arcadians are in some Reputation for Virtue among the
Greeks, not only for their laudable Manners, and the Humanity wherewith
Strangers and all People are received among them; but chiefly for their
Devotion to the Gods; it will not therefore be amiss, that we give some account
of the Brutality of the Cynaethians, and how it came to pass that being of
Arcadian Extraction, they should have so degenerated, as to surpass in all
sorts of Crimes and Barbarities the whole Greek Nation beside. For my own part,
I am apt to conclude, that this their Depravity sprang from their being the
first and almost only People among the Arcadians that apostatized, and
renounced the wholesome and wise Institutions of their Forefathers; and the
common and natural Ties of Humanity, so strictly observed by all the Arcadians
beside. Music is esteemed useful everywhere, but to the Arcadians it is
necessary; I mean the true Mystery and Science of Music. And no Credit is to
be given to a Saying of Ephorus, so unworthy of the Author, who in the
beginning of his Writings tells us, That Music was invented to deceive and
abuse us. Nor is there any ground to conclude that the Cretans and
Lacedaemonians did, without Reason, introduce the Use of the Flute and Singing,
instead of the Trumpet in War: Nor that the original Arcadians did not, on
solid Grounds, alott the Preference to Music, as to give it a Part in the
Establishment of their State; and whatsoever Austerities they may otherwise
profess, they make it an indispensible Part of the Education of their Children,
and enjoin the Study of Music to their Young Men till they arrive at the Age
of Thirty Years, And most certain it is, that there is hardly any People beside
the Arcadians, who in their private Families accustom their Children from their
tenderest Age, (and which is grown into a Law) to sing Hymns to their Heroes
and their Gods; every one according to the Style and Mode of his Country. Then
after their Children have been instructed in the Music of Philoxenus and
Timotheus, they are brought yearly to the Theater, where they celebrate the
Feast of Bacchus with Songs and Dances; as likewise the Games, called the Games
of Childhood, as their Young Men perform those called the Games of Youth. So
that all their Lifelong, they divert not themselves so much in their
Entertainments, and Conversation, in the Exercise of their Wit, as their
Voices, singing one to another by turns. And in case any one should profess
himself ignorant of other Arts and Sciences, he may do it without reproach; but
none may presume to want Knowledge in Music, because the the Law of the Land
makes it necessary; nor dare they own their Insufficiency therein, it being
held infamous among that People. They are likewise at the Charge of the Public
instructed in martial Dances, and to Fight and Exercise their Arms, according
to the Cadence of Music, and are seen every Year on the Public Theater, to
show the People their Improvement in that Exercise.

In short, we may safely conclude, That their ancestors did not establish this
Custom amongst them, so much for Luxury and Delight, as from a wise
Consideration of the Life they lead, and the Climate they inhabit; being a
People addicted to Labor, and, in a word, leading a toilsome and industrious
Life: Which seems to proceed from the Inclemency of the Air, for the most part
cold and melancholy. For it is an established Law in Nature, that we should
partake of the Soil that breeds us. Nor can there be a better Reason rendered
for the Unlikeness of Nations, as the difrence of the Air they breathe, and the
situation of the Countries they inhabit. And hence it comes to pass, that the
distance of Climates begets that dissimilitude among us, both in Manners, Make,
Humor, and Complexion. These gladsome Remedies then we have related, were
wisely instituted to cure and calm by Art the Rigours and Defects of Nature.
Furthermore, they had a Custom of mixing Men and Women indifferently in their
Sacrifices and Public Assemblies, wherein they frequently met. They likewise
instituted Quires, where the Youth of both Sexes conversed, and sung and danced
together; and in a word, they left nothing unattempted, that might prevail to
soften and sweeten those Austerities of Nature to which the Climate had
condemned them. And the Cynaethians, who by reason of their situation, had of
all others the greatest reason to preserve these Customs among them (they being
the most Northern part of all Arcadia) no sooner fell to neglect these wholesome
Institutions, when they fell into Dissentions and civil Discords; and grew at
length into such depravity of Manners, that their Crimes, in number and
measure, surpassed all the Nations of the Greeks beside.

Great and manifest Testimonies were given, of the Corruption of this People's
Manners, from the Aversion the Arcadians in general had conceived against them,
who, when they dispatched their Ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians, after their
Defeat, they hardly came into any Town of Arcadia, where the Inhabitants did
not warn them out again by Sound of Trumpet, and the Voice of their Public
Crier. And the People of Mantinaea proceeded yet farther; for they had no
sooner caused the Cynaethian Ambassadors to depart, when they cleans'd
themselves as from Infection, and slew Victims about their Town and Country,
and offered Sacrifices of Purgation.

We have taken occasion to enlarge on this Subject, to justify the Arcadian
Customs and Manners; and to the end lest the Arcadians themselves, by a wrong
Judgment and Belief, that Music became thus familiar among them, barely for
Luxury and the entertainment of idle Minds, should at length fall into Contempt
of that part of their own Laws and Institutions. Nor are the Cynaethians
themselves without a share of our Commiseration in this Digression; who, if by
the Favor of Heaven, they should one Day see an end of their Affliction, may
be drawn to return to the ancient Manners of their Country; and embrace and
principally cultivate this Science among them, whereby to soften and bend their
Minds with those Charms, which have power to tame wild Beasts themselves; than
which, no way seems more likely to polish them from the Rust of Barbarity. But
having spoken enough of Cynaetha, it is time now to return to our Business.

The Aetolians having acted these Violences in Peloponnesus, as has been
related, returned home without Impediment. In the interim Philip arrives at
Corinth to succor the Achaians; but coming too late the occasion was lost; he
therefore sent his Dispatches to the several Confederates, praying them
speedily to send their respective Deputies to him there, that they might
deliberate together about their general Affairs. While he himself led his
Troops toward Tegaea, on a rumor that the Lacedaemonians were fallen into
civil Broils.

The Lacedaemonians, who had been used to Kingly Government, and were but newly
by the power of Antigonus set at liberty, fell into Factions; and Seditions
growing among them, they were laboring to establish Equality in their State.
In these Disputes there were two of their Ephori, of whom it could not be
discovered to which Party they were inclined, while the other three openly
manifested their being of the Aetolian Faction: Considering King Philip as not
yet of Age ripe enough to Rule the Affairs of Peloponnesus. But when, contrary
to their Opinion, and more speedily than they expected, the Aetolians were
retired; and Philip arrived out of Macedon sooner than was believed; the three
Ephori began to fall into suspicion of Adimantus, one of the other two; for
they well knew he was privy to their Designs, and testified his disapproval of
their Counsels; wherefore they apprehended lest he when Philip should approach
nearer might reveal to him all that had passed. Wherefore imparting their
purpose to certain young Men of their Party, they proclaimed by sound of
Trumpet, that all who were of Age to go to War, should assemble with their Arms
at a certain place of Rendezvous near the Temple of Minerva Chalciaece, to make
head against the Macedonians, who were approaching their Borders. Hereupon the
People assembled, terrified at this surprising News; but Adimantus disapproving
the proceeding, hast'ned to those who were so drawn together, and spoke to them
after this manner: It would be wholesome Counsel to conceive such Edicts, and
make such Proclamations, upon notice that the Aetolians our Enemies were on our
Borders; but not at this time, when the Macedonians our Friends, from whose
Bounty we have received so many good Offices, are approaching us; having their
King in Person with them. He had no sooner ended these words, when those who
were of Intelligence with the other Ephori fell upon him, stabbing him to death
with their Poinyards, and together with him Sthenelaus, Alcamenes, Thyestes,
Bionidias, and many other Principal Citizens. Polyphontes and some others, who
foresaw the Danger, escaped to King Philip. But the Ephori, becoming by this
Action formidable in Sparta, sent forthwith to the King, laying the cause of
what had happened to the charge of those who had been slain; praying him to
deferr his coming to Sparta, till their Tumults should be over, and their
Affairs in a more quiet posture: In the mean time they give him solemn
assurance of fair Dealing, and that they would perform the Capitulations
punctually.

Their Ambassadors found the King near the Mountain of Parthenia, where they
performed their Commission. After he had given them Audience, he told them they
should return back to Sparta, and let the Ephori understand, that he intended
to proceed on his way to Tegaea, where he desired they would dispatch to him
proper Persons with whom to confer touching the present posture of Affairs. So
they commissionated ten of the Principal Citizens of Lacedaemon for that
Negotiation, appointing Onias chief of the Embassy.

Upon their arrival at Tegaea, they were introduced to the King in Council,
where they renewed their Accusation against Adimantus; making him the Author of
all those Disorders, that had happened among them. And, in short, they made the
King plausible Promises to act in every thing the part of faithful
Confederates, and to proceed in such manner as to make it manifest, that they
surpast in Zeal and Affection those whom he held for his faithfullest Friends.
After this Discourse, and more to the like effect, the Ambassadors withdrew.
Those who were present in the Council were divided in their Opinions; and being
well assured that Adimantus, and those who had been assassinated were
sacrificed for their Fidelity to King Philip, and that the Lacedaemonians
prevaricated, and were disposed to enter into Alliance with the Aetolians;
counseled the King to make them an Example, and treat them as Alexander had
done the Thebans upon his coming to the Crown; But others of the graver sort
were for more moderate Counsels; remonstrating that such a Punishment was too
great for their Fault; and that it would be enough to punish the Promoters and
Heads of the Sedition, by removing them from the Magistracy, and placing the
Authority in such Hands as were firm to the Interest of the King.

After they had all spoken their Minds, the King delivered his Opinion; if it
were true that what he said in that occasion was his own: For, in truth, it is
hardly probable, that a young Prince of seventeen Years of Age, could be able
to determine with such Sagacity, in an Affair of so much moment. But as it is
good manners in Historians, to attribute to the Princes themselves the
Resolutions that are taken in their Cabinets; so the Readers of History ought
to conclude, that such wholesome determinations flow rather from the riper
Conceptions of their faithful Servants, and such as are admitted to the
Prince's Privacy. And there is all the reason in the World to do Aratus the
justice of believing him to be the Author of what the King delivered on that
occasion.

Who said, That if the Confederates had any difference among themselves, what
was fitting to be done in such case, was to admonish them by Word or Letter,
and let them know that their Proceedings were observed: That whatsoever was
done in violation of the general Alliance, ought to be punished by the joint
Sentence of the Confederates: But that since it did not appear that the
Lacedaemonians had been guilty of any Infraction of the Union; but, on the
contrary, had given the Macedonians such Assurances of their sincerity, as they
did, there was no reason to deal severely with them. That, in a word, it would
not be just in him to animadvert on them for light Offenses, whom his Father
had pardoned while they were Enemies, and he a Conqueror. This Opinion then of
the King prevailing, That it would be better to connive at what had happened,
he dispatched Petraeus, one of his favorite Servants, in company of Onias, to
exhort the Lacedaemonians to continue firm to the Treaty, and to ratify it by
a new Oath, while himself marched with his Army to Corinth; having given the
Confederates an admirable instance of his Prudence and Magnanimity, in this his
behavior toward the Lacedaemonians.

The Ambassadors of the Confederates were already met at Corinth, where, upon
the King's Arrival, they fell to deliberate with him about their common
Affairs, and what resolution to take touching the Aetolians. The Boeotians
accused them of having in time of Peace plundered and violated the Temple of
Minerva Itonia: The Phocians, for attacking in Hostile manner the Towns of
Ambrysus and Daulius: The Epirots charged them with making Inroads and
Plund'ring their Country: The Acarnanians, for their attempt on Thyreum; and
after it had been made evident to the Assembly, in what manner they had
possessed themselves of the Fortress of Clarium, in the Dominion of the
Megalopolitans: That they had ruined the Country of Pharus and Patrae in their
march, destroyed Cynaetha with Fire and Sword, profaned the Temple of Diana at
Lussi, besieged Clytoria, made War by Sea at Pylus, and Landed in hostile
manner on the Territory of Megalopolis. In short, when all these Outrages of
the Aetolians had been proved, and canvass'd in the Assembly, they accorded
unanimously to declare War against them. So after they had prefac'd their
Decree, with enumerating the Causes and Provocations of the War; it was
concluded, That all those who had been sufferers by the Aetolians, since the
Death of Demetrius, Father of Philip, should be received into the Confederacy;
and that if any by the violence of the Times had been awed into Obedience or
Alliance with the Aetolians, and paid them Tribute, that they should be
forthwith set at liberty, the security of their respective Governments
committed to their own hands, and no Garrisons imposed upon them; but that they
should be permitted to return to their ancient Laws and Customs, free from any
Tribute or Impositions whatsoever: That Aid should be given the Amphictyons, in
order to their re-establishment in their Privileges, and the restitution of
their Right to the administration of the Temple, which the Aetolians had
violently wrested from them, to make themselves Masters of that sacred Place,
and all the Revenues thereof. This Decree being ordained in the First Year of
the Hundred and fortieth Olymphiad, the War of the Allies thereupon ensued,
which was begotten by the violent and general unjust proceedings of the
Aetolians. And now Ambassadors were sent from the Assembly of the States, to
all the Confederate Towns, to the end the Decree being everywhere received and
ratified by the Suffrages of the People, they migh jointly and separately in
their distinct States, publish the War against the Aetolians; whom King Philip
likewise advertised by his Letters, letting them understand, That if it were
so, that they had just argument or motive whereby to indemnifie themselves, and
could fairly wipe off the Imputations that lay against them, that they would do
well to apply themselves to the general Assembly, and endeavor to put a period
to so solemn a Process by a Conference: That they did but make Ostentation of
their Weakness, by thinking they might with impunity spoil and pillage, as they
did everywhere, without any declared War, or apparent cause for such violence;
and that those who underwent these Outrages would rest unrevenged; or that it
would be believed the Sufferers would be reckoned the Aggressors, and Authors
of the War, while they only applied themselves to such Remedies as their case
made necessary.

The Aetolians, on the receipt of these Intimations from King Philip, were at
first persuaded he would not appear, and therefore prefixed a Day for their
assembling at Rhium; afterward, when they heard of his arrival, they sent to
let him know, that they had not Power to determine any thing in their Public
Affairs, till the Convention of the General States of the Aetolians. In the
mean while, the Achaians assembling at the usual time, ratified the Decree by a
general Vote of the Assembly, and afterward declared War against the
Aetolians. And now the King coming the Aegium, where the Diet was held, he
there explained himself in many Point, and proceeded in such manner, as greatly
pleased and obliged the Assembly; where they renewed with him the several
Treaties that had been heretofore made between his Ancestors and the Achaians.

About the same time the Aetolians assembled in their General Council, where
they elected Scopas for their Praetor, he who had been the Author of all those
Violencese we have related. By what name then shall we be able to distinguish
such a Determination? For to spoil and treat their Neighbors in hostile
manner, without any Declaration of War; and not only not to punish the Authors
of such Outrages, but to conferr on the Ringleaders the prime Authority in the
Government, seems to me the extremity of all Dishonesty. For what gentler Terms
will so vile an Action bear! But our sense thereof will be better known by what
follows. When Phaebidas surpised Cadmaea by Fraud and Perfidy, the
Lacedaemonians, though they would not quit their possession, yet they punished
the Authors of the Action, believing they had done enough to expiate for the
Wrong, in the chastisement of the Offenders. In short, they might have
proceeded with less severity, and it would have been more beneficial to the
Thebans. Afterward, during the Peace of Antal^idas, they published a Decree,
That Liberty should be restored every where to the Greeks, who should enjoy
their ancient Laws and Customs; nevertheless, they withdrew not the Governors
they had placed over the several Towns.

When they dissolved the Government, and ruined the Town of Mantinoea, they
colored the Action by asserting they had done them on Injury, in transplanting
them from one Town to a great many. But it is the sum total of Folly and
Depravity, to think because our Eyes are shut, that all the World is blind.
Thus both the one and the other of these People, by pursuing these pernicious
Maxims in the administration of the States, drew on themselves many and
grievous Calamities. Wherefore as well in Private Affairs as Public
Negotiations, such Counsels are never to be followed, by any who would consult
their own Good and Tranquillity.

King Philip having now come to a Resolution with the Achaians, touching their
common Affairs, returned home with his Army, to make preparations for the War;
having gained not only among the Confederates, but the Greeks in general, a
mighty Opinion of his Goodness and Magnanimity, by the publication of the
Decree we have mentioned.

All these Matters were transacted about the time that Hannibal the
Carthaginian General was deliberating about laying Siege to Saguntum after he
had subdued all that part of Spain that lies on the other side of the River
Eber. Since the Enterprises of Hannibal then take beginning, and bear data with
these Affairs of Greece, there seems to be a necessity that we should treat of
them alternately, according to the Method of our preceding Book; to the end,
having punctual regard to the Time, we may confront (as one may say) the
Affairs of both these People of Spain and Greece. But forasmuch as those of
Italy, Greece, and Asia were produced from different Causes, though they had one
and the same event; we have therefore thought fit to handle them distinctly and
apart, till such time as we shall arrive at that Period, when the Matters
whereof we have made mention come to mingle, and grow to conspire toward one
and the same end. By which means, the beginnings and steps of each one
respectively, will be made the more intelligible; and the interweaving them
afterward be less subject to confusion, when the time of the respective
Occurrences shall be adjusted, and the Means and Causes of things duly set
down. In conclusion, they will together compose bu one entire History; and, in
short, these Affairs became thus mingled toward the end of that War, which was
finished in the third Year of the Hundred and Fortieth Olympiad. Wherefore
there will be all the reason in the World to treat succeeding Matters
conjointly, as those that go before separately, after having first briefly
refreshed the Memory in some Occurrences that fell out about those times.
Having propounded to our selves not only to write our History with perspicuity,
but so as to engage the Reader's esteem, who shall study it with attention.

King Philip passed the Winter in Macedon, in making Levies and Preparations
for the War, and fortifying his Frontiers against the Attempts of the
Barbarians, who were his near Neighbors. Afterward finding out Scerdilaidas,
he a little too boldly consided in, and contracted Alliance with him; and
promising him Aids toward his acquiring certain Towns in Illyria, and
censuring the Actions of the Aetolians, (which pleased Scerdilaidas above all
things) he easily won him to his purpose. For private Injuries have their
force, and differ not from public in the nature but magnitude of the Offenses.
And there is nothing so fatal to such as league together in criminal and
violent Actions, as the breach of Faith among themselves. This was experimented
by the Aetolians; for it was a Stipulation between them and Scerdilaidas, that
he should share a proportion in the Spoils and Plunder that should be taken,
who was to be a Party in the Crimes that should be committed, if he would join
wih them in their Expedition against the Achaians. Nevertheless on their taking
and spoiling the City of Cynaetha, where was found great Booty of Slaves,
Cattle, and other movables, they admitted him to no part thereof. Which breach
of Articles so distasted Scerdilaidas, that when Philip had refreshed the sense
of that Injury, he was wrought to promise he would enter into the common
Alliance, on the terms of being paid yearly the sum of twenty Talents, and
would make War on the Aetolians by Sea with a Fleet of thirty Vessels.

And now the Ambassadors, who had been dispatched to the Confederate States,
first coming to the Acarnanians, treated with them; who frankly confirmed the
Decree, and declared War against the Aetolians. And yet though they should have
taken time to explain themselves, and expressed their just apprehensions of the
War, there is no People against whom less Offense could have been taken, as
being Borderers on the Aetolians; and what is more, were very ill able to
defend themselves, and not long before had been deep sufferers by Aetolian
Violence.

But there is no doubt but a generous Nation, jealous of their Honor, prefers
that to all other Considerations, both in their public and private Treaties;
and herein the Acarnanians have surpassed most of the Greeks, who, weak as they
are, have in defense of their Reputation, engaged in the greatest Dangers.
Wherefore there is no People among the Graecians with whom Friendship may be
more safely contracted; there being none who profess more regard to public or
private Faith, or will venture further for the love of Liberty. As to the
Epirots, though they ratified the Decree, yet they would not yield to declare War
against the Aetolians, till King Philip should first proclaim it: Wherefore
they dismissed the Aetolian Ambassadors with promise to continue in good terms
with them, wherein they made show of very little Generosity. Ambassadors were
dispatched in like manner to King Ptolomy, to dissuade him from yielding any
help to the Aetolians against King Philip, either by supplies of Money, or
otherwise. As to the Messenians, on whose score the War first brake out; they
replied to the Ambassadors, That they would not engage in the War unless
Phigalia, which commanded their Frontiers, were first drawn off from the
Aetolian League: But Oenis and Nicippus, with others who favored the
Oligarchy, had procured this Declaration against the general Inclinations of
the People, wherein they seem to have been much in the wrong. For while I deny
not but War is an Evil greatly to be apprehended, so it is as true that our
fear thereof ought not to subject us to suffer every thing, and debase us into
Villanage to avoid it. For why do we keep such a stir about preserving Equality
among the Citizens, and the freedom of Speech in Deliberations? Why, in short,
does the name of Liberty bear such a Price among us, if there were not
something more valuable than Peace it self? For what Man ever applauded the
Thebans, who out of fear of the Dangers they must have been exposed to, for the
sake of the general Good of Greece, during the Median War, entered into
Confederacy with the Persians. I am not therefore of Pindar's mind, who to
defend that weak Action has said somewhere in his Writings, That a wise
Citizen, who would study the true Welfare of his Country, prefers above all
things the Benefits and Tranquillity of Peace. And he thought perhaps that he
had all the World of his side, while on the contrary he could-not have broached
a more pernicious and scandalous Opinion. For as there is nothing more eligible
and profitable, than Peace on Conditions Just and Honorable: So nothing can be
more hurtful or shameful, than when it is purchased by Servitude, and stained
with base and infamous Ends.

However it were, the Principal Citizens of Messina, who had no further
Prospect than private and present Profit, pursued Peace more passionately than
they ought. It Is true, that at the price of many Evils which they were content
to suffer, they shunned some present Fears and Dangers: But the Disease
increasing by degrees, they by those Measures brought their Country at long run
into grievous Calamities. The best reason that I can conceive may be rendered
in their defense, is, That they were Borderers on the two most considerable
States, not only of Peloponnesus, but of Greece it self, namely, the Arcadians
and Lacedaemonians; of whom, the one was always their most implacable Enemy,
from their first possessing of that Country; the other a peaceable Neighbor,
wishing them well and desiring their preservation. Nevertheless they had never
openly declared themselves either Friends to the Arcadians, or Enemies to the
Lacedaemonians. Wherefore when at any time those two People chanced to differ,
or were otherwise engaged in War, the Messenians found their account thereby,
and enjoyed their repose: But when ever the Lacedaemonians were disengaged from
other Wars, they presently entered on new Designs to molest and subdue the
Messenians; who never presumed to contend with a Power so much superior to
their own: Nor had ever made any Friend, who would adventure any thing in their
behalf; so they became obliged at length, either to comply with the
Lacedaemonians, and patiently submit to the Yoke they imposed; or otherwise to
abandon their Country with their Wives and Children. In short, they had already
frequently felt these hardships, and but a very little before tasted thereof.
And it were much to be wished, that the Affairs of Peloponnesus could be
settled on such a Basis, and the care of its Conservation might so affect Men's
Minds, that there should be no occasion of applying such Remedies, as I shall
mention by and by. But in case any general Change or Revolution should
threaten, my Judgment is, that there is no Course or Counsel so wholesome for
the Messenians and Megalopolitans to preserve them in a safe and lasting
Possession of their Country, as the contracting a firm and sincere Union one
with another in every thing, according to the Advice of Epaminondas, and to
preserve their Friendship inviolate.

In conclusion, this Counsel may be confirmed from ancient Story. For the
Messenians, not to mention other matters, erected a Column in the Reign of
Aristomenes in the Temple of Jupiter Lycaeus, where according to the report of
Callisthenes this Inscription was engraven:

Fate will not always favor Tyrants rule;
Messenian Jove their ruin has decreed.
Whatever Ills are done, no Ills are hid
From the Divinity's all-seeing Eye.
Grant then, O Jupiter, whom all adore,
Arcadia may be still in thy protection.
It is not improbable but that when they were driven from their Country, they
then erected this Column, with the Inscription, to implore as it were the
Favor of the Gods, to conserve to them their second abode. Nor was it indeed
without good reason; for the Arcadians did not only receive them into their
City, upon their being compelled to abandon their Country during the War of
Aristomenes, but admitted them to a Fellowship of Privileges with their
Citizens, and consented to their mixing with them in Marriage. Furthermore upon
discovery of the evil Purposes of King Aristocrates, they put him to death and
exterminated his whole Race with him. But to look no further into ancient
Story, what has come to pass since Megalopolis and Messena were restored,
makes proof enough of the truth of what we have been observing. For after the
Battle the Greeks fought near Mantinaea, where the Victory became undetermined,
through the loss of Epaminondas, the Lacedaemonians in hopes of getting Messina
into their Hands, would have excluded them from the Treaty of Confederacy,
while the Megalopolitans, and the rest of the Arcadian Party obstinately
opposed it; and so far prevailed in favor of the Messeninas, that they came at
length to exclude the Lacedaemonians themselves from the Treaty.

Now if Posterity can but reflect with attention on these things, we shall not
be censured for having thus enlarged on the Points we have been treating. And
it will be perceived that what has been delivered, is in service of the
Messenians and Arcadians; to the end that bearing in mind the Injuries they
have received from the Lacedaemonians, they may be incited to a closer Union in
their Alliances: And that whenever they would deliberate rightly about the
security of eithers Estate, it may grow into an established Principle among
them to admit no breach in their Confederacy, either through fear of War, or
love of Peace.

As to the Lacedaemonians, they, according to their manner, dismissed in the
end the Ambassadors of the Allies, without any reply; so much had their Folly
and Pride prevailed on their Judgment; which verifies a good old Saying, That
great Presumption is but another name for Vanity and Weakness of Mind.
Afterward, on creation of their new Ephori, those who had been the Troublers of
the State, and were guilty of all that Bloodshed we have noted, dispatched
advice to the Aetolians, counselling them to send Ambassadors to Sparta; which
they presently performed, and Machatas soon arrived on the part of the
Aetolians, whereupon he applies to the Ephori, demanding that Machatas might be
heard in the Public Assembly; then he proposed the coming to a creation of
their Kings according to ancient custom, and that it was not to be suffered,
and against the tenure of their Laws, that the Dominion of the Heraclidae
should be discontinu'd. None of the Propositions pleased the Ephori; but
wanting strength to stem the Current of the opposite Faction; and fearing
violence from the hotheaded young Men, they replied, That as to what concerned
the Kings, they would take it into deliberation. In the mean time, they were
forced to assemble the People to give audience to Machatas: And being met, he
there appeared, and spoke many things to dispose them to an Alliance with the
Aetolians; impudently and unjustly calumniating the Macedonians, and extolling
and foolishly exaggerating the Praises of the Aetolians. When he had left the
Assembly, great and warm Debates arose touching the Propositions he had made,
one Party holding with the Aetolians, and another violently opposing them. But
at length, after certain of the gravest Senators had reminded the People, on
the one hand, of the fruit they had reaped by the good Offices of Antigonus and
the Macedonians; and, on the other, the Outrages of Charixenus and Timaeus,
when the Aetolians broke in upon the Lands of the Lacedaemonians, and putting
all to Fire and Sword, carried a multitude of the neighboring People away
captive; and did their best to surprise and ruin Sparta it self, aided therein
by those who were under the Sentence of Banishment whom they took with them:
The People thereupon were wrought to change their mind, and resolve to continue
firm to their Alliance with King Philip and the Macedonians. So Machatas
returned home, without any fruit of his Negotiation.

And now the Authors of the late Sedition, dissatisfied with these Proceedings,
and resolving not to acquiesce to the present Methods of Administration,
corrupted certain Persons to engage with them in a most detestable Enterprise.
It is the Custom of their young Men to asstmble once a Year in Arms, to
celebrate a Sacrifice in the Temple of Minerva Chalciaeca; in the performance
of which Ceremony, the Ephori are obliged principally to be present, and direct
all things relating to the said Sacrifice. At this Solemnity then, a Party of
those, who were in Arms to celebrate the Feast with greater Pomp, fell on the
Ephori while they were ministering, killing them in the very Temple, though it
were a Sanctuary even to those who were under Sentence of Death: And forgetting
what was due to that sacred Place, murdered those of their Party at the Table,
and before the Altar of the Goddess. Afterward, to complete what they had
projected, they caused Gyridas, and many other Senators, to be put to death,
and banishing the rest of the anti-Aetolian Faction, came to an Election of new
Ephori of their own Stamp, and proceeded to enter into Confederacy with the
Aetolians. So great was their Hatred to the Achaians and Macedonians. But the
whole World was witness, that all their other Counsels were conducted by the
same Steps of Imprudence and Temerity; being indeed disposed to that manner of
Government through their Inclination to Cleomenes; whose escape from the
Egyptians and return to Sparta, they wished and daily expected. Such
Impressions of Love does the Gentleness of Princes leave in Men's Minds, that
whether present or absent, i^ kindles such Sparks of Gratitude and Goodwill, as
are not presently extinguished: And though it were now three Years since
Cleomenes's flight, and the City had been governed according to their ancient
Institutions, there had not been so much as one motion made in Sparta for the
Election of their Kings: But the news of his Death was no sooner published when
both the People and Ephori proceeded to deliberate thereupon. The Ephori, who
were of the Faction of the Seditious, and had made Alliance with the Aetolians,
chose for one of their Kings Agesipolis, whose Father was Cleombrotus, who
succeeded Leonidas, he being the nearest in Blood. They appointed for his
Governor Cleomenes the Son of Cleombrotus, and Brother to the first
Agesipolis. As to the other King, although Archidamus left two Children begotten
of the Daughter of Hippomedon; and there were others of the same Lineage, but
more remote, though they were of the Family; yet these were rejected, and the
Royalty conferred on Lycurgus, who descended not from any one Ancestor that had
worn the Crown. But at the price of a Talent he bestowed on each of the Ephori,
he bought his Adoption to Hercules, and his Title to the Crown of Sparta. So
true it is, that all Villainies are everywhere bought at a price. And it will
be seen, that the Authors of these Violations, were not punished in their
Children, or Children's Children, but they themselves lived to share the Fruit
of their Folly.

Machatas receiving notice of these Proceedings, returned speedily to Sparta,
where he labored his utmost with the Kings and the Ephori, to dispose them to
declare War with the Achaians, there being no other means left, whereby to
vanquish the Difficulties they were now under, with those who opposed the
Alliance with the Aetolians, who had likewise a Party in Aetolia it self. But
having at length prevailed with the Kings and the Ephori, he returned back to
his Country, after having, by the Weakness of those whom he had gained to his
purpose, successfully executed his Commission.

As to Lycurgus, he marched out, and made Incursions on the Frontiers of the
Argians with the Troops he had raised, with whom was joined the Militia of the
City: So that taking the Argians thus by surprise, the Enemy easily effected
their purpose. Soon after he took Polichna, Prasia, Leucas, and Cyphas. He got
possession likewise of Glimpes and Zarax; after which good success, the
Lacedaemonians proclaimed War with the Achaians. Thus all things sorting to the
Wish of the Aetolians, they entered on the War with great assurance, while, on
the contrary, the Achaians had but a melancholy prospect of their Affairs: For
King Philip, on whom they most relied, was yet but forming his Army. The^
Epirots were slow in their Preparations; and the Messenians continued Neuters,
while the Aetolians, assisted by the Eleans and Lacedaemonians, attacked them
on every side.

At the same time Aratus's Praetorship expired, and Aratus his Son was, by the
Suffrages of the Achaians, chosen Praetor in his Place. Scopas likewise was
Praetor of the Aetolians, whose time was now half expired, the Aetolians
Election of Magistrates being in in the Month of September, the Achaians March.
Aratus the Younger then entered on his Charge early in that Summer, which was
remarkable for the beginning of so many Wars: For Hannibal was then meditating
the Siege of Saguntum. The Romans dispatched L. Aemilius at the Head of an Army
into Illyria, against Demetrius the Pharian, whereof we have made mention in
our preceding Book. Antiochus entered on the War, which was waged for the Lower
Syria, after Theodorus had delivered up to him Tire and Ptolemais. Lycurgus
King of Sparta arrogating the same Authority as heretofore Cleomenes did, laid
siege to Athenaeum, belonging to the Megalopolitans. The Achaians made Levies
of Horse and Foot to sustain the War that so much threatened them. Philip
marched out of Macedon with an Army of Ten thousand heavy-arm'd Troops, Five
thousand Targeteers, and Eight hundred Horse. These were the hostile
Preparations that were then everywhere making. Besides that, the Rhodians were
at the same time engaging in a War with the Byzantines, the Quarrel being
grounded on the Reasons we shall now deliver.

The Byzantines are situate the most commodiously of any People, who by their
neigh-hood to the Sea, have all things transported to them that minister to the
supply of human Life, or Luxury; but they cannot boast of the like Felicity by
Land with respect to the Sea; their City stands so on the Coast, that no Vessel
can go or come without their Permission. And whatever can be supplied by the
Pontic Sea, which yields abundance of every needful thing they are Masters of.
In a word, the Countries bordering on that Sea, afford us plenty of Hides, and
of good Slaves, Honey, Wax, salted Flesh, and all sorts of the like
Commodities. The Byzantines enjoy likewise, by the Benefit of Navigation, all
things of the growth of our Countries; as, Oil, Wine, and the like. Bread-Corn
is also a Commodity among them, which sometimes they buy, and at other times
they sell. It will concern the Greeks then, either not to deal at all in these
kinds of Merchandice, or to resolve to Trade without Advantage; if the
Byzantines should at any time enter into League with the Thracians or
Galatians: Or in short, totally to abandon all Commerce with those Countries;
for we should be no longer at liberty to Navigate in the Pontic Sea, by reason
of the straitness of the Inlets, and the multitude of Barbarians that possess
the Country round about. There is no doubt then, but it is the Felicity of the
situation of Places to which Byzantium owes the many Advantages it enjoys; for
be it either for the Consumption of such things whereof they abound, or the
Supply of what they want, they Negotiate both with ease, by the benefit of
their Navigation; nor are those who hold Commerce with them, without their
share of Commodity: Wherefore as they are beneficial to every one, so the
Greeks in general have a just Consideration for them: And they do not only
think they have a right to their Thanks, to but their Succors and Assistance,
whenever they are invaded or pressed by their barbarous Neighbors. But
forasmuch as the Nature and Situation of this Place is known but to a few, it
lying out of the way of the general Commerce of the World; we have therefore
thought it worth our Pains to show how it comes to pass that Byzantium enjoys
so many Advantages, superior to most other Cities. For it is our purpose to be
ever very particular in this sort of Subjects, and to endeavor to give such a
prospect of those things as shall be found worth remarking, as to paint them as
it were to the view; at least to engrave such a Picture of them in the Mind,
that the Images shall be but just short of Truth it self.

That which we call the Pontic Sea then, contains in Circuit about nine hundred
Leagues; it has two Outlets or Streights, the one into the Propontis, the
other gives it Communication with the Palus-Maeotis; whose Circuit is upwards
of three hundred Leagues. And forasmuch as many eminent Rivers of Asia, and
more of the principal Rivers of Europe, discharge themselves into this Lake, it
comes to pass that when it swells by the Tribute of so many Waters, it
enlarges and emptieth it self by the Straight into the Pontus, and the Pontus
is delivered by the Propontis. The Mouth or Straight of Palus-Maeotis is called
Bosphorus Cimmerius; which is in Length about threescore Furlongs, in Breadth
about thirty, the Extremities whereof are everywhere full of Flats and
Shelves. The Outlet of the Pontus is called the Bosphorus of Thrace, being in
Length about one hundred and twenty Furlongs, but the Breadth is unequal; for
at the entrance of the Narrow between Chalcedon and Byzantium, it is about
fourteen Furlongs over; but further out about Hieron, a Place so called on the
Coast of Asia, it is not above twelve Furlongs broad; it is reporred, that
Jason first sacrificed here to the twelve gods. In a word, there are two causes
to which is attributed the perpetual Current one way, that is observed to run
in these two Streights: The one plain and intelligible, to every one. For while
their Waters are incessantly replenished, by the Income of so many great
Rivers, there is no other way but by these Streights to discharge them; for
being bounded and confined everywhere by the Coast, the surplus of Water
necessarily and naturally flows out by these passages. The other cause is this;
namely, that the Rivers swelling with the great rains, their Streams become
thereby so rapid, that mighty quantities of Sand and Soil are by the Torrent
conveyed down; which lodging at the bottom, occasion the Water to swell so much
the higher and consequently augments the Stream we are speaking of. These are
the true Causes then of this constant Current; and we are not to hearken to the
Reports of Seafaring People in these cases, but to have recourse to the
Evidence of solid Reason, by which alone the natural Causes of Things are
understood.

But since it is our chance to fall on this Discourse, it will concern us to
endeavor that nothing may be left unsaid, that may serve to inform the
Understanding, touching the nature of the Subject we are treating Wherefore we
shall labor to lay things down as plainly as possibly we may, to the end no
Doubt may remain on the meanest Capacity. And, in truth, there lies an
Obligation on us, who live in the present Age, to examine things with our
utmost care and circumspection. For as there is nothing remains in these our
Days undiscovered of Earth or Seas, it would be a reproach to fly to Fiction
with the Poets and others, who have paid us with Fables, to give us Notions of
what themselves knew nothing. Nor will it become us to tread in the steps of
Historians, who have gone before us, who (as Heraclitus observes) by their weak
reasoning, leave doubtful things more in the dark. Our business therefore must
be to win the Faith of the Reader, by the force and evidence of Reason. We
conceive then that the Pontus and Palus Maeotis have been ever receiving, and
do at this Day continue to receive, and fill up with the Sand and Rubbish that
is brought down by the Rivers we mentioned, and will at last be totally filled
up and levelled; taking it for granted, that the Countries continue their
situation, and the Causes hold their force. For since Time is without limits,
and the Space subject to the Accidents we have noted, everywhere bounded and
enclosed; what wonder is it to conceive, That though the matter conveyed thither
be never so inconsiderable, that in process of Time that little will amount to
fill a great space? And, in short, it is a Rule in Nature, That such things as
are subject to increase and diminish, have their period some time or other, let
the steps of Progression be never so slow or invisible. But forasmuch as the
quantity of Matter brought into these Seas, or Lakes, is not a little, but
without question great, beyond all computation, there remain^ no dispute but
the Effect we prognosticate will be soon seen, and is indeed now visible: For
the Palus-Maeotis is almost already filled up, where in some places there is
not now above fifteen or twenty Foot depth of Water, insomuch as there is no
more adventuring to navigate with Ships of Burden without a Pilot, who is
acquainted with the difficulties. Furthermore, whereas this Sea (as our
Forefathers have observed) was heretofore replenished with salt Water, as the
Pontus at this day is, it is observable that it is now a Fresh Water Lake, the
surface of the salt Water being surmounted by the accession of so much Matter,
as is accumulated and brought thither by the means we mention. The like must in
time fall out in the Pontus, and is in some measure already come to pass: But
this cannot be yet so easily remarked, by reason of the very great depth of
Water in the Channel. Howbeit, those who carefully examine the Matter, may be
satisfied of the truth thereof. Hence the Danube discharging his Waters out of
Europe by several Outlets, has begotten a List or Bank of Earth at least forty
Leagues long, swelling above the surface, distant a Day's Sail from the Shore:
Which Bank is observed to increase daily by the addition of new Matter
constantly brought thither; insomuch as whenever Vessels happen to light upon
any of these places, which Seafaring Men call Shelves or Banks, they are for
the most part broken, and suffer Shipwreck. Take then my Opinion how it comes
to pass that these Mounds or Banks of Earth, grow at that distance from the
Continent, and not nearer to the Shore: The Soil and Rubbish then, which by the
force of the Torrent is conveyed down, is by the prevalence of the Current
transported still forward into the Sea, as long as there remains any strength
in the Stream that keeps it in motion; but as that declines, (which happens by
the depth and spreading of the Waters, which at length are lost in the wide
Sea) the Matter which was before by the Torrent pressed on, sinks and settles
to the bottom. And in proportion to the greater or less rapidity of the Rivers,
these Banks or Bars are at a greater or less distance from the Shore, though the
depth be great between that and the Continent. This is seen plainly in the
gentlest and smallest Streams, whose Bars are nearer the Shore, which yet in
great Floods (their Current being quickened) transport and remove this Bar at a
further distance than ordinary into the Sea, in proportion to the swiftness of
the Flood, and the quantity of the Soil it brings down. Hence it will not
appear strange, that such a mass of Matter as we have noted, should grow to so
great a dimension, as that which is found at the mouth of the Danube; nor that
such quantities of Sand only, but that Rocks and Trees should be unrooted and
rent from their Seats. It will not then be hard, I say, to credit what we have
delivered, but obstinacy rather to disbelieve it; since we behold the smallest
Brooks to make an easy passage through all Impediments, which increasing their
Rage they come to pierce, and remove by their violence the hardest Rocks,
carrying Sand, Stones, and all before them; filling up, and so changing the
face of things, that the View and Landscape becomes in a short space quite
another prospect.

Let it not be thought strange then, I say, that Rivers so great and rapid,
should produce such effects as we have Calculated, by their descent into the
Pontic Sea, which we have maintained, must at length be filled up, and
levelled. For he who weighs the matter rightly, will not only perceive it
probable, but necessary. For if we reason but from hence, that as the Waters of
the Palus-Maeotis are fresher than those of the Euxine, and those of the Euxine
in a degree different to those in our Seas; it is a plain consequence, that the
Euxine must at long run become a Lake of fresh Water, and at length a Moor or
Fenny Continent. But this effect must be the product of so much a longer space,
than it has been brought to pass in the Palus-Moeotis, by how much the Euxine
is of greater depth and content than the other: Howbeit, we may justly
conclude, it will be by some degrees proportionably sooner, by how much more
the Rivers there are greater and more numerous. We have been thus extensive,
the better to inform such as think it impossible, that the Euxine (which has
already visibly suffered some advance toward it) should ever become filled up;
and that so ample a Sea should, in process of time, grow into Continent. We had
likewise a further end by thus enlarging on this Subject; namely, to reprove
the fond and fabulous Relations of Seafaring People, and that the Readers may
not do like Children, who being yet ignorant of all things, listen with
astonishment to every extravagant Tale that is told them: But having their
Minds cultivated by the notions of Verity, they may become qualified to
determine of the truth or salshood of what they hear.

But let us further examine the situation of Byzantium. The Straight then that
lies between the Euxine and the Propontis is in length about fifteen Miles (as
was noted): On that part toward the Euxine, stands the City of Hieron, on the
extremity thereof; the other part toward the Propontis, terminates in the
space or opening that lies between Byzantium and the opposite Shore: Between
these on the side of Europe, and in the very narrow of all, stands the Temple
of Mercury, built on a Rock, that like a Promontory jets a good way into the
Sea, where the Straight is not above five Furlongs broad. Here it was that
Report makes Darius to have built his Bridge, in his Expedition against the
Scythians. Now forasmuch as the Coast on both sides, from hence downward
toward the Propontis trends away straight, and preserves a parallel distance
as it goes, the Current by that means moves equally. But as soon as these vast
Waters that descend from the Euxine Sea come to be pent up and streighten'd, by
the narrow passage made by the Promontory where the Temple stands, which we but
now mentioned, on Europe side, here driven as it were by some mighty force,
they recoil over to the Asian Shore, and from thence return to the Coast of
Europe, beating on those Head-lands or Promontories called Hestiae; and from
thence with unspeakable violence take their course over to Asia again, toward
that part of the Country called the Ox, where there stands a place bearing that
Name, and where the Fable tells us Io, having swam over the Straight, first set
her Foot. From hence, as one may say, being pushed off, it takes its course at
length over to Byzantium, where the Waters now dilated and spreading themselves
about the Town, the Current loses it self, and carries but a weak stream into
the Gulf, but terminates in a manner at the Cape called the Horn. In a word,
though the greatest part of these Waters make their traverse over again toward
the Asian Shore; yet forasmuch as the strength of the Current is now lost, the
motion cease ere it arrives so far as Chalcedon, situate on that Coast. For
after so many reverberations, the Straight now opening wider, the force of the
Stream being spent, cannot reach directly over; but with a kind of Biass
declines and steals away. And leaving Chalcedon, dies in the Channel, and so
pursues a direct course by the Straight.

Hence it comes to pass that Byzantium enjoys so many Benefits, and Chalcedon
so few; while to the view one would be apt to judge their situation equally
Advantageous. But as we have noted, the Navigation to the one is very tedious
and difficult; while to the other the Stream compels, and gives a quick and
easy passage. Hence those, who are bound from Chalcedon to Byzantium, cannot
stand directly over, by reason of the strength of the Current; but are forced
first to gain the Point called the Ox, and the Town of Chrysopolis; whereof the
Athenians were heretofore possessed, and were the first, who by the Counsel of
Alcibiades, exacted a Toll from all that Traded into the Pontic Sea. From hence
advancing a little, they fall at length into the Current, which then forces
them away directly to Byzantium. The like happens whether you are bound upward
or downward to this place. For if Ships are bound from the Hellespont toward
the Euxine, while the Wind blows at South, or from the Euxine toward the
Hellespont during the Levants; the Passage is direct and easy along the Coast
of Europe, from Byzantium to the Straight of the Hellespont, where stand the
Towns of Sestos and Abydus. But those who sail from Chalcedon coasting it
along, find quite the contrary; for they are forced to ply and turn to
Windward, by reason of the Land of the Cyzicenians, which runs far out into the
Sea. In short, as it is difficult for those who are bound from the Hellespont to
Chalcedon to Coast it along on the Europe side; so when they arrive near
Byzantium it is as hard to fetch over to Chalcedon, through the exceeding
violence of the Current, and the other Impediments we have mentioned, which
cross their Passage. It is impossible then to arrive directly from thence at
the Coast of Thrace, by reason of the strength of the opposing Current and
contrary Winds; which, let us stand which way soever we can, blowing almost
constantly Trade, is ever out of the way for that Navigation. For as the
Southerly Winds blow fair to waft us into the Pontic Sea, and the opposite
Point is fair to bring us back; so but with one or the other of these two Winds
it is impossible to gain our Passage. Thus have we opened the Causes from whence
these great Benefits arrive to the Byzantines by Sea: And what we shall now
further observe, will explain the Reason of their Misfortunes by Land.

Byzantium stands in the Country of Thrace, which borders on and begirts their
Territory quite round from Sea to Sea, whence it comes to pass that the
Byzantines are in perpetual Hostility with that People. And by how much these
Barbarians are a very numerous Nation, and governed by many Princes; by so much
is the Task more difficult to reduce them; nor have the Byzantines any prospect
of being able, with all the Provision they can make, ever to deliver themselves
from the Molestations of that War. For when at any time they chance to obtain
any signal Victory over any one of these Princes, they are sure to have three
or four combine with much greater Power to revenge and engage in the Quarrel.
And in case they should be disposed for Peace sake to yield to pay the least
Acknowledgment to any one of these their Neighbors, they were to expect by
gaining one Friend to purchase five Enemies. Whence it falls out, that in this
Warfare there can be no end; and there is nothing more irksome than the
Neighborhood of so brutal a Race of Men, or more terrible than Hostility with
a barbarous Enemy. Furthermore, over and above all these Evils to which they
stand exposed to the Landward, they are condemned to one kind of suffering, not
unlike that to which the Poets have sentenced Tantalus. For possessing a rich
and fruitful Territory, which they take care to Cultivate, their Harvest is no
sooner ripe, when these Thieves visit them, and rob them for the most part of
the Fruit of their Labor; which misfortune they lament in vain. Thus then the
Byzantines become familiar with the Calamities they suffer, and by the force of
Custom endure the Hardships of incessant Hostilities, persisting to preserve
their ancient Alliances with the Greeks inviolate. But after the Gauls (to fill
the Measure of their Adversity) came to be their Neighbors, under the leading
of Comontorius, their Condition became then most deplorable.

These Gauls were a part of those who swarmed out of their Country with
Brennus; who, after the execution done on them at Delphos, did not presently
pass into Asia on their arrival at the Hellespont; but invited by the Fertility
of the Country about Byzantium, resolved there to six their Abode. Afterward
subduing the Thracians, they established a Regal Seat in Tula, and grew quickly
to be Formidable to the Byzantines, whom they drove to great Streights; being
obliged on Comontorius his invading and spoiling their Frontiers, to buy off
that Burden by an Annual Present; sometimes of three Thousand Aurei; sometimes
of five Thousand; and some Years it amounted to no less than ten Thousand,
whereby to redeem their Country from the Rapine of these Barbarians. Till at
length they became driven to be plain Tributaries to the yearly sum of
fourscore Talents, which lasted to the Reign of Clyarus; In whom the Gallic
Dominion expired; the whole Nation being utterly exterminated by the Thracians.
It was at this time that the Byzantines, sinking under the weight of their
Adversity, sent their Ambassadors to solicit Succors from the Greeks, and
seek Relief from the many Hardships they endured. And, in a word, pressed by
their Wants they came at length to a Resolution of exacting a Toll, from all
who navigated into the Pontic Sea; for but few of the Greeks, it seems, laid
their Sufferings to Heart. But they no sooner began to levy this Duty, when the
Innovation was resented on all Hands, and the Rhodians above the rest were
censured, who being at that time Masters of the Sea, submitted to so undue an
Imposition. And this, in a word, produced the War which we are about to relate.

The Rhodians then provoked, as well by their own seeling of this new Tax, as
through the Instigation of others, dispatched their Ambassadors jointly with
those of their Allies to the Byzantines, to persuade them to abolish it. But
the Byzantines could not be brought to accord to the Proposition, in confidence
of the Equity of the Motives they had for what they did, and they were the more
confirmed in their refusal by the Authority of Hecato^dorus and Olympiodorus;
who, being at tha^ time first in the Magistracy of the City, opposed it with
all their Power: Whereupon the Ambassadors returned home with a Negative Reply
from the Byzantines, and the Rhodian^ thereupon declared War against them, and
(...) the same time sent to solicit King Prusias to join and take part with
them, being well assured that Prince did not abound in good Will toward that
People.

The Byzantines by the Example of the Rhodians dispatched likewise their
Ambassadors to Attalus and Achaeus, to solicit Aid from them. They found
Attalus disposed to assist them; but he was not in a present Condition to yield
them any great effects of his Friendship, inasmuch as he had been lately
compelled by the Power of Achoeus to retire and confine himself to the ancient
Limits of his Father's Kingdom. As to Achaeus, who now held the Dominion of the
whole Territory in Asia on this side Mount Taurus, and had lately assumed the
Title of King, he fairly promised the Byzantines, and frankly embracing their
part, put them in mighty hopes; and thereby gave matter of apprehension both to
Prusias and the Rhodians.

Achoeus was of Kin to Antiochus, who succeeded to the Kingdom of Syria, and
became possessed of the Power he held, by the means we shall now relate. After
the Death of Seleucus, Father of Antiochus, and that Seleucus his Eldest Son
had taken possession of the Kingdom, Achaeus accompanied him in his March and
Passage over Mount Taurus, about two Years before those Matters were
transacted, whereof we shall by and by make relation. Seleucus had no sooner
taken possession of the Kingdom, when he received Intelligence that Attalus had
already seized and brought under his Dominion all that part of Asia lying on
this side Mount Taurus; whereupon he forthwith fell prudently to deliberate
about the Affairs of his Government. But he had no sooner passed Mount Taurus,
at the Head of a powerful Army, when by the treasonable Practices of Nicanor,
and Villainy of one Apaturius a Gaul, he was Murdered. But Achoeus soon
compassed a just Revenge on the Traitors for the Death of the King his Kinsman;
and taking upon him the Conduct of the Army and the Government, managed all
things with great Prudence, and manifested in all his Deportments a singular
sufficiency and vivacity of Mind. And albeit the Sovereign Authority became now
left to his Election, and the People freely courted him with Tenders of the
Diadem, he nevertheless rejected the Offer; and determining to reserve the
Succession to Antiochus, Brother of the dead King, led the Army from place to
place, and managed the War so prosperously, that he soon recovered all that had
been lost on this side the Mountains. But vanquished at length by the
Temptations of his Felicity, and after having beaten and confined Attalus to
his own City of Pergamus, and reduced all those places that had been forceably
possessed, he renounced all those noble and generous Purposes he had taken; and
invading the Dominion, consented to be called King, and became the most active
and formidable Prince of all on this side Mount Taurus; insomuch, as barely on
the prospect of his Friendship and Assistance, the Byzantines took assurance to
wage War against the joint Forces of King Prusias and the Rhodians. Prusias had
an old grudge against the Byzantines; who either out of inadvertency, or in
contempt, had omitted to dedicate certain Statues, which they had once decreed
to erect to him. He had a further motive of Indignation against them, for that
they had interposed their utmost good Offices to give a period to the War, that
had fallen out betwixt Attlus and Achaeus, judging rightly that their
Reconcilement would not turn to his account on many Considerations.
Furthermore, he was displeased with the Byzantines, in that they had sent their
Ambassadors to Attalus, on the occasion of his celebrating the Feast of
Minerva; but sent none to him when he solemnized the Soterian Festival. Thus
having hoarded in his Mind so many various motives of Displeasure, it was no
wonder he embraced with joy the occasion the Rhodians gave him to discharge his
Spleen; so they resolved by their Ambassadors, that the Rhodians should attack
them by Sea; and he would prosecute them no less vigorously by Land.

These then were the Causes and the beginning of the War which the Rhodians
declared against the Byzantines: And, in a word, the Byzantines engaged therein
with Courage enough, while their Hopes of the Friendship of Achaeus lasted: And
in prospect of Tibites coming to their assistance from Macedon, they took
assurance to conclude, that Prusias (whom they most apprehended) would then
share with them the danger of the War.

Prusias pursuing the Dictates of his Anger, had already fallen on the
Byzantines, taking Hieron, a Town they had bought some Years before, at the
price of a great Sum of Money, in consideration of the commodious situation of
the Place, both with respect to the security of their Commerce and Navigation
into the Pontic Sea, and the greater safety of their Slaves, and other Profits
arising by their Trade on that Coast. He likewise seized on all they possessed
in Mysia, a Territory in Asia, whereof they had been long Masters; while the
Rhodians furnished out six Men of War on their part, to which the Allies adding
four more, with this Squadron of ten Sail, they stood toward the Hellespont,
the Command being given to Xenophon. Of these, nine remained about Sestos, to
obstruct all Commerce with the Pontic Sea, while the Commander in Chief, with
one Vessel only, shaped his course toward Byzantium, as well to observe their
Motions there, as to see whether these Preparations for the War had not wrought
a change in their Resolution. But finding them firm and determined to abide the
War, he returned to the rest; and without any Action sailed with the whole
Squadron back to Rhodes. At the same time the Byzantines dispatched Ambassadors
anew to Achaeus, to solicit speedy Succors from him; they likewise sent to
Tibites, to persuade him to come in Person from Macedon: For it was the general
Opinion that he had a more rightful Claim to the Kingdom of Bithynia, than
Prusias who was his Nephew. In a word, the Rhodians observing this firmness and
diligence in the Byzantines, were as careful on their part to prosecute their
purpose.

They observed, That this Obstinacy which appeared in the Byzantines to sustain
the War, was grounded principally on their prospect of Aids from Achaeus; and
knowing that Andromachus, Father of that Prince, was at that time under
restraint in Alexandria, and that he labored by all means possible to obtain
his Enlargement, they therefore resolved to send Ambassadors to Ptolomy, to
prevail with him to put Andromachus into their hands. This Matter had been
under Treaty heretofore, but not so solemnly; but at this time it was solicited
earnestly, to the end they might be thereby enabled to transact their Affairs
with Achaeus with better effect. In short, Ptolomy giving Audience to the
Ambassadors, did not readily yield to their Demands; for Andromachus being both
Father to Achaeus, and Brother to Laodice, the Wife of Seleucus, he proposed to
make a better Bargain of him for himself: For the Matters that had been in
dispute between him and Antiochus, were not yet composed. And Achaeus having
now lately taken the Title of King, was become very powerful, extending his
Dominions far and wide. Nevertheless, he was at length prevailed with to
gratify the Rhodians, who at that time could do any thing with him: So he
delivered up Andromachus to be by them restored to his Son. By which grateful
Office of theirs, with other Honors publicly decreed to Achaeus, they won him
from the Byzantine Party, in whom lay their greatest hope of Succors. Another
Misfortune besel them of almost equal prejudice to their Affairs: For Tihites,
whom they had persuaded to leave Macedon to come to their assistance, died in
his Journey; whose Death so perplexed their Counsels, that they began to sink
in their Resolution; while Prusias, animated by their Afflictions, raised his
Hopes, and pressed the War with greater vigor, levying Forces in Thrace,
whereby he so straightened the Byzantines, that on the side of Europe they durst
not look abroad: So that, in a word, being thus frustrate of their sairest
Hopes, and hardly streighten'd and in danger from all Quarters, they fell at
length to deliberate how they might fairly deliver themselves.

Cavarus, King of the Gauls, happened to be at that time in Byzantium, who
greatly coveting to be a means of composing these Hostilities, most readily and
with great Affection offered his Mediation between Prusius and the Byzantines;
whereupon they agreed to commit their Differences to his Arbitrament. When the
Rhodians came to understand this Negotiation of Cavarus, and that Prusias had
yielded to a Treaty (though they would much rather have prosecuted their first
purpose) they dispatched however Aridices their Ambassador to Byzantium; but at
the same time ordered Polemocles with three Triremes to make the best of his
way thither, to offer to them first, as 'twas said, their choice of Peace or
War.

Upon the Arrival of the Ambassadors, a Peace in short was concluded,
Hieromnemon Cothon, the Son of Calligiton, being present: The Terms of the
Treaty with the Rhodians were, viz. That the Byzantines should exact no Toll
from any Ships that Traded into the Pontic Sea. On which consideration, the
Rhodians and their Allies obliged themselves to preserve Peace with the
Byzantines. As to King Prusias, the Articles of the Treaty with him were, That
there should be perpetual Peace between Prusias and the Byzantines: That the
Byzantines should never lead any Army against King Prusias, nor Prusias against
the Byzantines: That Prusias should make restitution of the Lands, Towns,
People and Prisoners that had been taken during the War Ransom-free:
Furthermore, that he should restore such Vessels as had been taken at the
beginning of the War; all the Arms that were seized in their Magazines,
together with all the Timber, Marble, Brick, Tyle, and all whatsoever Materials
had been carried away: (For Prusias apprehending the approach of Tibites, had
caused to be dismantled all such places as might be of use to the Enemy) and,
in a word, obliged himself to cause restitution to be made to the Mysians, who
were under the Dominion of the Byzantines, of all that had been taken from them
by any of the Bithynians. Thus was the War entered upon and determined, that
sell out between King Prusias and the Byzantines.

At the same time the Cnossians sent Ambassadors to the Rhodians to demand the
Ships that Polemocles had Commanded, together with four Brigantines, which they
had lent them toward the War. This being effected, and the Vessels arriving in
Candia, the Eleuthernaeans believing themselves to have been outrag'd by
Polemocles, who to oblige the Cnossians, had caused Timarchus, a Citizen of
theirs, to be slain; having first publicly proclaimed their Right to demand
reparation of this Violence of the Rhodians, declared War against them. There
happened likewise, some time before this, a strange Adventure to the Lyttians,
or rather an incurable Calamity. To set down therefore, in few words, a State
of the Affairs in Candia in those Days, take them a little more or less, as
follows.

The Cnossians and Gortinians being in league, had by combining their Forces,
subdued the whole Island of Candia, the City of Lyttia only excepted; which
standing singly out against them, and refusing to submit to their Domination,
they agreed to make War upon them, resolving totally to destroy them, to the
greater terror of those who should meditate the like Designs. Whereupon the
rest of the Candiots in general fell on the Lyttians. But it was not long
before a slight occasion (as is the custom of that People) set them at variance
amongst themselves; so that Factions were formed, and Seditions grew between
them. The Polyrrhenaeans, the Creetaeans, the Lampaeans, Oryans, and Arcadians
left the Cnossians; and by common Consent took part with the Lyttians. In
Gortinea, the grave and experienced Inhabitants favored the Cnossians; but the
younger sort taking part with the Lyttians, begat great Disorders in the City.
The Cnossians terrified at these Commotions among their Allies, procured an Aid
of a Thousand Men from the Aetolians; whereupon the Party that sided with them,
getting the Citadel, gave it into the possession of the Cnossians and the
Aetolians; and after having slain some that opposed them, and pursued some, and
terrified the rest, they gave them up the Town likewise.

The Lyttians, in the mean time, led their Troops into the Enemy's Country,
while the Cnossians getting notice of their Expedition, marched and surpised
their Town, which they had left with little or no Guard: The Women and Children
they sent to Cnossus, but the Town they burnt and totally destroyed, exercising
all the Spite and Cruelty practiced in the most raging War, and so returned
home in Triumph. When the Lyttians came from their Expedition, and beheld the
Desolation of their City, they were struck with that horror, that not one of
them adventured to set his Foot within the Walls; but marching in a Body round
the Ruins, celebrated as it were by their Cries and Lamentations the Obsequies
of their Native Place, and then marched away to the Lampaeans, who received
them with all hospitality. So that in the space of only one Day, they were
banished their Country, which they had utterly lost, and received as free
Citizens into another, with whom they incorporated, and prosecuted the War
against the Cnossians. Thus Lyttia, a Colony of the Lacedaemonians, the most
ancient City of Creet, the Mother of a People surpassing all the rest of that
Island in Courage and Virtue, was destroyed and disappeared (as one may say) in
a moment. The Polyrrhenaeans and Lampaeans, and, in short, all the rest of the
Confederates, seeing the Cnossians have recourse to the Aetolians for Succors,
whom they knew to be Enemies to King Philip and the Achaians, dispatched their
Ambassadors to these to solicit Aid, and make Alliance with them; with whom
entering into Confederacy, they sent them four Hundred Ill^rians under the
Command of Plator, two Hundred Achaians, and an Hundred Phocians. The arrival
of these Recruits wrought a great Change for the better in their Affairs; for
they soon prevailed with the Elenthernaeans, Cydoniates, and Apteraeans (whom
they had confined within the Walls of* their Towns) to enter into the League,
and abandon the Interest of the Cnossians. In a word, the Confederates
following the Advice of the Polyrrhenaeans, sent to King Philip and the
Achaians a supply of five Hundred Candiots, the Cnossians having some time
before sent a Thousand of their People to the Aetolians. Thus they interchang'd
Supplies one with another to continue the War. At the same time the Gortineans,
who were in Banishment, getting possession of the Port or Haven, and surprising
that of the Phaestians, from thence they insested and waged War with those of
their own City. In this posture, at that time, stood the Affairs of the Island
of Candia.

At the same time Mithridates declared War against those of Sinope, which
became, in effect, the occasion of all those Calamities that afterward befell
that City. Upon the Sinopeans demanding Succors of the Aetolians to sustain
the Wa^, the Aetolians made choice of three Persons for that Service, to whom
they distributed the Sum of about one Hundred and forty Thousand Drams,
wherewith to purchase Supplies of all things needful for the defense of the
place. With this the said Agents made provision of ten Thousand Vessels of
Wine, three Hundred and Sixty Pound weight of Hair-Cordage, an Hundred and
Twenty Pound of Nerve-Cordage, a Thousand Suits of Arms, giving their
Ambassadors in Money about Three Thousand Pieces of Coined Gold. They likewise
furnished them with four Machines for casting of Stones, with Men skilful in
the use and, management of them; whereupon having received this Supply, the
Agents returned home. Those of Sinope apprehending lest Mithridates should
Besiege them by Land and Sea, that Fear gave occasion for the extraordinary
Preparations they made. Sinope is situated on the right Hand as we Sail toward
Phasis in the Pontic Sea; it stands in a Peninsula, which stretches a good
distance out into the Sea. The Town fills the whole breadth of the Peninsula,
which is joined to the Continent of Asia, by a neck of Land not half a Mile
broad. The rest of the Peninsula advances, I say, far into the Sea, and being
everywhere Low-Land, the Town lies exposed to be attacked from that side. The
extremities of the Seaward are with difficulty approached, where scarce a
single Vessel can with safety adventure to the Shore; and there are but few
commodious Places there for Landing.

Those of Sinope then fearing Attempts of Mithridates both by Land with
Machines, and to the Seaward by landing and possessing the level and lower
Grounds which lie near the City; they therefore resolved to fortify the whole
Circuit of the Peninsula toward the Sea; accordingly they barricado'd all the
Avenues with a good Palisado, and the same fear advised them to furnish every
proper place with Arms, and a sufficient Garrison where it was thought needful.
In short, the extent of the Ground is not great, and may be defended by a small
strength.

While these things were thus agitating at Sinope, King Philip marched out of
Macedon at the Head of an Army, (for there we broke off our Discourse, when we
were relating the Transactions of the Consederate War) which he lead through
Thessaly, and the Kingdom of Epirus; purposing by that way to fall on the
Aetolians. But in the interim Alexander and Dorimachus having found Men wicked
enough for their Design, plotted to surprise the Town of Aegira by Treachery,
for which service they assembled twelve Hundred Aetolians, drawing them
together at Oenantia, a Town situate on the other side the Water, over against
the place we mentioned, where they made provision of Vessels and all things
necessary for their Design, and there waited the occasion to put it in
execution. For this Service certain Aetolian Fugitives were found, who had made
their Residence some time in that place, and had taken notice that the
Soldiers, who had charge of the Aegian Gate, kept but a careless Guard, minding
nothing but Drinking and their Pleasure; they had therefore frequently given
Dorimachus intimation of what they had observed; and knowing him to be fit for
such Projects, invited him to engage in the Attempt. Aegira is situate in that
part of Peloponnesus that is washed by the Waters of the Corinthian Gulf
between Aegium and Sicyon, standing on high Ground, and by Nature strong and
hard of Access. The Town looks toward Parnassus and the Towns adjacent, and
not a Mile distant from the Sea. In a word, Dorimachus, when Matters were ripe
for execution, ^mbarks his Troops, and arriving by Night came to Anchor near
the River that runs by the foot of the Hill whereon on the Town stands.
Alexander and Donmachus, together with Archidamus, Son o^ Pantaleon, at the
Head of a good Body (...) Aetolians, attacked the Town on that sid^^ which
regards Aegium; while one of the F^^gitives (well acquainted with all the
Avenues) at the Head of a small Party of their braves and most knowing Men,
took his way ove^ the Rocks and Precipices, and getting Passag^ into the Town
by a certain Aquaeduct, surpised the Guard that had charge of the Gate, yet
asleep; which having put to the Sword* and forcibly broken down the Barrier,
they opened the Gates to the Aetolians, which they heedlesly entered without
any precaution, taking for granted they were now Masters of the Place. But this
precipitation o^ theirs turned to their destruction, and gave the Inhabitants
the opportunity of rescuing their Town. In a word, the Aetolians believing
themselves now sure of Success, stood but a small space under their Arms in the
Marketplace, but pursuing their natural love of Plunder, began by degrees to
Disband, and fell to pillaging the neighboring Houses, it being now broad Day.
The People of the Town were so terrified at this Surprise, that all who were in
their Houses, which the Enemy plundered, betook themselves to flight, and got
out of the Town, giving all for lost to the Aetolians. But those whose Houses
had not been yet rifled, having more leisure to bethink themselves, and coming
out to make Head against the Enemy, hastened to the Citadel; where their
Number increasing every moment, their Resolution augment proportionably. While
on the contrary the Aetolians grew weaker and weaker, through the Avarice of
those who incessantly le^t their Ranks to hunt after Booty; by which means
their Numbers and their Courage became greatly diminished. When Dorimachus
began to perceive the Danger that threatened his Party, he endeavored to rally
and recall his scattered Troops, and marched to Attack the Citadel; making
account that the boldness of the Attempt would so terrify the Multitude, that
were drawn together for the Defense of that Fortress, that they would
incontinently fly before him. But the Aegirates otherwise minded, animating one
another, opposed themselves bravely against the Enemy, and advancing to the
Charge, came manfully to the Sword's point with the Aetolians. For the place
being without any considerable Works about it, the Contest was for the most
part at hand, and a Combat as it were of Man to Man: And, in short, the Dispute
we may imagine was such, as when on the one part Men fight for the Liberty of
their Country, and their Families; and on the other, for their Lives and
Safety. But the Aetolians at length began to retire, and the Aegirates as
warmly to pursue them, when they once perceived them to give Ground. The
greatest part of the Aetolians then fell on the place, or were crowded to Death
in the Gate. In conclusion, those of them who were not killed on the Spot,
perished among the Rocks and Precipices by which way they endeavored to
escape. Some that gained their Vessels having basely quitted their Arms,
wondering at the fortune of their Escape, immediately Embarked and made Sail
away. Thus those of Aegira having lost their Town through their Negligence, had
the Fortune to recover it by their Resolution.

At the same time likewise Euripides (whom the Aetolians had sent to the
Aelaeans for their General) having plundered the Territory of Dyma, Pharae, and
Tritaea, returned to Elis with much Booty. As to Micas of Dyma, who was at that
time the Achaian Praetor's Lieutenant, he assembled all the Forces of Dyma,
Pharae, and Tritaea, and advanced after the Enemy, who was now retreating. But
pursuing with more Precipitation than Prudence, he fell into an Ambush, where
he suffered someloss; about forty of his Men being slain, and two handred taken
Prisoners. Euripides, exalted. by this Success, soon after took the Field
again, gaining a Fortress belonging to the Dymaeans, called Tychos, standing
very commodiously. This Place, as Fables say, was built by Hercules, at what
time he waged War with the Eleans, and was his retreat when he made Inroads on
the Enemy.

Those of Dyma, Pharae, and Tritaea, who had met with so ill Success in their
pursuit of the Enemy, beginning to be in pain for the ^uture, (after the taking
the Fortress of Tychos) dispatched Advice to the Praetor of the Achaians,
imparting to him what had befallen them, and demanded speedy Succors; each of
them apart sending afterward their Ambassadors with Instances to the same
effect. But it so happened, that Aratus could make no Levies of Strangers,
inasmuch as in the Cle^menic War, they had withheld part of the Pay that was
due to those who had served in their Army. And Aratus himself was, in a word,
but a very slow Mover in all Military Deliberations and Enterprises. And that
was it that gave Lycurgus opportunity to surprise Athenaeum of the
Megalopolitans; and afterward (as we have noted) to Euripidas to get possession
of Gorgona of Telphussa.

When those of Dyma, Pharae, and Tritaea perceived they were to expect no
Relief from Aratus, they resolved in their Assemblies to contribute no further
to the Confederate Stock, but to raise Forces of their own for their proper
Desence; so they listed three hundred Foot and fifty Horse, which they sent to
the Frontiers. In this Determination it was agreed by every one, that they had
(...) done very wisely for themselves, but very ill for the Confederacy and
Common Cause of the Achaians. But a great part of this Failure may justly be
imputed to the Praetor, whose custom it had been to amuse and deceive them by
his Coldness and Procrastinations, though their Affairs were never so pressing.
But it is, in short, incident to People in Danger, that while there is hope of
Aid from their Confederates and Friends, their greatest Reliance and
expectation of Support is from them; but those Hopes once lost, and straightened
by Adversity, they become driven to apply Remedies of their own, and convert
all their Strength to their single and particular Safety. Wherefore there seems
to be no blame due to the Pharaeans and the rest, for having made Levies for
their own defense, while the Achaian Praetor failed them. But they are not
without imputation of having done amiss, in refusing to contribute however to
the Common Stock of the Confederacy. And as there is no doubt but their care
for themselves in particular was just; so while they were able, they were
indispensibly bound to contribute to the General Concernment of the League;
especially considering that by the Articles of the Treaty of Alliance, they
were to be repaid, whatsoever they should contribute, and what was of further
weight, they themselves were the Authors of the Confederacy of the Achaians.

While matters were thus transacted in Peloponnesus, King Philip, having
marched through Thessaly, came to Epirus; where after he had incorporated the
Epirot Supplies, who were to join him with his own Troops, together with three
hundred Slingers that had been sent him from Achaia, and three hundred Cretans,
who were supplied by the Polyrrhenaeans, he continued his march; and having
crossed the Kingdom of Epirus, he came to the Frontiers of Ambracia: And in
case he had made no delay, but had led his Army directly into Aetolia, and
sallen by surprise with so strong a hand on that People, he had in all
likelihood given a period to the War. But the Epirots being instant with him to
set first down before Ambracia, he by that means gave the Enemy time to
fortify and provide for themselves. Thus the Epirots preferring little private
Gain, to the general Benefit of the Confederacy, their passion to get Ambracia
into their hands, incited them to labor that Philip might make the Siege of
that Place his first Enterprise, coveting nothing more than to win Ambracia
from the Aetolians, which nevertheless they saw not how it could be effected,
without first becoming Masters of Ambracium, a Fortress of good strength,
having a strong Wall about it, and standing in the midst of a Morass that
surrounded it on all sides; to which there is but one strait access or passage,
being a Causey made of Earth brought thither for that purpose. In short, this
Place stands very commodiously for infesting the Country of the Ambracians, and
the City it self: Wherefore Philip, by persuasion of the Epirots, sat down
before it, and disposed things for the Siege.

Scopas, in the mean while, at the head of all the Aetolian Forces, takes his
march through Thessaly, and falls into Macedon; where passing the Plains of
Pieria, he ravaged the Country without opposition: And after having taken much
Plunder, he marched toward Dlum; which Place being deserted by the Inhabitants,
he dismantled, burning the Portico's belonging to the Temple, and destroying
all the Ornaments, and whatever was of use to the People when they assembled to
celebrate their Festivals. He likewise spoiled and threw down all the Statues
of the Kings of Macedon: And he, who from the beginning of these Troubles, and
in his first Expedition, made War not on Men only, but against the Gods, was,
on his return home, not only not censured as an impious or sacrilegious Person,
but honored as a Man of Merit, and a good Servant of the Commonwealth; and (by
the promise of further success he made them) much animated the Aetolians, who
now concluded none would dare to approach their Country in a hostile manner,
while they themselves pillaged with impunity not only Peloponnesus, but
Thessaly and Macedon it self.

King Philip soon received advice of this Invasion of his own Kingdom; and though
he endured with pain the Obstinacy and Ambition of the Epirots, nevertheless he
resolved to continue the Siege of Ambracium: And when he had performed all that
could be expected in the like cases, and had terrified the Inhabitants by his
Works and Approaches, at length took it on composition, after a Siege of forty
Days. So turning out the Aetolian Garrison, consisting of about five hundred
Men, who by Articles were to suffer no ill treatment, he gave Ambracium to the
Epirots, and thus gratified their Ambition. This done, he leads his Army along
the River Charadra, with purpose speedily to pass the Gulf of Ambracia, where
it is narrowest, near the Temple of the Acarnanians, called Actium. This Gulf
comes out of the Sicilian Sea, and parts the Kingdom of Epirus and Acarnaria;
the Mouth is but narrow, being little more than half a Mile broad; but it soon
widens, and is in some places twelve Miles over, stretching in length about
forty Miles in, from the Sicilian Sea, running between the above-named
Countries. Epirus is on the North-side, and Acarnania on the South. After he
had passed this Gulf with his Army, he took his march through Acarnania, and
drew toward Phaerea, an Aetolian Town; and recruiting his Army with two
thousand Acarnanian Foot, and about two hundred Horse, he invested that Place;
and after many vigorous Attacks, for two Days together, the third it
capitulated, the Aetolian Garrison marching out with their Baggage, as it was
articled. The following Night, there arrived five hundred Aetolians, who came
to the relief of the Place, thinking it had been still their own. But the King,
receiving an account of their march, possessed himself of certain advantageous
Posts in their way; and falling on them, cut of the greatest part of them,
taking the rest Prisoners, a very few only escaping. Then after he had
distributed thirty Days Corn to the Army (the Granaries of this Town being very
well replenished) he marched toward Strategica; and coming within little more
than a Mile of the Place, he encamped by the River Achelous? From thence
continuing his march, he ravaged the Country round about, no Enemy appearing to
withstand him.

About this time the Achaians, beginning to feel the ill effects of the War,
hearing the King was at hand, sent their Ambassadors to wait on him, and demand
Succors. These found him near Stratus; who when they had done their
Commission, represented how profitable an Enterprise it would be to march to
Rhium, and fall by that way on the Aetolians. After Philip had given Audience
to the Ambassadors, he did not presently dismiss them; but holding them in
hand, told them he would deliberate on their Proposals: So decamping, he
marched the Army to Metropolis and Conope. At Metropolis the Aetolians held the
Citadel, but ^^^tred the Town, which the King destroyed, and so prosecuted his
march to Conope.

In the mean time the Aetolian Horse were got together, and boldly resolved to
attempt the obstructing his Passage over the River, about two Miles from the
Town, believing they should be able either to hinder his passing, or at least
to do the Army much damage in the attempt. But the King, who had knowledge of
their Purpose, commanded the Buckler-Men first to enter the River, and to
approach the other Bank by Troops or Cohorts well covered with their Bucklers,
after the Tortoise manner. These Orders being observed, as they gained the
other Shore, the Aetolians attacked the advanced Party, and in truth made some
dispute; but when they observed these to halt, and to draw into close order,
and that the second and third Cohorts joining them, composed as it were a Wall
of Defense with their Bucklers; they then gave back, and retreated into the
Town, despairing to perform any further Service.

After this occasion, the Aetolians presumed no more to come into the Field,
but shut themselves up in their Places of Defense. After the King had passed
the River, and spoiled all the low Country without opposition, he advanced to
Ithoria, a Place fortified and strong by Art and Nature, and standing in the
way of his march. Nevertheless, on the approach of the Army, the Garrison
thought it best to retire and abandon their Works. Thus becoming Master of this
Place, he ordered it forthwith to be dismantled and demolished, commanding his
Troops that ravaged the Country far and wide, to do the like to all the
Fortresses they could get into their hands.

After he had passed this Straight, he moved by easier marches, the better to
enable the Soldiers to carry their Plunder. Then having furnished the Army with
all things necessary, he led them toward Oeniade, and by the way sitting down
before Paeanium, (which Town he resolved to be first Master of) he took it by
force, after many Assaults. This was a Place of no great extent, being hardly a
Mile about, but no way inferior to the others, as well for the Beauty of the
Buildings, as the Strength of the Wall and Works. He caused the Fortifications
to be razed, and the Edifices to be demolished, taking order with the Timber
and Rafters to make Floats to transport himself to Oeniade. The Aetolians
seemed at first resolved to fortify and keep possession of the Citadel of that
Place; but on the approach of King Philip, the fear prevailed; so they quitted
that likewise. After the King was become Master of Oeniade, he marched into
Calydonia, where he invested a well-fortify'd Place, having a strong Wall, and
which was well furnished with Stores and Provisions of War. For King Attalus it
seems had supplied the Aetolians with all things needful to the Defense of this
Town: But Philip taking it by force, the Macedonians wasted all the Country of
Calydonia; and afterward he marched back to Oeniade. The King having well
considered the commodious situation of the Place, as well for the passage it
gave into Peloponnesus, as other Advantages, resolved to fortify and begirt it
with a Wall. Oeniade is situate on the Sea, upon the very out-skirts of
Acarnania, where it borders on the Aetolians, at the entrance of the Gulf of
Corinth; it stands fronting toward Peloponnesus, and lies opposite to the
Coast of Dyma, and not distant above twelve Miles from the Country that borders
on Araxus; wherefore he fortified the Castle, and laid the Design of joining
the Arsenal and the Port, and destined for that Service the Materials he had
caused to be transported from Paeanium.

But while these Things were under consideration, he received Letters from
Macedon, whereby he understood that the Dardanians believing he had taken his
march into Peloponnesus, had resolved to fall on him at home: That they had
levied Forces for that Enterprise, and were making great Provision of all kinds
for prosecuting the War. Whereupon judging it but just to repair to the relief
of his own Country, he therefore dismisseth the Achaian Ambassadors, giving
them assurance, That as soon as he should be able to compose his Affairs at
home, there was nothing more in his Thoughts than to come and give them his
utmost Assistance. Whereupon he departed, marching with great diligence back by
the same way he came. At his passage of the Gulf of Ambracia, in his way out of
Acarnania into Epirus, he was met by Demetrius of Pharus, who had been
compelled to fly out of Illyria by the Romans (as we have already noted) having
only one single Vessel with him. The King received him kindly, ordering him to
go first to Corinth, and from thence to take his way through Thessaly, and come
and meet him in Macedon.

After Philip had passed through Epirus, he continued his march without
halting; and on his arrival at Pella, a Macedonian Town, the Dardanians, who
had got intelligence of his return, by certain Thracian Fugitives, terrified at
his diligence and sudden appearance, dismissed their Army, after they were got
near the Frontiers of Macedon. Whereupon having notice that the Dardanian Army
was broken, he dismissed the Macedonians that were then with him, to go and
gather in their Harvest, passing himself into Thessaly, to spend the remaining
part of the Summer at Larissa. About the same time, Paulus Aemilius triumphed
magnificently at Rome, for his Victory over the Illyrians: And Hannibal, after
taking Saguntum by storm, marched his Army into Winter Quarters. The Romans now
assured of the loss of Saguntum, sent Ambassadors to Carthage, to demand the
delivering up of Hannibal; but did not in the mean time respite their
Preparations for the War, having created Publius Cornelius Scipio, and Tiberius
Sempronius Consuls. But forasmuch as we have treated at large of these
Occurrences in our preceding Book, we only give here this hint thereof, a
little to refresh the Reader's Memory, and to the end contemporary Affairs may
be the better understood. And here we are come to the end of the First Year of
the Hundred and fortieth Olympiad.

The Aetolians having in their Assembly created Dorimachus Praetor, he was no
sooner seated in his Authority, when assembling their Troops he led them into
the upper Epirus, where he acted all the Violences of War, not so much now in
prospect of Profit to himself as in Malice to the Epirots. And on his arrival
near the Temple of Dodona, he there burnt and demolished all the Portico's,
spoiling the Ornaments, and destroying in short the Temple it self. Thus the
Aetolians, careless of what is practiced in time of Peace or War, acted such
outrageous Parts in both Peace and War, as showed them ignorant of the Rights
and Customs of human Nature; persisting to execute what they had once resolved
without regard to Gods or Men. As to Dorimachus, after he had done all the
spoil he could, he returned back to Aetolia. And now albeit the Winter was not
yet over, and the Season afforded no hopes of King Philip's returning yet
awhile; that Prince notwithstanding, taking with him three thousand of that
sort of Troops they call Chalcaspides; from their carrying Brazen Shields; two
thousand Buckler-men, three hundred Candiots, and about four hundred Horse;
with this Body of Men he departed from Larissa, and took his march through
Thessaly, and so to Eubaea, and thence by Cynus to Corinth; marching by the
Frontiers of Boeotia and Megara; and in short performed his Journey with so
great secrecy and expedition, that the Peloponnesians had not the least notice
of it. On his arrival at Corinth he caused the Gates of the City to be
immediately closed, and placing Guards on all the Avenues, sent the next day to
Sicyon for the elder Aratus, and dispatched Letters to the Achaian Praetor, and
the several Towns of Achaia, requiring them to let him know, how soon they
could be able to assemble their Troops, and to assign a place of Rendezvous.
This done he continued his march toward Dioscurium a City of Phliasia and
there encamped.

At this time Euripidas having with him two Cohorts of Eleans, and certain
Pirates and mercenary Strangers, amounting in all to about two and twenty
hundred Men: With these Troops he departed from Psophis, taking his march by
Phoenice and Stymphalia, (ignorant of King Philip's return) with design to
attack and plunder the Territory of Sicyon. But so it chanced, that the same
Night that Philip encamped near Dioscurium, he marched by, leaving the King's
Army somewhat in his Rear, expecting the next Morning to fall on the
Sicyonians. But his People lighting on certain of the Candiots, who had been
commanded out to Forage; by these Prisoners Euripidas got notice of the arrival
of the Macedonians. Whereupon he marched back with his Troops without imparting
his Intelligence to any Body, taking the same Road by which he came, purposing
to prevent the Macedonians, and take possession of the Rocks and Ground beyond
Stymphalia that commands the Passage. The King, who knew nothing of his Design,
departed the next day as he had purposed, with intention to march by the Town
of Stymphalia it self, and so to Caphya; the place appointed for the Rendezvous
of the Achaian Troops

At that very instant then, that the Vanguard of the Macedonians came to the
foot of the Mountain Apeaurus, not a Mile from the Town of Stymphalia; the Van
of the Eleans in like manner approached the same Ground: Which when Euripidas
perceived, and by what he was told, and by reasonable conjecture became
thoroughly satisfied that it was so; he takes with him a Party of Horse only,
and to get himself out of danger, escapes to Psophis, passing over Rocks and
By-ways, the better to conceal his flight. The rest of his Troops beholding
themselves abandoned of their Leader, and being astonished at the surprise,
stood a while to consider what was best to be done: For the principal among
them were at first of Opinion, That it was only: Party of Achaians that had
been drawn together, and came to the relief of the Country: Then perceiving
they bore brazen Shields, they took them for Megalopolitans: For it seems that
People had made use of these Arms in the Battle that had been fought with
Cleomenes near Selasia, Antigonus having so ordered it. So that keeping
themselves in good Order, they continued their March, and with assurance
approached the Mountain. But they no sooner became certain that they were
Macedonians, when quitting their Arms, they betook themselves to slight. About
twelve Hundred of them were taken, some cut in pieces on the place, and many
perished among the Rocks and Precipices; and, in a word, not above one Hundred
of the whole Party made their Escape: So Philip sending the Prisoners and the
Booty to Corinth continued his march.

This Victory passed for a kind of Miracle among the Peloponnesians, the news
of Philip's Coming and Conquering being told at one and the same time. After he
had traversed Arcadia, and surmounted the Hardships of the Snows, and
Difficulties of the Ways, he arrived in three Days at Caphya. Here the King
halted for two Days to refresh his Army; then taking with him Aratus the
younger, with the Achaian Troops which he had there drawn together, amounting
to Ten Thousand Men, he marched the Army toward Psophis by the way of Clitoria,
seizing on the Arms and Ladders in all the Towns in his march. Psophis is
confessed by all without contradiction to be the most ancient City of Arcadia:
Its situation, with respect to Peloponnesus, is in the heart of that Country;
with respect to Arcadia it stands on the West-borders thereof, toward the
Achaian Frontiers, in the Neighborhood of the Elean Territory, with whom at
that time they were in League. Hither Philip arriving in three Days from
Caphya, Encamped on certain Eminences that lie fronting the Town; from whence
there is an easy prospect (out of all danger) both of the Town and
Neighboring Villages round about. From hence then taking a view of the great
strength of the place, he grew in doubt what to determine; for on the West side
there runs a rapid Stream, which during almost all the Winter is no way
fordable: This on that side fortifies the Town, and by the depth of its
Channel, renders it almost inaccessible, the Waters falling from on high,
having in process of time worn it to great depth. On the East Side runs the
Erymanthus, a great and violent River, whereof many Tales are told, and are in
every ones mouth. On the Southside, where the Torrent empties into the
Erymanthus, the Town is environed with many Waters, which give it great
strength on that Quarter. As to the other part that regards the North, there
stands an Eminence very strong by Nature, and exceedingly improved by Art; and
this work served them for a Citadel. Furthermore, the Walls and Works about the
Town were considerable both for height and structure. And over and above all
this, the Eleans had furnished the place with a good Garrison; and Euripidas,
who had escaped in the late Defeat, was in the Town.

When Philip had well weighed all these Matters, sometimes he resolved not to
adventure to Besiege them; but soon again he became of another Mind, when he
reflected on the great Importance of the place: For as it greatly annoyed at
that time both the Achaians and Arcadians, so it was a Rampire and Bulwark of
the Eleans; he foresaw that were it once in his possession, it would become an
admirable Fortress whereby to cover the Arcadians against the Insults of the
Enemy, and an excellent place of Arms and retreat for the Allies, who made War
on the Eleans. Wherefore he became at length resolved to attempt the Siege; and
ordering his Troops to refresh themselves, and to be in a readiness under their
Arms by break of Day, he commanded them to march down and pass the Bridge over
the Erymanthus; which they did without any Impediment, none suspecting they
would adventure on so hardy an Enterprise: Then bravely approaching the Town,
they came and lodged themselves at the foot of the Wall. Upon this, Euripidas
and all within the Town were struck with great Terror and Amazement, having
always concluded it most improbable, that the Enemy would ever be so
adventurous, as to make an essay of their Strength against a place so well
fortified and provided; nor to resolve on a long Siege, by reason of the Winter
and bad Weather. Nevertheless, with these Thoughts were mixed certain
Jealousies among themselves, and an apprehension lest Philip should become
Master of the Place by intelligence. But these Fears were soon over; and after
they found there was no ground of Suspicion of that, there being none so much
as inclined to Philip's Party, they then unanimously betook themselves to the
defense of the Works, the greatest part of the Garrison mounting the Walls,
while the Elean Mercenaries made a Sally by a Gate in the upper part of the
Town, to surprise the Enemy on that side. In the mean time, the King having
appointed three several Attacks, ordered Ladders to be raised by People
destined to that particular Service, against each assigned place, with a
sufficient Guard of Macedonians to sustain them: Then commanding to sound to
the Charge, they advanced to the Assault on all Quarters of the Town. The
Garrison for a space made brave resistance, casting down many of their Ladders.
But it coming to pass that their Darts, and other Weapons of Defense in such
occasions, beginning to fail them (for they were drawn to the Walls in haste,
as was noted) and the Macedonians bravely maintaining the Attack,
notwithstanding the opposition they found, new Men boldly succeeding and
filling up the places of those who had been cast from the Works; that the
Townsmen, no longer able to withstand them, deserted their Defense, and betook
themselves for safety to the Citadel: So the Macedonians mounted, and became
possessed of the Walls; while the Candiots, who were come to Blows with the
Party that had made the Sally, beat them back, and in the pursuit entered
pell-mell with them into the Town; whereby it so chanced, that the place was
subdued and taken in all Quarters at once. The Inhabitants, with their Wives
and Children likewise took Sanctuary in the Citadel, as did Euripidas, and all
that had time to provide for their safety.

The Macedonians were no sooner Masters of the Town when they fell to plunder
and rifle both public and private Places, where they remained till they should
receive further Orders. In the mean while, those who had retired to the
Citadel, foreseeing what must inevitably besal them, having nothing there to
sustain them, deliberated on yielding it up; accordingly they sent a Trumpet to
the King, who gave them his Pass for the security of those whom they should
appoint to Treat; who were the principal Men of the City, and with them
Euripidas, who obtained Indemnity for all who were retired to the Citadel, both
Townsmen and Strangers. Nevertheless, the Deputies were ordered to return
back, and there to remain till the Army should be drawn off, lest some of the
unruly Soldiers, less observant of the King's Commands, should be tempted to
rifle them.

The Weather being bad (much Snow falling) the King was constrained to take up
his abode here for some days, where assembling all the Achaians that were with
him, he first discoursed with them touching the situation of the Place; that it
was well fortified, and of great use to them in the War they had on their
hands. Then repeating the assurances of his fast Friendship to the Nation in
general, he bestowed the Town upon them, telling them, he was fully determined
to give them all the assistance in his utmost Power, and would let no occasion
pass, whereby he might express his Affection to them. After Aratus, and the
rest of the Achaians had expressed their grateful Acknowledgments for so many
Favors and good Offices, the King dissolved the Assembly, and marched the Army
away toward Lasion; upon which the Psophidians left the Citadel, and came down
into the Town to their respective Habitations. As to Euripidas, he departed
thence to Corinth, from whence he went to Aetolia. The Magistrates of the
Achaians gave the Government of the Citadel to Proslaus the Sicyonian, placing
therein a good Garrison, and Pythias they made Governor of the Town. Thus were
Matters accommodated at Psophis.

The Elean Garrison in Lasion receiving notice of the approach of the
Macedonians, and being informed of what had passed at Psophis, deserted the
Town; into which the King immediately entered; on his arrival, to give further
instance of his Kindness to the Achaians, he made them a Present likewise of
this Place. He also restored Stratus to the Telphussians, which the Eleans had
abandoned; and, in short, in five Days marched to Olymphia, where after he had
sacrificed, and magnificently treated the prime Officers of the Army, and
allowed three Days to repose and refresh his Troops, he marched them into the
Territory of the Eleans; where he no sooner entered, when he sent Detachments
abroad to waste and plunder the Country, himself encamping in the Neighborhood
of Artemissium, whither having ordered the Booty to be brought, he afterward
returned back to Dioscurium. And here, though they put all to Fire and Sword
wherever they came, and took many Prisoners; nevertheless, the greater part
saved themselves by flying to the neighboring Towns and Places of strength.
For the Territory of the Eleans is the best Peopled Country of all
Peloponnesus, and the most abounding in all things; for the Inhabitants are for
the most part so in love with a Country Life, that how Wealthy soever they are,
they cannot be drawn from thence to inhabit their Towns.

The reason of this seems to be, that the Government greatly incourageth that
sort of Life, whereby their Lands become better cultivated and improved;
insomuch as they receive from them all kind of Protection, and want no
Privilege or Support it can give them. For my own part, I can easily believe
they have been ever heretofore addicted to that manner of Living, as well
through the fertility of the Soil, as the innocence and simplicity of the
Manners of the ancient Inhabitants, while by the general consent of the Greeks
they enjoyed their Possessions without any Molestation; or fear of War or
Violence; in consideration of the Olympic Games that were there celebrated.

But after the Arcadians had now Challenged a right to Lasion and Pisa, and
they were become obliged to take Arms to defend their Possessions, they became
changed in their Manners, and forgot the ancient Customs of their Country:
without thought of recovering their old Liberty, and have long continued for
the most part in that state. Wherein, ^methinks, they manifest a very stupid
neglect of their own proper Benefit, and the Advantage of Posterity. For since
Peace is a Blessing which Mankind in general ask of the Gods; and for the sake
whereof there is hardly any thing we are not ready to do or suffer; and since
among all those things that bear the name of Goods of Human Life, that alone
remains undisputed; does it not seem a mighty Error then, and blindness of
Mind, that while this Blessing may be honestly obtained, and perpetually
enjoyed to despise such a Treasure, and not esteem it a Felicity preferable to
all others? But let it be Objected, That such a sort of Government would expose
them to the Insolence and Injuries of those, who should have a mind to make War
on them, and violate their Faith. But this can but very rarely come to pass,
and the general sense of such Violences, and the ready Succors of the whole
Greek Nation would soon remedy such an Evil. And after all, Riches being the
certain Product of long Peace, they would never want Mercenaries for their
Money, whereby to strengthen themselves, and Garrison their Places of Defense;
while now in these our Days, out of a vain fear of what is very unlikely ever
to happen, their Jealousies one of another beget nothing but War and Violence;
and the mutual Destruction of each other. We have thus lightly touched this
subject in our way, to give a hint only to the Eleans of their proper Interest,
and the rather inasmuch as they can never hope to see a more favorable
conjuncture, whereby to regain their lost Rights and Privileges. In a word, if
the Eleans chance at this Day to retain any kind of preference to their ancient
manner of Country Employments, it seems to be no other than some faint remains
of their old Customs, which are not yet quite extinguished.

Hence then it came to pass, that when Philip fell in upon them, so many
Prisoners were taken, and yet that so many notwithstanding made their escape
into their Towns. To the Fortress of Thalame especially many resorted, where
they secured much Cattle, and great quantities of their Movables; that Place
being strongly situate, and the Avenues difficult, and standing remote from all
Commerce, and almost every way inaccessible. But when the King became informed,
that many of the Enemy had retired thither, he thought himself obliged to
attempt (at least his best) to dislodge them: Wherefore having first gained all
the difficult Passes, whereby his Army might march with security, he left his
Baggage in the Camp, guarded with a good part of his Army, and taking with him
only his Buckler-men, and light-armed Troops, marched through the Defiles which
lead toward Thalame. Those who were within the place, terrified at his
approach, having been but little conversant in War, and wanting every thing for
their defense; and there being great numbers of the baser sort of People mixed
with them, soon submitted, albeit they had a strength with them of two hundred
Mercenary Soldiers that had been brought thither by Amphidamas an Officer of
the Eleans.

As soon as Philip was Master of Thalame, and the Booty they had there lodged,
together with five Hundred Men, who were made Prisoners, and much Cattle of all
sorts, he returned back to his Camp. And now his Army being over-charg'd with
Booty, whereby they became greatly hindered in their march, and all Military
Expeditions, he found it necessary to retire further, and re-encamp at Olympia.

Among the Tutors and Governors left by Antigonus to King Philip, who came a
Child to the Crown, Apelles was one, who had preserved a powerful influence
over the young Prince. This Person then having conceived a project of reducing
the Achaians to the state wherein the Thessalians then were, began his Design
by means malicious enough: For though it seemed to him, that the Thessalians were
a free People, and lived in the enjoyment of all their Rights and Liberties,
and their Condition quite otherwise than that of the Macedonians; nevertheless,
he was therein deceived, for there was little or no difference between them,
the Thessalians living liable to the same usage with the Macedonians, being
obliged to do and submit to every thing the great Men of the Kingdom thought
fit. Now forasmuch as Apelles bent all his Thoughts toward the compassing his
Design, his first essay was on the Patience of the Achaian Soldiers, who served
at that time in the Army; he therefore caused the Macedonians frequently to
dislodge them, and possess their Quarters, when they found them at any time
better provided than themselves; and often to deprive them of their Plunder. In
a word, he caused them to be severely treated by the common Executioners on
every slight occasion: And if at any time they complained, or the Soldiers
appeared to rescue their Friends from such hard Treatment, he caused them to be
taken into Custody; conceiving, that by this sort of usage, he should be able,
by degrees, and unobserved to bring the Achaians to bear by Custom any burden
the King should think fit to lay upon them.

Thus Apelles was not without hopes of compassing his purpose, from his having
observed, that heretofore in the time of Antigonus, the Achaians cheerfully
underwent many Hardships, to purchase their exemption from the Authority of
Cleomenes. But so it chanced, that certain Achaian Soldiers, provoked by this
Usage, assembled themselves, and went and imparted the Project and Practice of
Apelles to Aratus: Who thereupon applied himself to the King, to obtain a
Remedy for this Evil ere it got a head. Philip now informed of what had been
done, called these Soldiers to him, and gave them assurance that care should be
taken for the future, that no such Injury should be offered them, bidding them
rely on his Word; and accordingly he ordered Apelles to determine nothing at
any time about the Achaian Soldiers, without first communicating with their
Praetor, or Chief Officer. Thus Philip acquired a mighty Reputation, not only
among his own Subjects, but throughout all Peloponnesus; as well by his manner
of Treatment of the Allies in the Camp, as by his personal Courage, Vigilance,
and Abilities in War. And in truth it would have been hard to find a Prince to
whom Nature had been more bountiful in those Gifts and Qualities, that are
found necessary to the acquisition of Power and Empire: His Understanding was
clear, his Memory excellent, and his Person and Fashion bore the Majesty he
held; but his brightest Virtues were his Resolution and Military Abilities. But
in regard it would be too long a digression, to recount here how it came to
pass that he lost this excellent Character, and from a great King became a
Tyrant; we will therefore referr that Story to a more proper place.

King Philip then decamping from Olympia, marched toward Pharae, and soon
after came to Telphussa, and from thence to Heraea, where he caused all the
Booty to be sold. Here he ordered a Bridge to be made over the River Alpheus,
whereby to facilitate his passage into the Territory of the Tryphalians. At the
same time Dorimachus Praetor of the Aetolians, sent six hundred of that Nation
under the Command of Phylidas, to the Aid of the Eleans, who had demanded
Succors against those that wasted their Country. Phylidas on his arrival
joining five hundred Mercenaries to his own Troops, who were listed into the
Aetolian Pay, and adding to them a thousand of the City-Bands, together with
certain Tarentines, marched to the relief of the Tryphalians. This Country
takes its Name from an Arcadian Boy called Tryphalus: It stands in the Maritime
parts of Peloponnesus, between the Eleans and Messenians, looking toward the
Lybian Sea, on the skirts of Achaia toward the North-West. The Towns of this
Country are Samicum, Lepreum, Hypana, Typanaea, Pyrgus, Aepyum, Bolax,
Styllagium, and Phryxa. The Eleans having of late days subdued and reduced all
these Places to their Obedience, to which they added Alipheraea, heretofore an
Arcadian Town; and Megalopolis it self, by the procurement of Alliadas, while
the Sovereignty was in his hand, which was negotiated by way of exchange, for
certain Reasons best known to him and the Eleans.

The King being now quit of his Plunder and Baggage, passing the Alpheus which
runs by the Walls of Heraea, came to Alipheraea: This Town is seated on an
Eminence, which lies steep and sloping every way, being an ascent of above a
Mile to the top, where stands a Fortress, in which there is a Statue of Brass
of Minerva, famous for its Magnitude and the Excellence of the Workmanship. The
Inhabitants themselves can give no very clear account why it was there placed,
nor at whose Charge it was done. But as to the Workmen, all conclude it to have
been wrought by the hands of Hecatodorus and Sostratus; and that it is the most
beautiful and finished Piece they ever performed. Philip having ordered those
who carried the Scaling-Ladders to be ready by Daybreak, at certain places
assigned them, sent his Mercenaries before, and to sustain them a Body of
Macedonians, giving them Orders to begin all together to mount the Hill, at the
instant the Sun appeared above the Horizon: Which Directions were punctually
and with great Resolution observed by the Macedonians. Those of the place
hastening to that part where they saw the Macedonians in greatest number, gave
the King opportunity at the head of a Party of chosen Men, to pass unobserved
by those of the Fortress, over certain broken Grounds, full of Rocks and
Precipices: From whence giving the Signal, they approached with their Ladders
to mount the Works. Philip himself first enters, and takes possession of an
unguarded part of the Place, which he immediately sets in a flame; whereupon
those, who were defending the Wall, beholding all on fire, terrified at the
Danger they saw so near them, and fearing they should lose the Citadel, which
was their last Refuge, forthwith abandoned the Defense of their Wall, and
hastened thither. Whereupon the Macedonians became presently Masters of the
Works and the Town. But those who were retreated to the Citadel, soon sent to
the King, and, on composition for their Lives, yielded it up. This Success
spread Fear throughout all the Country of Tryphalia, and every one began to
deliberate how to preserve themselves and save their Country.

As to Phylidas, he having quitted Typanaea, and committed some Spoils on the
Allies, retired to Lepreum. For in those times, the Confederates of the
Aetolians were accustomed, though in Amity, not only to be by them deserted in
their greatest straits, but suffered themselves to be plundered and betrayed by
them; and endured at their hands (who called them Friends) all the Outrages
that could be feared from a conquering Enemy. Those of Typanaea gave up their
City to King Philip; and the Hypanaeans followed their example. In the mean
time, the Phialians having understood what passed in Tryphalia, detesting the
Aetolian League, resolutely took possession of the Palace, where the Polemarchs
or Magistrates resided. As to the Aetolian Pilferers, who held their abode at
Phialia, with design to spoil from thence the Lands of the Messenians, and were
at that time consulting about enterprizing something on the Phialians
themselves; when they came to understand that the Inhabitants were determined
to stand on their guard, and repel Force by Force, they thereupon changed their
purpose, and after having taken certain Security of those of the Town, they
marched out with all their Baggage; whereupon the Phialians dispatched their
Deputies to the King, giving their Town and Country up to his discretion.

During these Transactions, the Lepreans seizing a quarter of the Town into
their hands, attempted to force out of the Citadel, the Aetolians, Eleans, and
the Troops that had been sent to their relief by the Lacedaemonians. But
Phylidas at first set light by this their Attempt, seeming resolved to do his
best to preserve the Town in Obedience, and terrify the Inhabitants. But on
Philip's sending Taurion with part of the Army toward Phialia, and himself now
drawing near, his Courage began to sink; whereupon the Lepreans grew more
assured, and did an Action in that occasion very memorable. For albeit there
were at that time in the Town a thousand Eleans, five hundred Aetolians, and
two hundred Lacedaemonians, and the Citadel over and above in their hands; they
had nevertheless the Resolution to enterprise the delivering of their Country,
and would not consent to betray themselves by a slavish Fear or Submission.
Wherefore Phylidas perceiving the Citizens determination, marched together with
the Eleans and Lacedaemonians out of the Town; as to the Cretans, who had been
sent by the Spartiatae, they returned by the way of Messina to their own
Country, and Phylidas retreated to Samicum. As soon as the Lepreans became
Masters of their Liberty, they dispatched their Deputies to Philip to make
tender of their City, and put it into his hands. After the King had given them
Audience, he dispatched a part of his Troops to Leprea; and continued his march
with his Buckler-men, and light-armed Troops, being determined to attack
Phylidas; who (with the loss of all his Plunder and Baggage) was, as we said,
retreated to Samicum, whither the King speedily came, and encamped in view of
the Place; and sending This Orders for the rest of his Troops to join him from
Leprea, made countenance of resolving to besiege it. Whereupon the Eleans and
Aetolians, who were unprovided for Defense; and had nothing but the bare Walls
to trust to began to capitulate; so it was agreed they should march out with
their Arms; from whence they went to Elea. Thus the King became Master of
Samicum. And now upon the Supplication of the Towns round about, he received
them all into his Protection; as, namely, Phryxa, Styllagium, Epia, Bolax,
Pyrga, and Epitalia, and so marched back to Leprea, having in the space of six
Days compassed the Reduction of all Tryphalia to his Obedience.

After some Conference with the Lepreans, suiting the time and occasion, he put
a Garrison into the Citadel, and led his Army toward Heraea, leaving Ladicus
the Acarnanian his Governor in Tryphalia. Upon his arrival at Heraea, he
ordered the Booty to be divided and distributed to the Soldiers; and after he
had victual'd the Army, and supplied himself with all things necessary, he
departed from Heraea, being then midwinter, and marched toward Megalopolis.

While Success thus waited on the Arms of King Philip in Tryphalia, Chilon the
Lacedaemonian, conceiving the Right of Succession to the Crown to be in him,
and not longer able to suffer the Injury that had been done him by the Ephori,
(who in his wrong had preferred Lycurgus to the Royalty) was determined to
attempt something toward doing himself Justice. Wherefore being persuaded he
should win much on the People, if by the example of Cleomenes (and many others)
he gave them hopes of a new division of the Lands; he by that means meditated
how to put his Enterprise in effect. After he had imparted his purpose then to
his Friends, whereof there were no less than two hundred, who engaged in the
Conspiracy, he resolved to lose no time. But forasmuch as he well knew, that
Lycurgus and the Ephori who had elected him, were the main Impediment, he first
attacked them, and surprising the Ephori as they sat at Table, killed them
there. Thus did Fortune bring those Men to suffer what their Practices had
demerited; for whether we consider either the Actor, or the Action, it cannot
but be confessed their end was just. After they had dispatched the Ephori,
Chilon hastens to the House of Lycurgus, but chanced there to be disappointed;
he, by the help of his Friends and Servants being secretly conveyed away,
making his escape to Pellene, by private ways, unknown to his Enemy. And now
though Chilon failed of effecting the most important part of his Enterprise, and
had but an indifferent prospect of Success; nevertheless, he was under a
necessity of prosecuting what he had began. Wherefore going into the
Marketplace, he there attacks and kills all he could find, whom he knew to be
his Enemies; greatly animating his Friends and Relations, and giving some hopes
to the Multitude. But beholding at length when he had done all, that few or
none took part with him; on the contrary finding himself in danger, he secretly
withdrew and departed; taking his way through the Territory of Laconia, and so
escaped into Achaia, when he lived as a banished Man.

The Lacedaemonians apprehending the approach of King Philip, secured their
Effects in the Country, slighted Athenaeum of the Megalopolitans, and
dismantled the Works.

Thus the People of Sparta, who had long lived in the enjoyment of so excellent
a form of Government, from the time that Lycurgus gave them their Laws; and who
held so great a share of Power and Reputation till the Ba^tel of Leuctra, sell
at length (when Fortune had forsaken them) into deplorable Calamities. Their
Reputation diminished every day intestine jarrs vexed and tormented them, under
color of dividing their Lands, till is the end they were brought so low as to
submit to the Tyranny of Nabis, who heretofore could not brook to hear so much
as the Name of Tyrant. But enough has been said by others on the subject of the
ancient Lacedaemonians and their Actions, and every Body knows what befell them,
as soon as Cleomenes had subverted the established Laws and Form of their
Republic; nor shall we omit to make further mention of them as occasion shall
be given. From Megalopolis Philip marched his Troops by the way of Tegaea to
Argos, where he passed the remainder of the Winter; having acquired a
Reputation much greater than his Age promised, through the many, noble, and
early Actions he had already performed. In the mean time, Apelles (of whom we
have already spoken) had not so given over his Project as to be without hopes,
as was plainly seen, of bringing by degrees the Achaians Necks to the Yoke. But
he well knew that Aratus, both Father and Son, withstood his Design, and that
the King held them in singular esteem, especially the Father, who had been in
great Reputation with Antigonus, and was known to be a very powerful Man among
the Achaians; and the King himself, I say, valued him for his Prudence and
great Abilities. Wherefore Apelles resolved to attack these two, and by fraud
and address do his best to ruin them with King Philip. Pursuant to which, he
first carefully informs himself of their Enemies, and all who among the
Achaians were of the opposite Faction; and being well instructed in their
several Interests and Characters, he sends for them to Court; and on their
Arrival, employs all his Arts to win and engage them to his Friendship, acting
in their Favor with the King, whom he labored to persuade, That if he
continued to treat the Aratuses with so much Deference, he could never hope to
gain any thing on the Achaians, further than what was stipulated by the
Articles of the Confederacy. But if he should please to countenance and
encourage those he should recommend, he would soon compass whatever he desired,
and dispose of all Matters in Peloponnesus at his pleasure. Furthermore, the
time of Election of their Praetor drawing nigh, he resolved to do his best to
conferr that Dignity on one of his own Party, and to diminish by all means
possible the Power of the Aratuses Administration, as being in no wise proper
for his use in the Part he had to act; whereupon he prevailed with the King to
go as it were in Progress to Aegium, and to be present at the Achaian Assembly.
So Philip followed his Counsel, and failed not to be there in due time; where
Apelles by Threats on the one hand, and Persuasion on the other, compassed with
great difficulty the Election of Eperatus the Pharian, to the Praetorship, in
preference to Timoxenus, who had been set up by Aratus.

Soon after, the King departed from Aegium, marching the Army toward Patroe
and Dymas, and came to the Fortress of Tichos, which stands on the Borders of
the Dymaeans, and whereof, as has been elsewhere observed, Euripidas had been
long before possessed. The King then being very desirous to win back this
Castle, and restore it to the Dymaeans, encamped with the whole Army by it;
whereupon the Elean Garrison within became so terrified, that they quickly
delivered it up. This place, though but small, is exceeding strong; it is not in
circuit above a Furlong, but the Walls are not less than five and fifty Foot
high. So the King restored it to the Dymaeans, and then led his Army into the
Country of the Eleans, wasting and plundering far and wide; and after he had
laden the Soldiers with Booty, returned back to Dymas-Apelles, who began now
to think he had advanced far in his Enterprise; having obtained an Achaian
Praetor of his Faction, he renewed his Attempts on the Aratuses, being
determined totally to destroy their Interest with the King. He pursued them
then with Calumnies, which he thus managed: Amphidamus, chief of the Eleans,
who had been taken Prisoner at Thalame, (whither he was retired, as has been
told) being brought among others to Olympia, so wrought by the mediation of
Friends, that he was admitted to a Conference with the King; in which Audience
he persuaded him, That it would be no difficult matter to procure him the
Friendship of the Eleans, and that he well knew by what means to effect it, and
make that People covet his Alliance. The King being wrought to believe him,
forthwith discharged him without Ransom; impow'ring him to assure the Eleans,
That on condition of their entering into League with him, all their Prisoners
should be enlarged Ransom-free: That he would protect their Country from
Plunder, and all the wasteful effects of War, and confirm and preserve their
rightful Liberties, so as they should live in the entire enjoyment of all their
Privileges, and be exempt both from Garrisons and Tribute. And now albeit these
Overtures contained so much favor, and might be thought sufficient to engage
them; nevertheless the Eleans would not be drawn to listen to them, but
remained immovable.

This incidence armed Apelles with Calumnies against the Aratuses, who charged
them with Insincerity to the King, and that they did not, as they ought, serve
the Interest of the League in which they were engaged with the Macedonians,
telling the King, if the Eleans had shown any aversion to his Friendship, it
was wholly due to the Artifices of the Aratuses: That, in short, upon
Amphidomus's departure from Olympia toward Elis, they took an occasion to have
Conference with him, and so prevailed, that he became of another Mind, and
changed his Purpose; being by them persuaded, That it would be in no wise for
the Interest of the Peloponnesians, that King Philip should acquire any Power
over the Eleans; and that this was the cause why the Eleans received the King's
Proposals so coldly, and persisted in their Confederacy with the Aetolians, and
endured so patiently the Mischiefs they suffered from the Macedonians.

As soon as Philip had heard these things, he ordered the two Aratuses to be
sent for, to the end he might confront them with their Accuser, who should be
obliged to charge them to their Faces with these Matters, whereof they had been
accused to him in private. Whereupon they came and heard what Apelles had to
say; who charged them roundly and with great assurance, and a Countenance full
of Menaces; adding, in the King's Presence (who had not yet spoken) That since
the King had discovered their Ingratitude to him, and that they had rendered
themselves so unworthy of his good Offices, he had therefore deliberated on
calling an Assembly of the Achaians, to whom he would impart the Cause, and
then return with his Army into Macedon. Whereupon the elder Aratus replied,
praying the King not over-hastily to give credit to what he heard; and that
whenever he should stand accused of any Matters to him, by any Friend or
Ally, he would vouchsafe to fift^ and examine every thing with Caution, before
he came to believe a Calumnious Impeachment against him: That furthermore, as
it became the Justice of a Prince so to do, so the thing in it self was
advantageous to him: That in the mean time, it would be but fair-dealing in
Apelles to cause those Persons to be produced who were Witnesses to the
Conference, whereof he had been accused, and the Person likewise himself who
had given Apelles the Information: That, in short, nothing ought to be omitted,
whereby the King might arrive at the certain Truth of the Matter, before he
should determine to discover any thing thereof in the Assembly of the Achaians.
The King became of Aratus's Mind; and replied, That he would not in any wise
resolve hastily, but would carefully first inform himself in every particular
of the Matter; and thereupon dismissed the Company. Not long after this
Controversy (over and above that Apelles never produced any Proof of the
Accusation) a chance happened, which greatly favored the Cause of Aratus.
Amphidamus falling under suspicion of the Eleans, about the Time Philip was
wasting their Country, they had therefore formed a Design to secure his Person,
and sending him Prisoner to the Aetolians. But he having some suspicion of
their Purpose, withdrew himself, and escaped first to Olympia; afterward being
informed, that the King intended to remain some Days at Dymas, where he divided
the Booty, he departed from thence, and came thither to him. Aratus was well
pleased with the Escape and Arrival of Amphidamus; he therefore with the
assurance of an innocent Man, prayed the King to order him to be brought to his
Presence, who without Controversy would be best able of all others rightly to
inform him, he being a principal Person to whom the Secret was said to be
imparted, adding, That there could be no doubt of his Sincerity in the Relation
he should give, considering he had been compelled now to abandon his Country on
the score of the King, and had no other recourse but to him. This Request of
Aratus was thought but reasonable; wherefore Amphidamus was brought to the
King, by whom the untruth of the Accusation was made to appear. This proved the
occasion that the Good will of King Philip grew now more and more toward
Aratus, whom he held in very great consideration; and, on the contrary, of his
change toward Apelles, whom he came by degrees to dislike: Howbeit, he
dissembled that and many other things all he could, through the long possession
of Power he had acquired with him.

In the mean time, Apelles neglects not to pursue his Design, prevailing to
have Taurion, who was Governor for the King in Peloponnesus, to be removed
from that Trust; not by any Accusation he preferred against him, but more
artfully by praising his Abilities, and that it was for the King's better
Service to have him present with him in his Wars and Expeditions; when his
meaning was, to have it in his Power to provide a Governor of his own stamp in
Peloponnesus. Thus by this new way are Praises converted into Calumnies, and
Men are undone by Recommendation. A malicious refined Artifice, forged and put
in practice by those who live in the Courts of Princes, the effects of
Jealousy and Ambition. Furthermore, Apelles took all occasions to diminish the
Credit of Alexander with the King, who had the Command of his Guards, to the
end he might have it in his Power likewise to dispose of that Place, and, to
conclude all in a word, bent his utmost Endeavors to introduce a total Change
in the established Order of Government, which had been left by Antigonus; though
that Prince, while he lived, ruled the Kingdom and the young King with great
Wisdom, and at his Death provided as wisely for every thing. For in his Will he
left his Reasons to the Macedonians, of the whole Method of his Conduct, and
laid down Rules and Prescriptions for their future Government; appointing to
whom the administration of Affairs should be committed; and aiming by all means
possible so to settle the Kingdom, as to leave no motive of Dissension or
Discord among the Ministers and others, whom they should employ. Wherefore he
nominated Apelles for one of the young King's Tutors, who at that time was
jointly trusted with him in other Matters. To Leontius he gave the Command of
the Buckler-men; Megalea was made Secretary; Taurion was appointed Governor of
Peloponnesus; and Alexander had the Command of the King's Guards.

But in conclusion, Megalea and Leontius being Creatures of Apelles, he
disposed them as he pleased, and therefore set all his Arts at work to remove
Alexander and Taurion from Authority, that himself might have the Power, or
execute it by instruments of his own; all which Designs, he had in great
likelihood brought to pass had he not engaged in that secret War with Aratus.
Wherefore he came at length to feel the smart of his Folly; and reaped the
Wages of his Ambition; it being his Lot to suffer those Evils he was preparing
for others. But we will not prosecute his Story here, but leave to another
place the recital of the manner and reasons of all that befell him, it being now
time to put an end to this Book.

In conclusion then, after these things were brought to pass, which we have
been relating, King Philip returned to Argos, where he spent the Winter among
his Friends, sending in the mean time his Army into Macedon.

Finis Lib. IV.
POLYBIUS'S General History OF THE TRANSACTIONS OF THE WORLD.
VOL. II. BOOK V.
THE Year of the younger Aratus's Praetorship expired about the time of the The
beginning of April.
rising of the Pleiades (for so the Achaians computed) who was succeeded by
Eperatus; Dorimachus holding then that Trust in Aetolia. About the same time
Hannibal, having openly declared War against the Romans, departed from
New-Carthage, and passing the River Eber, entered on the execution of his
Design, and began his march toward Italy. While at Rome Tiberius Sempronius
was dispatched toward Africa, and Pub. Cornelius Scipio toward Spain at the
Head of their Armies. Furthermore, Antiochus and Ptolomy, coming to despair by
Conferences and Embassies to compose the Differences that were grown between
them about the Lower Syria, had likewise entered into Hostility one with
another.

As to King Philip, he coming to want Money and Provisions for his Army, had
convocated by their Magistrates the Assembly of the Achainas; which according
to custom was held at Aegium. Where perceiving Aratus (ill satisfied with the
Practices of Apelles) had willingly resigned his Authority; and finding
Eperatus unqualify'd for business, and in no esteem with the People, he came at
length to discern the foul play of Apelles and Leontius, which renewed his
esteem for Aratus, whom he now considered more than ever. Not long after,
having prevailed with the Magistrates, that their next Convention should be at
Sicyon, he there had private Conference with the two Aratus's; and imputing all
that had passed to the Artifices of Apelles, prayed them to forget their
Wrongs, and continue him in the same degree of Affection as heretofore.
Whereupon coming to a new Accord, the King went to the Assembly, where without
difficulty he obtained by their procurement all he defir'd toward the
furtherance of his Affairs. The Achaians then decreed, That as soon as the Army
should begin to march, fifty Talents should be advanced to the King, being
three Months pay to the Army; together with Ten Thousand Measures of Corn. And
it was also further resolved, That while the King made War in Person in
Peloponnesus, he should receive seventeen Talents Monthly. After these Acts of
the Assembly they separated, and retired to their respective Cities.

And now, when the Army began to move from their Winter Quarters, it was
resolved by the King in Council, to prosecute the War likewise by Sea;
concluding it to be the only means whereby to surprise and attack the Enemy
from all Quarters, by making descents and invading them, where their Towns were
distant and remote from Succor; whereby every one would be obliged to consult
their own single Safety through the uncertainty of their Motions, and it would
be in their power to carry their Arms with more case, whithersoever they should
judge it most expedient; for they had to do at once with the Aetolians,
Lacedaemonians, and Eleans. After this had been resolved, the King ordered the
Fleet, both his own and the Achaian Ships to Rendezvous at the Port of
Lechoeum, where he commanded the Soldiers of the Macedonian Phalanx to be
exerciz'd and instructed in the use of the Oar; for the Macedonians apply
themselves cheerfully to every thing, and learn with facility whatsoever they
go about. And, in short, are no less brave and active by Sea than by Land. No
People endure Hardship better, or are more patient of Labor, whether it be in
their Fortifications and Encampments, or any other painful or hardy Employments
incident to the Life of a Soldier. In conclusion, Hesiod seems to give us their
Picture in his Character of the Aeacidoe.

To whom soft Ease and Lust less Pleasure yield,
Than Martial Toils and Perils of the Field.
While King Philip and the Macedonians remained at Corinth, employed about
their Naval Preparations; Apelles who could not brook the diminution of his
Credit, nor work any change in the Mind of his Master, entered into Compact
with Leontius and Megaleas; with whom it was agreed, that they, on their part,
who were to act in the Army about the King, should labor with their best Arts
secretly to thwart and obstruct him in all his Designs; while he making his
abode at Chalcis, would take care so to shorten and retard his Supplies of
every thing from all Parts, that he should be so streighten'd on that side,
that the want of Necessaries to the advancing his Expeditions should be a great
impediment to his Progress. After Matters had been thus concerted between them,
this crafty old Courtier soon found reasons whereby to dispose the King to
approve of his Voyage to Chalcis, whither he went; and where he performed
Articles so punctually with the other two, that he brought the King under such
streights, that he became constrained to pawn his Plate to supply his Wants. As
soon as the Naval Army was drawn together, and it was thought the Macedonians
were now sufficiently exercised, and instructed in the management of the Oar;
the King, causing Bread and Pay to be distributed to the Soldiers, embarked
with Six Thousand Macedonians, and Twelve Hundred Mercenaries, and steered his
Course toward Patroe, where he arrived the next Day after his departure from
Corinth.

About the same time Dorimachus the Aetolian Praetor dispatched Agelaus and
Scopas with Five Hundred new raised Candiots to the Aid of the Eleans. For
these being under some apprehension that the King had some design on Cyllene,
had taken Foreign Troops into their Pay, and levied others of their own
Subjects, and took care to Fortify and Garrison that Place. Wherefore Philip
composing a Body of all the Stranger-Troops, of the Achaians, the Candiots that
were with him, some Gaulish Horse, and Two Thousand choice Achaian Foot, put
them into Dyma; both for a reserve, if occasion should require, and to
strengthen and secure that Place in case the Eleans should have a mind to
attempt any thing that way. Then sending his Dispatches to the Messenians,
Epirots, Acarnanians, and Scerdilaidas, requiring them to hasten with their
Ships, and meet him at Cephalenia, he parted from Patroe at a Day prefixed, and
came to Pronos a Port of that Island. Where observing the very great difficulty
of succeeding by laying siege to that Place, the Country about it being very
straight, he proceeded further, and steered toward the Town of Pale: Here
finding plenty of Corn on the Ground whereby to sustain his Army, he
disembark'd, and sat down before that Place, drawing his Vessels ashore, and
securing them with a good Ditch and Palissado, he sent out his Macedonians to
Forage, while he approached to view the Place, whereby to make a Judgment,
where he might best apply his Engines to the Walls; it being his purpose there
to attend the coming of the Confederate Forces, and to become Master of that
Place, thereby to deprive the Aetolians of the Benefit it yielded them: For
whenever they had any design of making a Descent on Peloponnesus or to plunder
the Coast of Epirus or Acarnania, they made use of the Vessels of Cephalenia.
Furthermore, he considered this Town would make a safe retreat both for himself
and Friends, and be of great use to them in all their Attempts on the Enemy on
that side. For Cephalenia stands not far from the Gulf of Corinth, looking
likewise toward the Sicilian Sea, and that part of the Coast of Peloponnesus,
that lies North and North-West; and is in the Neighborhood chiefly of the
Epirots, Eleans, Aetolians, and Acarnanians, whose Coast trends away West and
South-West.

This Town then lying so commodiously for assembling the Forces of the
Confederates, for annoying the Enemy, and protecting of Friends and Allies; the
King was therefore very desirous to get the Island into his possession. After
he had well considered that a great part of the Town was environed by the Sea,
and by Rocks that were inaccessible, and that there was but one small spot of
good Ground lying toward the way of Zacinthus, whereby they might approach, he
therefore resolved there to apply his Engines, and make that the principal
Attack. In the mean time, there joined him fifteen Vessels sent by
Scerdilaidas; for the Commotions that had happened in Illyria among the
Governors of those Provinces, who had fallen into dangerous Dissentions among
themselves, was the cause he could not send a greater Supply, Aids came
likewise from the Epirots, Acarnanians, and Messenians; for after the taking of
Phialea, the Messenians readily took their share of the War.

And now, when all things were prepared, and the Machines for casting of Stones
and Darts in a readiness, the King ordered them to approach the Walls, after he
had encouraged his own People, and had began to sap their Works. The
Macedonians then who wrought cheerfully at the Work, had soon undermined a
great part of the Wall, strongly sustaining the Burden with great Posts of
Wood as they proceeded, whereupon the King summoned the Town to surrender: But
they having no disposition to submit, he ordered Fire to be applied to the
Props that sustained the Wall, whereupon a Breach was quickly made. Then he
ordered the Bucklermen, who were under the Command of Leontius, (dividing them
into Parties) to march to the Attack, and enter the Town over the Ruins of the
Breach. But Leontius, mindful of the Agreement he had made with Apelles,
withheld certain forward Men, who were already advanced to the top of the
Breach from proceeding any further. And having before corrupted some of the
principal Officers of the Army, and acting his own part but coldly, it came to
pass, that after great loss of their Men, they were beaten off, when they had
the fairest opportunity that could be wished of taking the Town. When the King
therefore had considered the backwardness of his Officers, and that the
Macedonians had much suffered in this Attack, he raised the Siege, calling a
Council to debate what was best next to be done.

While King Philip was thus busy here, Lycurgus marched with an Army into the
Territory of the Messenians, and Dorimachus with part of the Aetolian Forces
into Thessaly, both with the same design of obliging the King to raise the
Siege. Whereupon Ambassadors were dispatched to him from the Acarnanians and
Messenians. Those from Acarnania proposing his falling on the Lands of the
Aetolians, so to compel Dorimachus, by spoiling the Country, to return to their
relief. But the Messenians prayed present Succors; adding, That now while the
Etesian Winds blew, they might in a Day's fail gain their passage from
Cephalenia to the Coast of Messenia; where Gorgus the Messenian was of Opinion,
they might endanger the surprising of Lycurgus, and that the Enterprise
promised great advantage. Leontius, who saw this Counsel tended to his purpose,
strongly seconded the Advice, foreseeing that if the King followed it, he would
spend the whole Summer without effect.

In short, it was true, that to Messenia 'twas a short and easy passage, but
it was impossible to return back during the season of those Winds; so that in
all probability should the King have followed that Advice, he would have been
shut up in Messenia during the season of Action, without doing any thing to the
purpose, while the Aetolians would be at liberty to spoil at their ease, and
put all to Fire and Sword in Thessaly and Epirus. This Counsel therefore was
very pernicious; wherefore Aratus labored to divert the King, showing how much
better it was to fall on the Aetolians by Sea, and that the occasion of making
Descents with their Fleet was not to be lost, now that Dorimachus with the
Aetolian Forces was diverted elsewhere.

The King, who had already conceived a doubtful Opinion of Leontius, as well
through his late Behavior in the Siege, as by other grounds of suspicion he
had given him of his Fidelity, became inclined to follow the Counsel of Aratus:
Whereupon he writ to Eperatus the Achaian Praetor to assemble his Troops, and
march to the relief of the Messenians, while he himself weighing Anchor the
next Day, gained his passage under covert of the Night from Cephalenia to
Leucas; where all things having been duly prepared at the Isthmus of Dioryctus,
he caused his Vessels to be drawn over, and so passed into the Gulf of
Ambracia, which, as we have observed, comes out of the Sicilian Sea, and runs
far up into the Country of Aetolia. Having performed this Journey somewhat
before Day, he made sail toward a Town called Limnoea: Here causing the Army
to take a short refreshment, and to be in a readiness to march, and to take no
Baggage with them but what they could not be without; and having procured store
of good Guides, he became exactly informed by them of the nature and situation
of the Country and Towns, and instructed in every thing he had a mind to know.

Here Aristophontus the Acarnanian Praetor came to the King, at the head of all
the Forces of that People; for having been heretofore great Sufferers by the
Aetolians, they came with Minds full of Revenge, and to repay them in their own
Coin. Wherefore they embraced the occasion with great joy of being thus
assisted by the Macedonians; so that not only such as by the Law were obliged
to go to the War, but those who were exempted by their Age, listed themselves
for this Expedition. The Epirots incited by the like Motives, were not less
forward; though by reason of the great extent of their Country, and the sudden
arrival of King Philip, they were not so well able to draw their Troops
together. Dorimachus, as was noted, had led with him the one half of the
Aetolian Forces, leaving the other half at home, which he conceived would be
strength sufficient to answer any sudden occasion, and be guard enough to the
Towns and the Country. And now the King, leaving the Baggage under a good
Guard, departed in the close of the Evening from Limnoea; and after they had
marched about eight Miles, he caused the Army to halt to take some refreshment;
and after (...) short repast he continued his march, and by break of Day came
to the River Achelous, his purpose being to surprise the Town of Therme.

Leontius, who had two Reasons to conclude on the probability of his Master's
Success, and that all the present strength of the Enemy on that side would be
too little to defend them; for the Macedonian Army had surpised them, and came
both when and where they were least looked for, being persuaded that Philip
would not be so prodigal of his own proper safety, to hazard himself among such
Fastnesses and Defilees as the parts about Therme abound with. Wherefore
persisting in his treacherous purpose, he advised the King to incamp about the
River Achelous, to give some repose and refreshment to the Army after so hard a
Night's march; being willing to do his best at least, that the Aetolians might
have some small space to bethink them, and provide for their defense. But
Aratus, who judged rightly of the importance of the occasion, that it was now
favorable, but would not stay; and perceiving Leontius openly now to withstand
all wholesome Counsel, and promising Designs, urged Philip by no means to
consent to the least delay, nor upon any reason whatsoever respite his March,
the success whereof lay in the dispatch. Wherefore the King approving his
Advice, would not be drawn to make the least stay; but after the Army had
passed the River, marched away directly toward Therme, putting all to Fire and
Sword that lay in his way. On his Left he marched by Stratus, Agrinium and
Thestium; on his Right he left Conope, Lysimachia, Triconium and Phoeteum: Then
he arrived at a Place called Metapa, standing on the entrance of a Pass or
Defilee near the Lake of Trichonium, about eight Miles distant from Therme.
Wherefore he took possession of that Place, which had been abandoned by the
Aetolians, and strengthened it with a Garrison of five hundred Men; forecasting;
it might be of use to him, and be a good retreat in case he should be pressed
in his march in or out of the Defilee. For the Lake is surrounded with
mountainous and broken Ground, and enclosed every where else with thick and
unpassable Woods, leaving no access but by this straight and difficult Passage.
In short the King ordered his march after this manner: In the Van of the Army
marched the Mercenaries, after them the Illyrians; then the Buckler-men and the
Legionaries of the Macedonian Phalanx; in the Rear of all marched the Candiots,
the Thracians, and light-armed Troops covering the Right; their Left being
defended by the Lake.

After they had marched a while by thi^ Straight, they came to a Place called
Pamphia, where the King placed a Guard, and (...) prosecuted his way to Therme,
by a Passag^ not only broken and difficult, but barrac^do'd and bounded on both
sides by stee^ Rocks, and so narrow in many places, that the Passage it self
was not without danger. Thi^ Desilee, though at least four Miles long, Phili^
soon passed; the Macedonians marching like Soldiers in pursuit of Victory, and
arriv^ near Therme when it was now broad Day As soon as the Army was encamped,
he permitted the Soldiers to plunder and ravage fat and wide, and to spoil and
plunder both the Town and Territory, which abounded not only in Corn, and all
sorts of Provision and Military Stores, but in the Town was found great
quantities of the most valuable Movables of the Aetolians. For over and above
that their Fairs were kept, and their Feasts celebrated there, and it was the
place where their Assemblies met, the Aetolians had lodged both for their use,
and the better security thereof, all they had that was most preciou^ in Therme,
in confidence that there was n^^ Place more secure, it having never at an^ time
before been visited by an Enemy, an^ by reason of its situation was held for
the Bulwark of Aetolia. Furthermore, through the long Peace they had enjoyed
all the Houses in the Neighborhood, and round about the Temple abounded so
much the more with costly Goods and Furniture. The Army remained that Night in
the Town, laden with all sorts of Plunder, and in the Morning, choosing out
what was most valuable and easy to be transported, they made an heap of the
rest, and burnt it before the Camp. They made choice likewise of the best Arms,
which they found in their Magazines, exchanging them for such of their own as
were less serviceable, burning the rest to the number of above fifteen thousand
Suits.

Hitherto their Proceedings were but just, and the War fairly made, but whether
what they did afterward will bear that Name, is a doubt: For calling to mind
what the Aetolians had done at Dium and Dodona, they were provoked not only to
burn and destroy the Portico's of the Temple and all the Ornaments thereof,
which were wrought with great Art and Expense. But not herewith contented, they
proceeded to demolish the very Walls, and levelled the Structure to the Ground.
Furthermore, they cast down all the Statues to the number of two thousand,
defacing and breaking in pieces the greatest part of those that were not
consecrated to, or erected in representation of the Gods. While to these they
reserved a Respect, ingraving on certain Stones those Verses, that were
afterward so much spoken of, being written by Samus Son of Chrysogonus, who had
been educated with the King, and began to give some proofs of his Wit:

Dium, behold how far our angry Shafts
Have pierced in thy Revenge!
In short, the Desolation was such as to strike the King himself and those
about him with a kind of Terror, while they believed however that they had not
over acted their Revenge, for the Sacrilegious Impieties of the Aetolians at
Dium. Nevertheless, we must take the libertty to be of a different Opinion, and
it will not be hard to discover whether we are in the right or no, by barely
enumerating some Examples of the Actions performed by the Ancestors of this
Prince, without seeking further. When Antigonus had overcome Cleomenes, King of
the Lacedaemonians in Battle, and compelled him to sly the Land, he thereby
became Master of Sparta. And albeit it was then in his Power to dispose of
them, both City and People at his pleasure; nevertheless, far from evil
entreating the vanquished, he restored them to their Liberty and Privileges,
and giving them other Marks of his Bounty, returned home to his Country; by
which Magnanimity he acquired the Title of Benefactor of the Lacedaemonians,
and their Redeemer, after his death; and won a glorious Name not only among
that People, but with the whole Nation of the Greeks.

King Philip, who began and laid the Foundation of the Macedonian Power,
raising his Family to that pitch of Greatness, gained not more by his Arms than
his Humanity, after he had vanquished the Athenians near Chaeronea. For as he
subdued those who encountered him in the Field by Force, so he reduced the
whole City and People of Athens by his Goodness and Moderation. Nor was it his
manner to give the Reigns to his Indignation in time of Hostility, nor to
pursue his Enemies by Arms any longer than till he had gotten it in his Power
to make them Examples of his Clemency. Thus by restoring the Athenian Prisoners
without Ransom; by giving decent Burial to those that were slain, and sending
their Bones by Antipater to Athens; and, in a word, by Clothing many of those
that returned home, he gave an easy Period to a most difficult Enterprise. For
by this Method and Greatness of Mind, he so charmed the proud Athenians, that
from Enemies they became Friends, and approved themselves ready to serve and
assist him on all occasions.

What shall we say of Alexander afterward? It Is true, his Indignation so far
transported him against the Thebans, that he razed their City, and sold the
Inhabitants by Outcry, yet he nevertheless forgot not what was due to the
Gods; expressly forbidding, that on no score whatever they should violate either
Temple or any Sacred Thing. When he passed into Asia, to revenge the Outrages
done by the Persians against the Greeks; he did his utmost, it is true, against
the People, and was willing to render their Punishment propo^tion'd to their
Fault; but still he spared the Temples, and every thing that was dedicated to
the Gods. Albeit the Persians, in the^^ Invasion of Greece, had therein
principally exercised their Rage. Philip then ought to have practiced according
to these excelle^^ Examples, whereby to give proof, that he did not succeed
these his glorious Ancestors less in Magnanimity, than in State and Authority.
But, in short, he labored all his Life long* to give proofs of his being
descended from Philip and Alexander, but too little care to imitate their
Virtues. Wherefore as his Actions had no resemblance with those of his
Predecessors, so his Reputation fell likewise short of that which they had
acquired. And it was visible by what he did at that time; for his Indignation
against the Aetolians wrought him to act the same Outrages he would be thought
to punish; and, as the Saying is, to remedy one Evil with another; but he
believed himself in the right, when he did no more than repay them measure for
measure: And while he himself incurred the same Guilt, to revenge the
Sacrileges of Dorimachus and Scopas, dreamed not that he should fall under the
same Imputation, and share the like Infamy. For to do our utmost to deprive an
Enemy of his Fortresses, Towns and Ports; and, in short, of all that can be
rightfully called their own; and even to pursue to destruction both them and
theirs, to compass Success to our Enterprises, is not accounted Criminal, or
against the Law of Arms, which compel to such Violences. But to act such Parts
as are neither profitable to our selves, nor a weakening to the Enemy; such as
casting down and defacing of Statues, destroying of Temples, and spoiling the
Ornaments; Who can reckon this other than Rage, and the effect of Madness? In a
word, it is the Office of a Man of Honor, though in Hostility with the vilest
Enemy, to pursue them no further than the Correction of their Faults, and the
Reparation of the Injuries they have sustained. To distinguish between the
Innocent and the Guilty, and not involve them in the same Punishment; and when
he cannot discriminate between them, he ought to preserve the Guilty for the
sake of the Innocent. For it is the Property of a Tyrant to be ever acting
Mischief, and to Reign by Violence; to hate his Subjects out of Fear, and be
detested by them. While it is the Character of a King, to be Beneficent to all
Mankind, to acquire the Love of his Subjects by Clemency and Acts of Grace, and
so to manage their Minds, that he shall not more desire to reign, than they to
be governed.

But Philip had no mind to walk by these wholesome Maxims; and if we reflect how
the Aetolians were likely to have understood it, in case he had pursued a less
violent course, and not profaned their Temples, and left his other Excesses
unacted; for my own part I take for granted, they would have been compelled to
consider him with Veneration, as (...) Prince abounding in Honor and Goodness;
and would themselves have been seized with remorse, for their own Inhumanities
at Dium and Dodona; while they knew it was in his power to have dealt them the
like usage, but was restrained by Motives of Clemency and Magnanimity. Most
certain it is, I say, that the Aetolians would have been driven to blush at
their own Proceeding, while they should behold King Philip, out of a truly
generous and Kingly Spirit, so mindful of his Duty toward the Gods, while he
was wreaking his Revenge on his Enemies. For what can be more Noble than to
vanquish our Foes by Virtue and Moderation! And how much more glorious and
safe, than to subdue them by Arms! Victory acquired by Force, compels
Obedience; but when it is gained by Gentleness and Humanity, it attracts it. The
one reduces not the stubborn Mind but at the cost of mighty Evils and grievous
Calamities, while the other leads us, and engages our Consent. Furthermore,
where Victory is won by Arms, the Soldier has his part of the Merit; but the
other way the Prince reaps all the Glory.

But it may be objected, That this Error was not entirely due to Philip, who
was then but young, but ought principally to be ascribed to the Counsels of
those about him; of which number were Aratus and Demetrius the Pharian: But it
will not be hard to determine which of those two was likeliest to give such
Advice, albeit he had not been then present at Council: For it will be nowhere
found in the whole Life of Aratus, that he ever acted any thing temerariously,
and without solid Deliberation; while, on the contrary, Demetrius never did any
thing but with precipitation. And we shall show, and plainly evidence by their
Behavior in the like Occurrences, the difference of the Minds and Manners of
these two Men, as occasion shall be given us.

But to return to our Story: Philip taking with him all that could conveniently
be carried, marched from Therme by the way he came. The Booty he ordered to go
in the Van, guarded by his heavy-arm'd Troops: The Rear guard was assigned to
the Acarnanians and mercenary Strangers, being himself extremely solicitous to
get his passage through the Streights with what expedition he could, thereby to
prevent the Aetolians, who in confidence of the Strength of those Fastnesses,
were likely enough to attempt their Rear in their march: Which, in short, came
to pass; for assembling to the number of about three thousand Men, under the
leading of Alexander the Trichonian, they let the Van of the Army march without
approaching, concealing themselves while the Macedonians kept the open Field:
But as soon as the Rear began to move, they marched into Therme, and fell on
and charged them roundly, insomuch that they put their Reer-Ranks into great
disorder; which the Aetolians perceiving, and favored by the advantage of
Ground, pressed them so much the more, killing many. But Philip in foresight of
what might happen, had ordered a Detachment of Illyrians, and some of his best
Buckler-men, to be lodged in ambush under color of a rising Ground; who
unexpectedly appearing, fell on the Enemy, who had now charged beyond them,
killing above a hundred of them, and taking as many Prisoners; the rest saved
themselves by flight among the Rocks and Woods.

After this repulse, those who marched in the Rear of the Army, set fire to
Pamphion; and having passed the Strait, joined the Macedonians again. Philip in
the mean time encamping near Metapa, to attend their coming up; and the next
Day, after he had ordered the Place to be demolished, he pursued his march, and
came and encamped near a Town called Acras; from whence departing the next day,
he pillaged the Country all along as he went till he came to Conope, where he
remained a day to refresh his Army; and then continued his marched toward
Stratus, along the River Achelous; where encamping out of shot of their Works,
on an Eminence that commands the Town, he from thence vexed and molested the
Inhabitants. But coming to understand that the Enemy had strengthened the
Garrison with a Recruit of Three Thousand Aetolians, and Five Hundred Candiots;
and none daring to adventure out against him, he decamped and marched to
Limnoea, purposing from thence to imbark. Nevertheless, as soon as the Rear of
the Army began to move, and was gotten some distance past the Town, a Party of
Aetolian Horse made a Sally, and charged them; these being backed by the
Candiots, and more Aetolians that came out to sustain them, compelled those in
the Reer-guard to face about and make head. At first it was an equal Dispute;
but as soon as the Illyrians came in to back the Mercenaries, the Aetolians
began to give Ground, and the Horse betook them to slight, and were pursued to
the very Gates of the Town, and at least a Hundred of them killed on the spot.
After this Repulse, those of the Town adventured no more out; and the Rear of
the Army mar^^'d without molestation, coming safe to the Camp, and to their
Vessels.

Here King Philip having commodiously Encamped the Army, sacrificed to the
Gods, and did other Acts of Devotion for the good success of that Expedition,
and at the same time gave his Officers a Royal Entertainment. In short, his
Attempt was looked on by all Men to have been very daring, to adventure as he
did among those dangerous and untravel'd places, which no Army had ever done
before. Nevertheless, he succeeded in his Enterprise, marching and returning in
safety, after he had thoroughly executed what he had designed. Wherefore to
express his Joy, he made a solemn Feast for his Officers; where Megaleas and
Leontius, who had been much disappointed, and looked with an evil Eye on the
good Fortune of their Master, having, as we have heard, complotted with Apelles
to give him all the Impediments they should be able, but could by no means
prevent the good Fortune which attended his Arms, were however present; though
their Behavior there expressed so much distaste, that it was not unobserved by
the King, and those about him; who thereby collected, that they had different
Sentiments from the rest, touching the prosperity of his Affairs. And now, when
all were well warmed with Wine, Megaleas and Leontius being obliged to do as
others did, came at length more openly to manifest their Minds; for being now
drunk, they went from place to place in search of Aratus; and meeting him as he
was returning from the Feast, they first attacked him with rude Language, and
afterward came to offer violence. Whereupon a Tumult arose, and the Soldiers
came about them from all Quarters, insomuch as the whole Camp was in disorder.
The King, upon notice hereof, immediately sent to appease the Tumult, and to
have an account how it happened: Where after Aratus had reported to him how
every thing had passed, and had vouched it by the Testimony of such as were
present, he retired to his Tent. Leontius, having in the mean time concealed
himself in the Crowd, privately withdrew.

The King being now fully informed of every thing, commanded Megaleas and
Crinon to be brought before him, whom he very severely reproved: But they were
not only not humbled and made sensible of their Fault, but adding Insolence to
their Error, plainly told the King, That they should not be drawn to change
their Mind, till they had been thoroughly revenged on Aratus. Whereupon the King,
greatly moved at this their Behavior, immediately condemned them in a Fine of
twenty Talents each, and put them under an Arrest; and sending the next Day for
Aratus, expressed his sense of the violence which had been offered him, giving
him assurance of his Protection, and that he would take due care to do him
right.

Leontius being informed how the King had proceeded with Megaleas, came boldly
to him, accompanied with a Party of his Buckler-men, thinking thereby to put
him into some apprehension, he being yet but young, and to awe him into another
Resolution touching the Offenders; wherefore he boldly demanded of him, who it
was that had presumed to lay hands on Megaleas, and cast him into Prisons? But
when the King firmly replied, and with an Assurance worthy of Himself, That
whatsoever had been done, was by his express Command, Leontius was confounded,
and betwixt Grief and Indignation retired from his Presence.

Here Philip embarked, and arrived with his Fleet soon after at Leucas; where
when he had directed those who had the charge of dividing the Booty to hasten
the distribution thereof: He assembled his Council, and fell to debate about
the Affairs of Megaleas; where Aratus charged him, and the rest of that
Faction, with all those criminal Practices we have noted. He farther laid to
their charge the Murder that had been committed after the departure of
Antigonus, and opened the whole Matter of the Conspiracy of Apelles, showing in
what manner they had obstructed the King's Business in the siege of Palaea. And
forasmuch as he urged nothing against them that was not vouched by solid
Reasons, and made evident by competent Witnesses; Megaleas and his Accomplices
became so hard set, that they had nothing to say in their defense; wherefore
they were with one Voice found Guilty. Crinon continued a Prisoner; but
Leontius became Caution for Megaleas, binding himself for the payment of the
Fine the King had laid on him. This was the success of the treasonable
Conspiracy of Apelles and his Adherents, which had quite another issue than
they looked for, having promised to themselves that they should oblige Aratus
to retire from the King out of fear; and that after they had removed the rest
of his Servants, who had any Trust about him, they should then Reign alone, and
Rule all as they list; but their Project failed them.

About the same time Lycurgus returned from Messina and Lacedaemon, having done
nothing worth recording: Afterward, on a second Expedition, he seized on
Tegaea; where the Inhabitants retiring into the Citadel, he resolved to besiege
it. But after many fruitless Attempts, despairing of Success, he was obliged to
march back to Sparta. In the mean while the Eleans made perpetual Inroads on
the Lands of Dymas, where the Horse of that Place, which marched out to succor
the Country, were drawn into an Ambush, and defeated with little difficulty.
Some Gauls were killed on the place, and certain of the Inhabitants made
Prisoners; among whom were Polymedes of Aegium, and Agesipolis and Megacles of
Dymas.

Dorimachus also took the Field with the Aetolian Troops, in confidence, as
has been noted, that he should be able to ravage Thessaly, and thereby oblige
the King to rise from before Palaea: But Chrysogonus and Patroeus prevented
them, being there ready to receive them with an Army; which obliged Dorimachus
to keep the Mountains, and not to adventure into the Plain Country. Who,
shortly after, being informed that the Macedonians had invaded Aetolia, marched
out of Thessaly, and hastened to the relief of his Country; but before he
arrived the King was retired. Thus Dorimachus coming always too late, made many
vain Expeditions.

In the mean time King Philip having embarked his Troops at Leucas, and
plundered the Coast of Hyanthes in his way, arrived with his Fleet at Corinth,
where landing his Army, and ordering the Vessels to be drawn over to the Port
of Lechoeum; he dispatched his Letters to all the Confederate Towns of
Peloponnesus, appointing them a Day when they were to Rendezvous their Troops
at Tegaea. And making but short stay at Corinth, he marched his Army by the way
of Argos, and came the next Day to Tegaea; where joining such of the Achaian
Horse as were there ready, he proceeded, marching over the Mountains with
design to fall by surprise on the Territory of the Lacedaemonians. And after
four Days march through a Desert Country, he gained the tops of those Eminences
that lie over against, and give a prospect of the City of Sparta, and leaving
Menelaium on his right, came close by Amycla.

The Lacedaemonians beholding his march from the Town were greatly alarmed, and
to seek what to do. For the news of the plundering of Therme, and the many
gallant Actions performed by King Philip in his Aetolian Expedition, gave them
both present. Terror, and future Caution. There was indeed a Rumor among them,
as if Lycurgus should be sent to the Succor of the Aetolians: But no Body
could suspect that King Philip would be able to compass such a march in so
short a space, while they considered him too of an Age, more to be contemned
than feared. Wherefore seeing now Matters to succeed so contrary to their
Expectations, it was no wonder they became surpised. But in a word, his
Deliberations and their Effects so far surpassed the expectation of his Age,
that his Enemies every where were held in fear and suspension. For marching out
of the heart of Aetolia, he crossed the Gulf of Ambracia, and gained the Port
of Leucas in the space of one Night; where remaining but two Days only, he
parted early the third, and plundering in the way all the Coast of Aetolia, he
arrived safely at Lechoeum. From thence continuing his march, he came in seven
Days near Menelaium, gaining the Hills that give a view of the City of Sparta.
So that whosoever shall compute the expedition of his Motions, would not be
able without difficulty to believe what they saw; which was the subject of the
Lacedaemonians astonishment, who knew neither what to do or resolve.

The King's first Encampment was near Amycla, a Town distant from Sparta about
four Miles, surpassing all others in excellent Fru^^ and delightful Gardens;
where there is a Temple of Apollo, inferior to none in the whole Country of
Laconia, both for Dignity and Riches. The next Day plundering all the
Low Country as he marched, he came to a Place called Pyrrhus-Castle; and after
doing all the spoil he could for two Days together in that Neighborhood, he
came and encamped near Carnium. From thence he le^ the Army to Asina, where he
made a fruitless attempt to become Master of that Place. Wherefore he decamped,
and ravaged all the Country as far as Tenarus which lies toward the Sea of
Candia, putting all to Fire and Sword. Then turning off, he took his march by
the way that leads to the Port of the Lacedoemonians called Gythium, where
there is (...) good Haven: Which Place is likewise distant from Sparta about
four Miles. But soon leaving Gythium on his right, he came and encamped near
Elia, the best and most spacious Country of the whole Spartan Territory. From
thence, sending out Parties, he spread War and Depredation far and wide, making
grievous spoil on the Corn and Fruits of the Country. He plundered also Acria
and Leuca, and the Lands of Baeara.

In the mean while the Messenians, having received King Philip's Letters,
whereby they were enjoined to take the Field with their Troops; forthwith
composed a Body of two Thousand chosen Foot and Two Hundred Horse; and came
short of none of the Confederates in their readiness and good Will. But
forasmuch as it was not possible for them, by reason of their remote distance,
to comply punctually with the day the Troops were to assemble at Tegaea, they
remained a while in suspense, uncertain how to proceed. Howbeit, doubting lest
their delay should be interpreted an effect of their former backwardness, they
came to a determination to march, and to take their way by Laconia, through the
Territory of the Argians, and to join the King's Forces with what speed they
might. Accordingly they took the Field, and arriving near Glympia, a Fortress
on the Borders of the Argians and Lacedaemonians, it chanced that they did not
encamp with that circumspection which they ought, having neither Retrenchment
or Pallisade; nor was the place where they Encamped well chosen; but in
confidence of the good Will of the Inhabitants, they quartered themselves under
the Walls of the place. Lycurgus coming to understand the Messenians were
arrived, took with him his Mercenaries, and a small Party of Lacedoemonians,
and marched to attack them; and coming upon them about the close of the
Evening, boldly attempted their Camp. And now, though the Messenians had acted
otherwise imprudently in every thing, and had marched with too small a Force,
and destitute of Officers in whose Judgment and Abilities they might rely;
nevertheless, their behavior in this Rencounter was without blame, considering
the surprise. For as soon as they received notice of the arrival of Lycurgus,
leaving all their Lumber, and whatever might trouble them behind, they retired
to a certain Fortress, so that the Enemy got nothing but their Baggage and a
few Horses; of their Foot they lost not a Man, and of their Horse not above
eight or nine, who fell on the spot. After this Defeat the Messenians returned
home by the way of Argos; and Lycurgus exalted with his Success marched back to
Sparta, where he fell to making of new Levies, and to deliberate with his
Friends how to proceed so as to oblige Philip to come to a Battle before he
left Laconia. But the King nevertheless marched from Elia plundering and
ravaging the Country all along in his way, and four Days aster returned to
Amycla with his Army in view of the Enemy.

As soon as Lycurgus had given the necessary Orders to his Friends and Officers
touching the Battle they had resolved on, he commanded the Troops to draw out
of the Town, consisting of about Two Thousand Men, taking Possession of all the
nearest Posts to Menelaium; leaving Instructions with those that were appointed
to remain within the Town, to have a special regard to a Signal that he would
give them; which, as soon as they saw, they should issue out of the Town with
all expedition, and by as many ways as they could, and draw up on a certain
Ground where the River ran nearest to the Town.

In this posture stood Matters between the two Armies: But lest our Relation
should seem obscure through want of due light in the nature and situation of
Places about which we treat, we shall therefore do our best to be as clear in
that, as in our accounts of matters of fact, which shall be our manner
throughout our whole Work. Some Places which are unknown, we shall describe by
comparing them with others that are known, distinguishing them by Marks and
Notes of common Observation: For through want of a right Information herein,
many and great Errors have been committed in the Conduct of Enterprises both by
Sea and Land. But we shall labor our utmost, that the Readers of our History
may be instructed as well in the manner as matter of Occurrences; and that
nothing may be left unsaid touching the Description of Towns and Countries, and
principally in Military Adventures, wherein the better to explain our Mind, we
shall have recourse sometimes to some certain Port of the Sea, sometimes to an
Island, sometimes to some conspicuous Temple, Promontory, o^ Mountain, or the
Name of some Country; and, in short, the diverse Regions of the Heavens, as
being things generally known, and familiar to Mankind. It Is by this Method
then, I say, that we hope to be able to lead the Reader to a just Conception of
Places and Situations, to him otherwise unknown.

To give a general description then of the City of Sparta, it is observable,
that in figure it is round; it stands on a plain or bottom, where there rises
here and there certain Hillocks or Eminences; and some places are waste and
barren. On the West Side runs the River Eurotas, which is deep and unfordable
at certain Seasons of the Year. The Mountains of Menelaium are on the other
side of the River, regarding the North-East part of the Town; these being
almost inaccessible and exceeding high, command all the space of Ground lying
between the Eurotas and the Town; which space, in a word, taking likewise the
River into the account, which runs by the foot of the Hills, is not above a
Furlong and an half wide. Now, by this way King Philip was obliged to pass in
his return from his Expedition, having on his left the Town, and the
Lacedaemonians drawn up in Battalia, and on his right the River, and the Troops
of Lycurgus posted on the skirts of the Hills. Furthermore, the Lacedoemonians
having stopped the course of the River, had brought all that space of Ground, we
mentioned, under Water; so that it became impossible for their Foot, much less
their Horse, to march. Wherefore the King's Army had no other way to go, but in
defilee along the foot of the Mountains; by which means, neither Party could
sustain or relieve the other; and the whole Army would run a mighty hazard,
marching so exposed to the continual shot of the Enemy. Philip therefore well
weighing the Peril, resolved that nothing could be better first done, than to
attempt Lycurgus, and endeavor to beat him from his Post. Wherefore taking
with him his Mercenaries and Buckler-men, which were sustained by the
Illyrians, he passed the River, and marched directly toward the Hills.
Lycurgus, who could not but understand the King's purpose, put himself in a
posture to receive him; and at the same time gave Signal to those within the
Town; who immediately sallied out, and drew up as they had been ordered,
placing the Horse on their right. When Philip was advanced somewhat near to
Lycurgus, he ordered the Mercenaries to march to the Attack; and so began the
Battle. For a while the Lacedaemonians, having the advantage both in their Arms
and the Ground, had also the better in the Dispute: But as soon as the
Buckler-men advanced to sustain the others, and that Philip himself with the
Illyrians fell on their Flank, the Mercenaries on the coming up of this Relief
took new Courage, and engaged with so much Bravery, that Lycurgus was worsted,
and betook himself to flight, leaving about an Hundred of his Men dead on the
place, and (...) greater number that were taken Prisoners. Many got into the
Town; and Lycurg^s himself, favored by the coming on of the Night, got
likewise through by-ways into Sparta. Whereupon Philip, having now the
Mountains to friend, where he placed the Illyrians on the Guard, returned
himself with the Buckler-men and Mercenaries to the gross of the Army.

At the same time Aratus came from Amycl^e with the Phalanx; on whose approach
to the Town, Philip repassed the River to countenance his march, posting
himself with the Buckler-men and light-armed Troops, to cover those also who
carried heavy Arms during their passage by that straight piece of Ground along
by the foot of the Hills. In the mean time, those who were drawn up nearest the
Town attacked the Horse, who were posted to cover the march of the rest. In
which occasion the Dispute was very obstinate, where the Buckler-men performed
excellent Service. But in conclusion, the King had the better here likewise;
and pursuing the Enemies Horse to the Gates of the City, passed the River
without difficulty, and joined the Phalanx. But Night now approaching, he found
it behoveful to hasten his Retreat, and was obliged to Encamp on a piece of
Ground, just without the Straight or Defilee.

It so chanced, that the Guides themselves had pitched on that very place
wherein to Encamp, being so advantageous a Spot, that whosoever would make
Incursions into Laconia, it is impossible to choose a more commodious Post: For
it lies in the way to Tegaea, and the Inland parts of the Country on the Banks
of the River commanding the entrance of the Defilee, distant about a quarter of
a Mile from Sparta, that side which looks toward the Town being covered by the
Brow of an inaccessible Hill. It lies, I say, just under the Rocks and
Precipices thereof, being a level piece of Ground, plentifully supplied with
Water, insomuch as it seems d^stin'd by Nature to ensure to the Soldier a saf^
entrance and retreat; where being once Encamped, and Masters of the Eminence,
they may with assurance say, they are both safe and possessed of a most
pleasant Post, which commands the Passage in and out of the Straight.

Here Philip, having passed the Night without any Alarm, in the Morning caused
his Baggage first to march; and leading the Army into the Plains, he there drew
up in Battalia, in view of the City of Sparta, where he remained a while, to
see if the Enemy were disposed to further Action: Then making a short turn,
took his way toward Tegaea; and coming to the Ground where the Battle had been
heretofore fought between Antigonus and Cleomenes, he there Encamped. And the
next Day after he had well observed every thing, and sacrificed on the top of
either Mountain, the one being called Olympia, the other Eva, securing his
Rear-guard, he prosecuted his march to Tegaea, where he commanded the Booty to
be sold, and then returned by Argo^ to Corinth with the whole Army. There he
was met by Ambassadors from Rhodes and Chios, who were dispatched to him on the
subject of a Pacification. The King gave them Audience, and made semblance of
an Inclination to a Peace with the Aetolians, with whom he wished them to
conferr and deliberate by what means it might be brought to pass: So dismissing
the Ambassadors, he went to Lechoeum, purposing to Embark from thence, in order
to a Descent on the Lands of the Phocians, where he had meditated some
Enterprise of great importance.

About this time Leontius, Megaleas, and Ptolomy, being not yet totally out of
hopes of giving some apprehension to King Philip, endeavored (so to cover
their old Crimes) to foment a murmuring among the Buckler-men and the King's
Guards (and they themselves instilled the like seditious Opinions) that they
who were first in all Hazards, and secured the rest of the Army from Danger,
were not treated according to their Merit; and were not only not considered and
distinguished by any particular Reward for their Service; but even such Booty
as fell into their hands was taken from them, notwithstanding the constant
custom in the like cases to the contrary. After this manner they had so
inflamed them, that assembling in Parties, they attempted and rifled the
Quarters of the King's chief Friends and Favorites; insomuch that their
insolence grew to that height, that they forbore not at length the King's own
Lodgings, breaking the Roof thereof.

This Mutiny spread so great Terror and Disturbance about the City, that the
King having notice thereof, came with all possible expedition from Lechoeum;
and immediately assembling the Macedonians, partly by Remonstrances, partly by
Menaces, appeased the Tumult. But forasmuch as on such occasions Men are of
diverse Minds, some advising to find out and seize on the Authors of the
Sedition to make them Examples; others, that it were better to reduce things to
Order, and pacify the Tumult without any further Process or Inquisition;
wherefore the King, hiding his Purpose for the present, and seeming well
satisfied with what he had already done, exhorted them only to Union and better
Obedience, and so dismissed the Assembly. Not but that he was well aware who
had been the prime Movers and Instigators of the Sedition, but thought it
Wisdom at that time to seem less knowing than he was. But these stirs were soon
over, and King Philip's Ph^cian Expedition likewise at that time for certain
Reasons respited.

And now Leontius, coming to perceive the vanity of his guilty Projects, and
the dangerous state he had contracted, had recourse to Apelles, soliciting his
return from Chalcis, and giving him frequent intimations of the many
difficulties he met with; and that the King grew into greater dislike of him in
every thing Now it is to be noted, That during Apelle^ residence at Chalcis, his
Deportment was more like a Sovereign Prince than a Subject, governing all
things with an Arbitrary Authority, and laboring to be thought singular in his
Sufficiency and Power, and that the King acted nothing but by his Counsels; by
which means he disposed absolutely of every thing Wherefore all who were in the
Magistracy, and had charge of the Affairs in Macedon and Thessaly ever applied
to him, and took his directions in all their Consultations. And i^ short, when
at any time any of the Gre^^ Towns had occasion to publish any new Law or
Ordinances, or to confer Honors or Pr^ferments, there was hardly any mention
mad^ of the King, but of Apelles.

Wherefore when Philip came to be rightl^ informed of all these things, he grew
justl^ sensible of the Outrage that had been done him: Nor was Aratus wanting
to warm hi^ Indignation; howbeit; he carried his Resentments so close, that
none were privy to his Purpose, or knew any thing of his Mind. Apelles
therefore, far from suspecting the least coldness from the King, was persuaded,
that he should be received at Court, after his wonted manner, and soon dispose
of the King's Mind at his pleasure, wherefore he left Chalcis to come to the
Aid of Leontius. And now as he drew near to Corinth, Ptolomy, Leontius and
Megaleas, who commanded the Buckler-men, and had prime Authority in the Army,
so wrought that the Flower of the King's Troops went out to meet and accompany
him. Insomuch, that what with Officers and Soldiers they composed a pompons
Train, with which he made his entrance into the Town, and so went directly to
wait on the King. But while he attempted (according to his manner heretofore)
to enter into the Presence, an Officer, who had received Orders to that effect,
with held him, telling him, that he must wait, for that the King was busy.
This was a sore rebuke to Apelles, who stood astonished without any Reply, and
after he had attended a while, retired to his Lodgings, accompanied only with
his own Domestics; all the rest having already deserted him. Behold the
uncertain state of mortal Greatness, where in one and the same Moment Men are
raised to highest Promotions, and sunk to the lowest ebb of Fortune; and this
principally in the Courts of Princes, where like Counters their Value rises and
falls according to the place they are set in; for those who follow the Court
are Great and Little at the Pleasure of their Master, who holds their Fortune
in his keeping.

As soon as Megaleas (contrary to his hopes) came to understand there was no
prospect of safety by the Mediation of Apelles, he began to see his danger
nearer, and bethought him of seeking security by flight. For, in short, though it
may be said, that after this Apelles was suffered at Court, and appeared in
ordinary Deliberations, yet he was never after admitted to the King's Cabinet,
where Matters of weight were principally handled. Some time after the King came
to resolve to Embark at Lechoeum, to pursue his Phocian Design, whereof he had
so long meditated, taking Apelles with him; but that Affair not succeeding, he
steered another course, and came to Elatea.

Megaleas then, without any consideration of Leontius, who was his Surety in
the sum of Twenty Talents, made his Escape, and got into Athens; but the
Government of that Place not permitting his stay there, he went from thence to
Thebes. In the mean time, the King with the Court departing from Cirrha, sailed
to Sicyon, where the Magistrates came out to receive him, and invited him to a
Palace, prepared to entertain him, which he thankfully excused, making choice
of the House of Aratus, with whom he spent whole Days in Deliberations about
his Affairs. During his abode there he dispatched Apelles to Corinth; and as
soon as he came to know of the flight of Megaleas, he sent Taurion to Triphalia
at the head of his Buckler-men, whose chief Officer was Leontius, seeming to
have some extraordinary occasion of their Service; who were no sooner departed,
when he caused Leontius to be secured for the payment of the Twenty Talents
wherein he stood bound. But the Buckler-men coming to hear thereof, by a
Messenger which Leontius had dispatched, sent their request to the King;
praying him, that if Leontius Commitment was on any other account than that of
his Surety-ship, that he would be pleased not to determine any thing against
him, during their absence; and that they should interpret any Sentence in his
prejudice, as an Injury done to them, and should accordingly so resent it; (it
having been a Custom among the Macedonians to use that liberty with their
Kings) that in case Leontius was imprisoned to secure the payment of the Money
due on account of Megaleas, they would readily contribute toward satisfying
that Debt. But this their Affection shown to Leontius proved unseasonable, and
was so ill taken by the King, that it became the occasion of his Death sooner
than he intended.

While these Matters were under agitation, the Ambassadors from Rhodes and
Chios returned from Aetolia, bringing with them Propositions for a Cessation of
Arms for thirty Days; reporting that the Aetolians were very inclinable to a
Treaty, and that they had appointed a Day for their assembling at Rhium, where
they prayed the King to give them a meeting, promising all the Advances
possible on their part toward a Pacification.

After the King had ratified the Treaty of Truce, he sent his Dispatches to the
Confederates, requiring them to send their respective Deputies to Patroe, there
to treat about the Peace with the Aetolians; then setting sail from Lechoeum,
he came the next Day to Patroe. About the same time Letters were sent him out
of Phocia, that had been writ by Megaleas to the Aetolians, whereby he incited
them vigorously to prosecute the War, for that King Philip, through want of
Provisions and Stores of War, was at the point of Despair. Furthermore, the
said Letters contained very reproachful and injurious Reflections on the King,
which plainly evidenced the Man's Hatred to him. Upon reading these Letters,
the King became firmly assured, that Apelles was at the bottom, and Author of
all these Evils; wherefore he ordered him to be taken into Custody, and
forthwith brought to Corinth, together with his Son, and a Youth his Favorite.
He also dispatched Alexander to Thebes, in pursuit of Megaleas, ordering that
he should be convened before the Magistrates, in order to the payment of the
Debt, for which security had been given. This Commission. Alexander executed
with diligence. But Megaleas prevented him by killing himself, not being
willing to adventure a Trial. At the same time Apelles was put to death,
together with his Son and Favorite. Thus perished the Conspirators, whose end
was no other than what was due to their manner of Life past, and principally
their practices against Aratus.

As to the Aetolians, they were sincerely disposed to Peace, being grown weary
of the War, all their Projects having succeeded quite otherwise than they had
proposed; for they expected to have to do with a Prince raw and unfit to
govern, King Philip being not arrived at an Age, as they thought, of Conduct
and Experience, while in the mean time they sound him a ripe and enterprizing
Leader, able and qualified both for Counsel and Execution; and the weak and
unwise Part seemed to be turned on themselves, as well with respect to the
Administration of their particular Affairs, as the Conduct of the War in
general. But when they came to hear of the Mutiny of the Buckler-men, and the
Death of Leontius and Apelles, hoping these Troubles would beget Distractions
at Court, they therefore respited their meeting at Rhium, which they did from
time to time; while King Philip, who had a hopeful prospect of the issue of the
War, and was indeed come to give all the impediment he could to the Treaty of
Peace, was glad of the occasion they gave him. Wherefore, after he had exhorted
and animated the Confederates to the prosecution of the War, he weighed Anchor
again, and sailed back to Corinth. Then sending his Macedonians to their
Winter. Quarters in their own Country, they took their march home through
Thessaly, while he himself, after his departure from Cenchrea, coasting it
along the Attic Shore, came by the Euripus to Demetrias, where Ptolomy, the
only remaining Conspirator in the Treason of Apelles, was sentenced by the
Macedonians, and accordingly put to death.

It was about this time that Hannibal, having gained his Passage into Italy,
was encamped on the Banks of the Po, in view of the Roman Army; that Antiochus,
having reduced to his Dominion a great part of Syria, had put his Army into
Garrisons; and that Lycurgus, fearing ill-dealing from the Ephori, had
withdrawn and retired into Aetolia: For he had been wrongfully accused to them,
as if he had meditated some Innovation in the Government. Whereupon assembling
in the Night, they came and beset his House; but he having timely notice of
their Purposes, had with his Domestics made his escape.

The King being now returned home about the beginning of Winter, the Achaian
Troops holding Eperatas the Praetor in contempt, and the mercenary Strangers in
like manner considering him as a Man of no worth, insomuch that they came to
despise his Authority, refusing to pay him Obedience; by which means it came to
pass, that they wanted Troops to guard and defend their Frontiers.

This became a motive to Pyrrhias, (whom the Aetolians had sent to command the
Elean Forces) to compose an Army consisting of fourteen hundred Aetolians,
about a thousand Mercenaries and Militia of the Town, and two hundred Horse,
making in all about three thousand Men; and with these he did not only waste
the Territory of Dymas and Pharoe, but proceeded to Patroe; and taking
possession of the Mountain Panachaicus which commanded the Town, he plundered
and put to Fire and Sword all the Country that lies in the way to Rhium and
Aegium; insomuch that those Towns of Achaia which labored under these Evils,
and saw no hopes of redress, became constrained to submit to lie under
Contribution: For the Soldiers being in Arrear of their Pay, refused to receive
Orders, when at any time they were commanded to march on any Expedition for the
relief of the Country. Whereupon the Affairs of the Achaians grew from bad to
worse, their mercenary Troops daily deserting the Service: All which Calamities
were, in a word, to be ascribed to the Insufficiency of Eperatus the Praetor.
Matters stood in this posture then in Achaia when Eperatus's Authority expired,
who was succeeded, early in the Summer, by Aratus the Elder.

Hitherto we have spoken of the Affairs of Europe only; now pursuing the Order
of Occurrences, we are arrived, as it were, at a fair and easy passage to
those of Asia; let us proceed then to recount the Hostilities transacted in
those parts of the World, contemporary with the others we have already related.

We shall begin, as we promised, with the History of the War, that was waged
between Antiochus and Ptolomy for the Lower Syria. For albeit Hostilities were
yet on Foot between these two Princes, at the time we brake off our Relation of
the Grecian Affairs; nevertheless, we had good reason to pursue that Method,
for the better uniting the Parts of our History. And to prevent the danger of
Mistakes in the Reader, touching the Date of Transactions, we conceive we have
therein done enough, when in speaking of what was there acted during that
Olympiad, and what at the same time in Greece, we have punctually remarked the
beginning and end of the Asian Transactions. Furthermore, for the better
perspicuity of our History, and that we may render it more intelligible, we
have judged it most behoveful not to mingle the Occurrences of that Olympiad,
but to refer it to subsequent Times, when woe shall assign to each Year its
peculiar Actions and Adventures in order as they happened. For having
undertaken to write not any particular or separate History, but to recount all
that was done every where at the same time; and forasmuch as we have engaged in
a Work superior to all who have gone before us; we ought therefore to make it
our chief Business so to dispose of the several Members, and unite the Parts in
such order, that the whole may appear uniform and entire: and yet that no one
part thereof may be liable to obscurity. Whereof after we shall have here first
hinted some distant matters touching the Reigns of Antiochus and Ptolemy, we
shall then proceed to give our Story such a beginning, as shall be evident and
known to all, and of a piece with the Occurrences which preceded.

The Ancients have somewhere said, That a good beginning is half the Work;
whereby they would instruct us, that in all our Undertakings, our principal
Care should be to begin well whatsoever we go about: And it is possible some may
object, That they have herein gone too far, while in my Judgment they have said
less than the matter will bear. For I think it may with safety be maintained,
That not the half only of any Enterprise is effected when it is well begun, but
the whole well-nigh brought to pass: For it is impossible to enter successfully
on any Design whatsoever, without having first formed and digested the whole
Project, and meditated with deliberation both on the beginning, progress, and
end. For who can be able to give a Summary, or Recapitulation, of what he has
written at the end of his Discourse, if there be not connection or coherence in
what he has delivered, whereby it may be discerned, from whence, why, and how
matters have been conducted to that issue? He therefore who would write a
General History, or would but study it as he ought, should above all things
labor to begin well, and then he may conclude the better half of his Work
done. And this shall be our utmost Endeavor.

Nevertheless, it is seen that most Historians say with me, That they write a
General History, and that their Work is the greatest that has ever been
undertaken. But of all these Authors, I know none, Ephorus excepted, who was
the first and only Writer that has proposed indeed to compose a General
History. But I will not arraign any one here in particular; and only remark,
that there have been Authors in these our days, who undertaking to write
History, have in three or four Pages, comprehended the Wars of the Romans and
Carthaginians, and with assurance are bold to boast they have therein written
the whole Story of the Universe. True it is, that that Age was celebrated for
many great Actions both in Spain, Africa, Sicily, and Italy; and the War of
Hannibal exceeded all others, both for Dignity and Duration, except the first
Punick War, when the Dominion of Sicily was contested; which, in short, was
such as held the whole World in suspense, all Nations under great Fear and
Uncertainty attending the Event. But who is so stupid or incurious, that is not
in some measure instructed in these Adventures? And yet there are Historians,
who though they have touched never so superficially those matters, would
nevertheless persuade us they have left nothing unsaid of the Affairs of the
Greeks and Barbarians; and these I think may be fitly compared to those
Painters, who according to the custom of some States, draw on the Walls of
their Public Buildings, the History of their Exploits in diverse Ages and
Places, and would be thought to have therein represented every thing just as it
was done.

If it should be demanded then, how Historians come to be guilty of this
Vanity? I answer, That it is easy to promise any thing, and as easy to
undertake and engage in the most difficult Enterprises by Words and Discourse;
but few there are who rightly weigh the Difficulty of the execution. The one is
common and familiar, the other rare and next to impossible; and whosoever he
may be that has compassed it, it must have been at the cost of mighty Pains,
and the product of many Years of Life. Thus much I have thought fit to say, in
reproof of such as over boastingly magnify their Works, and vain-gloriously
ex^^ their own Merit. But now let us proceed to our Business.

Ptolomy King of Egypt, surnamed Philopater, took on him the Government of that
Kingdom on the death of his Father, and the murder of Megas his Brother and his
Adherents; by which means, and some other Acts of Caution, he reckoned himself
secure against any Attempts from those of his own House, and concluded Fortune
Herself had covered him from all Dangers abroad. Furthermore, Antigonus and
Seleucus being now dead, and Antiochus and Philip succeeding them, who were yet
but young, and hardly out of their Childhood: Ptolomy, I say, for these Reasons
beholding himself sheltered on all sides from Danger, governed his Kingdom as
if his Pleasure and Ease had been now his only Business, and resigned up to a
voluptuous Life, forgot the Duties of his Dignity, and grew to neglect every
body and every thing; all access to him became difficult, as well to those of
his own Court, as others who had charge of Public Affairs, both within and
without the Kingdom; albeit the Kings his Predecessors had been no less
solicitous for the one than the other, and as jealous of their Authority abroad
as at home. For the Lieutenants of their Provinces in Caelo-Syria and Cyprus
were wont to wage War with the neighboring Princes of Syria by Land and Sea;
and those, who had the Government of their principal Towns on the Seacoast
from Pamphylia to the Hellespont, and who had the Command of the Country
bordering on Lysimachia, kept a watchful Eye on the Actions of the Princes of
Asia, and of the Islands; while those that ruled in Aenus, Maronea, and the
Towns beyond them, were as careful to observe the Macedonians and the
Occurrences of Thrace. Insomuch that the Egyptian Kings, embracing so wide a
Dominion, were covered, as one may say, with a Buckler against all those
Princes, and never took thought for Egypt it self, while the Avenues were so
carefully kept. But forasmuch as the King we are speaking of now left all
things at random, while himself, dissolved in Love and Wine, took care for
nothing; it was not strange that he should soon find Enemies, who would
conspire against both his Life and Kingdom.

The first of these was Cleomenes of Sparta, who attempted nothing during the
Life of Ptolomy Euergetes, with whom he was in great Friendship, and by whose
Favor and Assistance, he had hopes of recovering his Kingdom. But after his
Death, and his own Affairs inviting him to try his Fortune, Antigonus being
also now dead, and the Achaians diverted by War; and what Cleomenes had ever
ardently labored to effect being come to pass, namely, that the Aetolians
confederating with the Lacedaemonians (who equally hated the Achaians and
Macedonians) should jointly enter into a War against these two States. These
things, I say, falling out, were a motive to press by all means possible his
departure from Alexandria. And first he moved the King therein, demanding
Succors both of Men and Stores of War. Afterward perceiving him to lend no
very willing Ear to his suit, he besought him at least for permission for
himself and Followers to depart; for that be could not hope for a more
favorable Conjuncture, than that which now offered, for the recovery of his
Kingdom. But Ptolomy, amused neither with future nor present things, giving
himself up to his Pleasures and Debauches, came to no Resolution touching the
Request of Cleomenes.

Furthermore, Sosibius, who at that time was first Minister of State, and
governed the Affairs of Egypt, coming to consult with his Friends thereupon, it
was concluded among them, that it was not safe not only to supply Cleomenes
with what he demanded, but even to let him depart the Kingdom. For after the
death of Antigonus, they came to neglect their Frontier Provinces, taking for
granted, that the expense of those Affairs was now needless They furthermore
considered, that Cleomenes having now no Rival in Greece that could withstand
him, became jealous lest coming to recover the Dominion of that Country, he
might not become a formidable Enemy to them; knowing, as he so well did, the
Frailties of their King, and the general State of the Egyptian Affairs, and
that their Provinces were remote and disjointed, which he might greatly improve
to their damage: For at Samos they had a numerous Fleet, and at Ephesus a great
Body of Troops. Wherefore, I say, they resolved that it would not be Wisdom to
permit not only that Cleomenes should go with an Army, but not safe to permit
him to quit the Country at all, considering the Greatness of his Character, and
how he had been disobliged, which he would consequently study to revenge. It
remained then that they must determine to detain him by force; and yet they
wanted Resolution to conclude thereon, looking on it as a dangerous Attempt to
imprison a Lion among a Flock of Sheep; and Sosibius himself became of that
mind, for the Reasons we shall now deliver.

At what time they were deliberating about putting Magas and Berenice to death,
fearing; lest their Design might miscarry through the great Power and
Resolution of Berenice. The Conspirators therefore were obliged to flatter and
treat, with better usage than ordinary, some Persons about the Court; and to
give them Assurances of great Advantages, in case their Design succeeded.
Wherefore Sosibius well knowing of what importance it was to Cleomenes to
acquire the Good Will of the King, whose Assistance he needed, and that he was
an able and well experienced Person, came to reveal the Conspiracy to him,
adding many fair Promises, and Assurances of his good Offices in his Service;
whereupon Cleomenes taking hotice of the Disturbance he was under, and that
they very much apprehended Danger from their Mercenaries, told him he might be
ought of pain in that particular, for that those People should give them no
molestation; but, on the contrary, if need were, should lend them their
assistance. This was a surprising Saying to Sosibius, while Cleomenes
proceeded; adding, that there were few less than three thousand Peloponnesians
in the Army of Mercenaries, and at least a thousand Candiots, who, upon his
least beck, would be at his Command; and from the Troops of Syria and Caria,
there was no danger to be feared. In short, this Discourse at that time greatly
pleased Sosibius, and animated him to the murder of Berenice. But afterward as
often as he ruminated on the Folly and Weakness of the King, and the hardy and
enterprizing Qualities of Cleomenes, and the Affection the mercenary Soldiers
bore him, he could not contain his Fear. Wherefore he prevailed with the King
and those about him, to consent that Cleomenes might be taken into custody: And
the better to compass his purpose, he made use of an occasion we shall now
relate. There chanced to be at that time in these Parts, a certain Messenian
called Nicagoras, who had been an old Friend of the Father of Archidamus King
of Sparta; and albeit with Archidamus himself he had not had that intimacy,
nevertheless upon his leaving the City out of fear of Cleomenes, and retiring
to Messena, Nicagoras did not only hospitably receive him into his House, and
supply him with all things necessary, but grew at length to cultivate a
Friendship with him, equal to that which had been heretofore between him and
his Father. Wherefore when afterward it came to pass, that Cleomenes had given
Archidamus some hopes of his return, and that there appeared some likelihood of
an Accord, Nicagoras interposed his good Offices, and acted in the Treaty
between them.

After all things seemed to be adjusted, and that Archidamus on the Faith of
Nicagoras's Treaty was returning, and on his way to Sparta, he was intercepted
by Cleomenes, and slain, but without any Violence offered either to Nicagoras,
who was in his company, or any body else of his Train. Wherefore Nicagoras,
though he made public profession of his Obligation to Cleomenes for sparing his
Life, nevertheless he harbored in his Mind Resentments suitable to that
Outrage. This Nicagoras then coming to Alexandria, to dispose of certain Horses
he had brought over, as he was landing meets with Cleomenes, who with Panteus
and Hippitas were walking on the Strand. As soon as Cleomenes knew him, he came
and saluted him in friendly manner, demanding what business had brought him
thither? And when he told him, he had brought over some Horses to sell;
Cleomenes replied, That he would have made a better Voyage, if he had brought a
Cargo of Buffoons, and Beautiful Boys, for that the present King like'd that
sort of Merchandise much better. At which saying Nicagoras smiling, replied
little; but a while after coming to have some Discourse with Sosibius about the
disposal of his Horses, he told him what Cleomenes had said, not without design
of doing him an ill Office at Court; and perceiving Sosibius pleased with the
Relation, he proceeded to reveal to him the Subject of his Hatred, and the
Aversion he bore to Cleomenes.

Sosibius, coming thus to discover that Nicagoras was an Enemy to Cleomenes,
prevailed with him by Gifts and Promises to write a Letter to him, containing
Accusations against Cleomenes, which Letter should be lest with one of his
Servants on his departure, to be by him brought some Days after, as if
Nicagoras had dispatched him for that purpose. Accordingly a Letter was
written, and the Matter conducted as had been agreed, and as soon as Nicagoras
was gone, the Messenger brought the Letter to Sosibius, which, together with
the Bearer, he immediately carried to the King. The Contents were, that in case
Cleomenes were not speedily dispatched with a Body of Troops, and all things
necessary for his Enterprise, he would be the occasion of great Troubles in the
Kingdom. This then was the Engine whereby Sosibius wrought with the King and
his Creatures to determine on putting Cleomenes under Confinement, and securing
him with a good Guard. Whereupon he was secured, having a large House appointed
him for his Prison, which differed from others in nothing, but that it was more
spacious. And now Cleomenes perceiving there was no hope left him, resolved
however to attempt his Enlargement by all the ways he could imagine, whereby to
compass it; not that he saw how it could probably be effected, being destitute
of all necessary means to put his purpose in Execution, at least he resolved to
die like himself, and never yield to stain that Virtue which had rendered him
so considerable in the World. And I am ready to believe he had his Mind
prepossessed, and set before his Eyes what all great Men do in the like
Exigencies.

To urge their Fate with safety to their Fame,
And to Posterity consign a Name.
Cleomenes then being informed of the King's purpose to make a Progress to
Canopus, contrived to have it bruited among his Guards, that he was to be
speedily set at liberty; and on that pretext he caused Provision to be made for
a great Entertainment to those of his Family, sending to his Guards plenty of
Meat and Wine, Garlands of Flowers, etc. insomuch that the Soldiers drinking
too plentifully, he took that occasion about midday to escape out of Prison,
with all his Domestics in his Company; who with their drawn Swords meeting in
the Marketplace with the Governor of the Town, they threw him out of his
Chariot, and killed him on the place amidst his Guards, who stood astonished at
the boldness of the Action; in the mean time, crying Liberty, Liberty, as they
passed along. But when they saw none appoach to join them, all People standing
amazed at the Greatness of the Enterprise, they then betook them toward the
Castle, with design to set all the Prisoners at liberty, and to make use of
their assistance: but those who Commanded in that Fortress suspecting their
purpose, and streng^hened the Guards, and secured the Gates: Whereupon
Cleomenes and his Followers seeing now no hopes on that side, turned their
Swords on each other, and so generously died (and as one may say)
Laconian-like. Thus fell Cleomenes, a Personage most agreeable, and admirably
gifted for Conversation; but above all things qualified for the Conduct of
great Affairs; and, in conclusion, one whom Nature had endowed with all the
advantages requisite to a great Captain and a King.

Not long after, Theodotus an Aetolian, Governor of the Lower Syria, revolted;
partly out of Contempt of the King, who led so infamous a life, and partly out
of an apprehension of ill Offices done him by the great ones at Court some time
before; notwithstanding the good Service he had done the King in many
occasions, and principally in the War against Antiochus for the Lower Syria:
Nevertheless, he was so far from being considered according to his Merit, that
being commanded to come to Court, he there ran great hazard of his Life.
Wherefore on these Provocations, Theodotus resolved to apply himself to
Antiochus, and to put the Towns of that Country into his Hands; which Overture
was gladly received by that Prince, and the Design soon after put in Execution.
But that we may Treat of the Family of this Prince in the same Method we have
done the last, we shall have occasion to go a little back; and taking our
beginning from the time of Antiochus's coming to the Crown, we shall descend to
the Subject of the War, whereof we purpose to Treat.

Antiochus the Younger then, was the Son of Seleucus, who was sirnam'd
Callinicus; who after the Death of his Father, and the Accession of his Elder
Brother to the Crown, went into the Upper Asia, where he held his Abode for
some time. But on the Death of Seleucus his Brother, who was Treacherously
slain in his Expedition over Mount Taurus, as we have elsewhere Noted;
Antiochus Succeeded him who made Achoeus Governor of all that part of Asia on
this side Mount Taurus, and gave to Molon and his Brother, the Government of
the Upper Provinces; namely, to Molon the Satrapie (so called) of Media, and to
Alexander, that of Persia.

But these two Brothers contemning the Youth of the King, and being in hopes
Achoeus would join with them in the like Design; and apprehending above all
things, the Cruelty and perverse Mind and Calumnies of Hermias, who at that
time Ruled Affairs at Court; wherefore they came to a Resolution of casting off
their Obedience, and of endeavoring to withdraw the other Satrapa's from their
Duty to the King. Hermias was a Carian by Birth, and received his Authority,
and the Administration of the Government, at the Hands of Seleucus; who at his
Departure toward Mount Taurus, had committed the Affairs of the Kingdom,
during his Absence, to his Care; who beholding himself thus Exalted, grew to
Envy and Suspect all who had any Trust or Share in the King's Esteem. In a
Word, being naturally a Tyrant, he would ordinarily punish the slightest Faults
with Rigor, making them greater by his Exaggerations; and often appeared a
Cruel and Inexorable Judge toward others who had no Faults but of his finding.
But above all things, he was bent on the Ruin of Epigenes, who had the Charge
of leading back the Troops, that were Assembled out of Affection to Seleucus.
For he well knew him to be a Man both Eloquent and Able for Execution, and who
had great Authority in the Army. This he could not brook; wherefore he watched
him with a Malicious Eye, and studied by all ways possible, to render him
Obnoxious. In short, it chanced, that while they were deliberating in Council
about the Rebellion of Molon, and on the King's Command, that every one should
deliver his Judgment freely, touching the Means of Suppressing the Rebels;
Epigenes speaking first, gave it as his Opinion, That it was an Affair that
would not endure delay, and that the Remedies ought speedily to be applied to
the Disease: That he Conceived the King's Presence was absolutely necessary,
whose Authority on the place would weigh much: That in such case neither Molon
nor his Partisans would have the assurance to persist in their Error,
beholding the King himself at the Head of his Army: Or should they chance to
continue obstinate, the very Soldiers would Mutiny, and deliver them up to the
King.

Hardly had Epigenes finished his Discourse, when Hermias in passionate manner
replied, That this was not the first Traitorous Counsel he had given: That he
had long harbored Evil Purposes toward the King: That it now pleased him
however to behold him openly, declaring his Wickedness in the pernicious Advice
he had offered, wherein he plainly showed his Design of giving up the King into
the Hands of the Rebels. He added nothing further at that time on that Subject,
seeming content to have thus sown the Seeds of Suspicion and Calumny against
him, expressing rather his Indignation than Hatred. In a Word, his Ignorance in
Military Affairs (it may be) gave him greater Apprehension of the Danger than
needed: Wherefore his Advice was, That no Army should be sent against Molon,
but that they should March against Ptolomy; who being a Vicious and Careless
Prince, he concluded that War would be Managed with less danger. Howbeit, after
he had thus astonished the Assembly, he yielded that Molon should be Prosecuted
by War, and that the Chief Command in that Expedition should be given to Xeno
and Theodotus, Counselling the King to pursue the Recovery of the Lower Syria,
to the end that Young Prince being Engaged and Surrounded with Troubles from
all Quarters, and keeping him in perpetual Action, he might, as he conceived,
render himself the more necessary, and cover with more safety, the Crimes of
which he was Conscious, and better secure his Credit with his Master. Pursuant
to which Design, he Forges Letters from Achoeus, and brought them to the King;
which Letters contained King Ptolomy's Solicitations to him, to take on him the
Royalty, promising him his Assistance both of Money, Ships, and all things he
should stand in need of, provided he would Assume the Crown, and the other
Marks of Regality, whereof he was in effect already Possessed, though he shunned
the Title, and neglected the Tender of a Diadem which Fortune her self made
him. This Letter found so much Credit with the King, that he thereupon
determined forthwith earnestly to pursue the War in Caelo-Syria.

While these Matters were under agitation, Antiochus being at Seleucia,
Diognetus his General at Sea arrived, bringing with him Laodice the Daughter of
Mithridates, who was Espoused to Antiochus. This Mithridates boasted of his
being Descended from one of the Seven Persians, who slew the Magi, holding
Possession of that Dominion, which Darius had heretofore given to his
Ancestors, extending as far as the Coast of the Euxine Sea. Antiochus went in
great Pomp to receive this Princess, whom he presently Married, the Nuptials
being Solemnized with all possible Magnificence. As soon as the Ceremony was
over, he carried her to Antioch, where he caused her to be received as Queen;
and then turned his Thoughts to prepare for the War. In the mean time Molon had
prepared the People of his Government for every thing he might be disposed to
attempt, as well by the hopes of Reward, as through the fear wherewith he had
possessed the Principal Officers, by angry and menacing Letters counterfeited
from the King. Furthermore, his Brother was in a readiness to join him; and he
had well provided against all danger that might threaten from the
Neighbor-provinces, having been at great Expense to Purchase the Good Will of
those, who had any Authority among them; and, in a Word, Marched with his Army
to Encounter the King's Forces. While Xeno and Theodotus were so terrified at
his approach, that they retired and secured themselves in the Neighboring
Towns. Whereupon Molon making himself Master of the Territory of Apollonia,
became supplied with all sorts of Provisions of War in great abundance, and was
already grown formidable in appearance, and in effect: For, first the King's
breed of Horses was entirely in possession of the Medes; which Country moreover
abounds in Corn and all sorts of Cattle. As to its Strength, all that can be
said, would not amount to half what the Subject will bear. Media is Situate in
the heart of Asia, and if comparison be made between that and the other parts,
it will be found to surpass all the Provinces thereof, both in extent of
Territory and height of the Mountains that surround it. They have many powerful
Nations that are their Borderers: On the East are the Deserts which lie between
Persia and Parasia. The Caspian Pass called the Gates, is in their keeping,
where they touch on the Mountains Tapyroe, which are not far from Hyrcania. It
extends toward the South to Mesopotamia, and the Territory of the
Apolloniates. Nor is it remote from Persia, being covered on that side by the
Mountain Zagros, which has an ascent of above twelve Miles. And whereas this
Mountain is divided and broken into many Parts and Eminencies, it comes to pass
that there are diverse Valleys and deep Descents, which are inhabited by the
Cossoei, Corbrenoe and Carchi, and other Barbarous Nations, who are generally
given to War. Toward the West they approach the Country of Atropatii, who are
not far from those People, whose Dominion extends as far as the Euxine Sea. The
Frontiers of Media toward the North, are in the Neighborhood of the Elymaei,
Ariaracoe, Cadducoei, Matiani, and in short, overlook those Countries on the
Pontic Sea, that join the Palus Moeotis. The Country is also parted into sundry
Divisions, by Mountains, which run through it from East to West, between which
there are Plains abounding with Cities, and Peopled Places.

As soon as Molon had made himself Master of this Country, the most proper of
all others wherein to establish the Seat of his Dominion; over and above that,
he was become formidable, as was noted, by the Power he had acquired; he grew
likewise into such Reputation, that the People of Asia believed he was not to
be resisted; especially when they saw the King's Army had been forced to
Retreat into Towns for safety; which they took for granted, was no other than
yielding up the Field: This Success greatly augmented the Courage and
Expectations of his Army. Wherefore he resolved to pass the Tigris, and march
to the Seige of Seleucia. But being prevented in that Design by Zeuxes, who had
seized on the Vessels of Transportation, he retired to a Place called
Ctesiphon, where he made plentiful Provision of all Necessaries for the
Wintering of his Army. When the King came to understand that Molon Advanced,
and that his own Army retired, he then resolved to go at the Head of his
Forces, and to respite for a while, his Expedition against Ptolomy. But Hermias
continued firm to his Purpose, and prevailed to divert him; so Xenoetas an
Achaian, was sent with an Army, having as absolute Authority as if the King had
been there in Person; Hermias demonstrating that 'twas enough for Princes to
make War against Rebels by their Lieutenants, but that Kings ought to oppose
themselves only to their Equals, where Glory and Empire is the Subject in
Dispute. Thus having the young Prince entirely in his Possession, he prevailed
to carry on his first Design, so they went to Apamea, where they Assembled the
Troops. From thence the King lead his Army to Laodicea, then marching through
the Desert, they came to the Valley of Marsya between the Mountains Libanus and
Anti-Libanus, a Place very straight and enclosed by those Mountains which come
almost to touch; and there where it is narrowest, it is full of low and watery
Ground, where they gather Odoriferous Dew. The Castle of Brochi Commands on the
one side of the Straight, on the other that of Gerra; there being only a narrow
way between them. After some time had been spent in their March through this
Vale, and the taking in some Neighboring Towns, the King approached Gerra; but
both the one and the other Fortress being in the Hands of Theodotus the
Aetolian, who had likewise well Fortified the Defilee about the low Grounds,
and Posted Troops Commodiously for Defense, the King resolved to force his
Passage. But when he had well considered, that by Seiges he should Harrass his
Army, and be more a Sufferer himself than the Enemy; and having some Reasons to
believe that Theodotus would shortly be wrought over to his Service, he forbore
to Prosecute that Enterprise; so that having no present Prospect of succeeding
here, and receiving notice of the Defeat of Xenoetas, and that Molon Victorious
had subdued many Provinces, he resolved to relinquish all other Designs, and
deliberate on those Affairs which more nearly concerned him. For Xenoetas, as
we noted, being sent with an Authority full and absolute, could not well bear
that Degree of Greatness, which he had never hoped to attain, but grew insolent
toward his Friends, and acted inconsiderately against the Enemy. For taking
his march toward Seleucia, having Diogenes Governor of Susiana, and Pythias
with him, who brought his Troops from the Coast of the Red Sea, under his
Command; he came and encamped in view of the Enemy, being covered on that side
by the Tigris.

In the mean time many Deserters from Molon's Army, swimming the River, came
over to Xenoetas, who gave him assurance, that in case he passed the River with
his Army, the greatest part of the Enemies Troops would revolt to him, many of
the Leaders being disobliged by Molon; and that the Soldiers in general were
disposed to return to their Duty. Xenoetas, encouraged by these Reports,
resolved to pass over the Army, and showed a purpose to make a Bridge at a
certain place where by the force of the Stream the Earth is cast up in form of
an Island, but he did not prosecute that Design: Whereupon Molon made a Jest of
his Project. Nevertheless, Xenoetas, in the mean time, caused Boats to be
built, and seized on others where they could be sound, to put in execution what
he had purposed. Then picking out a Body of the best Troops of the Army, both
Horse and Foot, and leaving Zeuxes and Pythias with the rest to guard the Camp,
he wasted over his Men by Night, marching and encamping about Ten Miles above
the Enemy, where he made choice of a commodious and well-defended piece of
Ground to encamp in; for the River environed it almost quite round, and the
rest was secured by a Moor, and deep boggy Ground. Molon, upon knowledge
hereof, detached a Body of Horse with Command to march toward the Enemy,
partly to prevent the passing of those that remained behind; and partly to
attack those who were already got over. But on their approach to Xenoetas's
Camp there was no need of the Swords of an Enemy to defeat them; for being, it
seems, unacquainted with the Ground and Country about it, they chanced to fall
among the Bogs and watery places, whereby not only their Design miscarried, but
most of the Party were lost. Wherefore Xenoetas, now persuaded, that if he drew
nearer to the Enemies Camp, the greatest part of the Army would desert to him,
took his march along the River, and came and Encamped close by them. Whereupon
Molon, either out of Stratagem, or some real doubt of the Soldiers Disposition,
left his Camp by Night, with all his Baggage, seeming to take his march toward
Media. Xenoetas now believing that Molon had forsaken his Camp through ^ear
upon his approach, or through distrust of his own Troops, took possession
thereof, where he quartered his Army, giving his Orders, that the Horse and
Baggage of Zeuxes Camp should forthwith pass over and join him. Then assembling
the Soldiers, he encouraged them, by giving them hopes of a good issue of the
War, for that Molon had already thought it his safest course to sly before
them; so commanding them to refresh and repose themselves, he ordered them to
be in a readiness to march by break of Day in pursuit of the Enemy.

And now the Army of Xenoetas, full of Assurance, and being possessed of so
great plenty of all things, fell to Feasting and making Merry, Drinking to
excess, and acting in every thing the parts of careless dissolute People. While
Molon, when he thought he was got far enough, made an halt; and taking some
space to refresh his People, faced about, and marched directly back by the way
he came; and advancing to the Camp, found the Enemy negligently scattered here
and there, plunged in Sleep and Wine. Wherefore attacking them at Daybreak.
Xenoetas, astonished at the surprise, and not able to awaken and draw his
Troops together to make head against the Enemy, lost his Life, gallantly
fighting. The greatest part of the Army were cut off in their Tents, the rest
casting themselves into the River, hoped to gain the Camp on the other side,
but very few escaped over. Here might be seen the diverse Scenes of Tumult and
Confusion in the Army; for all had their share of Terror, at an Attempt so
unlooked for: And while they viewed their Camp on the other Bank of the River,
without regard to the violence of the Stream, or the difficulty and danger of
the Passage, such was their Passion to escape the Swords of the Enemy; their
fear, I say, had so blinded their Judgment, that to save themselves from the
hands of those that pursued them, they committed themselves to the Waters,
making their Horses, Baggage, and all attempt to pass the River, as if they
thought some special Providence had commanded the Flood to yield them succor,
and waft them safe to the other Shore; so that it was a lamenble sight to
behold at once Men, Horses, Arms, Baggage, the Dead and Living floating and
mingled together in confusion.

Molon becoming Master of Xenoetas's Camp, afterward passed the River without
impediment, none withstanding him; for Zeuxes, who might have hindered him, was
fled; wherefore he took possession likewise of the other Camp. Then upon this
Success he marched speedily to Seleucia, which soon fell into his hands; for
that Zeuxes and Diomedon, who was Governor of the Place, had deserted it. Then
reducing the upper Provinces to his Obedience, where he found none to oppose
him, he marched on, and subdued the whole Country of Babylon, and all the
Territory extending as far as the Red Sea. From thence he marched to Susa,
which was taken by Assault, as other Places had been; but he in vain attempted
the Fortress of that Place, for that Diogenes the Governor had made timely
provision for his Defense: Wherefore he forbore to use force, but leaving
Troops to block it up, took his march back to Seleucia, where he refreshed and
recruited his Army; and then after he had well encouraged them, he proceeded on
further Enterprises. Thus Molon reduced all the Country to the City Europus,
and all Mesopotamia as far as Dura.

When Antiochus came to be well informed of these Occurrences, he quitted the
barren Country of the Lower-Syria, (as we have noted) and turned his Thoughts
wholly on this War. Wherefore assembling his Council once again to deliberate
about it, and requiring every one to deliver his Opinion plainly touching the
War of Molon; Epigenes again first gave his Judgment, saying, That it had been
well for the King's Service, if they had followed his first Advice without any
delay or loss of time; for the Enemy had made so great a progress, that he was
confirmed in his former Opinion; namely, That it was most necessary the King
should march with the Army, and manage the War in Person. But Hermias thereupon
renewed his Indignation against Epigenes, charging and blaming him as
heretofore; and came to exaggerate his own Praises to that degree, that every
body despised him; and contesting with the King himself, labored all he could
to make him persevere in his Syrian Expedition; insomuch, that great Offense
was taken by Antiochus himself, who notwithstanding interposed his Authority in
vain to reconcile them, Hermias being by no means to be wrought from his
Aversion to Epigenes. Howbeit, his Advice at length prevailed, as being the
most safe and profitable; which Hermias not being able now longer to hinder,
seemed on the sudden to accord entirely to what he could not prevent; and
becoming (as one may say) another Man, resolved, that laying aside all other
Affairs, the War with Molon ought to be vigorously prosecuted: Wherefore he
applied himself with great diligence, and turned all his Thoughts to make
preparation for carrying it on.

And now when the King's Troops were assembled at Apamea, there grew a Mutiny
in the Army about the Arrears of Pay. Whereupon Hermias perceiving the King to
be surpised, and to seek what to do, made an Offer to him, proposing to
satisfy the Soldiers Arrears out of his own private Fortune, provided he would
yield that Epigences might not be employed in that Expedition; pretending, that
the Differences which had happened between them, would be the occasion of
Disputes, that would greatly hinder him in the management of his Affairs. The
King, in truth, lent a very unwilling Ear to the Proposal, believing it to be
for his Service to take Epigenes with him, who was well seen in Military
Matters, and in every thing an able Counselor; but won by the Artifices of
Hermias, who had gained likewise those about him, he was not Master of his own
Resolutions: Wherefore yielding to present Necessity, he complied with the
Demand of Hermias. Whereupon Epigenes retired to Apamea, pursuant to the Orders
he received from the King.

All of the King's Council were ill satisfied with this Resolution, while, on
the other hand, the Soldiers, who had received satisfaction of their Demands,
expressed great Affection toward Hermias, by whose means they had obtained
their Arrears. Nor was there any remaining Stirs, saving among the Cyrrhestae,
of whom there revolted from the King's Service to the number of Six Thousand,
who for a while gave him some Trouble; but being pursued and attacked, they
were defeated by those that were sent against them, the greatest part being cut
off, and the remainder returning to their Obedience.

And now Hermias, having subdued those about the King by his Authority, and
gained the Good Will of the Soldiers by his Bounty, departed with Antiochus and
the Army; but forgot not, by means of Alexis, who was Governor of the Citadel
of Apamea, to form this Design for the Destruction of Epigenes. He forged a
Letter from Molon to Epigenes; and having corrupted one of his Servants by
Promises of a great Reward, gives him the Letter, with Orders to lay it among
the rest of his Master's Papers. Whereupon Alexis comes to Epigenes, and
demands of him if he had not received Letters from Molon? To which Epigenes
replied with Indignation, That he held no intercourse with Rebels. But Alexis
boldly affirming the contrary, demanded leave to search; and entering by force
into his Lodgings, he found the Letter; with which pretext he immediately
killed Epigenes on the place, the King being persuaded to think him Guilty. And
though the principal Men about him were awed into Silence, and did not dare to
move therein, nevertheless the Action gave them great Jealousy and Offense.

Upon the Army's arrival at Euphrates, Antiochus joined the Troops that he
found there, and pursued his march; and coming near Antioch in Mygdonia, Winter
being now at hand, he there remained till the Colds were over, and in forty
Days after arrived at Liba. Here he fell to deliberate with his Officers what
course was best to take to find out Molon, and by what means they should
sustain the Army in their march; for Molon was in possession of all the Country
about Babylon. Hermias proposed to keep along the River Tigris, by which means
they should have the benefit of that River, and two others, Lycus and K^pros,
to cover and defend their Camp. But Zeuxes, though he wanted assurance to deliver
his Mind as he ought, having the Fate of Epigenes before his Eyes;
nevertheless, such was the Weakness and Danger of Hermias's Advice, that with
some difficulty he replied, That there was a necessity of their passing the
Tigris; and made appear the great Impediments they should meet with, in holding
their march along the River. He principally urged, that after a long and
tedious Journey, and a march of six Days through a continued Desert, they would
come to a place called, The King's Ditch; which place, if it should chance to
be possessed by the Enemy, would entirely bar their further Progress; which
might be the means of exposing the Army to great danger, by their being
compelled to return by the Desert, where (which was especially to be
considered) they should be reduced to want every needful thing. On the other
hand, he made appear, That in case they passed the Tigris, it was more than
probable, that those of the Country of Apollonia would see their Error, and
return to their Duty, who, it was plain, were compelled, and not out of
Goodwill, but out of Fear and Necessity, had taken part with Molon.
Furthermore, being to march through a plentiful Country, there would be no
danger of being driven to streights for any thing. And what was of further
importance, when Molon should see his passage ^ack into Media shut up, and
behold himself (...) streights for Provision, he would be constrained either to
come to the issue of a Battle, (...) in case of refusal, would hazard the
desertion of his Troops to the King.

This Advice of Zeuxes was approved, pursuant to which the Army being divided
into three Bodies, they passed over the Troops with their Baggage in three
several places. So they prosecuted their march toward Dura, which was at that
time streighten'd by one of Molon's Officers, who on their approach left the
Siege. Then continuing their march without halting, they passed by Oricum in
eight Days and came to Apollonia. And now Molon being informed of the King's
Arrival, and not being very well assured of the Good Will of the Susians and
Babylonians, whom he had but lately reduced, and who were surpised into
submission; and further, fearing the Enemies design of blocking up his Passage
back into Media, he resolved to lay a Bridge over the Tigris, and passing his
Army, determined to gain the Mountains of Apollonia before Antiochus should
arrive; for he relied much on his Slingers, which they call Cyrthii. Whereupon
putting in execution what had been resolved, he marched the Army away with
great diligence. But the King chancing to move with all his Troops about the
same time from Apollonia, that Molon's Army approached the Mountains, certain
advanced Parties of choice Men of either Army happened to meet on the Hills.
These had some dispute, and pickeer'd for a while, but on the approach of the
gross of the Army, they retired, and the two Armies Encamped about five Miles
asunder. But Molon, during the Night made reflection, how dangerous it was for
Men in Rebellion to march against their Prince in broad-day and give him
Battle; wherefore he became of Opinion, that the much safer course would be to
fall on Antiochus by Night, which was accordingly resolved; so detaching a Body
of select Troops, he lead them by secret ways toward the Mountains, and from
thence determined to fall on the Enemies Camp from high Ground. But while he
was on his March, he was given to understand, That Ten of his People had
deserted and stole away to the King; whereupon he desisted, and returned back
by the way he came; but coming to the Camp about break of Day, he filled the
whole Army with Fear and Tumult: For being surpised and awakened with the
Noise, the Terror grew to that degree, that they had like to have abandoned
their Works; but by Molon's Care and Diligence all was appeased.

In the mean while the King, who was prepared to come to a Battle, ordered his
Troops to march out by break of day. On the right of the Battle he ranged the
Lanciers under the Leading of Ardyes, of whose Conduct in War he had received
sufficient Proofs. After these he posted the Candiots, who had been sent
pursuant to the Treaty of Peace. These were joined by the Galatians and
Tectosages; and next these he placed the Mercenary Strangers, who were brought
from Greece. The King himself was at the head of a strong Battalion, where the
Cohorts were disposed after the same manner. On the left he posted the Horse,
that are called the Troops of the King's Allies, ordering his Elephants by
tens, with Intervals between them, a little advanced before the Battle. On the
Wings were posted the Auxiliary Troops, both Horse and Foot, who had Orders to
attack the Enemy in Flank, as soon as the Battle should begin. Then the King
going from Rank to Rank, spoke to the Soldiers, and in few words, as the time
and occasion permitted, animated them to their Duty. He gave the leading of the
Left-Wing to Hermias and Zeuxes, remaining himself in the Right.

Molon also marched out his Army, and ranged them with difficulty enough, by
reason of the last Night's disorder; nevertheless, he formed his Troops
according to the Measures the other Army had taken, and placed his Buckler-men,
Galatians, and heavy-arm'd Soldiers in the Center. He distributed his Archers,
Slingers, and all his light-armed Troops without the Horse, on the Right and
Left; posted his Chariots armed with Sithes, advanced before the Line of
Battle. He gave the Command of the Left to Neolaus his Brother, reserving the
Right to himself.

Being thus drawn up, the Battle began; and, in a word, the Right of Molon's
Army preserved their Fidelity to the last, engaging Zeuxes with great
Resolution. But the Left no sooner advanced near the King, when they deserted
and went over to him; which Accident, as it greatly terrified Molon's Army, so
it increased the Courage of the King's. And now Molon, beholding himself
deserted, and as it were abandoned on all sides, and reflecting on the
Punishment that awaited him, searing to fall alive into the Enemies hands,
killed himself; and all who had been Accomplices with him, and could escape home,
ended their Days after the like manner. Neolaus saving himself out of the
Battle, got into Persia, and came to Alexander his Brother, where he killed the
Wife and Children of Molon, and afterward died himself on their dead Bodies,
having persuaded Alexander to do the like. After the King had pillaged the
Enemies Camp, he ordered Molon's Body to be fixed on a Cross, and placed on one
of the highest Mountains of Media; which was immediately put in execution the
Body being carried into the Country of the Chalonitidi, and placed on the most
conspicuous part of the Mountain Zagra, where where was fixed on a Cross.

As to the Rebel-Army, after the King had severely reproved them, he vouchsafed
them his Pardon; appointing certain Officers to lead them back into Media, who
were to remain there to regulate the Affairs of that Province.

In the mean time the King returned to Seleucia, where he applied himself to
the establishing the Affairs of the neighboring Provinces, practicing his
customary Prudence and Clemency. As to Hermias, he continued the same Man
still, loading the Seleucians with many Accusations, and condemning them in a
Fine of two thousand Talents, sending their Diganes (for so their Magistrates
are called) into Banishment; and exercising his natural Cruelty on many of the
Citizens, dismembring some, and putting others to death. But in the end the
King's Humanity prevailed, and put a period to those Evils, sometimes by
ordering things his own way, sometimes by interposing to soften the Severities
of Hermias; and contented himself with diminishing the Mulct of the Seleucians
to five hundred Talents; on the payment whereof he received them into Grace.

After these things, Diogenes being left Governor in Media, Apollodorus in
Susa, and Tycho the King's Chancellor being sent into the Countries bordering
on the Red Sea, an entire Period was given to the Rebellion of Molon, and all
the Troubles that fell out thereupon were composed. Antiochus encouraged by
this Success, that he might terrify the Princes of the Barbarians bordering on
his Dominions, and deterr them for the future from taking part with his
Rebellious Subjects, or entering into Alliance with them, he resolved to invade
them. And first he proposed to attack Artabazanes, who was esteemed superior
to the rest both in Power and Military Abilities, being over and above Lord of
that People they call Atropatii, and other neighboring Nations. But Hermias
unwillingly engaged in that War, as well in regard of the Danger it threatened,
as for that his Mind was more bent on that against Ptolomy, according to the
Resolution that had been formerly taken: Nevertheless, on the News of the
Queen's having brought a Son, and conceiving the King would run some hazard of
his Person in a War with the Barbarians, he came to promote the Proposition of
invading them, in hopes of being delivered of Antiochus; proposing that in case
he could by any means be rid of him, the Government of the Empire, and Tuition
of the Infant-Prince would fall to his share. Wherefore after all things were
prepared for the Expedition, the Army marched over the Mountain Zagra, and fell
on the Territory subject to Artabazanes. The Country lies on the Borders of the
Medes, separated only by a ridge of Hills that lie between them. It extends on
the one side to the Pontus, where the River Phasis runs into that Sea; and
stretches as far as the Caspian Sea. The Region abounds in good Soldiers,
especially Horse; it is plentifully stored with Provisions, and all things
needful to sustain a War, the Kingdom having continued ever since the
dissolution of the Persian Empire, having it seems been neglected by Alexander.
But Artabazanes being old, and toward the period of his Days, and terrified it
the Kings arrival, thought it safest to submit, and purchase Peace with
Antiochus, on whatsoever Conditions he should please to impose.

After this Affair was accommodated, Apollophanes, the King's beloved
Physician, perceiving Hermias to aspire yet beyond that degree of Power and
Greatness to which he had been raised, began to fear, and take thought for the
King's safety and his own; wherefore taking a proper occasion, he imparted his
Jealousy to Antiochus, praying him not to rely over-confidently on Hermias's
Fidelity, concerning which, there wanted not grounds of distrust: That, in
short, it behooved him to be on his guard, and not to defer the means of his
Preservation, lest he fell into the like Snare with his Brother: He told him he
thought the Danger at hand; wherefore he conjured him to determine with speed
touching the means of his own and his Friends Preservation.

Antiochus hereupon dissembled not to his Physician the Hatred he bare to
Hermias, and that he had long entertained suspicious Thoughts of him: He told
him he took in good part his care for his safety, and praised his Resolution in
opening so frankly his Thoughts. This Discourse confirmed Apollephanes that he
had obliged the King, and that his Sentiments were conformable with his own;
which gave him both Joy and Assurance. In conclusion, Antiochus enjoining him
to have a careful eye to his and his Friends Preservation, not only in words,
but in effect. And Apollophanes manifesting his readiness to act any part to
insure his safety, they came, after a long conference, to agree, That the King
should feign himself indisposed in his Head, insomuch that for a while none
were to be admitted to his Chamber. Howbeit, at length such of the King's
Servants as he most esteemed, were to be permitted to wait on him; by which
means they dealt apart with such as they thought fit; and when they had
imparted the Conspiracy to those who were proposed to be engaged, (which was
not hard to bring to pass through the general Hatred Hermias had contracted)
they deliberated how to put it in execution. The Physicians then advised the
King to take the Morning's Air, while the Season was yet cool, and to walk
abroad early: So that Hermias was not wanting to give his attendance at the
Hour appointed; and with him those to whom the King had communicated his
purpose, but none else, in regard the King's walking out was designed to be
sooner than ordinary. Thus Hermias was led abroad; and coming to a lonely
place, where the King stepping aside, as on some necessary occasion, he was in
the mean time killed by those who were about him; a Punishment in truth too
gentle for his Crimes.

The King now delivered of this Troubler of his Affairs, resolved to lead his
Army home, all the Provinces through which he passed receiving him with
Acclamations of Praise, and applauding principally his Justice in taking
Hermias out of the World; whose Wife and Children were at the same time stoned
to death by the Women of Apamea.

Upon Antiochus's return home, he disposed his Army into Winter Quarters, and
sent to expostulate with Achoeus about his invading the Crown, and presuming to
call himself King. Afterward he let him understand, that the League he had
made with Ptolomy, was come to his knowledge; and charged him with many other
Acts contrary to Justice, and in violation of his Duty. It seems that at what
time the War was undertaken against Artabazanes; Achoeus imagining the King
might miscarry in that Expedition; and though that should not happen, yet the
King being thereby drawn so far out of the way, would give him a safe
opportunity to fall on Syria, and seize on that Kingdom for himself, aided
therein by the Cyrrhestoe, who at that time had withdrawn their Obedience from
the King: Wherefore with this Determination he marched his Army out of Lydia.
Furthermore, he caused himself to be Crowned at Laodicea of Phrygia, receiving
and giving Audience to Ambassadors; and in his Letters to the Cities, he
assumed the Regal Title; flattered principally into this Attempt by the
Instigations of a certain Exile called Syniris. But after some days march, and
that they now approached Lycaonia, there happened a Mutiny in his Army, the
Soldiers refusing, it seems, to be led against him, whom Nature had destined
for their King. Whereupon Achoeus perceiving the Army to have changed their
Mind, changed also his Purpose; and to persuade them that he never designed to
invade Syria, he took another way, and marched and plundered Pisidia. After
which Expedition, having enriched the Soldiers with Booty, and confirmed their
Affection, he returned home.

The King then, who was well informed of all these Passages, had, as was noted,
let Achoeus know so much by menacing Messages, and in the mean while prepared
for the War against Ptolomy. To which purpose, early in the Spring, he
assembled his Troops at Apamea, and called a Council to deliberate on the best
way to make his entrance for the invading of Syria; on which subject were long
Debates of the Nature of the Country, Situation of Places; of the Provision to
make, and of what Benefit a Fleet would be toward the furtherance of the
Enterprise. But the Advice of Apollophanes the Seleucian, the Physician we have
already had occasion to name, prevailed above the rest; who maintained, that
the Design on Caelo-Syria was vain; and it would be an unprofitable Expedition
to make War there, while they left Ptolomy in quiet possession of Seleucia, a
Royal City, and in effect the Metropolis of the Kingdom: That not to mention
the Dishonor to have that City in the hands of an Egyptian King, the recovery
thereof would redound greatly to the Service of the King's Affairs in many
Points: That in the interim, while it remained in the Enemies hands, it would
be a mighty Impediment to the progress of the King's Success in the Enterprise
he was upon: For which way soever he had a mind to carry the War, he would find
it necessary (over and above all other Preparations) to strengthen all his
Towns with extraordinary Garrisons, merely on the account of the Danger that
would threaten from Seleucia: But that if Antiochus made the recovery of that
Place his first Business, it would not only serve as a Bulwark and Frontier
against all the other Towns of the Kingdom, but would mainly enable him to
prosecute his Enterprise both by Sea and Land.

The Opinion of Apollophanes then was by common Consent approved; and it was
resolved to open the Campaign with the Seige of Seleucia. The Kings of Egypt
had held constant Garrison in this Town, ever since Ptolomy, called Euergetes,
offended with Seleucus for the Death of Berenice, became Master thereof; who on
that Provocation, had invaded Syria. When it was resolved then, that
Apollophanes's Counsel should be followed, Antiochus ordered Diognetus his
Admiral, to Sail with the Fleet to Seleucia, while himself marched with the
Army from Apamea, and came and Encamped near Circus. Theodotus was likewise
sent with a sufficient Body of Troops into the Lower Syria, with Orders to take
Possession of the Streights, and to have an Eye to all Motions in those Parts.
As to the Situation of Seleucia, and the Country about it, take it a little
more or less, as follows, Seleucia stands on the Seacoast, on the Frontiers of
Cilicia and Phoenicia, in the Neighborhood of a very high Mountain called
Coryphoeus; one side of which Mountain toward the West, is washed by the Sea
between Cyprus and Phoenicia; the other toward the East, regards the Territory
of Seleucia and Antioch. Seleucia stands on the Southside of this Mountain,
between which and the City is a deep Vale, waste and full of broken Ground,
which extends to the Sea, enclosed almost on all sides with Rocks and
Precipices. On that side of the City toward the Sea, the Ground is low and
watery, where there is a Suburb Fortified with a good Wall, like that of the
City it self. Seleucia surpasses all the Cities of Syria in the Magnificence of
her Temples and other Buildings. It has but one Communication with the Sea,
which is a Passage wrought out of the Rock in manner of Stairs. Not far off is
seen the Mouth of the River Orontes, whose Head is in the Country about Libanus
and Anti-Libanus, taking its Course through the Plain of Amycoe; and running to
Antioch, divides that City as it were into two, which it cleanses of all their
Filth and Rubbish, and at length discharges it self, not far from Seleucia,
into the Sea we mentioned.

Now before Antiochus would proceed with Hostility against Seleucia, he first
sent Offers of Rewards to the Principal Men of the City, and Promises of
further future Advantages, to win them to yield it up without strife or
resistance. But finding he labored that way in vain, he corrupted several of
their Military Officers, who had Posts distinct, and Commanded in sundry
Quarters of the City; and in confidence of their Compliance, drew out, and
ordered his Troops as for an Attack. To the Seaward the Marine Forces were
appointed; toward the Land, those of the Camp were ordered to make the
Assault. So making three Divisions of his Army, and animating the Soldiers
according to Custom, and Proclaiming by a Herald, Promise of extraordinary
Recompenses, as Crowns, and such like Rewards to the Officers and Soldiers, who
should best behave themselves. He gave to Xeuxes, and those under him, the
Attack of the Gate that leads to Antioch; to Hermogenes, that of those parts
that are nearest the Temple of Castor and Pollux; and to Ardys and Diognetus,
the Ars'nal and Suburbs; for it was agreed with the Conspirators, that as soon
as the Suburbs should be won, the Town should be Surrendered. And now the Signal
being given, the Attack began in all places at once, and was pressed with great
forwardness and bravery. But Ardys and Diognetus signalized themselves above
the rest, both in Resolution and Address. Though indeed in other places they
could not come to the foot of the Wall to erect their Ladders, without coming
to Blows with the Enemy; but at the Ars'nal and Suburbs they approached, and
applied their Ladders without Impediment: So that while the Marine Soldiers
Scaled the Ars'nal, and Ardys the Suburbs, and those of the Town not being able
to come to their Relief, being themselves pressed on all Quarters, Ardys, after
some Dispute, became Master of the Suburbs; whereupon the Officers who had been
gained by the King, and Commanded in several Posts of the City, came to
Leontius the Governor, pressing their Opinion, that there was now no safe way
left, but to send immediately to the King to Treat, before the Town should be
taken by Assault: Whereupon Leontius, who was ignorant of the Treachery, being
frighted with their seeming Fear, dispatched a Message to Antiochus, with
Proposals of Conditions that no Violence should be done to any, and that the
Inhabitants should be Safe in their Persons.

The King on sight of the Proposals, promised that no manner of Injury should
be done to any one of free Condition, which were to the number of Six Thousand.
And in a word, when the Place was delivered up, he did not only deal graciously
with those, but recalled their Exiles, and restored the City to its Privileges,
and the Inhabitants to their Estates and Authority, leaving only Garrisons both
in the Port and Citadel. While the King was busied in these Affairs, Letters
were brought him from Theodotus, by which he was Solicited to march with what
Expedition he could into Syria, giving him assurance that on his Arrival, he
would deliver the Kingdom entirely to his Possession. This News gave the King
some trouble and suspense, uncertain what to resolve, on the intimation he had
received. Theodotus was by Birth an Aetolian, who though he had done Eminent
Service to the Egyptian Kings, nevertheless his Recompenses were not only
short of his Merits, but coming to Court, as we have elsewhere noted, he there
ran great hazard of his life. Whereupon when Antiochus was on his Expedition
against Molon, Theodotus having no very good opinion of the state of Ptolomy's
Affairs, and jealous of his Interest at Court, had himself taken Ptolemais, and
won Tire by the help of Panoetolus, and had now earnestly invited Antiochus.
Who therefore respiting for that time his Expedition against Achoeus, and all
his other Affairs; he marched with his Army, taking the same way he had gone
before. And having passed the Valley of Marsyas, he Encamped near the Straight,
where the Fortress of Gerra stands, along the side of the Lake, between the
Mountains. There he received notice that Nicolaus, one of Ptolomy's Captains,
had laid Seige to Ptolemais, where Theodotus was shut up; wherefore leaving his
heavy-arm'd Troops behind, and giving Orders for the Besieging the Castle of
Brochos, that commanded the Passage by the Lake, he marched at the Head of his
light-armed Forces to raise the Seige of Ptolemais. Nicolaus, receiving
Intelligence of the King's approach, decamped from before the Town, and sent
Lagoras a Candiot, and Dorymenes an Aetolian, to possess the Straight near
Berytus. But Antiochus hasting after them, forced them to a Battle, where they
were beaten; so the King himself Encamped in the Straight. In which place
assembling the whole Army, after he had encouraged them, he prosecuted his
March with the entire Body of his Troops, full of expectation of great Success,
whereof there were already so many promising appearances. Theodotus and
Panoetolus, accompanied by their Friends, coming out to meet the King, were
received by him with great Courtesy, to whom they delivered up Tire and
Ptolemais, with all the Stores of War that were there lodged; among other
things they found, there were forty Galleys, whereof twenty were covered and
equipped for the Sea, and none were less than Quadriremes; the other were
Triremes, and Vessels of less Rates; these were committed to Diognetus the
King's Admiral.

In the mean time Antiochus being informed that Ptolomy was gone to Memphis,
that his Troops were assembling at Pelusium, and that they had opened the
Canals of the Nile, and let loose all their Watercourse; he thereupon
chaing'd his purpose of marching to Pelusium, and divided his Army, resolved to
attempt the Towns by the way; some by fair means, some by force. Such Places as
were not sufficiently Garrisoned for Defense, were on his arrival frighted into
Submission, and putting themselves under his Protection, Courted his Favor;
but such as had Men and Provisions within, and thought themselves able to
withstand him, preserved their Obedience to their Prince; insomuch, that the
King spent much time and labor to reduce them.

At to Ptolomy himself, who was manifestly betrayed, he took little or no
thought for the better posture of his Affairs; nor dreamed of approaching the
Enemy, as he ought to have done; such was his stupidity, and the aversion he
ever had to Military Employments: Wherefore Agathocles and Sosibius, who were
at that time in prime Authority, having the entire Administration of the
Public in their Hands, fell at length to deliberate with the best Advice they
could. They resolved to make all possible Preparations for Defense; and to win
Time, concluded to send Overtures to Antiochus; and to proceed in such manner,
as to possess him with assurance, that he was not at all mistaken in the Mind
of Ptolomy; namely, that he would never resolve to meet him in the Field, but
endeavor by Conference and Mediation to dissuade his Enterprise on Syria. This
Counsel being approved, Agathocles and Sosibius, to whom a share of the
Management likewise was committed, dispatched Ambassadors to Antiochus, and so
wrought that the Rhodians, Byzantines, Cyzicenians, and the Aetolians
themselves, dispatched their Ambassadors to Mediate a Peace. In so much, that on
their arrival, the time that was taken up in Treating and Journeying from one
King to another, lent space sufficient for Sosibius and Agathocles to prosecute
their Preparations for the War. Their Residence was at Memphis, where they held
their Conferences with the Ambassadors, according to the Emergency of Affairs;
and where they received and treated with the Ministers of Antiochus. But while
these were well received, and civilly entertained, and held in hand, all the
Mercenary Strangers, which Ptolomy had in his Towns and Garrisons throughout
the Countries of his Dominion, were assembled at Alexandria. Furthermore, they
sent every where to levy Troops, taking care above all things, that due
Provision might be made as well to sustain those they had already in Pay, as
those whom they expected. Nor were they less mindful of every other Point that
might require their Application to advance their Purpose; sometimes the one,
sometimes the other, going to Alexandria to provide that nothing might be
wanting toward the Execution of what had been resolved. To Echecrates the
Thessalian, and Phoxides the Miletian, was committed the Care of providing
Arms, raising Men, and forming their Troops; who were assisted by Eurylochus
the Magnesian, together with Socrates the Boeotian, Cnopias and Aloritas. In
short, it was a mighty advantage to the Egyptians, to be furnished with those
Men who had served under Demetrius and Antiochus, and who were at least seen in
some degree in the Conduct of Battles and Military Expeditions. These then
proceeded to provide for the War as fast as they could Exercise and Discipline
the Soldiers, that were committed to their Care.

First, they caused them to be distributed according to their Age, then they
armed them after such manner as they judged proper, taking from them such Arms
as they had before been used to. They abolished the old way of drawing up in
Battle, which had been observed on the review of their Armies; when they Paid
the Soldiers, and Modeled them in such sort, as best suited with the Service
they were to go upon. Then they accustomed them to the Word of Command, wherein
their Officers kept them in perpetual Exercise; instructing them likewise in
the use and management of those Arms they were appointed to carry. At other
times they caused the whole Army to be drawn up in one place, and Exercised
together; wherein Andromachus the Aspendian, and Polycrates of Argos, who were
newly arrived out of Greece, were employed above the rest. These had truly the
Courage and Industry of Greeks, and well knew how to apply it in occasions of
War. Furthermore, they were Men of Experience, and both Eminent by the
Reputation of their Country, and the Quality of their Persons. Polycrates was
particularly considerable by the Antiquity of his Family, and the Character of
Mnasias his Father, who had often won the Prize in the Olympic Games. Thus
then the Officers Exercising and Animating sometimes in Public, sometimes in
Particular, the Soldiers who were respectively put under their Command, they
became bold and expert for the Service wherein they were to be employed.

Furthermore, every one of those we have named, had their particular Posts and
Charges in the Army, suited to their Talents and Capacity. Eurylochus the
Magnesian had the Command of three thousand Men, being of those Troops of the
King's Household, called Agema. Socrates the Boeotian, Commanded two thousand
Buckler-men. Phoxidas the Achaian, and Ptolomy the Son of Thrasea, together
with Andromachus the Aspendian, had the like Charge in the Phalanx and the
Greek Mercenaries. But Andromachus and Ptolomy had the prime Commands in the
Phalanx, and Phoxidas of the Mercenaries. The Phalanx was Composed of about
five and twenty thousand Men: The Mercenaries amounted to about eight thousand:
The Horse of the King's Household came to about seven hundred, who were led by
Polycrates, together with those who were brought from Libya; and that were
raised in Egypt, making in all to the number of three thousand Men. But
Echecrates the Thessalian, had the Command of the Groecian Horse, and the rest
of the Foreign Cavalry, being to the number of two thousand in all. And as he
had taken great pains in Exercising and Disciplining them, so was his Care
visibly recompensed in the Service they afterward performed to Ptolomy.
Cnopias also the Aloritan, yielded to none in his Diligence, in Training and
Instructing those who were committed to his Charge; who were a Body of three
thousand Candiots, among whom were a thousand new-raised Men, which he put
under the Command of Philo a Cnossian. There were likewise three thousand
Africans, Armed after the Macedonian manner, whose Chief was Ammonius the
Baroean. The Egyptian Troops, or Phalanx, amounted to twenty thousand, the
Command of which Body Sosibius reserved to himself. They assembled likewise of
Thracians and Gauls, Subjects of King Ptolomy's, to the number of three
thousand; and more, two thousand new-raised Men of the same Nations; these were
put under the leading of Denis of Thrace. The Army of Ptolomy then was Composed
of this number, and of the diverse People we have recited.

Antiochus, in the mean time, laid close siege to Dura; but that attempt not
succeeding, the Place being strong of it self, and Nicolaus finding ways to
recruit and supply them from time to time, he therefore accorded to Ptolomy's
Ambassadors (who arrived the beginning of Winter) a Truce of four Months;
telling them, it would not be through his default, if a Peace did not follow.
Nevertheless, in that he spoke not his Mind; but being unwilling longer to be
detained out of his own Dominions, he was earnest to withdraw his Army to
Seleucia to their Winter Quarters. Furthermore, there were grounds of suspicion
that Achoeus (whom none doubted took part with Ptolomy) was practicing Designs
against the King.

In conclusion, Antiochus having granted the Demands of the Ambassadors,
dismissed them, with Injunctions to let him know speedily the Resolution of
Ptolomy, requiring them to meet him on their return at Seleucia. Then putting
Garrisons into proper places, and leaving Theodotus in the chief Command, he
prepared for his return home. As soon as he arrived at Seleucia, he dispatched
his Army into Winter Quarters; where during their abode, but little care was
taken to train and keep them in good Discipline; he holding his Opinion, that
there would be but little occasion of fighting, to finish what he had begun:
For being already possessed of a good part of the Lower Syria and Phoenicia, he
made no great doubt of acquiring easily the rest; and that what remained in
Dispute, would be ended by Treaty and Conference; and that Ptolomy would never
be drawn to Dispute with him in the Field. The Ambassadors were likewise of his
Opinion; for Sosibius, who held the Treaty at Memphis, had entertained them
with all possible Deference and Respect; and had managed his Affairs in such
sort, that none of those, who had been sent to Ptolomy, were able to obtain the
least information of the Preparations that were making at Alexandria: Wherefore
the Ambassadors, at their return, declared that Sosibius was ready to yield
every thing.

It Is observable, that in all the Conferences Antiochus had with the
Ambassadors of Ptolomy, he seemed most carefully to insist on the advantage of
the Right he had, as well as the Success of his Arms, against his Adversary.
And on the arrival of his Ambassadors at Seleucia, when they came to treat
about the Conditions of the Peace, pursuant to the Instructions they had
received from Sosibius, the King made but very little account of the violence
that had been acted against Ptolomy, whereof the whole World was witness, in
his seizing of Towns in the Lower Syria; but frequently boasted of that
Expedition, affirming he had done no wrong therein to any Man, having but
barely attempted the recovery of his Right; and that Antigonus, Cocles, and
Seleucus, who were the first Conquerors of that Province, were the rightful
Masters, and that therein consisted the force of his Pretensions to the Lower
Syria, in opposition to Ptolomy's. He further said, that it was true that
Ptolomy waged War with Antigonus; but it was not for Dominion, but merely as a
Friend and Ally of Seleucus, to whom that Country appertained. Then he referred
to the Accord made by the several Princes; at what time Antigonus being
defeated and vanquished, Cassander, Lysimachus, and Seleucus, met in a General
Assembly, to deliberate on that Subject, when the entire Kingdom of Syria was
adjudg'd to Seleucus. Those who were present on the part of Ptolomy, labored
to prove the contrary, and to show the weakness of Antiochus's Pretensions; and
further to exaggerate the Injury, remonstrated the Indignity of breaking the
Peace, by the Treachery of Theodotus, and the Expedition of Antiochus: That
Ptolomy the Son of Lagus entered on the War for the acquisition of Syria: That
he joined his Arms with Seleucus conditionally, that as the Dominion of Asia
should be his, so the Lower Syria and Phoenicia should fall to Ptolomy's share.
The several Ambassadors urged these and the like Reasons in the Conferences
that were held; but no fruit came of their Debates, through want of one common
Mediator: For while Matters were canvas'd by People equally interess'd and
partial to their own side, without any one to moderate the Heats that could not
but grow between them, what success could be hoped? The Affair of Achoeus was
likewise a great clog to the Negotiation: For Ptolomy urged to have him
comprised in the Treaty; but Antiochus could not brook so much as to hear him
named exclaiming how scandalous it was that Ptolomy should entertain so much as
a thought of giving protection to one in Rebellion against his Prince.

Thus while these two Princes built on the Equity of their Allegations, the
Treaty was defeated; and early in the Spring Antiochus assembled his Troops,
with intention to attack the Enemy by Sea and Land, and to prosecute his
Conquest of what remained to be reduced of Caelo-Syria. Ptolomy, on the other
part, committing his Affairs in those parts to the Conduct of Nicolaus,
furnished Gaza plentifully with every needful thing for its defense, moved also
with his Sea and Land Forces. On their arrival, Nicholaus prepared with
determination to abide the War; and was readily supplied in all his Demands by
Perigenes, to whom Ptolomy had given the Command of the Fleet and Naval Army,
which consisted of thirty Vessels of War, and four hundred of Burden.
Nicholaus was an Aetolian by Nation, very brave, and in the Trade of War
superior in Knowledge to most, who at that time were in the Service of
Ptolomy. His first care was with part of his Army to possess the Streights near
Platanos, posting himself with the other part of his Army in the places near
Porphyreon, to prevent any attempt of Antiochus on that side. In the mean
while, the Fleet remained at Anchor not far off.

On Antiochus's arrival at Marathum, the Aradians applied to him with Tenders
of Friendship and Alliance; whom he did not only kindly receive, but interposed
his Mediation between the Islanders, and those of the Continent; composing the
Difference that had happened between them, and establishing Friendship among
them. Then marching into Syria, by that passage which is called Thouprosopon,
he came to Berytus; took Botris in his march, and burnt Trieres and Calamus.
From thence he dispatched Theodotus and Nicarchus, with Orders to possess the
Streights which lead to the River Lycus, to be beforehand with the Enemy. In
the mean time, himself kept on his march with the Army, and came and Encamped
by the River Damura, Diognetus, with the Fleet, keeping always near him. From
thence, taking with him Nicarchus and Theodotus, with his light-armed Troops,
he went to view the Streights where Nicholaus was posted; and after he had made
Remarks to his Mind, he returned back to the Camp. The next Day, leaving
Nicarchus with the Command of his heavy-arm'd Troops behind, he marched himself
at the head of the rest of the Army, to put in execution what he had projected.
Now, in regard Mount Libanus streightens, and contracts the passage by the
Seacoast, and the space is bounded by a Valley, waste and inaccessible, it
comes to pass, that the way between that and the Sea, is very narrow and
difficult. Here it was where Nicolaus had posted himself; where by placing good
Guards in some places, and fortifying others with Works, he thought he should
be able, without much difficulty, to withstand Antiochus's Passage.

The King, in the mean time, disposed his Army into three Divisions; to
Theodotus he gave the Command of one, with Orders to attack the Enemy that was
posted along the Mountain; another Division he gave to Menedemus, who was
expressly directed to attempt the Passage that lay in the middle of the Vale;
the third he appointed for a reserve, with respect to what might happen in the
Naval Conflict: These were lead by Diocles, who was Governor of the Country of
Parapotamia near the Euphrates. Antiochus himself making choice of such a place
(attended only by his Guards) where he might stand and have a fair view of all
that passed on every side, whereby being a Spectator of each Man's behavior, he
was enabled to judge where to supply Succors in case of Need. And now
Diognetus and Perigenes drew their Fleets into a Line of Battle, drawing as
near the Shore as they could, insomuch as the whole Action by Land and Sea
became one single prospect. When the Signal was given they advanced to the
Attack on all sides. The Fight at Sea continued for some time doubtful, their
Forces being in every thing equal. And notwithstanding Nicolaus seemed a while
to have the better, having the advantage of Ground; yet upon Theodotus's
forcing the Enemy from their Post on the Mountain, and from thence falling on
the rest, Nicolaus was compelled to give Ground, and betake him to flight.
About two thousand were slain in the pursuit, and no fewer taken Prisoners, the
rest got into Sidon. Perigenes likewise, who once thought he had the better in
the Naval Dispute, terrified to behold his Friends beaten a-shoar, left the
Enemy a stern, and flying, secured himself in the same place.

Antiochus presently thereupon leads his Army to Sidon, and encamps before the
Town: But he thought it not advisable to attack it; for as it was very well
supplied with all sorts of Provisions of War, so the Inhabitants were numerous,
and their Strength re-inforc'd by those who had fled thither after the Battle.
From thence then he took his march toward Philoteria, ordering Diognetus his
Admiral to make sail with the Fleet to Tire. Philoteria stands in the
neighborhood of a great Moor, through which runs the River Jordan, which from
thence pursues its course through the Plains of Scythopolis. Antiochus becoming
Master of the two forementioned Places, grew into greater assurance of
succeeding in his Enterprises, in regard the Territory subject to those Towns
produced sufficient of all things to sustain his Army, and yielded over and
above enough of every thing he might need to prosecute his Design; wherefore
after he had strengthened them with good Garrisons, he took his march over the
Mountains, and came to Atabyrium. This Town stands on a rising Ground, which by
a gentle descent terminates in a Plain, from whence to the top of the Eminence
it is near two Miles. Here Antochus lodged an Ambush, which in effect won him
the Place. For after by little Skirmishes and Disputes he had drawn the People
out, in one of these Engagements, feigning to be too weak, his Party retreated,
while the others pursued; when presently facing about, the Enemy in their turn
retired, who meeting the Ambush in Front, many were cut off; and, in short,
Antiochus himself pursuing the Advantage, so terrified them, that the Town was
taken on the first Attack.

At the same time Keroeas, one of Ptolomy's Captain, deserted, and came over to
Antiochus, whom receiving with great Solemnity, it gave occasion for many other
prime Officers of the King of Egypt to leave his Service. For shortly after
Hippolochus the Thessalian acted the same part, bringing with him to the number
of four hundred Horse. Antiochus likewise Garrisoned Atabyrium, and pursuing
his Journey, in his march received to his Obedi^^^e the Cities of Pella, Camus,
and Gephrus, which surrendered.

This great Success so wrought on the Minds of the neighboring People, that
they unanimously took part with Antiochus, whereby his Hopes increasing, and
his Power being augmented by this new accession of his Arabian Friends; he
advances into Galatis, which reducing, he took Abila, and in it those who were
come in to succor it, under the leading of Nicias, a Kinsman and Confident of
Menea's. In short, Gadara was the only Place that now remained to be reduced,
which was esteemed the most considerable for Strength in all that Country. To
this Town the King approached with his Army, and so terrified the Inhabitants
with his preparations to Attack them, that they yielded themselves up. And now
being informed that great numbers of the Enemy were drawn together in a certain
Town of Arabia, called Rabath-ben-Ammon, or Rabatamana, from whence they made
Excursions, and plundered the Country of those who had contracted Friendship
with him; he therefore laying aside all his other Affairs, bent his march that
way, and approached the Mountain whereon the Town stands. After he had viewed
the situation on all sides, he concluded there were but two places by which
they could be attacked; there then he posted his Troops, and caused his
Machines to approach. The Conduct of the Works he divided betwixt Nicarchus and
Theodotus, whi^^ himself kept an equal and vigilant Eve of their Behavior, and
remarked the Affection that carried these two Leaders to advance his Service:
Who emulating each other, and laboring who should first open a Breach, the
Wall was demolished by that means much sooner than was expected. That Work
done, the King continued his Attacks Night and Day, pressing by all means
possible to get into the Town; but therein they long labored in vain, by
reason of the multitude of the Defendents. Till at length one of their Prisonen
discovered, to the Besiegers, a Vault or Passage under Ground, by which the
besieged descended to supply themselves with Water; which Passage being once
stopped up, the Inhabitants, streighten'd by necessity, confessed themselves
vanquished, and so yielded up the Town.

Thus Antiochus became Master of Rabatamana, where he left Nearchus Governor,
with a good Garrison, and sending Hippolochus and K^roeas, (who had deserted
Ptolomy) at the head of five thousand Foot into the Country in the
neighborhood of Samaria, to Command in that Province, and to Defend those who
had submitted to him against Incursions of the Enemy, he bent his march toward
Ptolemais, there to pass the Winter, for so he had before determined. During
the same Summer, those of Ped^elissa being attacked and besieged by the
Selgians, and finding themselves in danger, applied to Achoeus for Succor by
their Ambassadors; who readily promising them his Assistance, they sustained
the Siege with great Constancy, in hopes of his sending them Relief, which he
accordingly did, dispatching Garsyeres at the Head of Six Thousand Foot and
Five Hundred Horse.

As soon as the Selgians had notice of the approach of these Succors, they
marched with the greatest part of their Troops to possess the Streights, near a
certain Place called by those of the Country Climax, or the Ladder; posting his
Troops on the Passage, or Entrance hard by Saporda, breaking the Ground and
barracadoing the Passages every where. Garsyeres, marching into the Territory
of the Milyades, came and encamped near Cretompolis; and finding it was
impossible for him to advance any further, for that the Enemy had every where
made themselves Masters of the Defilees; he therefore devised this Stratagem:
He caused his Troops to face about, and march back by the way they came, making
show, as if on finding the Ways so fortified, that he could not march on, he
had despaired of his Design of relieving the Besieged. The Selgians were
deceived by this show, and concluded Garsyeres had changed his purpose;
whereupon one part of their Troops returned to their Camp, and, the^ (...)
marched home, for that their time of Harvest was at hand.

This being observed by Garsyeres, he there upon marched back, and gained the
top of the Mountains, without meeting any force to oppose him; where posting
sufficient strength to guard the Avenues, he left Phaylus to Command there, and
marched with the Army to Perga; dealing with other People of Pisidi^, and with
the Pamphylians themselves by Persons he dispatched to them, setting forth the
insolent behavior of the Selgians toward their Neighbors, and exhorting them
to enter into the League of Achoeus, and to contribute to the Relief of
Pednelissa.

While these things were in agitation, the Selgians sent an Army against
Phaylus, which being well acquainted with the Country, had conceived hopes of
terrifying him, and forcing him from his Post. But finding their Attempt in
vain, and losing many of their Men in the several Attacks they made upon him,
they lost their hopes likewise of succeeding that way; howbeit, they would not
forsake their Enterprise, but had recourse to their Machines.

In the mean while the Etennenses, who inhabit the Mountains of Pisidia that
overlook Sida, supplied Garsyeres with a re-inforcement of eight thousand Men;
and the Aspendians with four thousand. But those of Sida, who though they had a
just Consideration for Antiochus, yet bearing no Good Will to the Aspendians,
would not be drawn to send relief to the Besieged.

Garsyeres however, thus strengthened with the Succors of the Allies, marched
toward Pednelissa* promising himself to be able to raise the Siege on the
first attempt. But when he perceived the Selgians to be under no surprise at
his arrival, he drew near, and Encamped his Army close by them. The
Pednelissians the mean while were driven to great streights for every thing;
wherefore Garsyeres, resolving to put relief into the Town by one means or
other, drew out two thousand choice Men of his own Troops, each Man taking with
him a certain proportion of Corn, ordered them to march, and endeavor to get
into the Town by Night. But this attempt being discovered by the Selgians, they
hastened to prevent them; and attacking them, took all the Corn, and cut off
most of the Party. This success so exalted them, that they came thereupon to
resolve not only to assault the Town, but to attack Garsyeres himself in his
Camp. For the Selgians are a People who in War love both those Counsels and
Enterprises best, that are most rash. Leaving their Camp therefore with a good
Guard, they drew out the rest of their Troops, and posted them in diverse places
about Garsyeres's Works, and marched to the Attack on all sides. Garsyeres
finding himself enclosed every where by this surprising Attempt, and beholding
his Defenses in some places already broken down, and the whole Camp reduced to
extremity, ordered his Horse to sally out by a way the Enemy had taken least
notice of. And now the Selgians, believing the Horse to be fled and escaped
away, made no more account of them, but let them pass unpursu'd; whereupon,
after they had gone some distance, they wheeled about, and fell on the Enemy's
Ree^, where the Dispute was bloody. Upon this, the Foot, who before were
heartless, and on the point of turning their Backs, took Courage, and faced the
Enemy with fresh Resolution, insomuch that the Selgians, who ^ut now thought
the Day their own, beh^ld themselves on the sudden, surrounded on every side,
worsted, and driven to fly. At the same time the Garrison of Pednelissa sallied
and fell on the Selgians Camp, which they forced; whereupon the Enemy flying in
disorder, they lost to the number of at least ten thousand Men. Those of their
Allies who escaped, retired home; and the Selgians gaining the tops of the
Mountains, got to the City. Garsyeres pursuing them, being desirous to hasten
out of the Defilee, and approach Selgia before the Enemy could have leisure to
rally, and consult about their safety. Accordingly he came before the ^^ty,
with his Army where the Enemy, hopeless of help from their Allies, through the
loss they had lately sustained in their Service, and terrified at their Defeat,
grew into doubt both of their own and their Country's safety. Wherefore calling
an Assembly, they agreed to dispatch Logbasis, one of their Citizens, in
quality of their Ambassador to Achoeus. This Logbasis had been in great esteem
with Antiochus, he who died in Thrace; and it seems had the care of the
Education of Laodice, (whom he brought up with the tenderness of his own Child)
and who was afterward married to Achoeus.

On these Considerations they concluded him the properest Person to be sent in
the present Exigence, wherefore they dispatched him, But Logbasis revealing the
Secret of his Embassy to Garsyeres, made so little reckoning of his Duty, and
the preservation of his Country, that on the contrary he was instant with
Garsyeres to let Achoeus understand, that he was ready to put the City into his
hands; whereupon Garsyeres, furnished with those Hopes, dispatched Letters to
Achoeus, praying him to dispose himself for his Journey, on the receipt of his
Advice, while he in the mean time held a Truce, and entered into Treaty with
the Selgians; and contriving Disputes about the Articles of the Peace, spun out
the time till the coming of Achoeus, and that Logbasis had leisure to conferr
with him, touching the execution of their Enterprise.

And now during the Treaty, and the going and coming of Messengers from the
(...) to the Camp, and from the Camp thithe^* the Soldiers by degrees were
admitted into the Town, to traffic and buy Provisions, and what else they
wanted; and Oversight which has had many bad effects. And it may (...)
assurance be said, that as there is no Creature that possesses so great a share
of Sagacity and Reflection as Man, so there is scarce any more subject to be
deceived: For how many Town^* Fortresses, and even Camps, have been by this
means betrayed to the Enemy! And albeit there are frequent and fresh Examples
of such Disasters, and we know they have befall^^ many; it is as true
nevertheless, that by I kno^ not what kind of fatality, we know not how to
secure our selves against such Arts, and a^^ always to seek to prevent them;
the reason^ take to be from our want of reflection on other Men's Adventures.
Our Providence is seen in making Provision to sustain and pay our Armies, and
to furnish our Soldiers with the best and most proper Arms for our Defense,
while at the same time we omit what is both more easy and profitable; namely,
to be on our guard against these kind of Evils to which we lie exposed: For
Prudence may be acquired at our leisure, and by the study of History, we
improve the Understanding without difficulty, in the contemplation of things
past.

Achoeus failed not to be present at the time assigned, and the Selgians
entering into Conference with him, were in hopes on that occasion of sharing
with others the Benefit of his Gentleness and Humanity. But in the mean time
Logbasis, having privately got into his House a good number of those who came
from the Camp into the Town, labored with the Inhabitants not to lose the
occasion, but to improve, while they might, the Offers so bountifully tendered
by Achoeus: That they would do well to convoke their Assembly, and delib^rate
on their present state, and put a period to the Treaty they had already begun.
Whereupon they called an Assembly of the People, drawing off those who were
posted on the Walls and elsewhere, for the defense of the Place, pretending the
necessity of a General Assembly of the whole Body of the People, solemnly to
conclude on the Proposals.

While things were in this posture in the Town, Logbasis gives the Signal to
the Enemy, and in the mean time causes the Soldiers he had received into his
House, to be ready with their Arms, while himself and his Sons likewise prepare
to act their Parts. Acha^us then approaches the Town on one side, with one part
of the Army, and Garsyeres with another advances toward Cesbedium, which is a
Temple of Jupiter, that commands the Town in manner of a Citadel. But it
chanced that these motions were observed by a certain Shepherd, who giving an
account to the Assembly, that the Enemy were approaching the Walls; some
hastened to Cesbedium, others to their Posts on the Walls, from whence they had
been called; while the multitude enraged, ran to the House of Logbasis; whose
Treachery being now manifest, some untile the House, while others attack and
force the Gates, and in short killed Logbasis, with his Family, and the whole
Party that were with him. Then they proclaimed Liberty to their Slaves; and
drawing up in several Bodies, they marched to the defense of such Places as had
most need of succor. And now Garsyeres, beholding the Temple in a posture of
defense, thought it not safe to advance, while Achoeus, who attempted the
Gates, and used his utmost Endeavors to get into the Town, was attacked by the
Selgians; who making a Sally, slew about seven hundred Mysians* of his Party,
and compelled the rest to retire.

After this repulse, Achoeus and Garsyeres returned to the Camp, while the
Selg^ans, doubting danger from a Sedition within the Town, (the Enemy being
still at hand) sent out some of their gravest Inhabitants to treat with
Achoeus, who at length accorded them Peace on the following Conditions: That
they should pay down presently four hundred Talents: That the Pedneliss^an
Prisoners should be enlarged: and that within a certain space, they should pay
further three hundred Talents. Thus the Selgians, being reduced to manifest
danger of losing their Country by the Treachery of Logbasis, had the good
Fortune to rescue it by their Resolution, without staining their Liberty, or
violating the Alliance in which they were engaged with the Lacedoemonians.

Achoeus, having reduced the Country of Milyas to his Dominion, and part of
Pamphylia, marched to Sardis, where he waged War with Attalus, menacing also
Prusias; becoming formidable to all the Asians inhabiting on this side Mount
Taurus. But while he was diverted by the War with the Selgians, Attalus having
with him the Gauls, Aegosages, or Tectosages, led his Army to the Towns of
Aeolia, and others in that Neighborhood, who out of fear had submitted to
Achoeus The greatest part of which Towns yielded themselves up, whom he
received with gentleness, willing them to understand it in effect of his Grace
and Goodness; nor were there many which exercised his Arms to reduce them. The
principal Places that submitted were Cuma, Smyrna, Phocoea; and in short, the
Aegoeans and the Lemnites terrified at his arrival, submitted. The Teii and
Colophonii also applied to him by their Ambassadors, and put themselves and
Towns under his Protection.

After he had received these People according to the Conditions of the ancient
League, and had likewise received their Hostages, he entertained the Smyrnian
Ambassadors with singular Benignity; for indeed, that People had above all
others distinguished themselves by a generous Fidelity toward him. From thence
he continued his march, and having past the River Lycus, he came to the Towns
inhabited by the Mysians, and so proceeded to the Country of the Carsenses,
and, in short, spread so much Fear among them, that the Garrison of
Didyma-Tiche, where Themistocles had been left Governor by Achoeus, delivered
up the Two Castles. From thence he marched and spoiled the Lands of Apioe, and
passing the Mountain Pelecas, he came and encamped near the River Megistus.
Here there happening an Eclipse of the Moon, the Gauls, who could no longer
bear the Toils of so tedious a March, (for they went with their Wives and
Children, traveling in Wagons along with them) conceiving the Eclipse to be
ominous, came to a Resolution to march no further. Whereupon, though they were a
People of no use in Attacks, and had all along, during their march, encamped by
themselves (being subject to no Discipline) and were a proud and refractory
Nation: Nevertheless, the King was in pain what to resolve about them; for he
was doubtful if he should dismiss them, le^t they should take Arms under
Achoeus, and that to punish their Insolence by destroying them, would redound
to his discredit, they having passed over into Asia out of respect to him;
wherefore he took that occasion for his return, after he had promised to
conduct them safe to the place from whence they came, and assured them of Lands
wherein to plant, and that he would at no time refuse to comply with any of
their reasonable Demands, but do them all the good Offices in his Power; so
after he had led his Gauls to the Hellespont, and treated those of Lampsacus,
the Alexandrians, and Illians with great Respect (they having continued firm in
their Fidelity) he returned with his Army to Pergamus.

It was now early in the Spring, when Antiochus and Ptolomy, having made all
necessary Provisions for the War, were arrived at the conjuncture of deciding
their Controversy by Battle. Ptolomy marched from Alexandria with an Army of
seventy thousand Foot, five thousand Horse, and seventy three Elephants; while
Antiochus, receiving intelligence of the Enemies advancing, assembled also his
Troops. His Army consisted of Daoeans, Carmanians, and Cilicians, who were
light-armed; these were commanded by Byttachus the Macedonian. Theodotus the
Aetolian, who had deserted and betrayed the Affairs of Ptolomy, was placed at
the head of twenty thousand Men, armed after the Macedonian manner, chosen
Troops, and carrying for the most part silvered Bucklers. The Phalanx was
composed of about twenty thousand, which was conducted by Nicarchus and
Theodotus, surnamed Hemiolius. Menedemus the Alabandine led two thousand
Archers and Slingers, with whom were mingled a thousand Thracians. There were
likewise Medes, Cyssians, Caddusians, and Caramanians to the number of five
thousand, who were ordered to obey Aspasianus the Median. The Arabians and
others of the Neighbour-Nations, composed a Body of above ten thousand, whose
Chief was Zabdiphilus. The Greek Mercenaries amounted to five thousand, and at
the head of these was placed Hippolochus the Thessalian. Antiochus had likewise
five hundred Candiots, commanded by Eurylochus, and a thousand new-raised Men
of the same Country, whose Leader was Zebes the Gortynian; there were also five
hundred Lydian Slingers, and a thousand Cardaceans, who had over them
Lysimachus the Gaul. The Horse consisted of about six thousand, four thousand
of which obeyed Antipater the King's Nephew; the rest were led by Themison. In
conclusion, the Army of Antiochus consisted of seventy two thousand Foot, the
Horse above-noted, and a hundred and two Elephants.

Ptolomy first marched to Pelusium, where he encamped; and as soon as the Rear
was come up, and he had distributed Bread to the Army, he prosecuted his march
through a Country destitute of Water, along the Mountain Casius, passing by a
place called Barathra. When he arrived at Gaza, he drew out a Detachment, with
which he marched and advanced before the Army, without any apprehension of
Impediment. The fifth Day he came to a Place where he purposed to halt,
encamping about fifty Furlongs from Raphia. This is the first City of the Lower
Syria, after Rhinocorura, that lies in the way from Egypt into that Country.

Antiochus at the same time advanced with his Army; and passing by Raphia, he
encamped by Night about ten Furlongs from the Enemy. For a while their Camps
stood at this distance one from another. But shortly after, Antiochus decamped,
and came and lodged nearer the Enemy, as well to better the Conveniences of his
Army's abode, as to hearten the Soldiers; so that there was not now above five
Furlongs space between their two Camps; insomuch that those who went to Water,
and marched out to Forage, had frequent Rencounters; and often by Parties both
Horse and Foot pickeer'd between their Camps.

Here Theodotus gave an instance of Aetolian Resolution, and indeed worthy of a
truly fearless Man: For having resided heretofore in Ptolomy's Court, and being
well acquainted with the Ways and Manners of that Prince, he got a little
before Daybreak into the Enemies Camp, with two Men only in his company. It
was not easy to know him by his Face, it being not yet Day; nor by his Habit,
for that the Army consisted of great diversity of Garbs. He having before
observed where the King's Tent stood, for that they had frequently pickeer'd
near that place, approached undiscovered, and entering the Tent where the King
used to Eat, and give Audience, he searched everywhere for him, but found him
not; Ptolomy it seems having lain that Night elsewhere. Wherefore wounding only
two Persons, and killing Androeas the King's Physician, he retired in safety,
having executed his Design, if we rightly weigh the Hazard, but failed only
through want of information where the King was lodged.

After these two Princes had remained five Days thus near each other, they
agreed to come to a decision. Ptolomy first marched out, and soon after
Antiochus appeared in Battle. Their Bodies were composed of their Phalanxes and
chosen Troops, armed after the Macedonian manner, who were opposed one to
another; their Wings were thus ordered, in Ptolomy's Polycrates commanded the
Left, with the Horse that were under his Command; and betwixt these and the
Phalanx, first marched the Candiots next to the Horse: These were followed by
the Regiment of Guards, called Agema; after these marched the Buckler-men, led
by Socrates; then the Libyans, armed like Macedonians. The Right was led by
Echecrates the Thessalian, with the Horse who were under his Command; on the
Left next Echecrates marched the Gauls and Thracians; then Phoxidas with his
Greek Mercenaries; after these marched the Egyptian Phalanx. They placed forty
Elephants to cover the Left-Wing, where the King was to be, and the other
thirty three stood on the Right to cover the Mercenary Horse. Antiochus thus
ordered his Battle: On his Right he placed sixty Elephants, to cover the
extremities of that Wing, where he himself proposed to stand, opposed to
Ptolomy, giving the Conduct to Philip his Foster-Brother; in the Rear of these
were posted two thousand Horse, led by Antipater; next these were the like
number drawn up in form of a Tenaile; after the Horse stood the Candiots in
front; then the Greek Mercenaries; betwixt these stood the five thousand Men,
that were armed like Macedonians, under the Command of Byttacus the Macedonian.
His Left-Wing consisted of two thousand Horse, led by Themison. After these
were the Cardaces, the Lydian Slingers; and next those three thousand
light-armed, who were under Menedemus. The Cyssians, Medes, and Caramanians
followed; and to these succeeded the Arabs, and their Neighbor-people, which
closed up to the Phalanx. The Right-point of the Battle was covered by the rest
of the Elephants, which were conducted by Myiscus, who had been the King's Page.

In this order of Battle were the two Armies drawn up; while the two Kings,
attended by their Officers and Favorites, went from Rank to Rank to animate
their Troops. But forasmuch as they had placed their greatest Confidence in
their Phalanxes, which may be called Legionaries; to these therefore they were
more earnest in their Exhortations, wherein Sosibius and Arsinoe seconded
Ptolomy; and Theodotus and Nicarchus, Antiochus; who were Chiefs of the
Legionaries of the one and the other Army. In short, it may be concluded, that
the Speeches of these two Princes were near the same, whereby to encourage
their Troops; neither being furnished with stronger Reasons than the other; for
they were but young Kings, and had never yet done any thing very memorable, out
of which to collect Matter for their Exhortations; wherefore they labored to
hearten them to the Battle, by laying before them the Prize of Glory that was
to be won, and the Reputation of their Ancestors; and above all, made large
Promises of Rewards to the Officers in particular, and the Soldiers in general,
to oblige them to their best performance in that occasion. Thus then the two
Kings animated their Armies, partly by themselves, and partly by their
Interpreters.

As soon as Ptolomy and his Sister Arsinoe were come to the Left-Wing, and
Antiochus to the Right of their two Armies, attended by their Guards, they
sounded to the Charge, and the Battle began with their Elephants: Some of those
Beasts, on Ptolomy's part, came at first boldly on to the Attack; and the Men
who fought from the Turrets behaved themselves well, fighting from thence with
their Pikes; but the shock between the Elephants themselves was more
remarkable, those Animals attempting one the other with an impetuosity hardly
to be represented; for they fight after this manner: They first make proof of
their Strength by engaging with their Teeth, and with a firm foot keeping their
Ground, press one against another with their utmost strength, till by this
contention one of them prevails, and compels the other to yield ground to his
superior Strength; whereby the Trunk being turned aside, he is forced, by
endeavoring to disengage himself, to expose his Side and Flank to his Enemy,
who fails not to hit him there, goring him with his Tooth, as Bulls do with
their Horns.

But it came to pass, that Ptolomy's Elephants for the most part wanted Courage
to stand the Shock; and as the Elephants of Libya, who can neither endure the
Smell nor Braying of those of India; so these, frighted at the Strength and
Size of the others, turned their backs before they came near them, putting
Ptolomy's Regiment of Guards into disorder, who were drawn up behind them, upon
whom they fell. In the interim, Antiochus leading about his Battalion of
Guards; and getting before the Elephants, charged Polycrates at the head of the
Horse; and at the same time the Mercenary Greeks, who were posted near the
Phalanx, advanced against Ptolomy's Buckler-men, whose Order had been already
broken by the Elephants. The Left-Wing of Ptolomy's Army being by this means
worsted, turned their backs, and betook them to flight; but Echecrates, who
commanded in the Right, and stood waiting to see the issue of the Dispute
between the two Points, whereof we have been speaking, observing a thick Cloud
of Dust drive toward him, and perceiving their Elephants would do nothing,
commanded Phoxidas, who led the Greek Mercenaries, to advance, and charge those
that were opposed to him, while he led the Horse about, and charge those that
were posted behind the Elephants, and were covered by those Animals; whereupon
attacking the Enemies Horse in Flank and Rear, they put them to flight. Nor was
Phoxidas and those with him less fortunate, who falling on the Medes and Arabs,
had the like success.

Thus the Right-Wing of Antiochus beat, and the Left was beaten; and now albeit
the Phalanxes on either side were deprived of their Points, they remained
however entire, and held their Order, attending (betwixt Hope and Fear) the
Event. Antiochus, we observed, where he fought on the Right, had the better;
but Ptolomy retiring into the Phalanx, and appearing in view of both the
Armies, much discouraged the Enemy, and gave new Heart to his own People to
prosecute the Battle; insomuch, that Andromachus and Sosibius caused their
Phalanx to charge their Pikes, and advance. The Assyrian Soldiers did indeed
for a while sustain the Charge; but those who were under Nicarchus hardly
enduring the first Shock, were presently broken, and turned their backs.
Antiochus, like a young Prince and unexperienced Captain, imagined because they
had beaten the Enemy where he fought, and pursued them, that the Victory had
been entire; but he was soon undeceived by an old Officer, who advised him
heedfully to consider what that mighty Cloud of Dust meant, that came from the
middle Battle, driving toward the Camp; so that being soon given to understand
the Success, he hastened toward his Camp, attended only by his Troop of Guards;
where finding his Army routed, he made speed to Raphia, under this Comfortable
Persuasion only, that the Battle was not lost through any Default of his, but
by the Cowardice of his Soldiers.

Ptolomy, thus winning the Day through the good Behavior of the Phalanx, many
of those that fled being cut off by the Horse and Mercenaries, who fought in
the Right Wing, retired out of the Field, and remained that Night in the Camp.
The next Day, after he had caused the Dead on his side to be buried, and had
stripped the Enemy that remained on the place, he Decamped, and Marched
directly toward Raphia. In the interim, Antiochus, Rallying and Forming into
Troops such as he found, who had fled out of the Field, would have Encamped
without the Walls; but finding they were for the most part gotten already into
the Town, he thought it best to retire himself in likewise; and early the next
Morning, Marching out with the Remains of his Army, took his March toward
Gaza; where after he had Encamped, he sent to Ptolomy, to Demand the Bodies of
those that were slain; which being obtained, he caused their Funeral Rights to
be perform.

In this Defeat, Antiochus lost no less than ten thousand Foot, and above three
hundred Horse, besides Prisoners to the number of four thousand: Thirteen of
his Elephants were killed in Fight, two died after of their Hurts. On the part
of Ptolomy fell about two thousand five hundred Foot, and seven hundred Horse;
16 of his Elephants were killed, and the remainder most of them taken. This was
the success of the Battle that was fought near Raphia, for the Dominion of
Caelo-Syria.

After Antiochus had caused the Slain to be buried, he Marched away with the
rest of his Army homeward, while Ptolomy received to his Obedience Raphia, and
the other Towns, which contended which should be first in their Submission to
the Conqueror. In short, it is the Custom of Mankind on the like occasions, to
Accommodate their Affairs to their present Fortune; but of all Countries, none
produce Minds so pliable that way, as these of this Country, when Fortune will
have it so; nevertheless, that Nation being disposed to a better liking of the
Government of the Egyptian Kings, it was a less wonder that they so frankly
gave themselves up to Ptolomy And indeed those of the Lower Syria, have ever
born a singular Veneration for the Royal House of Egypt. Wherefore, to acquire
the Good Will of this Prince, they forgot no ways of Flattery, Honoring him
with Crowns, and Adoring him with Sacrifices and Altars, and doing all things
of that Nature.

When Antiochus was arrived at the City that bears his Name, he dispatched
Antipater his Nephew, and Theodotus Hemiolius, his Ambassadors to Ptolomy to
Negotiate a Peace; being doubtful least his Enemies should take the occasion to
Attack him; and having no great Trust in the Multitude of his Subjects, by
reason of his late Misfortune. He was jealous likewise, that Achoeus might make
use of the Conjuncture to hurt him. As for Ptolomy, none of these Reflections
employed his Thoughts, who contenting himself with unexpected Victory, and
pleased with the entire Recovery of the Lower Syria, so contrary to his Hopes,
manifested a much greater inclination to Peace, than in Prudence he ought,
through the natural Sloth that was in him, and the other Infirmities of Mind,
to which he was subject through the whole course of his Life. Wherefore as soon
as Antipater, and the rest of that Commission arrived, he presently consented
to a Years Truce, after having first said some menacing things, and complained
of the Injuries offered him by Antiochus: Then he dispatched Sosibius to
ratify the Accord; and making about three Months stay in Syria and Phoenicia,
to regulate and settle the Affairs of the several Towns and Cities, he left
Andromachus the Aspendian, his Governor in those Provinces, and so departed
for Alexandria, with his Sister and Favorites; having put a period to the War,
to the great Wonder of his Subjects, who so well knew his Life and Manners. In
conclusion, after Antiochus had Ratified the Treaty of Sosibius, he prepared
for the War against Achoeus, as he had before determined.

About the same time the Rhodians, wisely improved the occasion of an
Earthquake, that happened in that Island, which had Demolished their Colossus,
their Ars'nal, and the greatest part of their Walls. But this Calamity, by
their Wisdom, was Converted to a Benefit: So wide the difference is between the
effects of thoughtless Negligence, and prudent Vigilance, whether it be in
private or public Affairs: For as the one often turns the best Success into a
Calamity; so the other can extract Benefit out of the greatest Disasters. Thus
the Rhodians aggravating their Sufferings and Losses to the World, by
Ambassadors which they sent abroad for that purpose; that what by Treating in
Public, what by Private Persuasion, People (especially the Kings) were so much
touched, and took so sensible a part in their Affliction, that they were not
only relieved and supplied, but were Treated with such Respect, that their
Benefactors reckoned themselves obliged by their own Generosity. Hiero and Gelo
gave them seventy five Talents to rebuild the place of their Exercises; part of
which Sum was paid down, the rest soon after. These presented them likewise
with Silver Candlesticks, and other Vessels for Sacred Uses, with ten Talents
for their Sacrifices, and other ten for the supply of the like Necessities; the
whole Sum amounting to an hundred Talents. Furthermore, all who Navigated and
Traded to Rhodes, they exempted from Public Duties and Tribute. They presented
them likewise with fifty Catapults, or Cross-Bow, of three Cubits long each. In
short, after they had shown their Good Will in so many Noble Expressions of
Bounty, as if they themselves had been obliged, they caused two Statues to be
erected in the principal Marketplace of Rhodes, where the People of that City
were Crowned by those of Syracuse.

King ^tolomy likewise promised them three hundred Talents of Silver, a million
of Artabes, or Measures of Wheat; Materials for building of twenty
Quinqueremes, and the like number of Triremes; as namely, forty thousand Cubits
of Pine-Timber, a thousand pounds weight of Copper Money, three thousand pounds
weight of Tow, three thousand Masts, three thousand Talents to re-edifie their
Colossus; an hundred Architects, three hundred and fifty Artificers, and
fourteen Talents by the Year, to pay for their sustenance. Furthermore, he gave
them ten thousand Artabes of Corn, for the expense of their Sacrifices and
Exercises; and twenty thousand of the like Measures of Corn, for the Service of
their Fleet. In short, the greatest part of these particulars were soon
delivered, and a third part of the Money in Hand.

Antigonus gave them ten thousand pieces of Timber, of sixteen Cubits long each
piece; seven thousand Planks, of seven Cubits long each; three thousand pounds
of Iron, three thousand pounds of Pitch and Rosin, and a thousand Metreta's or
Measures of Tar; further, promising them a hundred Talents of Silver. Chryseis,
his Wife, gave them an hundred thousand Measures of Wheat, and three thousand
pounds weight of Lead. Seleucus, Father of Antiochus, gave immunity to all the
Rhodians, who Navigated on the Coast of his Dominions, ten Galleys equipped for
War, and two hundred thousand Measures of Corn, besides many other things of
value.

Prusias, Mithridates, and the rest of the Princes then Reigning in Asia; as
Lysanias, Olympichus, and Limnoeus, made them proportionable Presents. In a
word, it is impossible to recount the numbers of Towns, and People, who
contributed to the Relief of the Rhodians, according to their Ability in that
occasion. Insomuch, that whoever should have considered only, how suddenly that
City rose from its Ruins, to that wonderful height of Riches and Splendour,
both in Public and Private, would be struck with astonishment. But when
consideration is had to its Commodity of Situation, and the superfluity of all
things that were supplied them from abroad, that they might be sure to want for
nothing; their flourishing State, and the Felicity to which they so soon
arrived, will then cease to surprise us, and rather defeat our Expectations.

We have a little enlarged on this Subject, to exemplify the Rhodians Love to
their Commonwealth, who have shown themselves worthy of Praise from all Men,
and are an excellent Example for imitation. And this we have taken the liberty
the rather to say, to the end that both Princes and People may confider and see
how the Minds of Men are shrunk, and how little the Liberalities of our Days
appear, when compared with the Munificence of our Forefathers; and to the end
that when they have extended a small Favor, they may not exalt their own
Generosity, and for little Acts of Grace, exact Remunerations and Honors,
equal to what was due to Kings of Old; and that by weighing rightly eithers
Merit, neither may want his due.

About the beginning of Summer, Agetas being Praetor of the Aetolians, and the
Elder Aratus Elected to that Magistracy by the Achaians, being now entered on
his Charge, (I think at least, 'twas there we brake off our Discourse of the
Social War) Lycurgus the Spartan returning home from Aetolia, being recalled by
the Ephori, who had found the Information false on which the Sentence of his
Banishment was grounded, (he I say) in conjunction with Pyrrhias the Aetolian,
who was at that time the Elean Praetor, resolved to fall on the Lands of the
Messenians. Aratus, in the mean time, found the Achaian Mercenaries corrupted
by Idleness, and decay of Discipline, and the Cities indisposed to contribute
toward the War, through the default of Eperatus, who had but ill discharged
his Office of Praetor. Wherefore after fit Exhortations to the Achaians, and
wresting from them by force, as it were, a Decree for his purpose, he applied
himself with his best diligence to prepare to prosecute the War. The Achaians
Decreed to entertain eight thousand Mercenary Stranger Foot, and five hundred
Horse; and that they should levy at home three thousand Foot, and three hundred
Horse; and that to complete that number, the Megalopolitans should contribute
three hundred Foot, called Chalcaspides, from their bearing Brass-Bucklers, and
fifty Horse; and that the Argians should furnish the like number. It was
further Decreed, that they should fit out a Fleet, and that three Ships should
be sent toward Acta, and the Gulf of Argos; and three to hover about Patrae
and Dymas, and the Seas in the Neighborhood.

While Aratus was busied in these Affairs, and making Provision for the War,
Lycurgus and Pyrrhias led their Troops into the Territory of Messenia, having
concerted by their Agents about the time they were to move with their Armies
into the Field. But Aratus getting notice of their purpose, took with him the
Mercenaries, to whom he joined some chosen Troops, and with these Marched away
in haste to succor the Messenians, and to proceed to Megalopolis. In the
interim, Lycurgus takes Calamas, a Messenian Town, by Intelligence; from whence
he prosecuted his March to join the Aetolians. But Pyrrhias, having drawn but a
small Force out of Elea, was Encountered by the Messenians on their Frontiers,
and worsted, and so compelled to retire home again. Whereupon Lycurgus,
defeated in his Hopes of increasing his strength by that addition, and not
having Force sufficient of his own to put his Design in effect, after he had
Forag'd the Enemy's Country, and done them what damage he was able, with the
little strength he had, returned back to Sparta, having done nothing worth
mention.

The Enemy thus disappointed, Aratus who was provident to foresee the future,
prevailed with Taurion to order out fifty Horse, and five hundred Foot,
enjoining the Messenians to provide the like number; with which Force, he
proposed to defend the Frontiers of the Messenians, Megalopolitans, Tegaeans,
and Argians: For that these Countries, lying in the Neighborhood of Laconia,
whenever the Lacedaemonians wage War in Peloponnesus, stand exposed to the
first shock of the Enemy. As to the Lands of Achaia, that lie toward Elea and
Aetolia, those he resolved to defend with his Mercenaries, joining with them
some Achaian Troops.

Aratus, having put his Affairs in this posture, dismissed the Megalopolitans
home, by a Decree of the Achaians; for that having not long before been forced
to leave their Country entirely ruined by Cleomenes; and albeit they were poor,
and in no condition to do any thing, Public or Private, nevertheless they
possessed still the same Courage and Greatness of Mind. But this begat great
Disorders and Dissentions among them, as it seldom ^ails to happen in States or
Private Families, when pinched with Poverty, and deprived of means to Prosecute
what they would design. First, a Contention arose about the Structure of the
Walls of their Town; some were for confining it to streighter limits, and so to
build, that when they should come to erect the Walls, they might compass it
without difficulty, and that in case of Hostility they might the better defend
it. These remonstrating that their Town had not been lost, nor they undone by
the Enemy, but through the overgreat circuit of their Walls, and their want of
numbers to Man them. Furthermore, they proposed that the Rich, who had
Possessions and Inheritances, should contribute the third part of their Estates
toward the re-peopling the Town. Others were of a different Opinion, neither
yielding to build the Town less than it was, nor thinking it reasonable that
the rich should so contribute. But the Dispute was heightened on occasion of the
Laws of Pritanis, a Person of great Fame; who had been bred among the
Peripateticks, and was sent by Antigonus to be their Legislator. But Aratus at
length composed these Differences, and bringing them to Reason by all the Arts
he could, entirely reconciled them; and had the Articles of Accord engraven and
placed on a Column near the Altar of Vestoe.

As soon as Aratus had united the Megalopolitans, he departed to go to the
Assembly of the Achaians, leaving the Mercenaries to the leading of Lycus the
Pharoean, who was at that time Pro-Praetor of the Country. The Eleans, who were
not pleased with Pyrrhias, procured to have his Place filled by Euripidas, who
came to them from Aetolia; he taking the occasion of the Assembly of the
Achaians, drew out two thousand Foot and threescore Horse, and led them into
the Territory of Pharoea, plundring and spoiling all along as he marched as far
as the Frontiers of the Aegeans, and having got much Booty, retired to
Leontium, Lycus receiving Intelligence of what had passed, marched out and got
before him, with design to make him quit his Plunder; and Attacking him, killed
above four hundred of his Party, and took two hundred Prisoners; among whom
were Physsias, Antanor, Clearchus, Euanoridas, Aristogiton, Nicasippus, and
Aspasius, all Men of note; taking over and above, their Arms and Baggage. At
the same time the General of the Achaian Fleet, sailing to Melycria, took there
no less than an hundred Prisoners; and after his return, he transported a Body
of Troops to attempt Chalcea, the Inhabitants of which Town immediately
Sallying out against him; nevertheless, he took two of their Ships with all
their Men aboard; he made Prize likewise of a Brigandine near Rhium, with all
the Soldiers and Rowers that were in her. And in that Expedition he took much
Plunder both by Sea and Land, which produced a great Sum of Money, and so
great plenty of Provision, that the Soldiers took better heart, in prospect of
better Pay; and the People assurance to think, they should be now exempt from
Taxes and Contributions toward the War.

And now it came to pass that Scerdilaidas, conceiving himself abused by King
Philip, a good part of the Money that was due by the Stipulations that were
concluded between them, being with held from him, fitted out a Squadron of
fifteen Ships, with orders to take by reprisal, what by agreement was his due.
This Squadron came to the Port of Leucas, where on account of old Friendship
they were well received; and here indeed they acted no Hostility, having no
occasion given them. They took only Agathynus and Cassander of Corinth, who
arrived at the Port in Vessels belonging to Taurion, and as Friends adventured
into the Harbor; but these seizing the four Vessels, and making them
Prisoners, sent them away to Scerdilaidas, Ships and all. From thence they made
sail for Malea, plund'ring all the Merchants Vessels they met in their way.

And now Harvest approaching, and Taurion taking no thought for supplying those
Towns we mentioned with Succors, Aratus therefore with a chosen Band of
Soldiers marched to assist the Argians in their Harvest; and Euripidas drew out
his Aetolians to Forage the Lands of Tritoea. But Lycus and Demodochus,
Generals of the Achaian Horse, coming to understand that the Aetolians were
marched out of Elea, immediately gathered a Body of Troops out of Dymas,
Patroe, and Pharoea, whom joining with the Mercenaries they had with them, they
marched and fell on the Lands of the Eleans; and drawing near to a Place called
Phyxium, they ordered their Horse and light-armed Troops to Forage the Country,
concealing the rest of their Forces in the forementioned place; whereupon the
Eleans marched all out against those that spoiled the Country, and pursued them
who seemed to fly. Lycus in the mean time rises from his Ambush and attacks
them, whom not able to withstand, but facing about at the first sight of them,
the Achaians cut off to the number of two hundred, took about fourscore
Prisoners, and so marched home in safety with all their Booty. He who commanded
the Achaian Fleet likewise, making several descents on the Coast of Calydon and
Naupactus, pillaged at pleasure all along the Country, and charged and routed
in two occasions the Forces that came to the relief: In one of which he took
Cleonicus of Naupactus Prisoner, who was soon enlarged without Ransom, as being
a favourer of the Achaians, wherefore he was not sold with the rest on his
being taken.

At the same time, Agetas the Aetolian Praetor raised an Army out of his own
Nation, with which marching into the Lands of the Acarnanians, after he had
taken much Plunder, he made Inroads and Forag'd the Country of Epirus, and then
returned home, and dismissed the Aetolians to their several Towns. Upon this
the Acarnanians invaded the Territory of Stratus, where being surpised with a
causless Terror, they retreated back with shame, howbeit without loss; the
Country People who made head against them, fearing to pursue them, jealous that
their ^light had been only to draw them into an Ambush. At the same time a
piece of mock-Treason was acted in Phanotis, which was managed after this
manner; Alexander, whom Philip had placed his Governor in Phocis, contrived
with Jason, whom he had made Governor of Phanotis, this stratagem to catch the
Aetolians; he made Jason treat with Agetas, the Aetolian Praetor, about the
betraying to him the Citadel of that Place, which by Oath he confirmed;
whereupon Agetas coming with his Aetolians thither, and at the time concerted
between them, chose out an hundred of the best Men of his Party, and sent them
toward the Fort, while himself with the rest remained concealed not far off.
Jason, who had Alexander himself in the Town ready to sally to his assistance,
admitted (pursuant to the agreement) the Aetolians into the Citadel; whereupon
Alexander immediately entering, surpised and took them. Agetas coming to
understand by Morning what had happened, marched back with his Army; having
been caught in the same Snare by which he had often taken others, being
singular in those kinds of dishonest Arts.

During these Transactions in Greece, King Philip took the Town of Bylazor in
Poeonia, which place commanded so entirely the way by which we go from Dardania
into Macedon, that becoming Master thereof, he became thereby safe against all
Attempts of the Dardanians; it being very difficult to invade Macedon, after
Philip had got this Place into his possession, which gave him all the Inlets to
that Country. As soon as he had strengthened it with a good Garrison, he
dispatched Chrysogonus with expedition, to conduct a Body of new-raised Troops
out of the Upper Macedon; going himself to Edesa with those he had raised in
Bottia and Amphaxitis. And as soon as Chrysogonus returned with his
Macedonians, he marched and came in six Days to Larissa; from whence continuing
his march Night and Day, with reposing as little as possible by the way, he
came before Melitea, which place he attempted to take by Scalade; while those
within were so terrified at an Attack so surprising, that he had mastered the
Town with little difficulty, had not their Ladders been too short. In which
Matter their Officers were greatly to blame; for what is more reproachable,
than to come rashly to the Assault of a Town or Fortress, without preparation
of every necessary thing? As a right knowledge of the height of the Walls, and
the like proper Information, whereby to strengthen their assurance of Success.
Who will not therefore condemn these of Negligence and want of Foresight? Or,
having themselves taken wrong measures, and committed it to others to pursue
their mistakes in providing Ladders and other Machines, which are contriv^d and
prepared without difficulty, and are of indispensible use in such Enterprises;
who, I say, can excuse them of being Authors of their own Shame and Reproach,
who conceive such Orders? And what is more certain, than to see in these
occasions every omission of our Duty punished? For the Error is no sooner
committed when we see the Damage, and feel the Effects, which appear in diverse
manners. First, the bravest and most forward Men are hereby most exposed, who
being by this means compelled to retire, the Enemy recovers heart and attacks
them with assurance, and pursues them with advantage. This is confirmed by
infinite Examples; for of those, who are forced to retire in such occasions, we
shall find more to perish, and be reduced to the utmost perils than to escape.
And it must be confessed, that such as act thus weakly contract to themselves
the misfortune of never being afterward trusted; incur a lasting hatred among
the Soldiers, and teach the Enemy to be more on his guard. And such Errors do
not only admonish the Spectators how to improve them, but afford instruction to
those who hear the relation. Wherefore all Officers and Leaders, who shall be
engaged in the Conduct of the like Enterprises, be hereby taught to proceed
more regardfully. Nor is it difficult, by the help of a very little Science, to
be Master of the means, whereby to compass exactly such heights and measures,
as import us to know with assurance, when we have such designs to prosecute.
But let us resume our Discourse, referring to another place what we purpose to
deliver for the instruction of those who would not be deceived when they engage
in Actions of this nature.

King Philip, hopeless of succeeding in his purpose here, drew off and encamped
his Army along the River Enipeus; ordering to be brought from Larissa, and the
other Towns, all such Stores and Provisions of War, as during the Winter he had
caused to be provided for the service of Sieges and attacking of Towns; his
main design in the Expedition being to attempt the City of Thebes, called
Phthiotis. This place is situate near the Sea, distant about eight and thirty
Miles from Larissa. It Is a Frontier of Magnesia and Thessaly. The Territory
borders on Magnesia on the side toward Demetrias; on Thessaly, toward that
quarter that is inhabited by the Pharsalians and Pheroeans. But forasmuch as
the Aetolians were now Masters of that Country, and from thence made incessant
Inroads, they greatly annoyed those of Demetrius, the Pharsalians and
Larissoeans, spoiling and plundering as far as a place called the Fields of
Amyricus. Wherefore Philip, concluding the Enterprise to be worth his while,
resolved to spare no application whereby to become Master of that place. In
order to which, he had provided an hundred and fifty extraordinary Catapults,
and five and twenty other Engines for casting of Stones, and so marched and sat
down before Thebes; and forming his Army into three Divisions, took possession
of the nearest Posts to the Town; one Division being posted on the Ground near
Scopius, another about Heliotropius, and the third possessed an Eminence that
looks into the Town. These three Camps he united by Lines of Communication,
which he fortified with wooden Redoubts, standing at about an hundred Paces
distant one from another, wherein he placed good Guards for their defense. Then
securing all his Stores and Equipage of War in one place, he caused his
Machines to be drawn out.

During the first three Days, the Inhabitants showed great assurance by the
brave resistance they made, whereby the Works advanced but little; but after by
incessant Attacks, which kept them continually in action, and a mighty number
of Darts and Stones that had been cast into the Town, whereby the better half
of the Besieged were either killed or wounded, their Resolution began to fail,
and the Macedonians with more success, advanced with their Mines. Howbeit, though
they wrought with their utmost diligence, they were five Days gaining the foot
of the Wall, the Ground proving so difficult. But in the end, by working
without intermission Night and Day, relieving each other by Parties, they had
sapp'd about two hundred paces of the Wall, which they sustained by strong
Posts or Props of Timber. But it so happened, that these Props being not of
sufficient strength to sustain the Burden, the Wall fell, before the
Macedonians could apply Fire to consume them, as was their Custom. Then they
wrought a Mine under the Ruins, to make a passage into the Town; but as soon
as the Thebans perceived the Enemy preparing to force their entrance, they
yielded. Philip by this success having secured the Frontiers of Thessaly and
Magnesia, and taken much Booty from the Aetolians, his Army came then to
confess, That Leontius had justly suffered; for it was now evident, That he had
not done his Duty as he ought, with the strength he had at the Siege of Palaea.

Philip thus becoming Master of Thebes, sold the Inhabitants, and re-peopling
it with a Colony of Macedonians, changed its Name to Philippi. Thus having
succeeded in all his Enterprises, new Ambassadors came to him to treat about a
Peace, on the part of the Rhodians; also from Chios, the Byzantines, and from
Ptolomy himself. But Philip replied, as he had done before, That he held the
same disposition to give a period to the War, willing them to apply to the
Aetolians, to know their purpose; but that in the interim he was resolved to
pursue his Enterprises. In order to which, receiving intelligence that the
Ships of Scerdilaidas infested the Sea about Malea; that they treated all the
Trading-Vessels as Enemies; and that contrary to the Treaty, they had seized
some of his own Subjects Ships in the Port of Leucas. He therefore Embarking on
the Euripus with a Fleet of fifty Sail great and small; some equipped for War,
others Vessels of Burden; with this force pursued with great diligence the
Illyrians, persevering in his purpose to press the War against the Aetolians,
being yet totally ignorant of Occurrences in Italy: For about the time that
Philip held Thebes besieged, the Romans were beaten in Tuscany by Hannibal, the
news whereof had not yet reached Greece. Philip coming too late to attack the
Illyrian Fleet, sailed to Cenchrea, from whence he sent his Vessels of War to
cruize on the Coast of Malea, toward Aegium and Patroe, ordering his other
Ships to steer toward Lechoeum by the Cape of Peloponnesus, with instructions
there to remain at Anchor, while he himself, accompanied with his Friends and
Favorites, made haste to Argos, to be present at the Nemoean Games; at which
time he received Letters from Macedon, imparting the news of the Romans Defeat
in a great Battle, and that Hannibal was Master of all without their
Retrenchments. This news Philip communicates to Demetrius of Pharus, and to no
other, to whom he enjoined all possible secrecy. Demetrius glad of the
occasion, advised him thereupon to give a period to the Aetolian War, with what
expedition he could; but his Opinion was, That he should prosecute his Design
against the Illyrians, and prepare his Thoughts for an Expedition into Italy.
He persuaded him, that such a Design would win him the Obedience of the whole
Greek Nation for the time to come, that the Achaians would submit through the
Affection they bare him, and the Aetolians through fear, after the many
Calamities they suffered by the War: That Italy, and his Voyage thither, would
be his first step to the universal Dominion, to which none had so great Right
to pretend; and that the present Distresses of the Romans was a fair and most
favorable occasion to incite him to the Enterprise.

Thus did Demetrius easily work on Philip, who was yet but young, and whose
Affairs Fortune had hitherto espoused; whose Mind was great, and he of a Race,
that I, by I know not what kind of Destiny, above all others, yielded with case
to the transportments of acquiring the Universal Dominion. Philip for the
present, I say, communicated the news he had received to none but Demetrius:
But soon after assembling his Friends, he fell to deliberate about a Peace with
the Aetolians; to which Aratus appeared well enough disposed; weighing, that by
how much they had the better in the War, by so much was it likely they should
better their Terms in a Treaty of Peace. Wherefore, without attending the
arrival of Ambassadors, who were to act in that Negotiation, he disp^tch'd to
the Aetolians Cleonicus of Naupactus, whom he found attending the Assembly of
the Achaians, and where he had remained ever since he had been taken Prisoner.
Then taking with him what Ships he found at Cor^nth, he went with his Land
Forces to Aegium: But the better to hide his Inclinations to a Peace, he
advanced toward Las^on; and taking a small Fortress that was built on the
Ruins of that Place, made show of a purpose to seize on Elea. After Cleonicus
had made two or three Journies backward and forward, the Aetolians demanded a
Conference, to which Philip consented. And having now his Mind totally weaned
from the War, he dispatched Letters to the respective Cities of the
Confederacy, exhorting them to hasten their Deputies to the Assembly, to
deliberate together about Peace. In the interim, he embarked his Army for
Panormus, a Port-Town of Peloponnesus, lying against Naupactus, where he
Encamped, resolving to attend the Arrival of the Ambassadors, who were to
compose the Assembly. But he went himself to Zacynthus, where he stayed till he
had notice of their meeting, and then returned, after he had first by his
single Authority settled the Affairs of that Island.

As soon as the Assembly was full, King Philip dispatched Aratus, Taurion, and
certain others who had accompanied them to the Aetolians, who at the same time
held a General Assembly of their States at Naupactus, whither the Ambassadors
likewise came; and after some Conference, whereby they became assured of the
Aetolians being sincerely disposed to a Peace, they returned to impart the News
to Philip. But the Aetolians being in good earnest to put a period to that War,
accompanied them with their own Ambassadors, to persuade the King to come over
with his Army into Aetolia, to the end they might by conference give an issue
to the Affair, which would be expedited with greater ease, when he should be so
near. Philip moved by their Entreaties, passed over with his Troops, and came
to a place within less than a League of Naupactus, where he Encamped; and
securing his Army and Fleet with a good Retrenchment there, attended the result
of their Debates. In the mean while, the Aetolians came flocking to them in
Multitudes, confidently and without Arms. And because the place of Treaty was
not above a quarter of a Mile from Philip's Camp, they held continual
intercourse with him, by Persons empowered by them to treat; and after a while,
the King sent to them the whole Body of the Confederate Ambassadors, with
Instructions to to yield a Peace with the Aetolians, on condition principally,
that each Party should be confirmed in the possession of the Places then held.
After the Aetolians had declared their Consent to the Proposition, they entered
into Debates touching the Articles that had regard to each one in particular:
But of that we shall make no mention, as containing little of Importance, and
shall only recite the Terms of a Remonstrance, made by Agelaus of Naupactus, to
the King and the Confederates, on their opening the Assembly.

He told them, that nothing so much imported the Greeks, as to shun all
occasions of War among themselves; and that they ought to render Thanks to the
Gods, that becoming now of one Mind, and leading each other as it were by the
hand, like those who ford a River, they have obtained a prospect of uniting in
the general Defense of themselves and their Cities against the Barbarians,
whose Designs they had so much cause to apprehend. That albeit they should not
be able to give perpetuity to the present Union among the Greeks, it behooved
them at least in that Conjuncture, to agree as one Man in the preservation of
their Common Safety; since none could be ignorant of the strength of the
Barbarians, and the mighty War they were like to have on their hands with that
People. That none, how unacquainted soever in the Affairs of the Commonwealth,
but must discern, that nothing was more probable, than that whether the
Carthaginians vanquished the Romans, or the Romans the Carthaginians, in the
present War, the Conquerors would not rest satisfied with the Dominion of
Italy, or Sicily, but prosecute their Designs further than they would be
willing; and at length as far as Greece it self: Wherefore he exhorted them,
especially King Philip, to have an eye to the Danger that threatened them; that
the Task would not be insuperable, if instead of impairing the Forces of the
Greeks, as he had hitherto done; and rendering them by that means an easier Prey
to their Enemies; he would now lay their Affairs to heart, and do for them as
for himself, and act in behalf of the whole Greek Nation, as if Greece were his
Inheritance. That if he so conducted his Councils, he should have no cause to
doubt of acquiring the general Affection of that People; of being by them
abetted, and assisted, in all his Designs; and that Foreigners, terrified at
the Firmness of their Fidelity to him, would be cautious how they invaded him.
That if his Mind was bent on great Enterprises, and he thirsted after Glory, he
should extend his Prospect toward the West, and contemplate the War that had
set all Italy in a flame; that he should watch the Event, and improve it to his
advantage; and when Time should ripen his Affairs, generously aspire to the
Dominion of the World. That the present Conjuncture did not impugn that Design.
In conclusion, he prayed him, that if it were so that he had any remains of
Displeasure against any of the Greeks, which might dispose him to new
Hostilities, he would respite his Purpose to a Season of more leisure, and so
provide that it might be always in his Power to renew, and give a period to the
War with them. For if once he suffered the Tempest that was gathering in the
West to reach Greece, it might justly be feared, that all these Treaties,
Leagues, and Wars, which, as it were in pastime, had hitherto entertained them,
would be then so little in their choice, that they might come one day to
ascribe it to the great Favor of the Gods, to be able to determine among
themselves of Peace and War; and to have it equally in their power, as their
Wish, to be Judges of their own Differences.

This Speech of Agelaus prevailed with the Confederates, especially King
Philip, to desire the Peace more earnestly. For he, who was already shaken by
the Counsels of Demetrius, heard nothing from Agelaus that did not sort to his
purpose. Wherefore after he had adjusted the Conditions with the Aetolians, and
signed the Treaty, every one returned home, carrying with them Peace in
exchange for War. These things came to pass, namely, the Defeat of the Romans
in Tuscany, the War of Antiochus for the Lower Syria, and the Peace of King
Philip, and the Achaians, with the Aetolians, in the third Year of the Hundred
and fortieth Olympiad; about which time it was, that the Affairs of Italy and
Africa began to mix and have relation with those of Greece. For after this,
neither K. Philip, nor any of the Greek Princes, formed any Design, or amused
themselves about Peace or War in Greece; but all had their Eyes six'd on Italy,
as the Object of every one's Attention. And it was not long before the several
People inhabiting the Isles of Asia, acted the same part; for those who could
not brook the growing Greatness of Philip, and others who had any Contests with
Attalus, had no more recourse to Antiochus or Ptolomy, to Southern or Eastern
Princes, but had their Prospect Westwards; some sending their Ambassadors to
the Carthaginians, others to the Romans. In like sort, the Romans themselves,
awakned by the Power and Prowess of King Philip, and being willing to obviate
betimes the Danger that might grow from that Prince's Enmity, who might add new
Evils to those which already sorely pressed them on all sides; resolved to
dispatch Ambassadors into Greece. But forasmuch as we have already clearly
explained, at what time, by what means, and what Counsels the Affairs of Greece
came to be interwoven with those of Italy and Africa; after we shall have
continued to relate the Transactions of Greece, to the time when the Romans
were defeated at Cannoe, where we brake off our Discourse of the Occurrences of
Italy, we purpose to finish this Book.

As soon as the Peace was ratified, and the Achaians had created Timoxenus
their Praetor, they returned to their old Manners and course of Life; and the
rest of the Towns of Peloponnesus, in like sort, fell to repair their public
and private Damages, to cultivate their Ground, re-edifie their Altars,
establish their Worship, and restore their Laws and Customs. All which had been
near utterly ruined and made desolate through the long War they had sustained:
It having been the fate of the Peloponnesians, (who of all others are most
disposed to a Life of Ease and Tranquillity) to enjoy less of that Blessing than
their Neighbors; and of whom it may be said with Euripides, Whose Life with
War and endless Toil, is vexed.

Nor is it more than what in my Judgment seems reasonable to expect should
befall them; for what is more probable, than that a People aspiring after
Dominion, jealous of their Liberty, and who would yield Precedence to none,
should be ever embroiled in Hostilities. One would have thought that the
Athenians, after they were delivered from their Fears of the Macedonians,
should have been at case, and established their Security on sure and lasting
Foundations; yet so it happened, that giving themselves up to the Counsels and
Conduct of Euryclidas and Micyon, and secluding themselves from the Society of
the other Cities of Greece; what Fla^teries, what Decrees of Honors and Praise
(led by the Weakness of their Governors) did they heap on the Neighboring
Kings, especially Ptolomy, without regard to Decency or their own Honor,
through the Folly of those who administered their Affairs! Ptolomy had no sooner
composed his Affairs in Syria, when he became obliged to wage a new War in his
own Dominions. For after that Prince had put the Egyptians in Arms against
Antiochus, wherein he was not ill-advis'd, if regard only were to be had to the
occasion that then pressed him; the sequel showed, that nothing could have been
more pernicious with respect to the future. For the Egyptians growing proud and
over-weaning of their Strength, after the Victory at Raphia, grew to withdraw
their Obedience from the King; and conceiving their Power sufficient to
withstand him, waited only for a fit Person to head them, to proceed to a
Rebellion; and in short, did rebel soon after.

Antiochus, who, during Winter, had made mighty Provision for the War, early in
the Spring passed over Mount Taurus; and entering into League with Attalus,
prosecuted the War against Achoeus. The Aetolians, to whom the War had not
proved so fortunate as they had hoped, were for a while well enough pleased
with Peace; and, on that Consideration, they chose Agelaus of Naupactus
Praetor, whom they believed to have been mainly instrumental in the
Pacification between them and the Achaians; nevertheless, it was not long
before that Peace distasted them, and their Complaints brake out against
Agelaus; murmuring, that they had now lost all occasions of bettering their
Fortune, and enriching themselves by the Spoils of Strangers; and were become
hopeless for the time to come, the Peace not being particular with some few
Towns, but with the whole Greek Nation. But their Praetor, with wise Patience,
enduring their foolish Reproaches, so moderated those Heats, that they
submitted to his Authority, though with repugnance enough.

As soon as the Peace was ratified, King Philip returned by Sea to Macedon;
where finding that Scerdilaidas, who had already seized certain Vessels in the
Port of Leucas, had lately plundered Pissoeum, a Town of Pelagonia, with the
same Proetext as before, of paying himself the Money that remained due; that he
had further drawn to his Party the Towns of Dassaretis; that by Promises he had
allured the People of Phoebatis; as, namely, Antipatria, Chrysondiona, and
Gertunta; and had made Inroads on the Macedonians: Philip therefore first led
his Troops against the revolted Towns, with Resolution however not to delay his
march against Scerdilaidas, judging it to be of great moment to compose the
Affairs of Illyria, in order to the Enterprises he had conceived, especially
his Voyage into Italy. For Demetrius had so kindled his Ambition, that it
became his meditation Night and Day, and was the subject of his Dreams, talking
in his sleep of a War in Italy. While yet these Instigations grew not from the
Love he bare to Philip, whose Affairs he little considered, but from his Hatred
to the Romans, and a Regard to his own Ends, conceiving there was now no other
means left him, whereby to regain his Dominion of the Island of Pharus. In
conclusion, Philip departing with his Army, recovered the Places we mentioned,
together with Creonium, and Gerunte in Dassaretis: And besides those,
Enchelanoe, Cerax, Station, and Boei, near the Lake Lychnidius. Furthermore, he
made himself Master of Bantia, in the Territory of Calicoeni, and Orgysum on
the Frontiers of the Pissantines; and after these Successes, marched his Horse
into Winter Quarters. It was during the same Winter that Hannibal, having
spoiled the best part of Italy, held his Quarters in Apulia near Gerijon, at
which time Lucius Aemylius, and Terentius Varro, were created Consuls at Rome.

King Philip, in the mean time, calculating, that to further the Enterprises he
was projecting, he should stand in need of a good Supply of Ships and Seamen;
not that he conceived himself a Match for the Romans by Sea, but to enable him
to embark and transport his Troops, where he should think it best, whereby to
take the Enemy by surprise, and when they least suspected him: Wherefore,
finding the Vessels of the Illyrian Fashion were properest for his use, he
caused forthwith an hundred of that sort to be built; and was one of the first
Macedonian Kings who had ordered so great a Fleet to be provided. After he had
rigged and equipped them with all things necessary, he assembled his Troops
about the beginning of Summer; and when he had exercised his Macedonians a
while in the Use of the Oar, he put to Sea. This was about the time that
Antiochus marched over Mount Taurus.

After Philip had passed down the Euripus with his Army, and doubled the Cape
of Malea, he arrived near Leucas, sailing by Cephallenia; when taking Harbor,
he remained watching the Motions of the Roman Fleet, having a careful eye to
every thing. But as soon as he became assured, that the Fleet at Lilybaeum
remained still at an Anchor, he weighed, and stood off to Sea, steering as if
he were bound for Apollonia. But after they had passed the Mouth of the River
Loius, (or rather Aous) which runs by the Walls of Apollonia, the Fleet was on
the sudden terrified with a panick Fear, such as usually surprises Armies by
Land. It seems some of the Vessels in the Rear, who had touched in a Port of a
certain Island, called Saso, lying at the entrance of the Ionian Sea, came up
in the Night with the King to let him know, That by certain Vessels that came
out of the Sea of Sicily, and arrived at the same Port, they were assured, that
they had le^t the Roman Fleet at Rhegium, and that they were making the best of
their way for Apollonia, with Orders to join Scerdilaidas. Philip therefore
apprehending the Roman Fleet to be at hand, took the Alarm, and in a fright
stood about with his Fleet, and returned from whence he came, his Ships sailing
dispersed, and without any order. The next Morning arriving at Cephallenia, and
being recovered from his Fear, he told his People, That certain Affairs, that
imported him to negotiate in Peloponnesus, had made him change his Purpose. The
News however that had so terrified Philip, was not entirely false; for
Scerdilaidas being informed of Philip's great Naval Preparations during the
Winter, had concluded that his Design was to fall on him: He had therefore
given advice thereof to the Romans, and prayed Succors from them; so that the
Romans had sent him ten Vessels out of the Fleet at Lilybaeum, which Squadron
was seen at Rhegium as they passed by: And if Philip's Surprise had been less,
he might have succeeded better in his Illyrian Expedition. Furthermore, it is
not improbable but that the Romans themselves, who were humbled by their Loss
at Cannoe, might have fallen into his hands: But being terrified at the News,
he made the best of his way to Macedon; without Loss indeed, but not without
Reproach.

But what Prusias' did about the same time, merits to be recorded to his great
Honor: Those Gauls whom Attalus had drawn out of Europe (having an
extraordinary Opinion of their Bravery) to prosecute the War against Achoeus,
having deserted his Service, for Reasons we have elsewhere noted, fell to spoil
and plunder the Towns about the Hellespont, wherein they proceeded with great
Violence and Cruelty; and coming to lay siege to the Ilians, the Alexandrians,
who inhabited the neighboring Country, ^ehav'd themselves with great
Reputation on that occasion; for sending out Themistas at the head of four
thousand Men, he did not only raise the Siege, but forced the Enemy quite our
of the Trojan Territory, by cutting off their Convoys, and opposing other ways
their Designs.

Afterward the Gauls, having taken Arisba, a Town of the Abydenians, attempted
other Places of that Country, vexing them with continual Hostilities. Wherefore
Prusias marched at the head of an Army to attack them; and giving them Battle,
gained a memorable Victory, where they were all cut off, their Wives and
Children only escaping to their Camp. The Spoil he gave to his victorious
Soldiers, and by that Success delivered the Peloponnesians from their Fears,
and the great Danger that threatened them; and instructed those Barbarians by
that Example, to be cautious for the future how they adventured out of Europe
into Asia. The Affairs of Greece and Asia then were in the posture we have
related. As to Italy, after the Battle of Cannoe, the People, both of the Towns
and Country, for the most part, gave themselves up to Hannibal, as we have
already observed.

But having now summarily recorded the Occurrences of the Hundred and Fortieth
Olympiad, we will here give a period to that History; and after we shall have
made a short Recital in the follow Book, of what has been delivered in this,
we purpose to treat about the Form of the Roman Commonwealth.

Finis Liber V.
(...)
