THE SAMARITAN Showing that Many and Unnecessary IMPOSITIONS ARE NOT The Oil
that must Heal the Church: Together with The WAY or MEANS to do it.

By a Country Gentleman who goes to Common Prayer, and not to Meetings.

Ou ce sont des diversites, qui lassent les Fondemens de la Religion en leur
entier, and ne nous obligent a manquer, ni au service de Dieu, ni a la
dilection des hommes, c'est la ou doit avoir lieu ce que prescrit l'Apostre, Et
si vous sentes quelque chose autrement, Dieu vous le revelera aussi.

Daille on Phil. c. 3. v. 15. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Simmons at the Prince's
Arms in Ludgate street. 1682.

THE SAMARITAN.
SECT. I.
FOrasmuch as the Press spawns Books and Pamphlets, in as great abundance as
the River Nile does Froggs, many whereof seem to be compounded of Venom, and
written with no other design, than to foment Divisions, and exasperate the
several Factions that are among us; I think I may do some office of Love and
Kindness to my Country, and the Church of God therein, if I write a few Sheets
on the behalf of Amity and Peace, and with purpose to allay the Heats, and calm
the Rage and Passions of men.

I expect the same Fate with others, that have endeavored to persuade the
Contentious to Reconciliation. The Boutefeus and Bedlams, will Rage and Foam,
they will spit their venom, and disgorge their gall; and by ugly Insinuations
represent me as a secret Enemy to Church and State; and whatever else the
Father of Lies may suggest unto them.

But I will take liberty to advertise them, that if they please, they may spare
their Passion, and restrain their Wrath; they may keep it in reserve for some
other occasion; for I am utterly above the reach of it, and shall be no more
concerned in their Revilings, than the Moon in the barking of little waspish
Dogs.

Nevertheless, if their Impotence be such, that they cannot forbear; and if the
reek of their own vomit be fragrant and aromatic to them, I shall not envy
them that pleasure Let them enjoy all the satisfaction they can find in it, I
shall receive no more injury by what they say, than by what they dream; and
peradventure there may be as much worth, weight and sense in the one, as in the
other.

I honor my Sovereign; I love the Government in Church and State; I hate both
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Piques and Animosities that are maintained and
kept up among us, against all the Sense and Reason of the World; and I wish
with all my soul, that the several Parties in this Nation, would lay aside
their Prejudices and Passions, and impartially study the things that belong to
our Common Peace: I am sure it is high time to do it, and I fear if it be
delayed a while longer, 'twill be too late to attempt it. There Is a Gentleman
at Paris, and another at Rome, that looks through their fingers, and laugh at
our Divisions, and hope to make good advantage by them in due time; and I make
no doubt but that by their Emissaries they do, and will endeavor to continue
the Breaches, and hinder all Coalition among us.

The Necessity of Union therefore being obvious, and granted by all men of
sense and consideration, I have resolved to cast in my Symbol or Mite, for the
promotion of it. What I shall say, I know will not please all men: Nay, I am
sure some will be angry and enraged thereby. But jacta est alea, I have
computed my Cost, and told them at what Rate I shall value their displeasure. I
shall speak what I think, and do with some assurance and confidence believe, I
shall speak for Peace; and in so doing I shall speak for God, and his Christ,
and for the Church, which is his Body, and purchased with his Blood. And I am
not without hope, but that God may bless what shall be said, and make it
serviceable to the promoting of that end. I am one of the meanest of the
Worshippers of Christ our Lord, but it is his pleasure sometimes, by weak things
to confound the mighty; and by things that are base and despised, yea by things
that are not, to bring to naught things that are.

SECT. II.
THE Union and Peace that I intend to discourse, is a Union of Judgment and
Practice in matters of Religion, and the Worship of God; together with that
mutual Love, and those good Offices that are the proper fruits, effects and
consequent thereof. And by Religion, and the Worship of God, I mean the
Christian Religion, and those ways of worshipping and serving the Majesty of
Heaven that are prescribed unto us by the Christian Laws, the Records whereof
are in the holy Scriptures.

That this Union and Peace is an excellent thing, is the confession of all
Christians. Those that do practically hate and abhor it, pretend a mighty
esteem and veneration for it; those that destroy it, speak much in its favor;
and the most mortal Enemies thereof, will not fail to make its Panegyric, and
exalt its praise. The Romanists (who are certainly the greatest Incendiaries
and Firebrands that are upon Earth, and have for many years, yea ages past, and
do at this time imbroil and fill all Europe with Confusion and Disorders, with
secret Conspiracies and Confederations, with open Wars, Violence, Oppression
and Rapine, are (as they would be thought) the most passionate Lovers, and
greatest Admirers of it: But whilst men see their fangs, and feel their paws,
they will believe them Bears and Lions, though they should avow themselves the
most harmless Doves or Lambs.

But why is it that Peace and Union has the universal suffrage of men, even of
those that have a practical abhorrence and detestation for it? It Is its own
proper Excellency and Advantages that commands their Approbations. Union and
Peace (as all other virtues) have their charms and attractives; and so great is
the force of them, that men cannot behold and consider them, without being
enamored of them, and captivated by them. But though the excellency,
loveliness and beauty of Union and Peace, do subdue the understandings and
judgments of men, their Interests, their Passions, and their Lusts, will not be
conquered by any of them. Though Union be never so lovely in the opinion of
their Consciences, they will sacrifice it a thousand times in favor to their
Pride, their Ambition, their Covetousness, their love of Empire, Domination,
and other Lusts.

Though the Commendations that are given to Union and Peace, be no proof of the
virtue or excellency of those that speak in the praise thereof, yet it is an
undeniable Evidence of its own proper worth and advantages. That which has the
suffrage and approbation of all men's Consciences, that which has the esteem,
and is the Darling even of its very Enemies, must needs be very excellent,
worthy and valuable.

The Excellencies and Advantages of Union, are most evident in the Causes of
it, and in the Effects that it produces in the World. Union is the effect of
good Knowledge, and sound Understanding; (for that Union that is seen among the
Ignorant, is no other than what is found in a heap of Logs or Stones, which
does not indeed deserve that name.)

Those that fill the World with Controversies, Quarrels and Contentions, are
for the most part men of small understanding, and of raw and undigested
notions. It Is half-witted people that set the Churches of Christendom together
by the Ears, and kindle those flames in the House of God, that are like utterly
to waste and consume it. Men of great understanding are modest and peaceable;
they will not contend for trifles, nor express great Zeal for any thing, but
the great Essentials of Faith and Godliness: They will not suspend the Peace of
the Church upon uncertain, or unnecessary things. In things of that nature they
can permit men to their Liberty, and where Liberty is permitted, there is
seldom any Controversy; but where there is unnecessary restraint, there is
everlasting quarrels, and will be to all Generations.

Let me add further, Union is an effect of great holiness and sanctity of mind
and nature. Let men's Knowledge be never so great, if they be not born of God,
and partakers of a Spirit of Holiness and Sanctification, they will quarrel and
contend everlastingly, not in compliance with their Consciences, but in favor
to their Lusts. If enquiry be made, 'twill be found true, that the holiest
persons, and such as have most of the Image of God impressed upon their Sou's,
are always the most peaceable, quiet, and give least disturbance to the World;
and what I have said of Persons, is true of Churches; those Churches whose
Members are most holy, most renewed, sanctified and transformed, are the most
freest from Divisions, Quarrels and Separations.

Again, Union is an Effect of great Self-denial, Mortification, contempt of the
World, and all the Pomp and Glory of it. This I do confess is comprehended in
what I said in the preceding Paragraph; but that what I intend may be the more
obvious and apparent, I have chosen to discourse it separately, and by it self.
Men of unmortified Lusts and Passions, men that cannot deny themselves in any
thing, men that are fond of the World, and the Advantages of it, will never
rest, nor permit others to do so: They will move all stones, and make all
trials that they can imagine, will serve or advance their Pride, their
Ambition, their Riches, their Honors, or whatever are their darling and be
oved Lusts.

Many of the Ancient Schisms and Heresies, that so plagued the Church of God,
were occasioned by the Pride and Covetousness of Churchmen. The Church
continued for many years a Virgin. Thebuthis was the first that corrupted it
with false Doctrine, (...), because he was not made a Bishop, as Hegesippus
reports. Eusebius. lib. quar. cap. 22. Novatianus, a Presbyter of the Church of
Rome, (...), being puffed up with Pride, became the Author of a Sect which
called themselves Catharists, but by others were called Novatians. Paulus
Samosatenus broke the Peace of the Church, and espoused the Doctrine of Ebion
and Artemon, and affirmed our Lord Jesus a man of common human Race, (...),
Eus. lib. 7. cap. 27. And what he was for his Morals, those that please may
read Eus. lib. 7. cap. 30. He was covetous, unjust, proud, effeminate; he
permitted his Presbyters to partake in the same sins, that conscience of their
own guilt might hinder and restrain them from opening and exposing his vile
abominations. Arius was a proud man, and affected Domination; and because
Alexander was preferred before him, and made Bishop of Alexandria, he mutinyed
the Presbyters, and raised those Divisions in that Church that from thence were
spread into almost all the Christian World. Vid. Theod. lib. 1. cap. 3. and 4.
But it would be endless to mention the Quarrels and Contentions which have been
raised in the Church of God, by men of unmortified Lusts and Passions, and no
Union or Peace will be had in the Christian world, whilst those Vermin are
lodged and nourished in the breasts of men. They are humble, mortified, and
self-denying men that live quietly, and give no disturbance to the Church or
World in which they live, and whereof they are Members.

SECT. III.
SOmething having been said of the Causes of Union and Peace, let me add some
few words of the Effects thereof, and but a few; for I intend no large or
elaborate Discourse. Union would make the Church strong and impregnable, were
the Members thereof united in and among themselves. Were they of one mind, and
one heart, they would stand firm like a Rock, against all the Assaults of their
Enemies. For besides their own proper strength, which would be consequent to
their Union, God would stand by them, and be their Protector and Defender. It Is
Faction and Division that weakens the Church, and causes God to withdraw his
defense and guardianship from it; and then it becomes a prey to the Enemies
thereof.

Moreover, were the Church of God at Union and Peace within it self, it would
be beautiful and lovely in the Eyes of the World. Did the Members thereof agree
together; were they of one judgment in the Doctrines of Religion, and of one
practice in the duties and actions thereof, how comely and decorous would the
prospect be? And how would it ravish those that behold and consider it? even
the very Enemies thereof would cry out and say, How beautiful are thy Tents O
Jacob, and thy Tabernacles O Israel!

Were the Church of God at Peace and Unity with it self, it would be a mighty
means to Convert the World, and bring it over to the Christian Religion. Were
there a great and mutual Friendship and Amity among the several Parts and
Members of it, it would be a mighty Evidence of the Truth of Christianity, and
almost all Mankind would fall under the sorce of it: The Authority thereof
would be irresistible; it is the Factions, the Feuds, the Divisions, the
Strifes, Hatreds and Contentions that are in Christendom, and among the
Churches thereof, that makes them a scorn and abhorrence to Turks and Infidels,
as well as to the Atheistical and profane that are among them. It Is the
everlasting Quarrels, and mutual Censures and Condemnations of each other, that
makes Christianity a poor languid thing, and takes off all the convincing power
thereof in the apprehension of its Enemies.

Again, were the Church of God united, and at Peace in it self, the mutual
offices of Love and Kindness, of Charity and Compassion, which would be
exercised by the Members thereof, would very much sweeten and abate the
Miseries and Calamities of the present Life and State. The Rich would minister
to the wants and necessities of the Poor, and the Poor would cheerfully serve,
and minister to the advantages of the Rich. According to their capacities they
would mutually help and assist each other; and by these mutual offices of
endearment and kindness, much of the miseries and infelicities of Life would be
removed, prevented, and sweetened, and the World be a much more happy place
than now it is.

The holiness of men's hearts and lives, would be very much increased and
advanced by Union and Peace. Quarrels and Contentions do heat men's spirits, and
fill them full of rancour, spite, malice and bitterness. It makes them fearful,
jealous, and suspicious of each other, and these kind of unhallowed passions do
drink up their spirits, and possess their souls, insomuch that they have no
room or leisure for the introducing of pious affections, holy habits, and a
divine frame and temper of mind; whereas, were men at Union and Peace, they
would be free of these Diabolical Passions, and would be at leisure to trim and
adorn their own Souls with the Ornaments and Perfections of Christians: They
would have time and opportunity to impress the Image of God upon them, and
their communion in the Public Worship of God would contribute great assistance
to it.

In fine, the Church of God on Earth would be some small figure and resemblance
of the Church of God in Heaven, were it united, and did the Members of it live
in Love and Peace together. There are no Divisions or Separations; There are no
Enmities, Variances, or Strifes. All love and serve God with one heart, and one
consent; all have a mutual love and kindness for each other. And something like
this would be seen upon Earth, if Christians and Churches would, or could unite
and live in Amity and Peace. But alas, Unity and Peace seem to have forsaken
the Earth; and some men seem resolved, that they shall never return again, the
conditions they propose for the restoration of it, being utterly
impracticable, as shall be said and proved anon.

SECT. IV.
THE Excellency and Advantages of Union and Peace, being such as I have
mentioned, (to which many more might be added) it will easily be granted, that
all Christians are obliged to endeavor the obtaining of it. Things so worthy
and excellent, so profitable and advantageous to Kingdoms and Nations, to
Cities, Towns and Villages, Families, and single persons, to the Bodies and
Souls of men, certainly ought to be prosecuted with utmost might and endeavor;
it should be sought as Silver, and searched after as fine Gold. All just and
prudent means should be essayed for the attaining of it.

Our Interest, as well as our Duty, lays on us the greatest obligations to
seek and pursue Peace and Unity. The love of our selves, and our own
advantages, as well as the many Precepts, and earnest Exhortations of Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles, should make us earnest and zealous in our labors to
obtain it. Strife and Contention, Divisions and Factions, destroy and take away
all the comforts and pleasures of life, and are great breaches of the Divine
Commandments; yea they are a mighty reproach and scandal to the Christian
Religion, and huge pleasure and gratification to the Devil, that great Enemy of
God and Men.

And surely methinks, if men would but give themselves the liberty of a little
sober consideration, they should not with so much earnestness, obstinacy and
zeal offend God, mischief and undo themselves in time and eternity; for no
other reason than to please the Devil, and gratify some brutish and profane
passions, which have him for their Author and Original. But men will not
consider, or if they do consider, they advise with their lusts, but not with
their reason; with their passions and prejudices, but not with their
consciences; and thence it is, that the effect of their consideration is many
times more pernicious and prejudicial to Peace and Union, than if they had
totally neglected it. For it is impartial Reason, and well informed Judgment and
Conscience, that speak in the favor of Union and Peace; but Ambition and
Pride, Love of Riches, Empire, Honor and Dominion, are for Faction and
Division: They are for setting the Church (and the World too) in a flame,
hoping to make some advantage thereby.

These things peradventure will be granted by the most of men; those that are
the greatest Dividers will acknowledge the excellency of Peace, and the duty
and obligation of laboring after it; they will confess that it is the Interest
of Mankind to prosecute and obtain it, and to advise with their reason, and not
with their passions, when they consider how it be may recalled and restored
again to the Church of God, and Societies of Men. They will also grant, that
there is fault somewhere, and that some men are to be blamed, that there is so
little Amity and Peace among Christian People and Churches; and that it is
become such a mighty difficulty to heal the breaches of Christendom, and to
compound the Differences that are in some particular Parts and Kingdoms of it.

But although all men will acknowledge that the fault lies somewhere, yet there
are none of the Contending Parties that will lay any blame at their own doors.
The Church of Rome does acknowledge, and some of their Writers seem to bewail
the Divisions and Factions that are in the Christian World; but that they are
no cause of them, they do avow with all the assurance imaginable. The
Calvinists and Lutherans do also confess and bewail the Divisions among
Protestants; but they will both protest that they are not the faulty Cause
thereof. To come nearer home, the Conformists and Nonconformists in the Church
of England, do sufficiently confess, and many of them I believe, lament the
Differences that are among us; but neither of them will acknowledge themselves
worthy of any blame: They are both Innocent in their Opinions, but both Faulty
in the Opinion of their Adversaries.

But peradventure an imprejudiced and unbyassed Spectator, (if such a one be to
be found) may think that there are Faults on both sides, among the several
Factions of Christendom, though not equally great. The Romanists, without
doubt, are the greatest Make-bates that are upon Earth, and the most Faulty
Dividers; and yet I believe that there are some Protestants that make the
Difference greater in some things than really it is, betwixt us and them. And
there is no man that shall calmly read the Late Theses of the Learned Le Blank,
but will be satisfied of it. The Lutherans certainly are much to blame in
separating from the Calvinists, and speaking and writing so bitterly and
spitefully concerning them: And yet it is possible that the Calvinists may not
be altogether Innocent; for amongst them also are found men of unyielding
spirits, and such as lay too much weight upon small things. As for the
Contentions among our selves (if I may be pardoned the liberty of saying it) I
do not doubt but we are all to blame.

SECT. V.
NOW the great Cause (in my apprehension) of all the Divisions, Quarrels,
Schisms and Separations that are in the Christian World, is the making and
imposing things unnecessary, doubtful, difficult, unintelligible, unprofitable,
and numerous, the Conditions of Church Communion. This has rent and torn the
Church of God in pieces these thirteen hundred years; and yet those that are
the Guides and Governors of Churches, either cannot, or will not see it. Let
the Histories of the Church be consulted, and this may be easily observed. What
is it that divides the Greek and Roman Churches from each other? What is it
that divides the Greek Churches among themselves? What is it that divides the
Roman Churches from those of the Protestant Profession? What divides the
Lutherans and Calvinists? What is it that divides the Christian People of this
Nation? Is it not the Imposing of things doubtful, dark, uncertain, and
unnecessary, and this with a pertinacious and inflexible rigor, and severity
one against another?

Do not all these Churches agree in the great Essentials of the Christian
Religion? Do they not all believe the common Articles of the Christian Faith?
Do they not all believe the Lord's Prayer to contain the sum and matter of all
the Requests that we are to make to God? Do they not believe the Ten
Commandments to comprehend the main, if not all those Duties that we owe to God
and Men? And are not these things in which all agree, sufficient for the Union
of Christians? Might they not live together in Love, notwithstanding their
other Differences? Or, though they could not communicate together (as indeed
Protestants cannot communicate with the Romish Churches) might they not
maintain Love and Peace under distinct Communions? Might they not repute each
other Christians, and Christian Churches, though not equally sound and perfect?
These things methinks, might be done, were it not that a Spirit of Imposition,
and Arbitrary Domination over the Judgments and Consciences of Men, has
possessed the Guides of Christendom; All men must believe, and think, and
speak, according to their apprehensions, or else they are no Christians. Their
Judgments, yea sometimes their Prejudices, and their Dreams, must be made the
Conditions of Communion; and if any refuse to swear to their words, and will
see with their own Eyes, and believe and practice according to the Light of
their own understandings, they are Heretics, and unworthy the Name and
Communion of Christians. And hence proceed the various Separations and
Divisions, and all the direful and tragical Effects of them, which have made
the Christian World a Bedlam, and sometimes a Field of Blood, to the reproach
of Christians, to the scandal of Infidels, and to the perverting of many
Professors of Christianity to Atheism, or Apostasy to some other false Religion.

SECT. VI.
TO press this a little, Whosoever considers the great variety and difference
that is to be observed in Human Minds, must find that Imposition of many
doubtful, and unnecessary things is no proper means of preserving Peace and
Union in the Church of God, especially among Protestants, where a judgment of
discretion, or a liberty of believing, according to the convictions of our own
minds, is confessed the undoubted right of every Reasonable Man. Is it
imaginable that Men whose understandings are almost of as various degrees and
sizes, as are the shapes and figures of their faces, should agree in the same
sentiments and perceptions concerning things dark, doubtful, and unnecessary?
Is it imaginable that all Christians should have the same thoughts, and make
the same judgment concerning the Determinations of the Council of Trent? Is it
conceiveable that all the Christians in England, or all the Clergy in England
should have the same conceptions, and entertain the same Opinions concerning
the Doctrine, Discipline, and Liturgy of this Church? To me it seems altogether
as improbable, as that twenty thousand blind Men should from twenty thousand
places, move and march, and at last meet together, and put themselves in good
order on New Market Heath, or the Plains of Sarum. And why should Impositions
be made, where there is no probability, or indeed possibility of Assent unto
them? Or are such Impositions, which make Division in our Church, a likely
means of making Peace in the Churches of Christendom? He that can believe it,
may with as much reason believe that the casting on fuel and combustible
matter, is a means to extinguish a furious raging flame; or the way to preserve
a Ship from sinking, is to commit it to the Wind and Waves without any Pilot or
Person to sit at the Helm, and manage the Course of it.

That the gradual Difference of Men's Understandings, is very great, and almost
infinite, cannot reasonably be denied. Parents, Teachers of Schools, Tutors,
and all kind of Artificers, find it so in the Experience of every day. It has
been so in all Ages, and will be so for all that I can see, as long as the
World endures. Whether there be an inequality among Souls; or whether this
great variety proceeda from the differing mixtures of the Elements, that
compound our Bodies, and out of which our Organs are made, I will not
determine, though I incline to believe the former; for it is past my imagination
to conceive how the various mixtures of senseless Elements or Atoms, should
produce all that variety that is observable in the Understandings of Men from
the greatest Statesman, Philosopher, or Divine, to the meanest Peasant, or the
most blockish Dolt.

Parents first find a vast difference in the capacities of their Children; some
of them are of quick and pregnant Wit and Ingeny; they easily receive and
apprehend whatever is proposed to them; others are dull and heavy, and receive
with difficulty such things as are offered them for their Learning and
Knowledge. Some of them are capable of understanding some things, whereas of
other things they are as incapable almost as the veriest Idiots. The Experience
of Schoolmasters next, is much the same: Some of those Children that are
committed to their care, do readily learn and receive whatever they reach and
inform them: Others with difficulty and much labor. Some can never be brought
to learn any thing that is regardable, by all the care and endeavors in the
World. Tutors at the University find the like variety among their Pupils. Some
Youths hear their Lectures, and understand and remember the Contents of them;
and if they be examined concerning them, will give a good and fair account of
them: But others hear them, but neither understand, nor remember almost any
thing of them; and if the same things be repeated over again, with all the
clearness that can be expressed by words, yet they still remain without
Knowledge or Understanding therein. You may as well think to draw a Cable
through the Eye of a Needle, as to impress Learning upon some men's Minds.
Artificers and Mechanics speak the same Language, and give us the same
Informations. Some Apprentices easily learn the Arts that they profess; others
do it with great difficnlty, and are but bunglers at the last. Non puede ser
mas negro el cuerbo que las, alas, says the Spanish Proverb, The Crow cannot
be blacker than her wings.

And as the Degrees and varieties of Men's understandings are vastly great and
many, so are their prejudices and Anticipations. Some persons suck in certain
Opinions with their Milk; they receive them from their Parents, and such as
give them their Education. Thus some are prejudiced for the Doctrine of Calvin,
and others for the Doctrine of Aaminius; thus some persons are prejudiced for
Episcopal Government in the Church, and others for a Presbyterian Parity: Thus
some contract a kindness for a pompous and ceremonious Religion, and Way of
Worshipping God, others contract a fondness for a very plain and and simple Way
and Method of Worship and Devotion.

Moreover some men read but one sort of Books, and care not to read any thing
that is written in opposition to their Anticipations; or if they do read any
thing of that nature, it is with so great a prejudice, that their judgments are
rather confirmed than altered thereby. They are strongly persuaded of the truth
of their own apprehensions, and what is intended to shake them, does but (as
the Wind by Trees) fix and establish them. That this is a fault I do easily
grant, but it is easier to observe than cure it; and that men's prejudices are
strangely fixed and confirmed thereby, cannot be denied.

Besides, men are strangely prejudiced against some Opinions, by the infamous
reports that have been raised concerning those that have defended and
maintained them. Thus the Papists are prejudiced against the Doctrine of
Protestants, by impudent and frontless Lies, that have been raised against
Luther and Calvin, and other great instruments in the Reformation: And thus
many among us have an Implacable Pique and Displeasure against Dissenters and
all their Opinions, because some men do report them a company of seditious
People, that can never be quiet, but are always libelling Authority, and
disturbing all Order and Governments wheresoever they live. And others are as
much prejudiced against Episcopacy, and the peculiar Opinions of that sort of
men, because they are reported to be a generation of men, that are proud and
imperious, lovers of Empire and Domination, that engross the Revenues of the
Church, and employ them in Luxury and Sensuality, but care not for the Souls of
men. If they will obey the Orders of the Church, and submit to its
Institutions, they may defy all the Laws of God, and without restraint or
control make what haste they please to Hell; they countenance the Ungodly and
Profane, and persecute and oppress such as fear God, and tremble at his word;
they are impatient of such Meetings and Assemblies, where a company of poor
Christians meet together, to hear Gods Word, and call upon his Name; but they
can very patiently bear the Assemblies of riotous Sensualists and Blasphemers,
that convene to defy God, promote their own Damnation, and of as many others
as they can.

Again, some Persons receive prejudice against Opinions, from the real faults
of some single Persons or a few men that have embraced and entertained them.
Some Dissenters have used some uncomely, indecorous, and unadvised Expressions
in their extemporate Prayers, and therefore they reproach and reject all
extemporate Effusions: some of them have preached Doctrine not agreeable to
some men's conceptions, or have used homely Language and Similitudes, and
therefore all their Mouths must be stopped, and the Church of God will do
better without them than with them. Some Conformists read the Liturgy without
any seeming seriousness or Devotion, they are in such haste to have done with
it, that they can scarce give themselves time enough to pronounce the words in
their full extensions, and therefore they infer that all forms of Prayer are
inconsistent with, and enemies to Devotion, and good for nothing, but to
promote Laziness, and introduce Formality, and a kind of Lifeless Worship of
God.

Another thing that sixes men's prejudices, is their worldly Interest and
Advantage, this is that which is the strength of the Papacy, and the support of
the Antichristian Hierarchy and Kingdom. The Romanists are by their Education
seasoned and imbued with the Opinions of that Church, and their Interest
confirms them in the belief of them. When they come to the use of their Reason,
and a Capacity of judging concerning them, men do seldom embrace Opinions that
are inconsistent with their worldly Advantages, or forsake those (though never
so unreasonable) that do favor and advance it. By believing the Doctrine of
that Church they possess Estates and Honors, they live in Ease and Peasure,
and exercise Dominion over the Consciences of men; and these things are
pleasant to depraved Natures and corrupted Minds, and by them men are charmed
and bewitched into a Belief of the wildest and most unreasonable persuasions in
the World. 'Twere impossible to hold the Members of the Church of Rome to a
belief of its own Doctrine, were there no worldly Interest to biass and sway
their Judgments thereunto; Bishoprics and Abbacies, Caps and Miters, and the
many Preferments and Advantages wherewithal that Church abounds, do more to
preserve it than all the Power of Princes, yea than all the writings of the
greatest and most learned Champions of that cause. And it is not only in the
Roman Church, but in some other Churches of Christendom besides, that Interest
does either form men's Opinions, or fix their Anticipations, and make them
steady and immutable therein.

The variety of men's Understandings and Prejudices, being thus obviously great
and many, how is it possible that there should be Union and Concord among
Christians, if Church Communion be suspended upon the belief and acknowledgment
of doubtful and unnecessary things? May not their concord with as much reason
be suspended upon a similitude of faces, features, and proportions?

SECT. VII.
BUT I shall argue the improbability of it, from Experience, as well as from
its proper Causes. Do we not see great variety of judgments, and apprehensions
in all parts of Learning and Knowledge? Do not Grammarians differ in the sense
and meaning of words, and in the explication of the Idiotismes and
peculiarities of the learned Languages? Do not our Mythologists differ in the
account they give of the Fables of the Greek and Latin Poets? Do not some
Learned Men think that they are (at least many of them) corruptions of the true
History of things which we have in the Holy Bible? Has not the Learned
Bochartus among others given very probable reasons for it? and has not an
English Doctor and Divine of our Church derided, and laughed at him for it?

Have not, and do not our Theological Critics and Translators differ in their
Opinions, even concerning the Signification of words, as about the Original of
them? Is there any agreement or concord among them, or do we need to go far for
proofs of it? The first verse in the Bible will furnish us with enough. In the
beginning is translated by the Jerusalem Targum, in Wisdom, By the Arabic
(...) the first, and by Aquila (...), Summatim. Nor are they agreed in the
origination of the word Some will have it compounded of the words and ibi sunt
aquae, there are waters: Others will have it derived from the Arabic word
(...) altum esse. And as great variety may be observed in the Translation of
those words, The Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters, but such
varieties are endless. I will only mention the different opinions of Critics,
upon those words, Psalm, 22.17. They pierced. The word some think is derived
from the Hebrew word, and that the Aleph in the middle is Epenthetical, and the
Jod in the end of the word is put for Vau, either by the negligence of
Transcribers, or the fraud of the Jews out of spite to the Christian Religion:
Others think the radix of the word is, and that Aleph is put for Ajn, by a
permutation usual in the Eastern Languages: Others think that the word is
Syriack, and that the radix is (...) and that it is here the infinitive Mood
with the affix of the first Person, which often admits the signification of the
preter perfect Tense among the Hebrews. This opinion they think is favored by
the Septuagint, who Translate the word (...), which is of the same
signification with (...) as Ferrarius informs us. Other diversities of opinions
there are concerning this word, those that please may consult De Dieu,
Glassius, Hottinger, Amama, Pocock, in Porta Mosis, with many others.

Are there not great diversity of opinions among Historians and Chronologers?
do they give the same account of things? is there no diversity in their
narrations? Do the Greek and Roman Historiographers, report the same things of
the Emperors, great Generals, and men of War, whose lives and actions they
transcribe, and transmit to future Ages and Generations? Do they fix the same
Epoches, and Periods to the beginning and end of the four famous Empires that
have succeeded each other in the world? Are they agreed in what year of the
Julian period to fix the Creation, or how long it has been existent?
Longomontanus reckons it existent. 3964. Kepplerus 3993 years before the birth
of our Lord. Ricciolus says in his Almagest that he has proved in his
Chronology that this duration of the world could not be extended farther than
4076, nor determined shorter than the year 3993, from the Nativity of our Lord;
And the most probable year of the intermediate space betwixt these two periods
he thinks is the year 4063. See And Tacquet. Astron. lib. 1. p. 46. This is
enough to prove the variety, and uncertainty of Chronology, to which many more
might be added, if it were to any purpose.

When will our Learned Commentators agree in their expositions of the dark and
obscure parts of the Scripture? When will they give the same sense of the
Prophecies of Daniel and the Revelations? Mr. Mede seems to have given the
fairest account of them, and yet the Learned Dr. More dissents from him in many
of his interpretations, as well as from Dr. Hammond, and his admired Hugo
Grotius. And it is not only among Christian Writers that this diversity is
found, but even among the Jewish Doctors: I shall only give one instance
thereof amongst numberless numbers that might be produced: and that shall be
from their expositions of the 53 Chap. of Isaiah. Abravanel in his enquiry
concerning the Subject of that Prophecy tells us, that many of their Wise Men
understand it de Messiah venturo and thus Paehmanides understands it: Rabbi
Saaidias understands it of Jeremy the Prophet, and so does Aben Esra and Rabbi
Menachem, with whom Grotius assents, though not without some hesitation. Jarchi
and both the Kimchi's (Father and Son) understand it of the Jewish Nation,
which opinion he embraces and defends. Vide eum si placet in Commentariis fol
78. The like diversity is found among the Mahumetans, as those that please may
find in Mr. Pococks specimen Historiae Arabum, and his notes upon it, as also
in Hottingers Historia Orientalis.

When will the diversity of opinions concerning the Hebrew Points receive a
determination? Capellus in his Arcanum punctationis asserts the novelty of
them, so does our Learned Walton. Buxtorfius Junior asserts them in his Anti
Critica, Capellus, defends his opinion with acrimony and scorn enough toward
his adversary, as may be seen throughout his whole defense; Buxtorfius replies
again, and the Controversy is not yet ended, nor I think like to be. These
things Create no disputes among Carpenters and Masons, among Plough-men and
Carters, and Persons that live in an utter ignorance of them, but they are, and
will be controversies among the Learned, till Elias come.

And are there not as many controversies, varieties, and uncertainties in
natural Philosophy, as in what I have already mentioned? are not all things
variously argued there, and are not men's Judgments in those matters as
multifarious as their Persons in them? Have not DesChartes, and some other
Philosophers of late overturned the whole Systeme of the Aristotelian
Philosophy, and may not others do the like by what they have established, and
are there not as great objections lying against their Novel Systemes, as
against those that they have rejected? Or are the minds of ingenious, and
inquisitive men any more satisfied in the one, than in the other?

Are Physicians agreed in the nature of Simples, Drugs, and Minerals? have they
any fixed Method for the Cure of Diseases? are they agreed in the Nature and
Causes of them? Can they tell what causes Convulsions, and Epilepsies? Are
they agreed, or satisfied in what Dr. Willis has discoursed concerning them?
Do they know what causes an Ague, or in what part of the body, and in what
vessels thereof that Fomes lies, which at stated times ferments, and produces
those various Symptoms? Are they agreed in their judgments about these things,
or are they ever like to be? Do we not find new methods of Curing Diseases
propounded every day, which after they have had their turn upon the Stage, they
go off, and others succeed them.

As the varieties in natural Philosophy are many, and the differences among
those that converse therein innumerable, so are there the like among the
Writers and Students in Metaphysics. What is there in that Science that is not
variously argued and disputed? When will they be agreed about the Principle of
Individuals, about the nature and number of Causes, about Quantity, Habits,
Relations, and other things past count and number? When will they with one
consent tell us the difference between the Decrees and Essence of God, whether
it be real virtual, relative, or by extrinsick denomination?

To these varieties and differences in Science, add those that are found among
Mathematicians in Astronomy, and other parts of Mathematical Learning. When
will they be agreed about the Diameter and Circumference of the Earth, when
will they tell us how many miles we must move Northward, ere the pole be
elevated one degree higher than it is in the place of our present abode and
habitation? When will they determine the quantity of the paralacktical Angle of
the Sun? Is it two degrees, or three degrees, and some prime minutes, as
Albategnius will have it; or is it only 14 or 15, seconds as Vendeline
determines it; or at the most but 30 seconds even when the Sun is nearest the
Earth as Tacquet resolves it? Astron lib. 3. p. 131. 132. When will they fix
the distance of the Sun and Moon from the Earth, and from each other? when will
they determine the nunber of the Earths Semidiameters, by which these distances
may be measured? when will they agree in the height and extension of the
Atmosphere, and how much the Diameter thereof exceeds that of the Earth, in its
length and extension? when will they consent in the proportion that the several
planetary Orbs have to each other, with many other questions of like nature and
uncertainty, too many to mention?

If the variety of men's Judgments in matters of Humane Learning and Philosophy
be so great, it cannot reasonably be expected, that they should be one and the
same in the Doctrins of Religion. There are as great depths, and as many
unfathomlessabysses in Religion, as in any part of Learning or Philosophy; and
indeed those very things that are difficulties in Religion, at least some of
them, are not peculiar to Christianity, but were the same before it was known
in the world, and are indeed difficulties in Philosophy, as much as in
Religion. Such are the difficulty of reconciling the Divine Prescience and
Decrees with Liberty and Contingence, or the Liberty of man's will with the
Infallibility of Gods; Such is the original of Evil, and many things about the
nature and acts of God, and therefore whilst there are controversies and
obscurities in the one, there will be in the other. The things themselves being
mixed and blended, the obscurities that attend them must be mingled and
confounded also.

In brief; There is nothing but a profound Ignorance that can make Men of one
Judgment (pardon the expression, for it is Catachrestical and improper) in the
obscure, dark, and unnecessary Doctrines of Religion. This is obvious among the
Papists themselves; for though the common People, which are kept in Ignorance,
and not permitted to read the Bible, manage no Controversies concerning Points
of Religion, nor are divided in their Judgments about them; yet their Learned
Men are at as great Differences, and there are as great Feuds among them, as
among Protestants, unless it be in such things where their Interest unies them.
This is sufficiently known by all Learned men, what everlasting Quarrels there
are between the Jesuits and Dominicans, the Jansenists and Molinists, and many
other Orders among them; insomuch that his infallible Holiness himself durst
not determine them, for fear of disobliging the one or the other Party of them.

Ignorance indeed keeps men quiet, and free from raising Controversies, and
running into variety of Judgments. Plough-men and Carters, do not use to differ
about the signification of words in the Greek, Hebrew, and Oriental Languages,
but Linguists do, and will everlastingly differ about them. Tradesmen and
Farmers have no Debates about the passing of things out of a State of
Possibility into a State of Futurity; or whether there needs a Decree of God
for the effecting of it. The Mercers and Haberdashers are not divided in their
Opinions about the variation of the Sun's farthest declination, the mutation of
his Excentricity, or the unequal Motion of his Apoge. These are things they
pretend no knowledge in, and therefore they entertain no diversity of
Sentiments concerning them: But Astronomers have been of different Judgments in
all these things, as may be seen in the Author lately quoted, page 45. 37.

SECT. VIII.
YET after all that I have said to evince the Improbability, or rather
Impossibility of Union among Christians in many things, especially such as are
dark and doubtful, and of little use or necessity, I do not intend to affirm
that Christians can agree in nothing, or that all Uniformity of Judgment is
impossible and impracticable among them; no, I do with much assurance say, That
Christians may, do, and will agree in all the Essential and Constituent Parts
of Christianity, and that Peace and Love may be maintained notwithstanding very
great variety of Opinions, and some different practices too in other things.

That Christians will agree in the great Essentials of Christian Religion, is
apparent; for they do so, Greeks and Romans, with all the several Subdivisions
that are among them, do consent in one Common Creed, Rule of Life, and
Compedium of Prayer and Devotion; all Protestants, Calvinists, Lutherans, and
Arminians, or by whatever other title they may be known or called, consent with
them in the great Agenda, Credenda, and Petenda in Religion. In these things
there is no diversity among them; those things are so obvious in the Scripture,
and many of them in the Light of Nature, and by the Providence of God have been
so superintended, that in the greatest defections of the Church, and Apostasy
of Christians, the knowledge and belief of them has been preserved and
continued amongst all.

Yea I am past doubt, that if only these things were made the Conditions of
Communion among Christians, with Liberty of Difference in other things, and
some variety of practices in particular Churches, more Unity, Peace and Love
would thereby be produced, and Knowledge, Piety and Godliness be more advanced
than by any other means in the world. In the days of the Apostles, and in some
Ages after them, persons were admitted into the Christian Church, upon their
belief and consent to these few plain things; yea upon a bare consent to the
Contents of the Baptismal Covenant; and whilst they continued that Consent and
Faith, they were continued in the Communion of Christians; and I do not yet
understand why men may not be Christians, and partake in the Communion of
Christians upon the same terms now as then; I think the Apostles were as wise
men, and knew as well what they did, as any that have come after them in the
Government of the Church; and I do not as yet see any reason why their Laws and
Conditions of Communion should be altered. I am afraid the alteration of them
has done more hurt, and occasioned more mischief to the Church of God, than
they that were the Authors thereof will be able to give a fair account of to
God Almighty one day.

It is not to be doubted, but that there was great diversity of Opinions (and
some diversity of Practices) in things of inferior nature among Christians,
and among Churches, even in the Primitive Church; The Jewish and Gentile
Converts had not the same Opinions, nor were not of the same Judgment; Some
differences there were among them, both in Opinion and Practice, as is obvious
in the Scripture: And St. Paul allowed it, and communicated with them therein.
And thus it was in the Ages subsequent to the Apostles, as Eusebius reports
from the Letter of Ireneus to Victor Bishop of Rome, lib. 5. cap. 24. Victor
had Excommunicated the Asiatick Churches, because they would not observe Easter
after the Roman manner, for which Ireneus Bishop of Lions in France reproves
and admonishes him not to Excommunicate and Cut off whole Churches, for
observing the Tradition of their Fathers; for they had always observed it on
the fourteenth day of the Month, and would not change it, to comply with the
Roman Custom, who observed it on the Lord's Day. Ireneus tells Victor, That
there was not only a Controversy about the Time of Observing Easter, but also
about the Observation of the Fast that did precede it; some thinking themselves
obliged to observe one, some two, some more, and some forty Days; and this
variety was not a Novel Custom lately introduced, but had been such long before
in the Times of their Progenitors and Predecessors; but this brake no Peace,
though they differed about the Number of the Days of Fasting. (...), The
diversity of the Fast did commend the Agreement of Faith. He adds that Hyginus,
Anicetus, Pius, Zystus, and Telesphorus, which Ruled the Church of Rome before
him, though they never observed Easter after the Custom of the Asiatiques nor
permitted it to be done in their Church, yet they kept Peace with those that
came to them from other Churches where it was so observed; and gives instance
in Polycarpus, who being at Rome in the time of Anicetus, was treated by him
with Love and Honor, and permitted to consecrate the Eucharist in his Church:
And if Bishops and Churchmen, were as humble, pious, and peaceable as those
two Bishops were, there might be the same Peace among them and their Churches,
though they differed in some Customs, Practices, and Observations.

I know no more reason that Bishops and Churches should quarrel one with
another for the sake of some differing Opinions and Practices, than that they
should quarrel about the difference in their bodily strength and stature (I
have instanced in the face before) or the various sorts of Fashions and
Ornaments wherewith they are covered and adorned. Were it not a pleasant thing
to observe men hussing, and raging, anathematizing, and cursing each other,
because one wears brown colored Cloth, and another wears Gray; one wears
Serge, and another Freeze; one buckles his Shoes, and another ties them with
Strings? And are not many of the Contentions of Christendom indeed founded and
established upon Reasons of equal weight and value? Are not most of the
unchristian Feuds and Heats that are in England, of this sort and kind? What if
one man fits at the holy Sacrament, another stands, and another kneels? Is not
a Unity of Affection and Faith reconcilable with this diversity of gesture?
What if one man reads his Prayers, and another repeats them from his Memory?
What if one man uses a Form, and another prays Extemporately? may they not
believe the Common Faith, and live in Love and Peace together? I am sure this
may be, and if it be not so, it is not hard to tell what is the reason of it,
nor where the blame must be laid.

If Peace and Love may be preserved, amidst some diversity of Opinions, in the
lesser things of Religion, and some variety of Practices, also (as I am very
sure it may, if nothing else do hinder it) it may be hoped that the Christian
world may enjoy some quiet once again, and lost Charity, Love and Kindness may
revive among the Disciples and Servants of the God of Love and Peace; but if
nothing will satisfy the Guides and Rulers of Christendom, but Uniformity in
all things; and no Liberty be given for some diversities of Practices, there
will be, nor can be, any Peace or Concord upon Earth; for Christians never will
agree in many things; nor is it morally possible they should, as I have evinced
(I suppose) at large already.

The truth is, the idle Dream, the fond Imagination of a possibility of making
Christians of one uniform Judgment and Practice, has filled the Christian
world with variance, strife and contentions, with blood, violence, rapine, and
oppression, with proscriptions and banishment: Yea has left little more than
the name of Christian Religion in most parts of the world. For that men may be
of one Judgment and Practice in Religion, there must be Impositions, and these
Impositions must be enforced by Laws, and the contempt or breach of these Laws
must be penal, and those penalties must be sharp and severe, and severely
executed, and so bring us to such a pass, or else they are only Maukings, and
men will laugh at them, and differ still as much as ever.

And sure it is, that men fearing God, will not debauch their Consciences, nor
sin against God, they will not hazard their Souls to preserve and secure their
Lives, their Bodies, and their Estates; they will not run the hazard of being
damned everlastingly, to escape the temporary punishment of imposing and
domineering Rulers and Churchmen; and therefore they must be imprisoned, fined,
banished, hanged, and damned too, if it were in the power of their good Friends
and Prosecutors to do it. And these are the blessed Effects of Tyrannical
Impositions; these the means of Peace, Union and Concord among Christians and
Churches. But I would fain learn who taught them these means, ways and methods
of Peace, Unity and Concord. Of all the Creatures upon Earth, a man would
suspect they learned it from the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning;
surely they never learnt them from the holy Jesus, for he never used any such
methods of Peace, nor taught any such to his Disciples that I can find in the
Gospels. Ye know not what manner of spirit you are of.

And what follows? When they have banished, ruined, burnt and murdered all the
Dissenters of one Age, the next Age furnishts them with more, to exercise their
Cruelty upon, and employ their Rage which they call by the name of Love and and
Zeal for Union and Peace: And thus for the maintenance of their Impositions and
an Imaginary Peace by the means thereof, they are obliged to live in perpetual
War, and to maintain some Legions in constant pay, to ruin and destroy those
which are much better than themselves, and dearer to God and Christ, as they
may also dearly know when they come to account to him for it.

But if they chance to ruin all Dissenters, and none arise in succession to
them, then must men grow to a carelessness and indifferency in all Religion;
they shall retain the name, and perform and exercise some of the exterior
parts and formalities thereof, but as for the Power of it, and a conscientious
reverence and veneration for the Authority and Laws thereof, they are utter
strangers thereunto. Impositions and Prosecutions upon the breach of those Laws
that do enforce them, puts a period to all search and enquiry; it gives a check
to all endeavors after an Increase in Knowledge: For if men use the means
thereof, they will differ in their Sentiments and Apprehensions, and those
differences will expose them to the public Rods and Axes; and therefore they
must grow utterly negligent therein, choosing rather to be ignorant with
security, than to obtain Knowledge to their ruin and destruction; and whatever
puts a period to all endeavors after Knowledge and Understanding does
certainly ruin and destroy the Power of Religion. For Ignorance introduces
Irreligion, Formality, and Superstition, but is no Mother to, or promoter of
true, internal, hearty Religion and Devotion. And this is one of the dismal
Effects that Impositions and Laws for the enforcing of men have had in Popish
Countries, especially in Spain and Italy. There Is nothing left in those
Countries, but the name of Christianity, and some outside Formalities of
Worship and Devotion; they know nothing of the Power of it: And I am not
without fears, that if the present Impositions in England be continued, and the
Laws prosecuted, and Dissenters ruined and destroyed thereby, that (unless God
raise up others) the Life and Power of Religion will decay, and Tepidity,
Formality, and Indifferency, with an increase of Sensuality and Profaneness
succeed thereunto.

And really, such a State peradventure may be acceptable enough to some men;
for so they may live in Plenty and Peace, and have what may caress their
senses, and please and gratify their lusts, they care not much what becomes of
the Honor of God, or the Souls of Men. Thus it is in Popish Countries; the Pope
and his Cardinals, the Bishops, Abbots, and most of the Clergy, live in Honor,
and at ease; they abound in all things that are grateful to the Flesh; they
withhold not their hearts from any Joy; but whether the People serve God or the
Devil, whether they be saved or damned, is very little their concernment. Let
them believe as the Church believes; let them be obedient to the Orders
thereof; let them advance no Opinions contrary to its Institutions, and for
other things they are at liberty, and may do as they list. There is no sin like
Inconformity, and breaking the Orders and tyrannous Impositions of the Church.
They may break all God's Commandments with more security than any one of them.
Some there be do not fear to say, That there are others in the world that are
much of the humor of those Catholic Gentlemen; and many there be that do not
know very well how to confute them.

Let it not be said that I impute all seriousness in Religion, to variety and
differences of Judgment and Opinion; I mean no such thing. I impute it to an
increase of Knowledge, and skill in the Scriptures and Doctrine of
Christianity, to which diversity of Opinions, and some diversity in Practices
too is, for ought that I can see, unavoidable; nor is there any way of
preventing one without the other. This the Papists see well enough, and
therefore forbid the Reading of the Scripture to the Vulgar; and some
Protestants see it too. See Bishop Bramhall's Vindication against Mr. Baxter,
who shall escape fairly (he says) if none cast it in his teeth, that the
promiscuous license which they give to all sorts of people, qualified or
unqualified, not only to Read, but to Interpret the Scripture according to
their private spirit, or particular fancies, without any regard either to the
Analogy of Faith which they understand not, or the Interpretation of Dectors of
former Ages, is more prejudicial, I might better say pernicious, beth to
particular Christians, and to whole Societies, than the over rigorous restraint
of the Romanist. p. 116, 117. There are more may see it in due time, and it is
to be susspected, that those that commend that Book, and have espoused some
other notions of that Author, concerning Patriarchal Power, and the Obligation
to obey the Laws of Universal Councils, till they be repealed, (which how they
shall be I cannot tell) may have some kindness for the same Opinion, and some
illuminations concerning it, though it be too early in the morning, as yet to
propose them to public Consideration.

However I have entertained the persuasion which I think I am not so like to
forsake, that Knowledge with serious Piety, and Godliness, though mixed with
some real Errors, Divisions, and Mistakes (for in variety of judgment
concerning the same things all cannot be true) is more eligible, than Union,
and sameness of apprehension, with Ignorance, Profaneness, Formality, and a
form of Godliness without the Power of it. A living man, though something
misshapen and deformed, is better than a lifeless Statue, though it be never so
beautiful and comely; and most Parents had rather have their Children alive,
though by their little pievish humors and quarrels, they give them some
trouble and vexation, than to be deprived of them, having nothing but their
pictures and lifeless Marbles, which never need their Umpirage to reconcile
their animosities and waspish feuds.

SECT. IX.
BUT what means all this Discourse? Why this is the meaning of it. Union and
Peace among Christians is a very fine thing, and greatly desirable; but so
various are the Understandings, and so great and inveterate are the prejudices
of men, that Union of Judgment can never be expected, with any probability,
unless in a few, plain, necessary things. Peace, Union, and Love was preserved
in the Christian Church in the Primo-Primitive times, upon such terms, upon the
consent unto, and agreement in a few plain, necessary things. Those were
thought then sufficient, and they are so still, though the belief of it be
perished from among men. Those persons that suspend the Peace of the Church,
upon many dark, useless, and controverted Propositions and Doctrines, and will
prosecute all Dissenters by severe and sanguinary Laws, (I will say it over
again) do but take a fair way to destroy the Church of God, and leave nothing
but the empty Name of Religion in the World.

You will say, What then would you have? Would you have all men left at
liberty, to believe and do as they list in Religion? Would you have no Laws or
Rules be imposed upon the Judgments and Faith of men? Shall they be permitted
to believe and publish what Doctrines they please? Before I make any Answer to
this Objection, I shall with all humility beseech both our Civil and
Ecclesiastical Governors, especially the latter, (whose Government certainly
is paternal) that before they make Laws and Rules for the Consciences of men,
they would a little consider,

1. The Weakness, Impotence, and Depravtion of humane Minds. Methinks those
that govern the Churches of Christendom, seem to have very little sense of the
common Calamity of Mankind; they seem to have forgotten the great and
lamentable Imperfections of the whole posterity of Adam: Are not the
Understandings of most men pitifully blind and dark? Are they not strangely
impotent and weak, yea, unable to discern sometimes the clearest Evidence and
Light? Are they not strongly influenced by Education, Company, Interest, and
many other things? Do not men's Lusts and Passions very much influence and sway
their Intellects? And are not their apprehensions of things very much formed by
them? This I do acknowledge is a fault, but it is a common fault, and surely
some consideration ought to be had of it, in the making and imposing Laws and
Creeds, upon the Consciences of men.

2. The very great Trouble, Tyranny, and Vexation of a scrupulous Conscience.
They that have had to do with those kind of persons, know something of it, but
none understand it fully but those that have had experience thereof. The
burden, the trouble, the anguish, and the torment of it is not to be
expressed; the severity of its Lashes, the rigor of its Rule and Dominion, is
almost insupportable. Persons of this temper there have always been, and will
be, and though some incompassionate men, (whose Bowels seem to be made of
Brass) laugh at them, and ridicule their tenderness and scruples, yet I do
belive that Church Governors (who should be Fathers to their People) ought to
have some respect unto them in their Constitutions and Impositions.

3. The impossibility of most men's giving assent with judgment to things
controverted, difficult and obscure. Let men say what they list, it is not
conviction that makes most men assent either way in the difficult controversies
of Religion. Do most men, yea most Clergy men, give their assent in the
controversies between Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants, out of conviction
of Judgment? No: Those things are of such profound and deep Speculation, that
very few men have either leisure, Books or Brains to fathom them, and make a
judgment of them. The Controversy about the difference between Bishops and
Prebyters, whether it be a difference in Order or in Degree, requires so much
reading and skill in ancient Authors, Fathers and Councils, with the debates of
Neotericks, that many men are not able with any settled judgment, to determine
on the one side or the other. It Is true, that some of the Church have lately,
with great confidence, without dispute, concluded a difference of Order between
them, and we must now believe it with as much assurance as the Apostles Creed:
yet I see no just reason to doubt, but that the Controversy will remain longer
than our Establishment, and peradventure there may have been, and still are as
great men, and as well skilled in ancient Learning, as the late and present
Bishops, that are of the contrary persuasion. I might instance in many of their
Controversies at this time, but this shall suffice, for I am persuaded, that
all men that have impartially studied, and thought of these matters, and made
observation on the understandings of men, must acknowledge, that very few men
of free judgments, can be brought to a full agreement in controverted and
obscure points of Religion: And as fo the most consequently, that subscribe to
what is imposed because they must, they do generally subscribe to things which
Combien entiendan come puerca de freno, they are as well skilled in as a Sow in
a Bridle, as says the Spaniard.

4. The incongruousness of Laws, Penalties, and Executions, to make men wise,
or give them largeness of understanding, to bring them to this Concord. Will
Laws and Penalties give Eyes to the Blind, or Ears to the Deaf? Or will they
enable a weak and impaired Eye to see Hairs, or the Webs of Spiders? Will they
enable the quickest. sight to see the Woods and Forests, the Rocks and
Mountains, the Towns and Villages, the Castles and Forts that are in the Moon?
Laws and Penalties may sometimes put men on study and consideration, (though I
think it is not very often, they rather warm and enrage men's Spirits, and put
them upon the defense of their own Opinions, than on the consideration of the
truth of those that are imposed on their assent and Faith) but they can never
make men understand beyond their Capacities: All the Teaching and Instruction
in the World will not make some men wise and learned, and what Instruction
cannot do, I am sure Laws will not do.

5. That Laws and Executions may make some men Lie and Dissemble, and Consent
against their Consciences to Impositions: but of all men such are the sharpest
and most enraged Enemies; And none upon Earth will be more ready to revenge
themselves upon the Imposers, than they will be, whenever an opportunity be
offered to them. Thus in the Days of Queen Mary, many dissembled, and assented
to the Roman Impositions, to preserve their Estates and Lives, but they
retained their Old Opinions, and conceived a mortal hatred against those that
put them on those straits and difficulties, as Dr. Burnet observes ( Hist.
Refor. part 2. page 364): And there is no doubt but they were the keenest, and
most eager Enemies to the Romanists, in the Days of Queen Elizabeth, when they
had the opportunity of revenging themselves upon them.

6. That it is not impossible, but the same measure that some mete to others,
may be measured to them again; and that those that Impose upon the Faith and
Consciences of others, may be Imposed upon themselves with the same, yea far
greater Tyranny and Rigor. The Papists are endeavoring to subvert our
Government and Religion; they have had Designs upon the Person and Life of our
Sovereign, and some men think they still have; and I know no reason to imagine
that they have forsaken them, unless they be convinced in their Judgments that
there is no possibility of prospering, or being successful therein, which why
they should be, I confess I do not understand. It Is true, a man would think
they should find mighty difficulties in accomplishing their Plot, but it must
be considered that we have been, and still are a sinful Nation. We have
exceedingly provoked the Majesty of Heaven, and whether or no for the sake of
our Iniquities, God may not give us up into the hands of our Popish Enemies, I
cannot tell; I am sure we have deserved it; and if he has determined to punish
us for our sins, by delivering us up to the Roman Scourge and Tyranny, it is to
no purpose to talk of difficulties; they shall be the Rod in his hand, and he
will chastise us in despite to all the opposition that we can make against it.

7. That God who is the great Sovereign and Governor of the whole Universe,
does suffer or permit many things in this Inferior World, which he does not
approve, proposing himself a Pattern to Rulers. God suffers much among Heathens
and Infidels, much among professed Christians, yea and many things he passes by
in those that are truly his Children; He knows their frame, he considers
that they are but dust. God is not severe, nor does punish every fault and
miscarriage among mortals; and surely those that are his Vicegerents here on
Earth, and represent him, would do well to imitate the Example of the most
Supreme Lord of all; or at least I think 'twere not amiss to be as equally
severe against Atheism, Profaneness, gross Immorality, and a contempt of all
Religion, as against some small Errors in Opinion and Differences in Practice,
from the Established Doctrines and Methods of Divine Worship prescribed.
Ecclesiastic Rulers (whose Government I have said is paternal) are more
especially obliged to consider this, forasmuch as they are, or at least should
be, best acquainted with the understanding of the Patience, Longsuffering and
Forbearance of God: But all should consider it, forasmuch as all have
experience of it, and must have, or they are undone. Civil and Ecclesiastic
Governors both have experience of much Indulgence and Connivance from God
Almighty, and they have still great need of more; and 'twere well that they
which enjoy and need so much, would impart and communicate some degree and
measure of it toward others.

8. That the requiring of greater Uniformity in Opinion and Practice in the
things of Religion, than the Church of God is capable of, is no means of Union,
Peace, or Concord, but a most effectual and certain means of Division,
Separation, Strife and Contention. The Christian World has found this true by
sad and lamentable Experience, and there is no man of sense or brains, but may
easily perceive it, if he apply himself to the consideration of it. Were it a
likely way to promote Peace in a Kingdom, yea or in a single Town or Village,
to oblige all the Inhabitants thereof by Laws, Penalties and Executions, to
learn and speak the Greek, the Chaldee, or the Arabic Language, and no other?
Are they capable of it? or have they Time, Leisure, Wit, or Helps sufficient to
obtain a skill and dexterity in it? Have they Teachers to instruct them in the
meaning, reading and pronunciation of it? Or supposing they had Teachers, Have
they all of them opportunity, leisure, or capacities for it? Would this make
Union, Peace, or Concord amongst them? Or would it not certainly mutiny,
trouble and divide them? No more is it any probable means of making Peace,
Union, and Concord among Christians, to oblige them to think, speak, and do the
same things, in the many doubtful and Controverted Cases and Points of Religion
and Worship in agitation among us? Are their minds all of the same shape and
size? Are they all of equal capacity and comprehension? Yea, are the minds of
all Clergymen of equal quickness and perspicuity? Are they of the same vigor?
And have they the same advantages for the improvement and cultivation of them?
Or are Impositions likely to unite them? Or are they not rather a sure Means,
and certain Engine of Division and Separation? It Is morally impossible that men
should have the same thoughts and apprehensions in the Controversies of
Christianity, as I have said and proved in the preceding Discourse; and if the
Governors of Churches will require things impossible, they may easily perceive
that it is not the way to make Peace, but War; not Union, but Division; not
Love and Friendship, but Hatred, Variance, and Strifes: For though some will
assent to all that they require, out of Interest, and for their Advantage;
others, by the hope of a fair and passable Interpretation; others will run with
the Herd, and swallow all without any chewing or consideration; yet there will
be men of tender, scrupulous, and severe Consciences, that will everlastingly
dissent from them. I do humbly conceive some regard ought to be had to such
persons by Governors in their Impositions, and that those that are most afraid
of offending God, should not for that very reason be exposed to the greatest
Sufferings and Calamities.

9. That it seems something hard, that it should be in the power of
Church Governors (who have all their Power for Edification, not for
Destruction) to make men Schismatics at their list and pleasure; and yet so it
is, if they may Impose what Controverted, Doubtful, and Unnecessary Doctrines
and Practices they please, upon the Belief and Observation of men. If this be
granted, those that are Good and Catholic Christians this day, may be a
company of Schismatics to morrow; it is but the Imposing of some Doubtful
Opinions on their Faith, and some Suspicious Actions upon their Practice, and
the work is done. And on this Supposition it is come to pass, that all the
Christian. World are by some part or other thereof, accounted Schismatics. The
Romanists account all Schismatics, that refuse and dissent from their
Impositions. The Protestants are of several Judgments, and various Practices,
and are more than enough severe in their Censures of each other. Some seem to
account all those Churches Schismatical, that have no Bishops, or Episcopal
Ordination; others think them Schismatical that do assert the necessity of it,
and will Impose the Belief and Practice thereof. The Case being thus, an honest
and sober man would be shrewdly tempted to think, that God never gave any Power
to Church Governors to Impose Doubtful and Unnecessary things upon the Belief
and Practice of Christians, and thereby make Schisms, Separations and Divisions
at their pleasure; but that all the Power they have, is to Command and Impose
things plain, necessary, and certain; and that those are enough to maintain the
Churches Peace.

10. That it seems very hard also, that men that believe all the Ancient
Creeds, assent to all the Fundamental Articles of the Christian Religion, and
live a pious and holy Life, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, living
righteously, soberly and godly in this world, should be denied the Communion of
the Church: And yet thus it may, and thus it does happen, by reason of the
Imposition of some Doubtful and Unnecessary things. Thus it is in England; let a
man be sound in the Faith, and live an Angelical Life, in the exercise of all
kinds of Christian Virtues, yet if he scruples Kneeling at the holy Sacrament,
he may not partake in it; if he doubts the lawfulness of Godfathers, and
Godmothers, or the use of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, he may not have his
Child Baptized, or admitted into the Church of God, though he be a person sound
in Judgment, and of unblameable and exemplary Conversation in all Godliness and
Honesty. No Clergyman can officiate in the Church, that suspects or doubts any
thing in the Liturgy, Book of Ordination, and Articles, to be contrary to the
Word of God; besides some other Subscriptions which a thinking man may be able
to find such difficulties in, that he cannot answer to his own satisfaction. Be
his Abilities never so great, be his Desires to serve God in the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus never so warm, lively and passionate; yea though he have been
solemnly devoted thereunto, he must not come near the Altar, nor meddle with
any Public Ministrations, for the promoting the Honor of God, and the
Salvation of Souls. The greatest skill in Languages and Philosophy; the largest
knowledge in Fathers, Councils, Histories, and the latter Books and Writings of
Divines, joined with incorrupt Faith, and an unblemished Life, are not
sufficient qualifications for the Priesthood. The Impositions must be all
swallowed, or the Candidates for it may go feed Swine. For the Flocks of God
(which he has purchased with his own blood) they shall not feed, though there
be no others to substitute in the Room of them, and they wander, go astray, and
perish eternally by the want of Teachers and Instructers.

SECT. 10.
HAving besought our Civil, and most especially our Ecclesiastical Governors,
to consider these few things now discoursed, I proceed to make some Answer to
the Objection; What would you have? And in general I reply, I am no Advocate
for Universal Liberty, that men should be left to believe, speak, and do as
they list. I would not that permission should be given to any to blaspheme God,
ridicule the Christian Religion, decry and burlesque all Morality, and laugh at
the day of Judgment, and a State of Rewards and Punishments. I would not that
men should be permitted to Preach Rebellion, and Mutiny the People against
their Prince; nor that they should be allowed to sow Sedition, or teach such
Doctrine as will subvert Order, and destroy all Peace among men; for these
things, and others of like nature, I am no Patron. Let these be prevented by
all just care and endeavors, and let such as offend in any of them undergo the
sharpest punishments.

But in particular, for satisfaction to this grand Query or Objection, as being
the chief business of my undertaking, I humbly propose these several things
which follow.

1. That nothing be Made or Imposed as Conditions of Communion, but a few
plain, obvious and necessary things. In these Concord among Christians may be
expected, and will be found, but in many Doubtful and Unnecessary things it is
impossible. Grammarians, Historians, Natural Philosophers, and Mathematicians,
agree in some things. There are certain Axioms, common Notions, and
Propositions, in which they do mutually consent, whatever their Differences be
in thousands of other things. In some few, great, plain, and useful things,
Christians do and will agree, though in many things of less certainty, use and
importance, they may and will differ to the worlds end. Existimat ejus Majestas
nullam ad incundam concordiam breviorem fore viam, quam si diligenter
separentur necessaria a non necessariis; and ut de necessariis conveniat, omnis
opera insumatur, in non necessariis Christianae libertati locus detur. Epist.
Causaboni ad Card. Perronium. p. 31.

Let the things Imposed as Terms and Conditions of Communion, be the Great,
Essential, and Constituent Parts of Christianity: Let them be such as are of
the Essence of Religion; such as without Assent and Consent unto, no man is, or
can be a Christian. That Religion (I mean the Christian Religion) has its
Essential and Constituent Parts, cannot reasonably be denied; for if it have no
Essential Parts, it is not Quid Compositum, it is no compound thing, which no man
in his wits, I think, will affirm; and if it be a compound thing, it must have
its Essential Parts, distinguishable from those that are Integral and
Accidental. We are not to be tied up to the one as to the other. Certainement
il seroit bien a desirer qu'il n'yeust pour tout aucune diversite, ni bigarrure
enter les fideles a cet regard. Mais parce que dans l'infirmite, ou nous vivons
en cette chair mortelle, ce bon heur est plus a souhaiter, qu' a esperer, il
fant restreindre la necessite de l'union de nos sentimens aux poincts, qui sont
Essentiels, and sans la creance des l'on ne peut parvenir au salut. A leur
egard, tous les fideles doivent sentir une mesme, chose. Nulle ne peut y avoir
de diversite sans rompre. Mais quant aux auters, qui ne sont pas de cette
importance, nous devons y souffrir la diversite quand il y en a l'example de
l'Apostre, qui oblige bien ci apres tous les fideles a cheminer d'une mesme
ragle en ce a quoy ils estoyent parvenus, mais supporte neantmoins ceux qui aux
rest sentent quelque chose autrement que luy, and les fideles parfaits,
esperant que Dieu le leur revelera aussi. Comme vous voyez, que dans un estat,
pourveu que tous les citoyens tiennent les maxims fondamentales, and
necessaires pour la sanction des devoirs essentiels a sa conservation, l'on
tolere enter eux de la diversite en plusieurs autres subjects de moindre
importance. Daille on Phil. 2.2.

3. Let the Essential Parts of Christianity be so carefully collected, that
there be no defect, nor no redundance: Let there be no defect, lest such
persons as are no professed Christians, be admitted to the Communion of the
Church: Let there be no redundance, lest those that are true Christians, and
believe all the Essentials of the Christian Religion, be excluded and denied
their proper Privilege and Right. Jacobus Acontius discoursing of a Common
Creed to be used among all Christians, and to be reputed the Test and Condition
of Communion, speaks as follows. Ac oportet quidem confessionem ejusmodi esse
instar definitionis cujusdam, quemadmodum enim requiritur, ut definitio neque
plura complectatur, neque pauciora, quam res ipsa, quae definitur; (viz.) ut
nihil desit, nihil redundet: ita in fidei symbolo nihil deesse oportet eorum
quae sunt ad salutem cognitu necessaria; nil etiam contineri debet, absque
cujus cognitione contingere salus possit: Si deesset etenim aliquid cognitu
necessarium, fieret ut qui Christianus haberi non debuit, neque Ecclesiae Dei
Membrum, propterea quod profiteretur illud symbolum, haberetur pro Christiano.
Sin contineretur Symbolo aliquid non necessarium cognitu, usu venire posset, ut
qui confiterentur quae essent necessaria, ut qui cum sua qualicunque fide salvi
esse possent, propterea quod non reciperent id absque cujus cognitione
contingere salus possit, cum essent pro Christianis and Ecclesiae membris
agnoscendi, rejicerentur; at sineque desit, neque redundet quicquam, jam neque
rejicerentur, nisi qui sunt rejiciendi, neque recipientur, nisi qui sunt
recipiendi, atque ita aptissimum fuerit Symbolum, quo Christiani a non
Christianis discernuntur. Acontii Strat. Satanae. lib. 7. page 366.

4. Let some difference be made between a Confession of Faith, and a Summary or
Institution of Christian Religion. In a Confession of Faith let nothing be
inserted which is not necessary to Salvation: In a Christian Institution all
things may be discoursed which may be thought any way useful or advantageous.
Whatever is mentioned in a Creed Symbol on terms of Communion, beyond what is
absolutely necessary, breaks the Church of God into Sects and Factions, and
fills it full of quarrels, strife and contentions. Those that will promote the
Peace of it, must require Assent and Profession only to some few necessary
things; and in vain do men hope or expect, that the whole Church of God should
be of the same mind in many or all things. In confessione scribenda, ut nihil
quod omnino sit cognitu necessarium praetermittendum est: ita quicquid addatur
non necessarium (etiamsi alicqui verum and bonum sit) id ad Ecclesiae
divisionem in Sectas pertinet, atque ad discordias and rixas; qui pacem and
concordiam in Ecclesia vult esse, oportet eum rerum necessariarum confessione
contentum esse; frustra enim speraverit aliquis fore unquam, ut cum Dei
Ecclesia tam been agatur, ut de rebus omnibus omnes idem sentiant; quare una
illa reliqua est concordiae ratio, si qui necessaria amplectuntur, ferant se
mutuo, and suas controversias inter se amanter, humaniterque uti fratres,
tractent. Acont. ubi supra. page 367.

5. Let this Confession, Creed, Symbol, or Test of Communion be expressed, as
near as possible, in the words of Scripture. Nihil complectatur nisi expressum
eisdem etiam verbis, and loquendi formulis (quoad sciri potest) quibus ipse Dei
Spiritus usus est: For there may be many men that will own and subscribe a
Creed, or Confession, expressed in the words of the Holy Ghost, which
peradventure may scruple that which is expressed in our own. All Protestants do
grant, that all things necessary to be believed and practiced, are plainly and
clearly revealed, and expressed in the holy and sacred Volumes. What hinders
then, but that our Symbol, Creed or Confession, may be drawn up in the words of
Scripture? Do we imagine that our own words will be more apt and proper, and
fitter to obviate Heretics than those of the Holy Ghost? Shall we pretend to
be more wise and cautious than the Divine Spirit? Or do we know what is more or
less liable to Cavils and Exceptions better than God himself? What arrogance,
madness, and presumption is this? Are we wiser than God? Or are we more prudent
and advised than he whose understanding is infinite?

6. Let nothing be condemned or rejected in this Creed or Symbol, but what is
inconsistent with the Faith of things absolutely necessary to Salvation. Let no
Errors be condemned in it, but such as exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven. If
Errors of inferior nature be condemned in it, 'twill become an Engine of
Division, and not an Instrument of Peace; 'twill exclude many from the
Communion of the Church, which ought to be received unto it, and so be an
occasion of Separation and Schism. And I know nothing almost that has
occasioned more mischief, and brought more fatal Calamities upon the Churches
of Christ, than the enlarging of Creeds and Confessions, under pretense of
obviating Errors and Heresies. This one Engine has caused more Schisms and
Separations, and shed more blood, and caused more desolations than all the
Heathen Persecutions; and yet notwithstanding the Lamentable Experience of so
many Ages, it is still kept in use: And I believe the Devil is very loath to part
with it; he has found such success and advantage by it, that he will never
forsake or abandon the use of it, if possibly he can: And there are many men
(and some that do pretend to be no Friends to him, or his Interests) that seem
to be almost as loath to part with this blessed Invention as the Devil himself.
Optandum foret ut qui publica templa and munera occupant, in sua confessione,
doctrina, ceremoniis, aliisque se intra primorum Christianorum and Apostolorum
simplicitatem and generalitatem continerent, aut duodecim illis Catholicae
Fidei Articulis, Symbolo Apostol. contentis, hoc est paucis admodum, and paucis
ceremoniis, contenti essent, and in aliorum conscientias Dominium non
usurparent, adeo ut omnes absque animi offensione publicos illos coetus
frequentare, and ibi inter se Eucharistiam celebrare possent. Curcellaeus in
his Preface to Episcopius.

7. Let us know that, the things absolutely necessary to Salvation, and utterly
inconsistent with it, are but few. The Learned and peaceable Author last but
one mentioned, reckons nothing directly necessary, but Faith in the Son of God;
and nothing inconsistent with it, but Unbelief of the same proportion. By
consequence he grants it necessary that we understand the depravation and guilt
of our own lives and natures, and the purpose and resolution of God to judge
the Living and the Dead. Vid. Jac. Acont. Strat. Satanae, lib. 3. a page 123.
ad page 131. And according to these apprehensions of things absolutely
necessary, both directly and by consequence, he forms a Symbol, which I will
propose to the Reader's view and consideration in his own words.

1. Quod unus sit verus Deus, and is quem ille misit Jesus Christus and
Spiritus Sanctus, and quod non recte negatur alius esse Pater, alius esse
Filius; quia Jesus Christus vere sit Dei Filius. 2. Quod homo irae judicioque
Dei sit obnoxious; and quod reviviscent mortui, justi quidem ad sempiternam
beatitudinem, impii vero ad sempiternos cruciatus. 3. Quod Deus Jesum Christum
Filium suum in orbem miserit, qui homo factus propter peccata nostra mortuus
sit, and propter nostram justitiam a mortuis excitatus. 4. Quod si crediderimus
Dei Filio, per ejus nomen vitam consequuturi, simus. 5. Quod non sit in ullo
alio salus, non in beata Virgin, aut Petro, aut Paulo, aut ullo alio Sancto,
vel quovis alio nomine, and quod non sit justitia in Lege, neque in hominum
mandatis, aut inventis. 6. Quod unus sit baptismus in nomine Patris Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti. Vid. page 373. lib. 7. Edit. Oxon.
In English thus:

1. There is one True God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, with the holy
Spirit, and it is falsely denied that the Father is not another, and the Son
another, because Jesus Christ is truly the Son of God. 2. Man is liable to the
Wrath and Judgment of God, and the Dead shall rise, the Just to everlasting
happiness, and the Wicked to everlasting torments. 3. God sent his Son Jesus
Christ into the world, who was made Man, and died for our sins, and rose again
for our Justification. 4. If we believe in the Son of God, we shall obtain Life
by his Name. 5. There is Salvation in no other, not in the blessed Virgin, not
in Peter, Paul, or any other Saint or Name. There is no Righteousness in or by
the Law, or by the Commandments and Inventions of men. 6. There is one Baptism
in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. I have not set down the Creed of
this Judicious Author, as if I thought it the best and most exact that can be
formed, but because it is short, and expressed in the words of Scripture, and
an Evidence of his Judgment, that the Communion of Christians, and consequently
the Peace of Churches, yea of Christendom, must be suspended, only on a few
plain necessary things. And peradventure our Common Creed, with the Lord's
Prayer, and Ten Commandments, as I have already intimated, might be Impositions
sufficient for the Union of Christians and Churches.
8. Let the Ministers of the Gospel be obliged to declare their Fai h in, and
Assent unto, no more than some such brief Symbol, or Confession, or rather to
those three Summaries of Christianity abovesaid. Let them not be obliged to
subscribe unto a multifarious number of Articles, or to profess a Faith or
Consent unto them. Let them heartily believe those few great things, and reduce
their Faith to Practice, and persuade others (I mean their several
Congregations) to do so, and this will be a more effectual way of producing and
preserving Peace and Union, than any other way or means whatsoever, and with
less mischief and inconveniences. It Is true, good, large, numerous and
swinging Impositions, ratified by severe Laws, and prosecuted by something like
an Inquisition, would peradventure silence more Disputes and Controversies; but
then there are two small mischiefs consequent thereunto, The one is, it would
destroy the best part of Mankind from off the face of the Earth: The other is,
it will destroy all serious Religion, and leave nothing but an empty name or
shadow of it in the World. And I am of the mind that some serious Religion,
though attended with Controversies and Contentions about some smaller things,
is more eligible than no Religion, or an outside Formality and Vizour of it,
though accompanied with the greatest Agreement, Union, and Sameness of Judgment
and Apprehension imaginable. Men are not Masters of their own Persuasions, and
cannot change their Thoughts as they please. He that believes any thing
concerning Religion, cannot turn as the Prince commands him, or accommodate
himself to the Law, or his present Interests, unless he arrive at that pitch of
Atheism as to look on Religion only as a matter of Policy, or as an Engine for
Civil Government. Burnet in his Preface to his late Book of the Right of
Princes.

9. Let Ministerial Qualifications be set as high as prudently they may: Let
them be required to have good Skill in the Learned Languages and Philosophy:
Let them be skilled in History, especially that of the Church: Let them know
something in the Controversies of Religion, and in the Writers of the Primitive
Times. And in these things, let them undergo a strict Trial and Examination;
and if they be not found competently instructed in them, let them be rejected.
Let it not be thought a sufficient Qualification, to have seen a University,
and spent some little time there. Let enquiry be made, what Advantage they have
made, what Learning they have obtained by the time they have spent there.
Persons may come as arrant Fools, and Ignorants, from thence, as they went
thither, and sometimes much more. If no place in the Ministry, nor Preferment
in the Church were to be obtained without Learning, it would oblige young
Scholars to follow their Studies, and employ their Time in the prosecution of
necessary Qualifications for the Ministerial Office, that they might be capable
of it: But where little else is required in order thereunto, but Submission to
the Ecclesiastical Yoke, and a good wide Throat that can swallow a Pompion,
it is no wonder if nothing else be Learnt or Labored after by a great many.

10. Let greater care likewise be taken of the Piety and Sobriety of their
Conversations. Ad Personarum quidem delectum quod attinet, qui ad munus
ejusmodi publicum eligi debent, tales esse oportet ut duo ista in iis
inveniantur, Primo, Doctrina sana and orthodoxa, Deinde vita and mores
convenientes non modo professioni Religionis Christianae, verum etiam tam
sancto and singulari muneri. Ad hoc etenim vocantur, ut alios tum sermon, tum
vitae exemplo doceant. Theses Salmur. De Minist. Evangel. vocatione. Let none
be admitted to the Sacred Office, that are of Impious Lives, and Immoral
Conversations; such persons give occasion to men of Profane and Atheistical
Tempers and Inclinations, to scoff, scorn, and deride all Religion, and
burlesque it out of the World: and to others that are of pious and devout
Inclinations, to forsake Public Assemblies, and run after Private Meetings,
and Conventicles. These things are obvious, and no man that has Eyes in his
head, can very well miss the Observation of them. And thus 'twill be, till
greater care be taken of the Lives and Practices of those that are admitted to
minister in holy things; of which at present I see no great I kelihood, seeing
those that make the fiercest Declamations against Separation and Conventicles,
and do sometimes complain also of the Atheism, Profaneness, and Debauchery of
the Times, take no care of removing away the Causes, and Occasions of them. For
I do not doubt but that very much of the Impiety, Irreligion, Separation and
Division, which do abound among us, is in a great degree imputable to the
Ignorance and Wickedness of Clergymen. Were Clergymen persons of Wisdom,
Learning and Gravity, and of unblemished Conversation, that had nothing to do
with any of the unfruitful Works of Darkness themselves, they would shame and
rebuke the Licentiousness of the Age, and more easily draw people from the
Private Assemblies to the more Public Worship of God.

11. If the Governors of the Church shall think fit to Commend a Christian
Institution, or Form of Doctrine to the Clergy, for the Direction of their
Sermons, and Public Discourses, I know no hurt in it, it may have its
Advantages and Utilities; but the Imposing such a thing is to me an Aversion. I
know not what to compare it to better, than a Rack, where men's Joints and Limbs
are retched and extended to their very great torment and vexation. To Impote a
large Confession, containing many and uncertain Propositions, and such as have
exercised the Wits of Learned men for many Ages, and are like to do so to the
Worlds end, is to set men's Minds upon the Tenters, and to exercise an
insupportable Tyranny over their Judgments and Consciences, to the breaking of
the Peace of Christians, and the Ruin of multitudes of good, and pious, and
holy men, and this to the great detriment of Religion, and the Souls of men,
and the Joy of the Devil and his Angels. And I do protest, I cannot but wonder,
by what fate even some good and excellent men are engaged in favor of
Impositions; Is it not as evident as that the Sun shines at Noon, that they
have Rent, and Torn, and Divided the Churches of God in all Ages for these 1300
years, and have engaged them in those Heats and Animosities against each other,
that by mutual Censures and Excommunications they censure the whole Universe of
Christians unto Hell? I doubt not but that God will be more kind to them all,
then they are to each other, or else I know not what will become of them, and
where their Portion must fall. But this is one of the happy Effects of
Impositions, which I can hardly mention without Indignation, and yet some good
men seem to be mightly in Love with it, and hug and embrace it as an excellent
Instrument of Union and Peace. Je demand que nous distinguions soigneusement
enter le's Doctrines si clairement estabilies en la parole de Dieu, que tous
les Chrestiennes sont obliges de les recevoir; and celles qui ont besoin, pour
leur eclaircissement, du travail and de la Meditation des hommes pour les
eclaircir; que nous n'en admettions point d'autres que les premiers pour
fondamentales and invariables; and que quant aux autres nous puissons nous
dispenser de les recevoir sans prejudice du salut, qui ne doit dependre que des
premiers. Je pretends que tout celase fasse sans rompre la paix and l'union que
nous devons entretenir avec ceux qui ont des sentiments different. I desire
that we do carefully distinguish betwixt those Doctrines that are so clearly
established in the Word of God, that all Christians are obliged to receive
them; and those that have need of the Thoughts and Industry of men for the
Elucidation of them; and that we admit no other than the first as fundamental
and invariable; and that we may dispense with our selves in receiving the
others without hazard of our Salvation, which does not depend but on the
former: And I do affirm, that this may be done without breach of that Peace and
Union which we ought to maintain with those that in these second sort of things
are of different Opinions. See that excellent Book La reunion du Christianisme,
p. 159, 160. and all over.

12. Many things may be forbidden by our Governors to the Clergy, which they
ought not to oblige them to abjure or renounce. Suppose a Clergyman should
have entertained an Opinion that Ordination by Presbyters is lawful and valid,
and that a Particular or Parochial Church is endowed with all Power, that
Christ Jesus has given to his Church: Peradventure our Governors may without
any hurt or injury to him, or any other else, forbid him the publishing of
these Opinions, or making Proselites to them; but why he should be obliged to
renounce them, I do not understand. He may be a good man, and capable of
serving God in the Gospel of his Son, though he should be of that persuasion in
those things; and though he cannot renounce them, he may be very willing to
silence, and keep secret his Sentiments, in obedience to his Superiors, and for
the sake of Peace. Again, to the like purpose Submission to many things may be
more safely required, than approbation; and there are multitudes of pious and
peaceable men, that could endure and bear with many things that they can never
approve. Many men peradventure might endure the use of the Cross in Baptism,
and the denial of the Sacrament to such as refuse to take it kneeling, and the
singing of Prayers in an unintelligible tone, and many other things which they
would never like nor approve. And indeed such is the World, and such is the
Church, that many things must be endured, which cannot, nor ought not to be
approved, for neither the one, nor the other, will ever be so good as they
should be. And here do I like well that good tempered Rule of St. Austin, and
which indeed is always reasonable, Adhibendus est modus temporaque servanda,
nec in confirmatione virtutis negligenda est disciplinae severitas, nec
immoderatione coercionis dirumpendum vinculum societatis. Cont. Ep. Parm. l. 2.
c. 6.

13. If Silence and Submission had been required, where Abjuration and
Approbation has been Imposed, the Christian World had known more Peace, and
Religion had flourished, and been much more successful, than it has been for
many hundred years. Silence and Submission would have obtained all those ends,
which have been sought for in vain, by peremptory and rigorous Impositions. But
when some men are not satisfied that others do quietly bear and submit to their
Pride, their Domination and imperious Folly, but they must also approve it,
justify it. and commend it. This is so monstrous a piece of Tyranny, that I
know not to whom originally to impute it, unless to the Devil, who requires the
same of his Servants; but those that are the Freemen of Christ, can never
endure it. Nay, I will add this little on the contrary hand, That had some
things been condemned only to Silence, instead of Renunciation, and others been
required only as to Submission, instead of Approbation, I do believe we should
have never seen those Divisions, nor known those Persecutions, nor heard those
Outcries and Complaints of Schism and Separation, nor been in this danger of
being swallowed up by the Papists, as now we are. But there are some Clergymen
in this, and some in another World, that were of another mind, though it is
like they have by this changed their Opinion at least some of them, and others
will do it in due time. Decisiones Divisiones pariunt, and quo plures fuerint
decisiones, eo plures inde oriuntur Divisiones and Schismata. Curcellaeus ubi
supra.

14. If Heretics in Fundamentals, and Persons of pernicious and dangerous
Opinions, creep into the Church, let them after due Admonition, by their
Superiors and Colleagues, be rejected. This is the Method that the Apostle
prescribes, and I know not where to find a better. Impositions to obviate
Heretics, have kept many sober and useful men out of the Church, but in my
apprehension very few Heretics. They are usually men of a lubricous and
slippery ingeny, and it is a very hard matter to set any traps or gins, which
they will not escape, or to make any nooses, out of which they will not slip
their necks; and I am abundantly convinced, that where One Heretic, or
dangerously Erroneous person, Many excellently Learned and Pious Persons that
might have been very useful Instruments in the Church of God, have been
excluded by this means. There is care ought to be taken to prevent Ignorant and
Scandalous Persons, from entering into the Church or Ministry; yet that hinders
not but that some such Varlets do intrude into it. I think now that the same
Methods of proceeding, which are used against wicked and immoral men, are to be
used against men of unsound and dangerons Opinions. The Governors of our
Church do not think fit to Impose Laws and Rules of severest Temperance,
Sobriety, Justice upon all such as are admitted into the Sacred Office, and I
know no reason why they should prescribe stricter Rules to their Judgments than
they do to their Lives; and that as a wicked Conversation becomes penal and
liable to censure, when it discovers it self; so it is time enough to punish
Erroneous Persons when their Errors do appear; for these entangling
Impositions (which are a sort or kind of preventing Medicines,) do, as I must
say still, rather choke honest men, than bar the Heretics, or persons of
dangerous and mischievous Judgments. No particular Church ought with rigor to
require Subscriptions to Articles that are evidently true and necessary to be
professed; because in the Division of hearts that is in the World, it is
certain that some good men may dissent, and then either they shall be
afflicted, or tempted to Hypocrisy: Of either of which if Ecclesiastical Laws
be guilty, they are not for Edification; they are neither just, nor pious, and
therefore oblige not. Bishop Tailor, Duc. dubitantium, lib. 3. page 358.

15. If the Bishops of the Church did vigilantly inspect both the Lives and
Doctrine of the Clergy, I do not see any great danger consequent to the
Intrusion of some ill, and Erroneous Persons into the Sacred Function; for as
soon as their Profaneness and Errors are manifest, they are liable to
Admonition and Censure, and if they remain obstinate and incorrigible, they may
be suspended, and removed from the Ministerial Office. This I do confess
requires great Care and Intendance over the Inferior Clergy, which yet I think
no more than is the duty of those that are the Overseers of God's House, and do
or should watch for Souls. But alas! that the honor which attends the
Episcopal Office, should be one thing, and the Labor that is annexed unto it
another; that the former should be loved so much by some men in the World, who
have no extraordinary kindness, if any at all, for the latter. Personally to
inspect and superintend the Doctrine and Manners of the Clergy is a drudgery
that these cannot bear, and must be done therefore by Commissaries and
Officials, and Archdeacons, who think nothing penal, or worthy of rebuke in
them, unless it be some defection in Conformity, nor nothing worthy of praise,
unless it be the virtue of Canonical Obedience.

16. Personal Inspection into the Lives and Doctrines of the Inferior Clergy,
is indeed a thing unpracticable in the Church of England, whilst Diocesses are
of the present Latitude and Extensions. Is a Bishop like to oversee the Life,
and take knowledge of the Doctrine of such Presbyters as he never sees, nor
knows no more of than he does of such as Live under the Empire of the Grand
Seignior, or the great Duke of Moscovy? To do these things by Delegates and
Proxies, is to change the Nature of Ecclesiastical Government into a worldly
and secular Method of Rule and Empire, of which I see no footsteps in the primo
Primitive Church, for the first two hundred years, but those that were Bishops,
did the work of Bishops; and Delegation of Episcopal Power and Duty without the
Office, I find none, nor I believe never shall, though Bishops of After-Ages I
do acknowledge, did find a way of devolving the most troublesome and laborious
part of their Office to others, they themselves reretaining what was most easy
and honorable, and it is well if they could have gone to Heaven too by the
Labor and Duties of their Proxies. Qui Episcopatum desiderat, opus bonum
desiderat, opus, non honorem, says Hierom on Tit. c. 1. (...). Then Prefecture
was not Honor, but Care of the Governed. This did not make those that were
chosen to it, to lift up themselves (for they were called to danger:) nor those
that were not chosen, to be troubled as neglected. But the matter is not so
now, but quite contrary. Chrysostom. in Act. c. 1.

17. Since the necessary Superintendance of the Lives and Doctrines of the
Inferior Ministers and People can never be reconciled with the present Extent
of Diocesses, it were to be wished in the next place, that Bishops and
Suffragans were multiplied and increased to that number, as they might be
capable of performing all the Duties of the Episcopal Office, and this I think
might be done if our Superiors pleased, without altering the present
Constitution, or diminishing the Revenues or just Honor of the present Bishops
and Episcopal Sees. For Example hereunto, St. Augustine is noted, who sent a
Bishop to Fussala, only because it was at too great a distance for his Care. I
think you may find it in his 260 Epistle. Caveant ergo Doctores and Episcopi,
says St. Jerome on Matthew. c. 5. Let the Bishops take heed, who though they find
Vicarios in Officiis, shall find none in Tormentis (according to Chrysostom,
and him) if they neglect their Charge. This multiplication of Overseers would
advance very much the Reputation of the Priesthood; for if they were diligently
watched, it would preserve and increase Knowledge and Sobriety among them,
which are the things that must give them a Reputation. It Is not a distinctive
habit, nor Titles of Honor, nor the Countenance of Authority and Laws, that
will procure them an Esteem and Veneration, but it is great Knowledge and
Soundness of Judgment, great Piety, Mortification, Self-denial, Contempt of the
World, Love to God and Men, Compassion toward Souls, and Zeal for the
Salvation of Sinners, that must make them loved and esteemed in the World. And
these things would be mightily promoted, assisted, and encouraged by the
Superintendence, and Personal Inspection, Care and Example of Good and
Excellent Bishops.

18. As the Personal Inspection of Bishops would advance the Reputation of the
Clergy, by promoting Knowledge, Wisdom, and Sobriety among them; so the Wisdom,
Good Conversation, and Esteem of the Clergy, would mightily advance and
increase Piety, Virtue and Godliness among the Laity. There Is nothing that I
know of, unless it be the Influence and Assistances of the Divine Grace, that
contributes more to the making of men good, than the Wisdom and Piety of those
that Preach the Gospel. For although in all places there are some, yea many,
that are incurably wicked, and so perverse, and crooked, that nothing will make
them straight; yet there are more Good and Pious men to be found, where the
Gospel has been preached, by Wise and Pious Preachers, than in any other
places whatsoever. The Ignorant and Impious seldom or never convert Souls (at
least in my Observation.) Animum non faciunt, qui non habent, Like begets its
Like. Those that are themselves strangers to Godliness and Virtues are not
likely to make others so. I do not absolutely deny that a wicked man may be an
Instrument of another man's Conversio and Reformation; but I do believe it is
very seldom, and of rare experience, (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. p. 277.

19. Let nothing be inserted in the Public Lyturgy of the Church, but what is
agreeable to the Doctrines contained in the three Summaries of Christianity,
formerly mentioned. If things of dark and uncertain nature be mingled in our
Public Offices and Prayers, they will occasion the same Divisions, and
Separations, the same Factions and Schisms, as if they had been put into the
Public Test and Symbol of Communion; and those persons that come into the
Church at one door, will be shut out at the other, and what is given to them
with the right hand, will be taken away with the left. Let the matter of of
Public and Common Prayers, be plain and indisputable; let them contain nothing
that can reasonably be scrupled; let the Confessions, Supplications, and
Thanksgivings that do compound them, be such as all Good Men may consent unto,
and readily and heartily say Amen. I must add; Let them be expressed in the
Language and Words of Scripture, this will make them the more grateful and
savoury to Pious and Devout Minds; this will render them the more
unexceptionable to all men; and certainly no words can be more proper to
express our Requests and Desires to God withal, than those that have the Holy
Ghost for their Author. A Proposal of this nature was made to some Bishops
suddenly upon His Majesty's Restoration, but 'twas rejected. A Lyturgy so
formed and expressed, would not serve their Ends, nor promote their Purposes so
effectually, as that which had been formerly established and in use, and
therefore in defiance to all Peace and Union, That must be Re-established. It Is
true, there are not many things exceptionable therein, but something had been
long objected against some passages in it, and the whole had been several years
disused in almost all Congregations; and if from thence occasion had been
taken, to new Cast and Mould it, I do humbly conceive it might have promoted
more Love and Union, more Charity and Peace, than the Imposing it, as we have
done with almost no Alterations. I remember a passage in Cyprian, De Oratione
Dominica, When Christ has told us (says he) that whatsoever we ask the Father
in his Name, he will give it us. Quanto efficacius impetramus quod petimus in
Christi nomine si petamus ipsius Oratione. Agnoscet Pater Filii verba, etc. It
this be true, that our Petitions are more efficacious for being put in the
words of Christ's Prayer, I am more persuaded that our Confessions and Lyturgy,
if they were formed only in Scripture Language would be safer from exception.

20. I would also wish further, that some Liberty were indulged to such
persons, (being otherwise of sound Judgments, and Loyal and peaceable
Principles, as are not satisfied in their minds, concerning the Lawfulness of a
Form of Prayer. I do confess that I never read or heard any thing said or
written against Forms of Prayer, that would convince me of the unlawfulness of
them; nevertheless, because there are many Learned, Pious, and Good Men, of
other thoughts and apprehensions, I do heartily wish that they might be
permitted the Liberty of their Judgments and Consciences in that Case; nor am I
able to see any danger, mischief, or inconvenience consequent thereunto. There
were greater Differences and Varieties among the Ancient Churches (without any
breach of Love or Charity) than the use of a Form or Extemporate Conceptions do
amount unto; and so it might be still, if Christians, both Clergy and Laity,
were as meek, humble, and peaceable as then they were, and as great Enemies to
Pride, Empire, and Domination, as then they seemed to be.

What is said by Socrates and Sozomen concerning the different Practices of
differing Churches, is often mentioned, and sufficiently known by Learned Men.
It Is plain from them, that though they differed much in some Rites and Customs,
yet they did not separate from each other, and treat and repute each other as
Schismatics. They reputed it, and very justly, says Sozomen, a foolish thing,
to separate from each other for the sake of some differing Customs, whilst they
agreed in the capital Points of Religion, (...), lib. 7. cap. 19. Amongst many
Diversities reckoned by Socrates, he mentions the great Diversity of their
Prayers, and these are his words, (...). Universally among all Sects, you will
hardly find two Churches that do altogether agree among themselves in the
Manner of their Prayers. In ritu precandi, Valesius interprets it. Socrat. lib.
5. cap. 22.

If any shall say, that Socrates speaks here of Sects, and not of the Catholic
Church; I answer, it is true, he speaks of the Novatians some few lines before,
and of the Macedonians some few lines after; but it is certain that the most of
the Varieties that he takes notice of in that Chapter, were found among the
Catholics; and I see no reason that we should understand the word (...) which
after Valesius I have translated Sects, in so narrow a sense as may respect
only the Novatians, and some other Separatists and Heretics; it seems more
agreeable to the Historian, to understand the word in a sense so large and
comprehensive, as may reach the Catholics as well as those that were separated
and divided from them. But supposing this doubtful, he affirms (in this same
Chapter) that those that were of the same Faith (by which he means the Orthodox
in opposition to Separatists and Heretics) differed among themselves in Rites
and Customs, (...), of which he gives many Instances in the Church at Rome,
Alexandria, Egypt, Thessaly, and Antioch. They agreed in the same Faith, but in
Rites and Customs there were great varieties among them, says that Historian.

Nor am I ignorant that some men think, and report Socrates a Novatian, and
that what he speaks of this great variety of Customs and Practices in Churches,
is in favor to himself, and others of that Persuasion; Persons that separate
from the Church, being willing to take notice of every little variety that may
be observed in particular Churches, to countenance their own Departure from
them, to prove themselves True Churches notwithstanding their Separation. If
the matter of this Objection be granted, I know not what prejudice it is to the
Allegations produced from him; for though he were a Novatian, I hope he might
speak Truth, and that the Credit of his History is not blasted by that
supposition; nor could he be so utterly bereft of all Sense, as to report such
things, wherein 'twere easy to confute him, if they had been false. Would he
have affirmed such a Diversity of Customs, if there had been a present Concord
in Christian Churches concerning them? And would he have inscribed his History
to Theodorus, whom he calls a holy Man of God (and therefore a Bishop, though
of what City is uncertain) who could not be ignorant of it, if there had been
no such Diversity? This is to suppose Socrates a Fool, or a Mad Man, which is
an imputation that none but men of that Tribe will charge him withal. But the
supposition of Socrates to be a Novatian, is in earnest but an Idle Dream,
there being no Evidence for it, that is of any weight or value; and many
against it, as those that please may Read in the Life of Socrates and Sozomen
prefixed to this Edition of their Works by Valesius. So long as Christian
Religion was a simple Profession of the Articles of Belief, and a hearty
prosecution of the Rules of good Life, the fewness of the Articles, and the
clearness of the Rule, was the cause of the seldom prevarication. Dr. Tailor in
his Liberty of Prophesying.

SECT. XI.
BEfore I proceed to the remaining Proposals, I must take leave by the way to
speak with an Objection or two of some folks, who are like to be troublesome.
That Conceived Prayers in Public Assemblies, are unlawful, I never yet saw
proved, and I believe never shall. Neither do I think it any such Novelty as
some men imagine. There are several Passages in the Fathers that make it seem
very probable, that they made use of Extemporate Conceptions. I will mention a
few of them. Illuc suspicientes Christiani manibus expansis, quia innocuis,
capite nudo, quia non erubescimus, denique sine monitore, quia de
pectoreoramus, precantes sumus omnes. Tertullian in Apologetico, cap. 30. What
Tertullian means by praying without a Monitor, or Teacher, and by praying out
of the heart, unless it be by a habit, by present Conceptions I understand not.
Nor do I know how he that prays by a Form can be said to pray without a
Teacher. We worship with Supplications according to our ability, (...), the One
God, etc. Origin contra Celsum, l. 8. And in the same Book, (...), according to
present given in Ability, which latter words expound the former, (...), and
makes it appear that their Prayers were Extemporate. To this same sense some
understand those words of Justin Martyr. The President as his Ability serves,
(...), sends up Prayers and Thanksgivings, the People joyfully saying Amen.
Apol. 2. cap. 39.

But it is objected, that those that use that way of Praying, do many times
speak Nonsense, and blaspheme in their Addresses and Supplications to God
Almighty, to which I have these few things to say, 1. I believe those that make
this report of men's Extemporate Conceptions, do not speak upon their own
knowledge, (they having little or no Communion with such, as make use of them)
and those that are their Informers, peradventure may be none of the most
upright, just and impartial men, but may put an ill sense upon words that are
very innocent, and of sound and safe signification. 2. Let this Objection be
acknowledged true, what can reasonably be inferred from it? Is it unlawful to
be used, because some men have not skill enough to perform it? Will not the
same Argument hold against Preaching? And may it not with as much reason be
said, some men Preach Nonsense, False Doctrine, Slanders; others Preach
foolishly, and pedantickly, not to the Edification, but to the Amazement of
their Congregations, and therefore Preaching is unlawful. If this Method of
Argumentation be good in one case, it is good in both; but I am of Opinion, it is
good in neither; and that the better way of Arguing from those miscarriages is
thus. Some men are neither able to Pray extemporately in a decorous manner, nor
to Preach soundly, and to the Edification of their hearers, therefore they must
let it alone, till they be better instructed in the one and in the other: Or in
Prayer, let them use a Form (which I do not doubt is lawful) and in their
Sermons let them take assistance from Books, whose Authors were better skilled
in the Art of Preaching than themselves; but in the mean time let them not
condemn those, that need not these Helps and Assistances, but can Pray and
Preach in comely, grave, and profitable manner, out of the abundance of their
own hearts.

Another Objection as wise as the former, is this: In Extemporate Prayers men
set their hands to a blank, and say Amen to they know not what; they give the
same blind Assent to the Prayers of every Priest, or Extemporizer, that the
Papists do in things doctrinal to the Authority of the Church. This very silly
Objection has been insisted on, and urged, against Extemporate Prayers, by
some very great men: To which I reply. 1. If men said Amen to Petitions before
they heard them, or before He that Prays had expressed himself in words
concerning them, there might be something of sense and truth in it; but
Assenting to Petitions before they are made, and uttered, is a thing that I
understand not, nor those, I believe, that have Communion in those kind of
Prayers; and if Persons do not give their Assent till the Petition be formed,
or expressed by words, I hope they may deny their Assent, if they judge the
matter of it unlawful. 2. According to this Doctrine, no man can join with
another in Prayer safely, unless he know aforehand what is the Matter and
Contents of it; and thus we must have Forms of Prayer for all occasions and
emergencies (if it were possible to hit of them) as well as for ordinary Cases,
or else persons may set their hands to a blank, and say Amen to they know not
what. We must have an Universal Form of Blessing before Meat, and of
Thanksgiving after it, or Form of Prayer for all Masters of Families, Tutors,
etc. which must be always used, and no other Form; a Notion that some of those
that are in Bedlam may possibly believe, but it would be strange that any that
are out of that place should believe it, unless some few that ought to be sent
thither. 3. The experience of multitudes of good and pious People, does confute
this Objection every day. They are sure they do join heartily in Extemporate
Prayers, and that they do not set their hands to a blank, or say Amen to they
know not what. They know that they Assent not to Petitions before they be
expressed, and that they do Dissent where they do not approve them, though it is
very seldom that they have occasion for it; For who are those persons that
express themselves in words sinful, blasphemous, and without sense, they do not
know. But enough of this; and peradventure some may think I have said too much,
to take notice only of such a brainless Objection.

This is sufficient to my purpose, that Dissent from a Public Lyturgy, and the
Use of Conceived Prayers, are no Reasons for making Churches or Persons
Schismatical. If any things of this nature are enough to denominate single
Persons or Societies of Men Schismatical, it is in the Power of those that are
uppermost to make whom they please Schismatics. Persons and Churches may walk
in all the Statutes and Commandments of the Lord blameless, and yet be cut off
from the Church of God as Schismatical and consequently be excluded Life
Eternal; for it is affirmed of late, that whoever is cut off from a particular
True Church, is cut off from the Church Universal, out of which there is no
Salvation; and so, for ought that I can see, a Man, or a Society of Men may be
very good Christians, and yet shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Which I shall
be very ready to believe when I can think the Surface of the Moon to be no
broader than a Sieve, or the Body of the Sun no bigger than the Globe that
Atlas bears upon his shoulders in Cornhill. Ce seroit un grand bien que les
fideles fussent si purfait, meant d'accord qu'il n'y eust ent'reux qu'un seul
sentiment sur toutes les chooses de la religion: Mais ce bon heur estant
plustest a souhaitter, qu' a esperer pour l'infirmite de nostre intelligence
tamdis que nous voyageons en la terre, l'Apostre nous ordonne de nous retiner
and moderer, en tell sorti qu'il si rencoutre de la diversite dans nostre
concord. Daille ubi supra.

SECT 12.
TO proceed therefore to three or four things more I have to propose, and are
yet behind. The one of them, that is, the One and twentieth, is, Let not these
Tolerated Churches be accounted Schismatics, but let them have the same
Estimation that the Churches of the Jewish Communion had from those that were
of the Gentile Communion, some Diversity in Rites and Ceremonies there was
between these Churches then, but they did not repute each other as
Schismatics; they accounted each other True Churches notwithstanding that
Diversity of Opinion and Practices that were among them, and so for ought I can
see, might we also. Is it reasonable or just to deny those to be true Men, that
do differ in the Manner of their Dress, and in the Color or Fashion of their
Garments? Or can it be affirmed with Truth, that the Indians in America are not
of the same Humane Race with us, because they go almost naked, and we cover,
and dress, and adorn our selves with all the fine things that Nature and Art
can furnish us withal? In some parts of Persia (as Herbert reports in his
Travels) they expose their Dead, in others they burn them, and we bury them.
The Essedons among the Scythians mince their Dead Friends with the Flesh of
Beasts, and eat them. Morendo il padre ad alcuno, tutti i suoi parenti portano
ivi piu pecore, and amuzzetele and fattele in pezzi, minuzzano ancho il morte
padre de colui, che gli ha invitate, e mescolate tutte le carni insieme,
mongiano di compagnia, e scorticata e nettata la testa del morto la indorano e
se ne serveno per un simulacro al quale agni anno fanno maggiori ceremony, and
amazzano maggior vittime, as the Italian Giovanni Boemo has it, in his Book of
the Customs of Nations. The differing Manners of People are reconcilable with
the same Common Nature. And if these be true Men, notwithstanding those things
in which they differ from us, so may these that I have spoken of be true
Churches, notwithstanding they may differ in some things from those that have
the Countenance, Favor and Establishment of the Government and the Law.

Another of them, that is, the Two and twentieth, is, Let it not be thought a
Scandal or Reproach for the People of several Communions, sometimes to
communicate (in such parts of Worship as they can) with each other. Why should
it be thought an infamous thing for a Churchman to go to a Separate Meeting,
and hear their Sermons, and partake with them in their Prayers? Do they not
Preach the same Doctrine, and offer up the same Petitions, (though not in the
same words) that is Discoursed, and are sent up to the Throne of Grace, in the
Public and Allowed Assemblies and Congregations? And why should not the
Tolerated and Dissenting part of Christians come sometimes and hear the
Discourses and Prayers of the Established Ministry? Do they not Preach the same
Jesus, the same Faith, the same Repentance, and the same Obedience to the Laws
of the Gospel? Will not many of both Parties Live together hereafter in the
same Heaven? Will they not behold the Face of the same God and his Christ? and
join together in the same Prayers and Hallelujahs, in the same Quires of Saints
and Angels for ever more? And shall Christians that will live together for ever
in the World to come, live at that Distance and Separation in this, that they
will not so much as own each other, nor communicate in the Service of their
common Lord and Master? Surely this is not well, there is fault somewhere, and
I am afraid that neither Party is Innocent. This strangeness and distance is
not seemingly in Brethren; those that have the same God for their Maker, and
the same Jesus for their Redeemer, and the same holy Spirit for their
Sanctifier those that are begotten by the same Word, to the same Eternal Hope
of Glory, should not live like Aliens and Strangers, much less like Enemies to
each other: They should have a mutual dearness and tenderness for each other,
and communicate together in what they can, notwithstanding their differences in
some, yea in many smaller things. To advance yet one step more, Let it not be
thought a crime, for a Public Minister to Preach in a Separate Assembly, nor
for a Tolerated Preacher to do the like Office in a Public Congregation; I
know no hurt in such a mutual Enterchange of Love and Duty to and for each
other: But I am very much assured, much good would be consequent unto it. It
would beget and increase Love and Kindness; it would take off those Prejudices,
and False Apprehensions that through Ignorance and Strangeness men of different
Judgments have entertained of each other. I do not at all doubt, but that there
are multitudes of persons of contrary Judgments in some things, that would love
each other with great Dearness, were they intimately acquainted and known to
each other. Yea I will add, that such a friendly correspondence and intercourse
of Kindness, between Conformist and Nonconformist, would do more to Heal the
Breaches, and Unite the Judgments and Practices of the Differing Parties, than
many Impositions, sharp and severe Laws and Executions. Men are to be drawn by
Love and Kindness, by Charms and Attractives to Union and Conformity, not to be
driven to it with Beetles and Sledges, with Swords and Axes.

The Three and twentieth is, In this Enterchange of Love and Duty, let nothing
be Preached, but those common Truths in which both Parties are agreed. Let them
not be allowed to meddle with those Doctrines which are the Subject and Matter
of Controversy between them. This will not generate Love, or serve any good
end that I know on, but will enkindle Wrath, and make Animosities and Feuds,
and set those that differ at an irreconcilable distance from each other. There
are things enough in which they agree to furnish matter for their Discourses of
this kind: And to come into each others Congregations, to rail upon each others
Persons and Opinions, is rude and insufferable. It is very pertinent Advice
bear of a Spanish Author. Estu dia de suffrir con paciencia quales quier
defectos y flaquezas agenas, mirando que tu tienes mucho que te sufran los
otros. Si non puedes hazer a ti qual desseas, como quieres tener al otros a tu
sabor? Patiently endeavor to bear the Imperfections and Weaknesses of others,
considering that there is much in you that others must bear and endure. If you
cannot make your selves such as you would be, how can you expect that others
should be according to your list, or as you would have them? Neither are the
Preachers of both sides to rail at, or reproach each other in their own proper
and peculiar Churches and Congregations, or in their Printed Books and
Pamphlets. If they do think fit to meddle with each others peculiar Opinions,
let them do it with calmness and meekness; let them in fair language, confute
one another Arguments, without all unnecessary Reflections, or personal
Provocations. Reproaches, and Mutual Exposing of each other to common scorn
does no good. No man ever becomes a Convert in his Judgment by being railed on,
exposed, or derided. This Method of proceeding enkindles and enrages men's
Spirits; it heals no Wounds, nor makes up any Breaches, but makes them greater,
and more incapable of Cure. No ay ninguno sin defecto ninguno sin carga,
ninguno es sufficient para si, ninguno es, complidamente sabio para si, y
portanto conviene llevarnos unos a utros. No man is without defect, no man
without fault, none is sufficient for himself, and therefore we must bear and
tolerate each other. Menos precio del Mundo.

What is said in these last Directions in the behalf and favor of an
interchangeable Love, and Offices of Kindness, betwixt Approved and Tolerated
Ministers and Churches, is no more than what Amyraldus pleads for betwixt the
Lutherans and Calvinists, and the Churches of those Professions. Having spoken
of the great distance and prejudices of those two Parties against each other he
adds, Nunc in magnam spem venimus fore ut in posterum tempus omnino melius se
res habeant. Nam producere quidem in suggestum Augustanum, reformatae
confessionis Ministrum, qui intemperie aliqua animi, vel Dogma Calvinianum in
iis in quibus dissentimus ad populum spargeret, vel in Dogma Lutheranum
inveheretur, uti preposterum esset atque temerarium: sic etiam in formula
Concordiae injustum pronunciari debet, quemadmodum Augustanae confessionis
preconem, apud reformatos vel detonare in Calvinum, vel eas res quas probare
non possumus, magna vi persuadere velle, nemo est qui non judicet minime
ferendum esse, quique id non pariter prohibendum arbitretur. Ac Ministrum
Augustanum a Reformato invitari, and item Reformatum ab Augustano, ut
Communionis testandae causa, Reformatus populum Augustanum, Augustanus populum
Reformatum public alloquatur ea lege atque omine ut sese contineant intra
ambitum earum rerum, quae sunt utrisque Communes, quaeque ad aedificationem
spectare possunt, Res est, quam non modo licitam and utilem, sed absolute
necessariam esse putamus. Vid. Amyral. in Irenico, page 386, 387. Something to
the same sense he speaks, p. 383. Hoc unum ex concordiae formula utrinque
stipulari sat erit, ut neque Reformatus in Ecclesia Augustana quidquam turbarum
excitet adversus ejus doctrinam disputando, neque Augustanus in Reformata
pariter, sed ut uterque contentus fidem and cognitionem habere apud se (ut
loquitur Apostolus) silentio se contineat, ne quid temere deblateret ex quo
animorum offensio vel scandalum oriatur.

The Difference between the Calvinists and Lutherans, is as great, and in some
things greater than betwixt the Churches of Public Establishment, and those
that I do wish might be tolerated among us; and why there might not be the same
interchanges of Love, Familiarity and Kindness betwixt them, as this Learned
and Pious Pacificator wishes and desires, yea hopes might be amongst the
Augustans and Reformed, I can see no reason. What reason might be given why a
Conformist might not hear Dr. Owen, Dr. Bates, or Mr. Baxter at Pinners-Hall,
or elsewhere? yea or why he might not Preach there himself? What reason can be
given why these worthy and excellent men might not be permitted to Preach at
Guild Hall Chapel, Bow, or other Churches in the City? Is not their Doctrine
as sound, their Ministerial Qualifications as great, and their Manner of
Preaching as likely to do good, at least as some of the Conformable Clergy? I
am not ignorant what Objections the Interest, Passions, and Prejudices of men,
do make against what I have proposed and discoursed, nor shall I undertake to
answer them. Humble, holy, mortified men, that love Peace, and the Souls of
men, before their own petty Interests and Advantages, can easily answer them
themselves, and others will not be convinced by any thing that I shall reply
unto them. There Is no confuting the Objections that are made by Pride,
Covetousness, Ambition, Love of Empire and Dominion, and other Passions of
Infernal Race; and I have no present Inclination to spend any Words upon the
Objections of inconfutable Men. It is true, that what I propose may seem at
present unpracticable, by reason of the Inconsistency of such Practices with
the Established Laws: But it is not impossible, I hope, that His Majesty (who
is the Breath of our Nostrils) with His Parliament, may come to think fit, that
such Laws be relaxed for the Uniting and Strengthening the Protestant Interest,
against the Roman and French Enemy. And if it should please God to incline the
Heart of the King, and His Great Council so to do; then will that which I have
said be not only very practicable, but, as I think, very useful; that is, to
lessen and abate Differences, restore decayed and dying Love, and to bring
Christians to a greater Uniformity in Judgment and Practice, than any other
Means or Endeavors whatsoever. Redintigrationem amicitiae necessario sequi
debet officiorum sedula communicatio atque familiaritas. Amyrald ubi supra.

The Last Proposal I have to offer, that is the Twenty-Fourth and chiefest, and
therefore reserved to the last, is this: Let these Tolerated Churches be made,
and then reputed Parts of the National Church, whereof the King is the Head.
What other Head to find for it, under that Consideration, after all that has
of late been said concerning it, I am as yet to seek. If the Bishops be made
the Head of the National-Church, by the same Reason all the Bishops of the
Christian World must be the Head of the Universal Church; (and indeed, those
that affirm the One, affirm the Other) which some Men will say, is French
Popery; and I know not how to confute them. If the Archbishops be the Head of
the Church, it will be enquired, whether they claim their Title Jure Divino, or
Humano? If Jure Divino, they must prove it, which will not easily be done: If
Jure Humano, I hope they will grant the King Superior to them, and that they
are but His Officers and Delegates; which is the same thing that I desire, and
which is agreeable to the Opinion of our First Reformers, as is apparent in Dr.
Burnet's History of the Reformation: For Cranmer took a Commission from K.
Edward, by which he held his Bishopric, and exercised his Jurisdiction. Vid.
Par. 2. page 6. And so Bonner had done before him, from King Henry the Eighth.
Vid. Par. 1. l. 3. p. 267. And this is the same thing, that has been lately
proposed by that Thoughtful Man, Mr. Humfrey, in the End of a Discourse written
by Himself and Others, and dedicated to the Right Honorable, the Earl of
Hallifax, that great and sagacious Statesman. I know some Men are Deaf Adders,
who will not be brought to regard it, let a Man have Charmed never so wisely;
but These (I take it) are such only, who are Enemies to Peace, and will part
with nothing for the sake of it.

And why now these Tolerated Churches should not be accounted true Churches,
and Parts of the National-Church, whereof the King is the Head, I do not
imagine. In my Apprehension, they look very like the Churches we read of in the
New Testament, which (no Man doubts) were of Divine Appointment. For although I
do not know, but that some particular Persons from among the Clergy, fittest
for it, (As St. Paul chiefly employed himself in Preaching the Gospel, and
meddled but little with Baptism) may be lawfully and prudently chosen, and
employed chiefly in the Government of several Congregations, even as many as
they can personally know, and be acquainted withal; and if they be called
Bishops, and have a peculiar Consecration, and nothing be done in Ordination,
Censures, and Absolutions, but with their Knowledge, Direction, and
Approbation, I would have no Controversy with them about it: Yet I do
professedly avow, that I can find no such thing in the Scripture, nor in the
Practice of the Church for 200 Years. I know it is said, That the Apostles were
Diocesans, and that they governed all or most of the Christian Churches whilst
they lived; but I see no Proof of it, and there is one Argument against it,
which I cannot tell how to answer, and it is this. If the Christian Churches, in
the Apostles days, had no Governors but themselves, it is certain, that for the
most part they had none at all, for they never fixed in any place, but having
preached the Gospel, planted Churches, and settled Officers amongst them, they
left them, and went to other Places and Countries. It Is true, they did
sometimes return, and visit the Churches that they planted; but who Governed
them in the intermediate Periods of Time? Or were there no Ordinations,
Censures, or Absolutions performed in them, or none but by their Direction and
Command? That some Acts of Discipline were performed by their Direction and
Command, I do acknowledge; but that all were so, and that none ought to be
performed without it, I see no reason to believe.

Touching the Practice of the Church after the Apostles, till the end of the
Second Century, I must say, That I can find no Evidence of Diocesan Episcopacy,
or of any Churches bigger than some single Congregations among us at this day.
I think the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Antioch, etc. single Congregations,
and that they all Communicated at one Altar; and that there are many
Congregations in England as numerous, and some much more numerous than they.
Yea, I will add (after all that has been said of late to the contrary) that I
am not convinced, that the Church of Carthage in Cyprian's days, which was Two
hundred and fifty Years after Christ, was any bigger than some of our
Parochial-Congregations. In an Epistle to the Clergy of Carthage, he tells
them, That from the beginning of his Episcopacy, he determined to do nothing by
his own private Judgment, nor without their Counsel, and the Consent of his
People. A primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim, nihil sine Consilio Vestro, and
sine consensu Plebis meae, privata sententia gerere. Ep. 6. ex Edit. Goulartii.

What does St. Cyprian mean by His People, in these words? Does he mean the
whole, or Major Part of a Diocese, in the Modern sense of the Word? Did he
assemble his Diocese, and take their Consent in all things that did concern
them? Credat Judaeus Appella. Many Passages of like nature might be produced
from this great Saint and Martyr, and are by Learned Men, which I will not
repeat.

And for ought that I can perceive, Diocesan Episcopacy was unknown in this
Nation, for several hundreds of Years after Christ Jesus. The Culdees were the
great Preachers of the Gospel, and Promoters of Christianity in Scotland. Those
Culdees were no Bishops, nor had any Ordination, but such as was performed by
the Monk, or Abbot of the Monastery, in the Island Hii. This Monk (who was
himself no Bishop) and his Pressters gave them their Orders; and from thence
came Aidan and Finan into England, and are called Bishops; but had no other
Ordination, than that abovementioned. Wini was the first Canonical Bishop in
Britain, as Bede reports. Non erat tunc ullus excepto Wini in tot a Britannia
Canonice Ordinatus Episcopus. Lib. 3. cap. 28. Which was near Six hundred Years
after Christ.

The Prefecture and Jurisdiction of Bishops in England, seems to me of Humane
Institution, and derived partly from the Favor of Princes, and partly from the
Usurpation of the Pope; and thus gotten, and obtained, they enjoyed and
exercised it for many Hundreds of Years, even till the days of Henry the
Eighth; who reassuming the Authority that had been granted by former Princes,
and usurped by the Pope, obliged them to acknowledge their Jurisdiction, by
derivation from Himself; and subjected them to a Praemunire, in case of refusal:
And of this Opinion those Bishops seem to be, that took Commissions from K.
Henry the Eighth, and K. Edward the Sixth, for their holding their Bishoprics,
and Exercise of their Jurisdiction; as I have signified already.

Let our present Diocesans therefore, as such, acknowledge themselves the King's
Officers, and by Deputation from Him, let them exercise such Authority, circa
sacra, as appertains to Kings: Let them enjoy their Honor and Revenues, as a
Reward of their Service: Let the Powers granted by Christ to such Bishops, as I
have above conceded lawful, and their Presbyters, be left inviolable: And let
our Diocesans supervise them in the Exercise of them; and see that they neither
neglect, nor abuse them: And all our Controversies about Church Government,
will come to an end. Such Churches as should be thought worthy of Toleration,
as well as those that have the Approbation of Authority, would submit to such
an Episcopacy.

When it shall please God therefore to send us a Parliament, that are able to
distinguish wisely betwixt, Tolerable and Intolerable Opinions and Persons; and
so by Law to permit to the One the Liberty of their Assemblies, and to restrain
the Other; and shall then prepare a Bill for Declaring the Constitution of the
Church, as National; making the King to be Head of all the Congregations, which
shall be Tolerated, as well as of those which are Parochial; and the Diocesan
Bishops to be His Officers or Delegates, for keeping good Order amongst them
all; leaving to the Pastor of every Parish or Congregation that Power, which
Christ has committed to him for Feeding and Ruling the Flock, over which the
Holy Ghost has made Him Overseer; without confounding this Internal Power of
His, with the External of the Other, derived from the King; but preserving the
Rights of both so, that the One be not swallowed up of the Other (Nor
forgetting the Concession of a sort of Episcopacy, to perform the ordinary Work
of the Apostles and Evangelists, in that Multiplication of Supervisors over the
Parochial-Clergy, which I propose also in these Papers); then shall the Grounds
be laid for a firm and lasting Concord in the Nation, about the Matter of
Religion.

There were two Bills in the House of Commons, that sat last at Westminster,
the One for the Uniting those that could come in to the present Church
Establishment, the Other for Ease to such as cannot. These Bills had they
passed, and become Laws, might be a good Interim for making up our Breaches,
till some more effectual means were also applied; but when they would serve for
excellent Scaffolds to stand upon, while the Work is in hand, the Fabric it
self should be formed out of such Materials as these, which I now offer, and
which I find put to the End of that Book I have before mentioned, in the last
Half Sheet thereof, and called Materials for Union.

Should it but please the King then, and a Parliament to consider the Contents
only of what Mr. H. has there proposed, and pass the Sense of it into a Law,
it would unite and heal us; it would make us a Glorious Church indeed; firm and
Compacted among our selves, and therefore impregnable to the Assaults of all
our Enemies. Tho there were Differences in Judgment among us, and some
Difference in Practices, yet there would be little or no Difference in
Affections; All would mind and promote the common Peace, and unite in resisting
the Common Enemy. This would put a Period to the Attempts of Rome; for to what
purpose should the Factors and Emissaries of the Roman Conclave attempt to
subvert an Established Church and Religion, where there is no probability of
prevailing? And what likelihood is there to prevail, where all Parties are
satisfied? The One in the Favor and Encouragement of the Government and Laws:
the other in their Indulgence, and Protection by them.

SECT. XIII.
ALthough it be plain enough from what I have discoursed, that I plead the
Cause of none but Tolerable Dissenters, and am Advocate for no Persons or
Churches that maintain pernicious Errors, and are impenitent and incorrigible
in them: Yet to prevent all Misunderstandings, I do again here subjoyn, That I
plead not the Cause of such as subvert the Christian Faith, in the great
Essentials of it, which the Jews, Mahometans, Socinians, and all other Infidels
do. I would not have Men permitted to Preach down Jesus Christ, and the Gospel,
and to Preach up mere Theisme, or the Religion of the Antique or Modern
Heathens; nor of such as Preach Immorality and Licentious Profaneness. I would
not have Men permitted to encourage or justify Violence or Rapine, Sensuality
or Lust, Rebellion or Treason, or any thing that is plainly Wicked, and
condemned by the Light of Nature, as well as the Doctrine of Christianity: And
of this kind are many Popish Doctrines, as is evident to all Men, that have
conversed in the Writings of their Casuists, and such as have the Conduct of
Conscience among them. Particular Instances whereof may be seen in the Mystery
of Jesuitism, and the Jesuits Morals, by any Man that has a desire to be
satisfied concerning them: Nor of such whose Doctrines are inconsistent with
Civil Government, and Public Peace; and such is the Doctrine of the Romanists.
A Papist (if he be true to the Opinions and Decrees of their own Popes and
Councils) must be a Rebel, and a Traitor, whenever his Holiness pleases to
command it. This has been sufficiently proved by many Authors, and is obvious
enough to such as read their Books: And if there be any other Sect or Sort of
People, that maintain such Doctrines, as do disturb the Peace of Mankind
necessarily and truly, (and not occasionally, and by accident, for so the
Gospel does it) I have nothing to say on their behalf.

But if the Toleration that I have proposed, and pleaded for, should be thought
a Means of increasing the Separation from the Public Congregations; I reply;
Let care be taken (as I said) that the Clergy, who officiate in them, be Men of
Worth, Ability, and good Conversation; that is, such as preach and live
Piously, and love the Honor of God, and the Souls of Men: And let some
Discipline be restored to particular Churches under the Inspection of the
Bishops, and difference be made between the Precious, and the Vile, by the
Exercise of it; that none be reputed and accounted Christians, and admitted to
all the Privileges of Christians, that know nothing but the Name of
Christianity, and live in open Defiance to all the Laws thereof: And if these
two things were done, there would be no great danger of increasing the
Separation by Tolerating some Dissenting Churches; but on the contrary, I do
think that Separate Churches would be drained and emptyed, and in a few Years
almost quite dissolved thereby. For in my Observation, it is the Ignorance and
Profaneness of Clergymen, and the Corruption and Impurity of Churches, that
began and does continue the Divisions, and Separations, that have been, and
still are among us: Let the Cause be removed, and taken away, and the Effect
will cease.

Nay, suppose some single Persons, few in number, should leave the public and
Allowed Congregations, on occasion of this Toleration, and join themselves to
separate Assemblies; What great hurt is there in it, and why should any Public
Preacher be offended at it? What hurt or wrong is it to my Physician, if I
leave him, and go to another, if he cannot cure me, or I do not like his
Methods and Prescriptions? Has he any Reason to be offended, if another do
that which he cannot do? I know the Minister of my own Parish does oftentimes
meet some or other of his Parishoners, going to their Conventicles, when he
has been going to Church, and the like in his and their Return; and yet I
never heard that he grew into any Passion or Displeasure with them about it,
much less that he prosecuted them at Law for it: But he has been heard to say,
That if they learned the Way to Heaven at their Private Meetings (as he hoped
they did, at least some of them), he did, and would rejoice: And why others may
not do so too, I see no reason, nor understand any thing to the contrary. Must
Men die, if I cannot cure their Diseases? Must they perish, if my Pills and
Potions will not recover them? Must Men be damned, if the public Preacher
cannot persuade them to Faith and Repentance, or teach them the Way to Heaven?
Surely, methinks those that know the Worth of Souls, should rejoice in their
Salvation, whoever be the Means of it.

I will add, that Interest has so powerful and mighty an Influence upon Men's
Judgments, that were nothing but things absolutely necessary to Salvation
imposed, and a Form of wholesome words commended to those that are admitted to
the Public Congregations, and Preferments of the Church, I am very much
inclined to believe, that in a few Years it would be hard to find Persons to
officiate in separate Congregations: Most Men would believe those Doctrines
which have public Approbation, and which make them capable of Livings and
Advancements; and others would silence their particular Apprehensions, and make
no opposition unto them, that they also might share in them, and where to find
Persons to minister in holy things, at Separate Churches, would peradventure be
no easy thing. And if at His Majesty's Restoration some few, plain, necessary
things had been imposed, and all the rest only commended and countenanced, I do
believe, that where there is now Ten Dissenters, there would not have been
above One. It Is these numerous and unnecessary Impositions, that are the Plague
of the Christian World, as well as the Church of England; and have both made
and continued all the Breaches, and Separations, that our Ears have heard, and
our Eyes have seen. Qui naturam Religionis prae^ipue Christianae, quae tota
Spiritualis est been perspectam habuerit, facile animadvertet vim and
coa^tionem non esse idoneum ad eam promovendam medi^m. Nec enim Equulei aut
gladii, aut ignes quibus ^orpor a cruciantur quicquam in animum valiant.
Cur^el. in Institut. l. 7. p. 589. Sed nec Religionis est ^ogere Religionem,
quae sponte suscipi debeat, non vi; Cum and hostiae ab animo libenti
expostulentur. Ita and si nos compuleritis ad sacrificandum nihil praesta^itis
Diis vestris, ab invitis enim sacrificia non desi^erabunt. Tertul. in lib. ad
Scapulam. p. 447. At the first Conversion of this Land to Christianity by
Austin, it is said, That the King (E^^lberthus) embraced all that came into
him, but he compelled none. Didicerat enim and a Doctoribus ^uctoribusque suae
salutis, servitium Christi voluntari^m non coacticium esse. Bid Eccl. Hist.
Ang. Genesis ^ 1. c. 25.

After all that I have said I do confidently avow and affirm, that it is but a
very imperfect measure and degree of Peace, that the Church of God is capable
of in this World, and that among variety of particular Churches, some are
capable of more Union and Peace, than others are; And then to attempt greater
Peace and Union, than the Church Universal is capable of, is to endeavor to
destroy it; And that to endeavor the reducing o^ one particular Church, to the
same Peace and Union, that may be found in another, is the High way to ruin
it. I here mean chiefly, Forcible endeavors by Impositions, Laws, and
Executions It Is with the Peace of the Church Universal, a^ it is with the Health
of the World, 'twill never be complete and perfect; And to attempt to make it
so, were an impracticable piece of Folly, an^ would make it more diseased, or
destroy a great Part of it. It Is with particular Churches as it is with
particular Climates and Countries, in some the Inhabitants are more hayle and
sound, that in others, and to essay an Equality of Health among them, would be
a pernicious and vain attempt; and make many more sickly, and sen^ Thousands of
others to their Beds of Dust an^ Earth.

All particular Churches are not equaly soun^ and strong, nor capable of equal
Peace and Un^on, and to attempt it by violent remedies wi^^ certainly increase
their Diseases, and make the^^ wounds and breaches greater, and destroy man^ of
the Members of it, if not the whole; and I fea^ this is the Case of the Church
of England, which I humbly commend to the Consideration of the Ecclesiastical
Physicians. I doubt we are not capable as yet of so much Union and Peace, as
may be found in some other of the Reformed Churches; What we may be in the
next, or in some future Ages, if we happen on Skilful Physicians, I will not
determine, but I hope well.

I have answered the grand Cavil, made in favor of Impositions, and in
prejudice to a brief Creed and Symbol, containing only a few plain necessary
things, expressed in the Language of Scripture, or rather the three Summaries
of Religion, contained in the common Creed, Lords Prayer, and Ten Commandments.
I have obviated also I think the most considerable Objections that are usually
made by the Patrons of Imposition. I know what I have said will not please
those kind of Men, and if I had designed their Acceptance, I must have rayled
at Dissenters, and have represented them a Generation of People, not worthy to
live upon the face of the Earth. I must have laid fuel on those flames, that
do already rage so furiously against them. But I have other thoughts of those
men, and another design in these papers, who would bring my Bucket to quench
the Fire, that burns against them. I would attempt to abate the rage, and allay
the heats that are raised, and do threaten their ruin. If what I have written
may serve this end, I shall rejoice; If it may be acceptable to moderate and
Pious Men, I shall not regard the censures of those that rage and rave. Simon
Aurem solum percutit Iracundia Criminantis, verumetiam conscientiam mordet
Veritas Criminis; quid mihi prodest si me continuis laudibus totus mundus
attollat? Ita, nec malam Conscientiam sanat Praeconium Laudantis; nec bonam
vulnerat Convitiantis Opprobrium. Aug. Cont. Lit. Petiliani. l. 3. c. 1.

The Sum of all is this, Peace and Union amongst Christians, is a thing greatly
amiable and desirable; but such are the imperfections, and Corruptions of
humane minds, and of such different sizes and various Prejudices are men's
understandings, that it is morally impossible they should agree in more, than
some plain things. And therefore numerous and unnecessary Impositions, are no
proper terms of Peace, but great instruments of Division, and have been been so
for many Hundreds of Years. And as much peace as the Church of God is capable
of, in this imperfect State, may be obtained by other and better means; and the
Evils that are pretended to be cured, or prevented by imposing, may be healed
and provided for by more Christian Methods. Neque ad plenam charitatis and
societatis Christianae concordiam, necessaria est plena opinionum de Dogmatibus
and Ritubus Consensio: sedcum aliqua in hisce dissensione iniri jure potest, ac
honest foveri inter dissidentes Ecclesiastica Pax and fraterna consociatio.
Forbs. Instruc. Histor. Theol. lib. 14. c. 7.

Before I go off, I must request the Reader, calmly and without heat to
consider the Contents of this Discourse, before he censure or condemn it, and
that he will not take some single Sections, separate and alone, and charge them
with Absurdities (which he may easily do) but consider the Whole, and compare
the Parts with each other. For what in one Place is liable to Objection, may in
another be freed from it. If any Man shall think fit to reply to what I have
written, and does write calmely, and with a peaceful Spirit, I shall not
promise a Rejoinder, but I shall consider what he says: But if he rages, and is
angry, and gives me hard words, having no cause for them, I know how to employ
my time better, than in answering such Folly.

And now then, I will shut up my Book with some words, which were in the Mouths
of the Protestants, at the First Reformation in Italy, and may be put in the
Mouths of those that Dissent from us now in England. God knows, how soon we may
be made one to our cost.

Ne vi Lasciate dare a Credere da i Vostri Ecclesiastici, che quelli che per la
Lettione de la Same Scritture vengono ne la cognoscenz a del Siglivolo di Dio,
et de sue promise, ne le quali Confidati rejettano tutte le Traditione humane,
Sciano (come pare hoggi a torto ci chiamanno) Tumultuosi, Perturbatori de la
Pace e Quieta publica, Autori de Seditione, e Pieri d'egni vitio e Licenza.
Impero che Dio non e Autore di Divisione, ma di Pace. Ne siamo noi i primi, i
quali siamo di cio Stati Salsamente imputati, Concioscia che a Elia primo su
dello che egli disturbaa il popolo d' Israel. Christo Anchora su chiamato
seditioso da i Judei. Egli Apostoli erano accusati che commoverano it Popolo.
Suffer not your selves to be prevailed upon by your Ecclesiastics, to believe,
that those who by reading the Scriptures come to the Knowledge of Christ and
his promises, and trusting on them, reject all Humane Traditions, are (as at
this day, to their great injury they are called) Tumultuous, Disturbers of
public Peace and Quiet, Authors of Sedition and Licentiousness, for God is not
the Author of Division, but of Peace: We are not the First, to whom these
things have been imputed. It was said of Elias, That he was the Troubler of
Israel. The Jews said of Christ, That he was Seditious and Subverted the
People: And 'twas said of the Apostles, That they did exceedingly trouble their
Cities and turned the World upside down.

Aprite, Aprite gliocchi vosteri, e considerate been voi che permettete che ne
vosteri citta stiano Gjudeiet altri non solamente di contraria Religione a
quella del figlivolo di Dio, ma Distruttori d'essa Anchora et Atheisti, et non
permetterete chi quelli, i quali seguitano la Vera Dottrina e Religione de
Giesu Christo, stiano ne vostri Citta e Case loro, contrae ogni Giustitia e
Leg tanto civil quanto Divina? Open, open your Eyes, and consider, you that
permit Jews in your Cities, and others not only of contrary Religion to that of
the Son of God, but utter Destroyers of it, yea, arrant Atheists; And will ye
not suffer those, which follow the true Doctrine and Religion of Christ Jesus,
to dwell in your Cities in their own Houses, contrary to all Right both Humane
and Divine?

These are Words in an Address to the Italian Princes, and Republics, in the
Year 1562. Unto which I will therefore yet affix a Sentence that is Fresh, out
of the present Bishop of Cork, in his late Book called, The Protestant
Peacemaker, who has rendered himself (I take it) Observable for his several
Condescending passages to the Nonconformists: and more especially, for the
mention he makes of one Book of theirs, entitled, A Peaceable Resolution of
Conscience touching our present Impositions (and it is a Peaceable Book indeed)
with so much Integrity and Honor as he does, though scarce taken notice of by
others: as also, for this one saying of his, which is fit (I think) to be set
on a Beacon, and shall be therefore my Conclusion. I am, and must be of the
mind, that the strength of the Protestant Cause, both at Home and throughout
Christendom, lies in the Union of Protestants; and the Glory, Purity, and Power
of Christianity in this World, stands or falls with Protestantism.

SECT. Vlt.
TO this Discourse before going, written by a Learned Hand in the Country,
which does here end, the Bookseller, who knows him not, is advised to annex the
Copy of those two Bills for Accommodation, that were in the House of Commons,
when they Sat last at Westminster; to this end, that they may be here as it
were upon Record, for the Use of the Parliament, when any shall be called.

It is some Months since this Book (which so much concerns that Argument,) was
sent out of the Country, and it was retarded in the Press several Weeks, in
hopes of a Parliament coming, that might have made the Subject more seasonable:
But now the very Talk of one being lodged for this Summer, it is fit something
be put to it, as may make it to be of use in October. The Bees and Ants have
their Instinct in the Summer, to make Provision for their Lives against the
Winter.

There are Two sorts of Nonconformists we know; The One who do allow of a
Liturgy, and our Parochial Churches, and these may be all C^^prehended upon
very reasonable condescen^^^^s: The Other who do not allow of either, and these
must be Indulged, or destroyed. It is two Bills therefore, or these two things
in one Bill, which are necessary to the design of Accommodation.

In that Parliament, the One of these Bills (for there was Two of them, as the
Gentleman before has told us) the Bill for Indulgence, was carefully attended
by some concerned in it, and was therefore brought to Perfection: The Other
Bill, that for Comprehension, was looked after very sorrily; and if it had
Passed as it was Drawn up, would have brought in, no Body.

For instance, The Declaration of Assent and Consent to the Book of
Common Prayer, required in the Act of Uniformity, was taken away wholly in this
Bill, but the Subscription required in the same Act, was taken away only in the
latter part: And when in the former part there are these words, And I will
Conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now by Law
Established, (which are really equivalent with the Declaration of Assent and
Consent to the Use of the Book, and it is to no more, than to the Use of it,
the Declaration is required to be made, by the Act), it follows, that to take
away One of these injunctions and not the Other, could be of no Signification.
Upon notice hereof therefore given to some Members of the House, it was moved
at the Committee to take away the whole Subscription, as well as the
Declaration; and it being carried in the Affirmative, the Bill as it is here
presented, has that Amendment.

There are some few Additions more inserted as necessary thereunto for the
obtaining its end, the reasons whereof appear in their own light, yet is it
Judged fit, that public notice be given of two or three of them.

The One of them is the Parenthesis about the Beginning, where the Thirty-Nine
Articles are imposed on every Minister to Subscribe, which notwithstanding the
Exception of Three of the Articles, do yet require more Caution. Whosoever have
read a Book, called, A part of a Register, wherein there is a Relation of
several things in reference to the Nonconformists in Q. Elizabeth's days, they
will find that there was nothing so grievous to them and exasperated them then
against the Bishops so much as the Subscriptions of those times, and the
Subscription to the Articles was one among the rest; which makes me wonder what
our good men did now mean, to impose the Subscription of these Articles so
rigidly upon all, for the enjoyment of the benefit of either of their Bills, of
Union, or Indulgence. They know not really what it is they were a doing, for if
the Persecuting Spirit should be raised hereafter about this Subscription, and
the thing be so pressed that all who Subscribe not, shall be Prosecuted by the
Law, there were like to arise greater troubles to tender Consciences, and
scruples more unanswerable, then could be about the Cap and Tippet, the
Surplice and Cross, in those days. The doubtfulness of many about the
Ceremonies is not to be compared to a Conviction of Conscience, that a man must
not Subscribe to any point which he believes untrue. By this means therefore
should these Articles of the Church, intended for Peace, become the instruments
of Torment, and be had in the greatest Detestation, which consequently will
defame, and then ruin the Protestant Religion. There will be Persecution in
the Church, that is certain, for the Devil will have it so: There will be Tender
Consciences, that is certain, for God will have it so. When there are no other
things then to trouble Men's Consciences but this Subscription, Exceptions and
Scruples will be raised against these Articles; and it a Parliament do not
prevent them in their Bill by a present mitigation, they Act not like wise Men,
and do not see Ten Years before them. The only remedy against this evil is to
provide a liberty in both the Bills, that every Conscientious Man that really
scruples any of the Articles may explain his sense, which if it shall not pass
unless it be allowed to be Orthodox by the Bishop (or by two other Bishops, in
case the Diocesan be partial) there can be no harm in it, at least none in
comparison of this mischief, which is to be prevented hereby.

Another of them is about the Middle, concerning Orders. In the late Times,
when the Bishops were down, many were ordained by Presbyters and the House was
willing to allow those Orders, as good in a Case of Necessity, upon which
account only the rigid Episcopalian will allow of the Ministry of the Reformed
Churches beyond the Sea: but there being others that have been Ordained since
the return of the Bishops, the House made no provision for such in the Bill,
being not willing (we may suppose) to countenance a neglect of the Bishops out
of that case. And what then shall such do? There is an Ordination to the
Office, or Ministry it self, and he that is Once Ordained to that, whether by
Presbyters or Bishops, cannot receive the Spiritual Power (or Character), or be
made Ministers, Again: But there is a laying on of hands to the Work of that
Office in regard to a new Charge, as Paul and Barnabas who were Ministers
before, and yet are separated to that peculiar Work, (unto which they were
called by the Holy Ghost) by the laying on of the Hands of those who are named
Act. 13. Such an Ordination now as this may be repeated, and is the only Medium
for resolution of this dimculty.

The Third of these Insertions is the last whole Clause concerning the
Common Prayer, the due consideration whereof is the very main hinge upon which
the whole matter of this Comprehension does turn. If Union it self be
necessary, it must be necessary to know what is the Bottom, upon which we can
be United. In all Reconcilements between different Parties, the first thing
that is to be found out, is a Medium for their Agreement. When we have found
this, it must be considered, how far each Party can come up to that Medium, and
then we can make the Accommodation. The Medium of Reconciliation in this
Business, at this time, between the Conformist and Nonconformist, is the
Common Prayer. Some Persons (as is said before) do hold, that a stinted Form of
Prayer, and our Parish-Churches, are unwarrantable by God's Word; who, though
they may be Indulged, are thereby incapable of Comprehension. Others are ready
to maintain the Lawfulness of both these; and the Enquiry about such is, How
far they can do that which is enjoined? That is, How far they can Read the
Common Prayer, and how far they cannot Conform to it? This is the Critical
Point, in regard to this Bill between the Conformist and Nonconformist. The One
can Read all, the Other so much only as will serve for Union. The Nonconformist
now, who hold a Form of Prayer, and the Parish-Churches lawful, are, for the
most part of them, able (through Providential Merey) to Conform to the Ordinary
Lord's- Day Service, their Exceptions (which make the Liturgy to them unlawful)
lying in other Parts or Moments of the Book. And consequently, if the Bill may
be hemmed up with the Clause here offered, it will do. Without that Clause, it
is apparently imperfect: With it, it will be what we may call Perfect, that is,
Perfect in its kind, so far as to answer its end, and bring in All of the
Willing, and Many of the Unwilling, that go under the Name of the Presbyterian
Persuasion. This being premised, the Bills (the Titles only as they were in the
House, being voluntarily omitted) are as follows.

THE Bill for Comprehension.
WHereas the Peace of the State is highly concerned in the Peace of the Church,
Therefore at all Times, but especially in this Conjuncture, it is most
Necessary to be preserved. In Order therefore to remove Differences and
Dissatisfactions, which may arise among Protestants, Be it enacted by the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, That if any Person shall (without making any
Interpretation of his own, unless it be such as shall be allowed to be Orthodox
by his Diocesan, or two other Bishops) Subscribe, and Declare his Assent and
Consent unto, and Approbation of the Articles of Religion, mentioned in the
Statute made in the 13th. Year of the late Q. Elizabeth, except only the 34th.
35th. and 36th. Articles; and also, except these words in the 20th. Article
[Viz. The Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in
Controversies of Faith,] in like manner as he is already Obliged to Subscribe,
and Declare his Assent and Consent unto, and Approbation of, all the said 39
Articles: Every such Person shall be as capable of taking any Degree in either
University, or being Ordained Priest or Deacon, or of being Collated, Admitted,
or put into, and to Hold and Enjoy any Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion, as
if the said Person had Subscribed and Declared his Assent and Consent unto, and
Approbation of all the said Articles of Religion.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person
Ordained between the Year of our Lord 1644, and the First of May, in the Year
1680, according to the Form of Ordination, used by laying on of hands by the
Presbytery, shall be as capable of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, or Promotion,
as if he had been Ordained according to the Form of Making and Ordaining
Priests and Deacons in the Church of England: And that every Person Ordained
only by Presbyters since the Year of our Lord 1660, shall not be admitted to
any Benefice, unless he receive a second Imposition of Hands from some Bishop,
to recommend him to the Grace of God, for the Work or Exercise of his Office,
in the Place or Charge unto which he is called; and the Bishop shall frame his
Words accordingly.

And Whereas, by a Statute made in the 13th. and 14th. Year of His Majesty's
Reign that now is, Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of the Public Prayer,
and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies, and for
Establishing the Form of Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, in the Church of England, there are two Declarations imposed upon
several Persons, and in such manner as is there specified.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person that
hereafter shall be Presented, or Collated, or Put into any Ecclesiastical
Benefice or Promotion, shall declare his unfeigned Assent and Consent to the
Use of all things contained, and Prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer; nor
Make and Subscribe the other Declaration, or Acknowledgment, [Viz. I A. B. do
declare, That it is not Lawful to take up Arms against the King, etc.]
according to the Forms in the said Act, in the 13th. and 14th. Year of His
Majesty's Reign, directed and appointed; but that Both the said Declarations
shall be wholly Omitted, any thing in the aforesaid Statute to the Contrary
Notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person shall
hereafter be capable of being collated, Admitted, or put into any
Ecclesiastical Benefice, or Promotion, before such time as the said Person
shall have taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance (which Oath of
Allegiance is contained in the Statute made in the 3d Year of King James)
before the Bishop of the Diocese, (who is hereby Empowered to administer the
same) and shall also Make and Subscribe the Declaration mentioned in an Act of
Parliament, made in the 30th. Year of His Majesty's Reign that now is,
Entitled, An Act to prevent Papists from Sitting in either House of
Parliament: And the Name of every Person so taking the Oath, and Making and
Subscribing the Declaration aforesaid, shall be Enrolled with the Day and Time
of his Taking the same, in Rolls to be kept by the respective Bishop of each
Diocese for that purpose.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person shall
hereafter be Obliged to take the Oath of Canonical Obedience, or to make the
Subscription required by the Canons, or to go to the Bishop for a License to
Preach, being already lawfully Ordained, any Statute or Custom to the contrary
Notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth, no
Person whatsoever wear a Surplice, during the time of Reading Common Prayer, or
Preaching or Performing any Religious Worship, in any Church, or Chapel
whatsoever, except only in the Chapel of the Kings Majesty, and all Cathedral
Churches of this Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth, no
Minister, or other Ecclesiastieal Person, shall be Obliged or compelled to use
the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, or any Parent Obliged to have his Child
Christened by the Minister of the Parish, if the said Minister will not use or
omit the Sign of the Cross, according to the Desire of the Parent, who in that
Case may procure some other Minister to do it. Nor shall the Child of any
Person be refused Baptism, for want of Godfathers and Godmothers, so long as
the Parent is present to fill their place.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Minister, or
Ecclesiastical Person, that shall Officiate in the Administration of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, shall refuse it to any Person that desires to be
admitted to the same, although such Person shall not use the Gesture of
Kneeling in the Act of Receiving, nor come up to the Communion Table, but shall
go to such Convenient Place in the Church, where such Person is, and there give
it him in some other decent Gesture of Ordinary use in the Reformed Churches.
Nor shall any Minister be troubled for the withholding his own Act, in delivery
of the Sacrament from any, whom he Judges notoriously unworthy, or unfit for
it: Nor for suspending his reading the Sentence of Excommunication against any
of his Parish, until he be satisfied in the Case, that his crime deserves it.

And to the intent that Uniformity may (so far as it is needful, and so far as
it can) be still maintained, Be it enacted Moreover by the Authority aforesaid,
That every Parson, Vicar, and Lecturer, shall conform to the Liturgy of the
Church, in the Ordinary Lord's Day Service, reading the same by himself, or by
his Curate, as by Law it is Established: Reserving a Necessary, and Just
Liberty, for his Conscience in any Matter, or Words, which himself esteems
unlawful (and so to him it is sin) in the By-Offices, Occasional Service, the
Rubricks, and otherwise: and also, for Prudence in the whole Mannagement, to
Act with respect to Time, Place, and Circumstances, so as appears most
conducive to Edification. And so long as the main Body of the Service
appointed, is there Read, and the Substance of the Offices (...) there
performed, he shall not be Punishable for any Breach otherwise of the Acts of
Uniformity, any thing in the said Statutes to the Contrary notwithstanding.

THE Bill for Indulgence.
FOrasmuch as Some Ease to Tender Consciences in the Exercise of Religion, may
be an Effectual Means to Unite His Majesty's Protestant Subjects in Interest
and Affection, which is highly necessary in this time of Eminent Danger from
the common Enemy the Papists: Be it Enacted By the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, That neither
the Statute made in the 23d. Year of the Reign of the Late Queen Elizabeth,
Entitled An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due
Obedience: Nor the Statute made in the Twenty Eighth Year of the said Queen,
Entitled An Act for the more speedy and due Execution of certain Branches of
the Statute made in the Twenty Third Year of the Queens Majesty's REIGN,
(Videlicet) the aforesaid Act: Nor Statute made in the Third Year of the Reign
of the Late King James, Entitled An Act to prevent and avoid dangers which may
grow by Popish Recusants: Nor any other Law or Statute of this Realm, made
against Popish Recusants, shall be construed to Extend to any Person or Persons
Dissenting from the Church of England, that shall (being lawfully required)
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy (which Oath of Allegiance is
contained in a Statute made in the Third Year of the Late King James), and make
and Subscribe the Declaration mentioned in a Statute made in the Twentieth Year
of His Majesty's Reign that now is, Entitled An Act to prevent Papists from
Sitting in either House of Parliament. And be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That all and every Person and Persons already Convicted,
or Prosecuted in Order to Conviction of Recusancy, by Indictment, Information,
Action of Debt, or otherwise grounded upon the aforesaid Statutes, or any of
them that shall take the said Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and make and
Subscribe the aforesaid Declaration, in the Court of Exchequer or Assizes, or
General or Quarter Sessions, to be held for the County where such Person lives,
and to be thence respectively certified into the Exchequer, shall be
thenceforth discharged from all the Penalties, Seizures and Forfeitures
incurred by force of any the aforesaid Statutes, without any Composition, Fee,
or further Charge whatsoever. And be it further Enacted By the Authority
aforesaid, that all and every Person and Persons, (that being lawfully
required) shall take the said Oaths, and make and subscribe the Declaration
aforesaid, shall not be liable to any Pains, Penalties or Forfeitures mentioned
in an Act, made the Thirty Fifth Year of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entitled,
An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience; Nor in
an Act made in the Twenty Second Year of His Majesty that now is, Entitled, An
Act to prevent and suppress Seditions Conventicles; Nor shall any of the said
Persons be Prosecuted in any Ecclesiastical COURT, for or by reason of their
Nonconforming to the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

The Bill proceeds next to a Proviso, That the Doors be not Locked, Barred, or
Bolted, where there are Meetings: Then to the Relieving Constables,
Churchwardens, and the like Officers, that Scruple the Oaths that be long to
those Offices, by admitting a Deputy: Then to the Repealing the Oxford Act (or
Releasing the Penalty) to all such as shall take the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and Subscribe to the Declaration aforesaid, and the Doctrinal
Articles of the Church of England, with the exceptions of the former Bill: Upon
the same Terms, Liberty is granted to any Person, to teach a School, or be a
Tutor in a Private Family. It Proceeds to giving Ease upon the same, to
Dissenting Protestants, who Scruple the Baptizing Infants: Then to the Easing
other Persons, who scruple Taking all Oaths; whom it shall suffice to say, That
J. A. B. Acknowledge, Profess, and Testify, instead of J. A. B. Swear That,
etc. According to the Words of the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy. Then
there is an Excellent Proviso, That no Persons who do not go upon Sundays, to
some Congregation of Religious Worship, allowed by this Act, shall have any
benefit at all by it.

The Bill is Long upon these Contents, and therefore upon Consideration also,
that it has been once Printed already, so that the Copy thereof is in the
hands of many (when it is not so, nor could be so with the other) it is
conceived best, to forbear any further Repetition. For indeed, if the whole
Bill for Indulgence were waved, and one Clause only advanced into the Bill
before for Comprehension (giving it the Title of a Bill for Comprehension and
Indulgence both) it were rather to be Chosen, and easier Passed. That Clause
should be to this effect.

ANd forasmuch as there are some Ministers of a good Life, that cannot
(according to their Judgments) allow of our Parochial Churches, nor a Book of
Liturgy; but do choose to Worship God and Jesus Christ, in the way of their
Gathered or Separate Congregations, and crave the Protection and Clemency of
the King, upon their Allegiance, as other Subjects.

Be it finally Enacted for the Happiness and quiet of the Realm, and the
Reduction of these Men, by other means than those which have hitherto proved
unsuccessful, That every Christian Subject throughout the Land, that profess
the Reformed Religion, be pardoned all Faults and Penalties, incurred upon the
Account of any forepast Nonconformity; And that all Prosecutions of the Paenal
Laws, which concern the Protestants, and not the Papists, in the matter of
Religion, shall be Suspended, Until by a further Act of Parliament, those that
are fit to be tolerated, and the Intolerable be distinguished; and such Order
be taken, as is necessary to the settling a more Firm and Lasting Union in the
Nation.

ERRATA.
PAge 20. l. 8. read cuervo. p. 27. l. 15. r. Nachmanides. p. 45. l. 31. r.
many other. p. 51. l. 5. for hope r. help p. 56. l. 10. r. desquels. l 23. r.
function. p. 58. l. 8. f. as r. or p. 61. l. 7. r. proposition. p. 72. l. 21.
after are r. not. Some literal mistakes there are in the Oriental words, as
Cheth for Ain, and Pe for Mem, and others, which I omit. Besides the mangling
some French and Italian Quotations.

FINIS.

