Christus in Cord: OR, THE MYSTICAL UNION BETWEEN CHRIST AND BELIEVERS
CONSIDERED, IN ITS Resemblances, Bonds, Seals, Privileges and Marks.

By EDWARD POLHIL of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire

LONDON: Printed by A. M. and R. R. for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three-Legs in
the Poultrey, over against the Stocks Market, 1680.

TO THE Christian Reader.
THERE are three admirable Unions noted by Divines; the essential Union of the
Three persons in the Sacred Trinity; the Hypostatical Union of the divine and
humane natures in the Person of Christ: and the Mystical Union which is between
Christ and Believers. In the first we have salvation in the primary fountain of
it; in the second we have it in the channel or excellent medium of it: in the
third we have it in the application or actual possession of it. The Deity is an
Immense Ocean of mercy and goodness, but it flows out to us only in and through
a Mediator; Jesus Christ is a Mediator of Alsufficient righteousness and merit;
but he communicates himself only to those that are in union with him, All our
righteousness, Caput and membra sunt quasi una persona mystica, ideo
satisfactio Christi ad omnes fideles pertinet. Aqu. 3. pars. quaest. 48. Art.
2. Fiant corpus Christi, si volunt vivere de Spiritu Christi. Aust. in Joh.
Tract. 26. In 3. part. Thom. qu. 49.
grace, peace, salvation depends on that Union. If we are in him, then his
satisfactory righteousness covers us, his Holy Spirit dwells in us; but if we
are out of him, then our case is as desperate as if he had never satisfied
justice, as if he had never merited grace and eternal life for us. Most true is
that of Medina, Tota ratio nostrae salutis in eo consistit, ut induamus
Christum, the total sum of our salvation stands in this, That we put on Christ;
who (as a learned man has it) is in his imputed righteousness as an artificial
garment to us; and in his imparted graces, as a natural one. This mystical
union (which is of such high concern to our salvation) is very signally set
forth in Scripture; There it is said, that Christ dwells in Believers, and they
in him; he abides in them, and they in him: which expressions point out a
mutual inexistence of him and them. But, (because this mystery is very deep)
the Holy Ghost, in condescension to our weakness, shadows out this Union by
many earthly patterns, viz. by the Law-union of a King and Subjects; by the
Love-union of an Husband and Wife; by the Artificial union of the Foundation
and Building; by the Natural union of the Vine and Branches, the Head and
Members; by the intimate union and incorporation of the Food and the Body.
There is that in the Mystical union which answer; to all these earthly
patterns; and withal, that which as much exceeds them, as a substance does a
shadow. The bonds of this union are Faith and the Holy Spirit; Faith sees,
comes to, receives, leans on, puts on, feeds upon Christ, as being the
universal capacity to take in Christ into the Soul; the Holy Spirit is primaria
commissura, the primary ligature, which knits us to Christ: That Spirit (which
is, as St. Austin speaks, Patris and filii communio) brings us into union with
Christ; that Spirit (which united the two natures in Christ) unites us to
Christ: Hence we become mystical parts of him, of his flesh and of his bone;
nay, (...), one spirit with him. The Seals of this union are Baptism and the
Lords Supper. Baptism is called by an Ancient, Christianismi investitura, in it
we are said to be buried with Christ, and to be risen with him; which is
notably adumbrated by the baptismal immersion into the water, and eduction out
of it. In the Lords Supper the body and blood of Christ are really, though
spiritually, present to our Faith; we may eat his flesh and drink his blood
unto life eternal; we are (as St. Cyprian speaks) united to him spiritali
transitione, by a spiritual transition or passing into him; and (as St.
Chrysostom has it) we are united to his body as that is to the word. The
privileges of this union are so great, that they are worthy to attract all men
into conjunction with Christ; the marks of this union are so plain in
Scripture, that Believers reflecting on themselves may have the comfort of
their being in him. These are the things that the ensuing discourse offers to
the Reader, with this only request, that he would agnoscere quod Dei est, and
ignoscere quod hominis est; If any glory may come to Christ, or comfort to his
members by this Treatise, it is enough, and as much as is aimed at by him, who
is

A Lover of Truth, Edward Polhil.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. MIllions in the Church miscarry for want of Union with Christ: This
is cleared from the two Covenants, of Works and of Grace; from the two heads
Adam and Christ; from the two ways and periods of mankind. Two Unions with
Christ, one in appearance, another in truth: this latter is a mystery, it
carries a respect to the Union of the Sacred persons in Trinity, and to the
hypostatical Union of two natures in Christ; it depends on them, it resembles
them, it is that the hypostatical Union aims at; it is not to be measured by
human Reason, but by Scripture. CHAP. II. The Scripture uses Metaphors to
express holy Mysteries by, because the mysteries are sublime; because it would
make us seek the things above. It sets forth the mystical union by
resemblances. There is an analogy between it and other unions; an excellency in
it above them. It sets forth the mystical union by that between a King and his
Subjects. The mystical union exceeds in the worthiness and nearness of the
persons united; in the rightness of Laws and Administrations; in the intimacy
of the union; in the benefits of government; particularly in protection and
rewards. CHAP. III. The Mystical Union set forth by the Conjugal one. There is
a mutual consent between Christ and believers. The believers consent imports a
right knowledge, a free choice, and a present compliance with Christ. Christ's
consent is purely gratuitous; believers purely supernatural. Christ and
believers mutually make over themselves each to other. The Emphasis of that
phrase ( one spirit) opened. There is an intimate love between Christ and
believers: he put on an humane nature for them, they put off a corrupt nature
for him. He died for expiation, they die in mortification. There is a
communication of good things from Christ to the Church; the Church propagates
in Believers and good works. The mystical Union set forth by that of a
foundation and a building. Christ laid, and Believers built on him by Divine
Art. The double cement of faith and the holy Spirit. Christ is a large and
strong foundation; he bears up the Church by Divine influences. CHAP. IV. The
Mystical Union set forth by the Vine and the Branches. Christ has one nature
with Believers; they are as branches in him, and receive juice from him. The
mystical union set forth by the natural head and the body. Those two famous
Texts, Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19. considered, which import more than when Christ
is called Head over all things, Head of principality and power, Head of every
man, Head of the Heathen, or Head of the Church as an Husband. Christ as an
Head has the same nature with Believers; but exceeds them in order, as being
first and highest; in perfection, as being full of Grace; in virtue, as
influencing into the Church. The necessity, matter, and way of this influence.
Christ an Head above all other heads, as making of no member a member; and as
having virtue enough for a world. CHAP. V. The mystical union set forth by that
between the food and the body. Christ is the true food. He strengthens against
the cursing Law. He strengthens unto all duties. He is united to Believers. He
is food by way of eminency. Several conclusions drawn from the resemblances,
viz. That the Union between Christ and Believers is not merely a political one.
That it is not merely a moral one. Several reasons to prove the same. That this
Union affords support to Believers. That it gives a vital influence to them.
That it is a very intimate Union. That it has a great mystery in it. That it
is very lasting and durable. CHAP. VI. There are two Bonds of this Union, Faith
and the Holy Spirit. Faith sees and presentiates Christ to the Believer; it
puts the soul into an apt posture for him; it gives a right to him; it
intimately unites to him. The Spirit it self is in some sort communicated to
Believers; he is sent to them; he is given to them; he dwells in them; his
special, operative, immediate presence is with them; he forms Holy Graces in
them; he actuates and preserves those Graces; he sheds abroad Gods Love in
their heart. In all these Operations, two things are noted, viz. somewhat of
Union with Christ; and somewhat of the Inhabitation of the Spirit. CHAP. VII.
The Seals of the mystical Union are Baptism and the Lords Supper. Baptism is a
Seal of Union, not to all, but to Believers. Some Infants are in their infancy
in union with Christ; some come to it afterward: some never attain to it. The
Lords Supper is a Seal to confirm and exhibit Christ to us. The presence of
Christ in the Eucharist is not a corporal one. The Bread and Wine are not (as
the Papists say) turned into his Body and Blood. His Body and Blood are not (as
the Lutherans say) in, with, and under the Bread and Wine. The presence of
Christ is spiritual. He is present objectively to our Faith, and virtually in
the communicate Spirit. Also the eating of Christ is not oral, but spiritual.
CHAP. VIII. The Privileges of those that are in Christ are great. Christ's
righteousness is imputatively derived upon them, to deliver them from wrath, to
entitle them to life eternal. Christ is their Advocate above; he pleads for
them, that they may have pardon; the spirit, access to God. They are adopted in
him; as sons they have a freedom in holy things, a continual indulgence from
God, an heavenly inheritance. They have the Holy Spirit in them, it lives,
breathes, moves, operates in them. They have communion with God; their services
answer to his call; his communications answer to their services. They are happy
in every condition; in prosperity their mercies are pure; in adversity they
have God with them; and admirably appearing to them. Our great work is Union
with Christ. CHAP. IX. The Marks of Union considered. In general, the marks are
internal, no mere outward thing is a mark; the marks are cordial, no mere
notion is a mark; the marks are supernatural, no mere moral virtue is a mark.
In particular, The first mark is poverty of Spirit; the second is an high
estimation of Christ; the third is a tender respect to the Bonds of Union, the
Spirit and Faith; the fourth is a conformity to Christ; a conformity to him in
Graces, in the rise of them, and in the kinds; a conformity to him in
Sufferings, in the mortification of Sin, and in bearing of the Cross; a
conformity to him in his resurrection, in heavenliness of mind, and newness of
life in matter and manner. The conclusion in two words of advice; one to those
that are not in union with him, the other to those that are in union with him.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 5. read (...). p. 9. l. 4. r. arcanum. p. 10. l. 20. r. viventes.
p. 48. in Marg. r. pignus. p. 70. in Marg. r. vinea. p. 72. l. 17. r. (...). p.
75. l. 16. r. Insititious. p. 78. in Marg. r. palmitibus. Ibid. r. moventem in
se habere Christum and movere in Christo. Ibid. r. Araus. p. 95. l. 15. r.
secundum. p. 110. l. 26. r. niti. p. 112. l. 19. r. Capernaitical. p. 121. l.
20. r. forinsecus. p. 123. l. 12. r. (...). p. 146. l. 5. r. venit. p. 168. l.
16. put a, at self, and dele, at waiting. p. 176. l. 18. Marg. r. unum. p. 184.
l. 10. r. nisi.

Christus in Cord: OR, The Mystical Union between Christ and Believers
considered.
CHAP. I.
Millions in the Church miscarry for want of Union with Christ: This is cleared
from the two Covenants, of Works and Grace; from the two heads Adam and Christ;
from the two ways and periods of mankind. Two Unions with Christ, one in
appearance, another in truth: this latter is a mystery, it carries a respect to
the Union of the Sacred persons in Trinity, and to the hypostatical Union of
two natures in Christ; it depends on them, it resembles them, it is that the
hypostatical Union aims at; it is not to be measured by human Reason, but by
Scripture.

GREAT preparations are made in the Gospel, for the salvation of men; there God
proclaims himself in rich titles of grace and mercy; Christ is set forth as an
All-sufficient Savior and Redeemer: His blood is a Laver able to wash away all
sin; his treasures of grace are enough to supply all wants. In his precepts we
have the true way of holiness and righteousness manifested to us; in his
Promises we have an heaven of life and immortality opened before our eyes; all
things are ready on Gods part, one would think they should be so on man's, whose
elective faculty and instinct after happiness might in all reason prompt him to
accept of so great an offer. Nevertheless, Millions in the bosom of the Church
utterly miscarry; their sins are unpardoned, their souls are unsanctified, the
pure way of holiness is forsaken, Heaven the region of bliss is lost; and,
which is the prodigy of corrupt nature, they run into perdition, as if it were,
what it is impossible to be, their choice or option.

The reason of this is, because they are not, nor will be united to Jesus
Christ. We find them drowning in sensual pleasures, or earthing themselves in
worldly profits, or breathing after popular air and vainglory; but they will
not come to Christ to wash in his Blood, or subject to his Scepter, or tread in
his holy steps, that they may live for ever; so they perish, as if there were
no Sayiour or Gospel. Two or three things will make this evident.

There are Two Covenants, the one of Works, which runs thus, Do this and live;
the other of Grace, which runs thus, Believe and live: the first in congruity
to man in his primitive integrity, calls for perfect sinless obedience; the
other in condescension to man in his fallen estate, asks only faith. All men,
as sinners, being short of the first Covenant, none can be saved but by the
second; nor by that neither, unless they be united to Christ; the Charter of
salvation gives nothing to those who are in a separate estate from the
fountain: the unbeliever, who is so, is condemned already; condemned by the
first Covenant, and not saved by the second.

There are two Heads, Adam and Christ, both communicate to those who are
theirs; Adam communicates sin and death to his posterity; Christ communicates
righteousness and life to his believing seed. There being nothing but sin and
death from the first Adam, none can be saved but by the second; nor by him
neither, unless they be in conjunction with him. He is the Savior of the body,
there is no condemnation to those who are in him, nor nothing else to those who
are out of him.

There are two ways, and two periods of mankind; those who are in Christ, walk
after the spirit in the pure way of holiness, and so pass on to that Heaven
which is the center of sanctity; those who stay in the first Adam, in a state
of corruption, walk after the flesh, in a way of disobedience, and so pass on
to that Hell which is the center of iniquity.

Hence it appears, That Union with Christ, is the critical point upon which
eternal life and death depend; upon this account the Apostle exhorts us to
examine our selves in this great concern, Know ye not, that Jesus Christ is in
you, except you be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. Which is as much as to say, if
Christ took our flesh, and we have not his spirit; if he were a propitiatory
Sacrifice, and we are not sprinkled with his blood; if he rose again from the
dead, and we are dead in sins and trespasses, he profits us not at all: To us,
as an Sunt quibus nondum natus est Christus, nondum est passus, non surrexit
usque adhuc. Bern. de Resurr. Dom. Ser. 4
Ancient speaks, he is not yet born; he has not yet suffered; he is not yet
risen; That is, he is of no effect to us, we are no better than reprobates,
rejectaneous persons, such as God will put away as the dross of the earth.
Memorable are the words of the Learned Zanchy, De Vera Dispensat. 4.
Tota verae justitiae, salutis, vitae participatio ex hac pernecessaria cum
Christo (...) pendet: The whole participation of true righteousness, salvation,
life, depends on that very necessary Union with Christ.

Union is a very extensive term, the Philosophers reckon up many kinds of it;
some learned men distinguish Unity, Unition and Union. Unity is of one
individual thing; Union is of more than one met in conjunction; Unition is the
act of the efficient, which joins things together. Union is the state of the
united, which is produced by the unitive act. There may be Union without
Unition; between the persons in the sacred Trinity there is an Union, but (it
being an eternal one) Unition (which imports a temporal act) can have no place
therein; but in all temporal Unions an Unition cannot be wanting, that being it
which tacks things together, and of two makes them in a sort to become one. In
Union both the extremes are united, but both are not always changed: Thus in
the Union of the Divine nature in Christ with the humane; the change is not in
the Divine nature, but only in the Humane, which is taken into one person with
the Divine. In 3. Part. Aq. Art. 7. In Quest. 2.
Medina (taking Union so largely as to comprehend Unition in it) observes in
Union three things; first the action by which things are united; then the Union
of the things united; lastly, the relation which arises between the extremes,
from the two former; the conjunction of the extremes depends upon the unitive
act, the relation between them results from both the unitive act and the
conjunction. Union with Christ, is union with him who is, (...), God and man in
one person; were he only God, the union of a fallen creature to him (being
immediate and without a Mediator) would be impossible; were he only man, the
union of a fallen creature to him (being but a creature and so incapable to be a
Mediator) would be unprofitable and to no purpose. God-man is the Sponsor,
Mediator, Head; God-man obeyed, suffered, satisfied for us; with him it is that
the union is.

A double union with Christ may be noted; the one is, (...), in appearance
only: Thus the mere professor is united to him; living in the Church and coming
to the Ordinances; he looks like a member of Christ, and is (as our Savior
speaks, Joh. 15.6.) (...), a quasi, branch in him; he seems to be such, but in
truth is not so; he has not the Spirit of Christ, and so is none of his; he is
in union with sin, and in that state cannot be in union with Christ. What
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion has light
with darkness? Bellarmine, who holds hypocrites to be members of Christ,
confesses, that they are but membra mortua, dead members; which is as much as
to say, they are but equivocal members, or rather none at all. Membrum mortuum
est membrum pictum, says Aristotle, a dead member is but a painted one. Upon
this account other learned Papists (as Melchior Canus) will not have them to be
members at all, but only parts; members (say they) cannot be without life, but
parts may. St. Austin best of all says, Tract. 3. in Epist. Joh.
That they are but as evil humors in the body, Aut in membris sumus, aut in
humoribus malis; either we are among the members, or among the humors:
hypocrites are but as corrupt humors in the Church, they do not fill up the
Body of Christ, but corrupt and deturpate it; putatively they belong to Christ,
but really to Satan.

The other is, (...), in truth and reality; thus belivers are united to him; as
subjects they are under him; as living stones they are built on him; as a dear
Spouse they are joined to him; as fruitful branches they are implanted into
him; as mystical members they are incorporated into him; there is a kind of
spiritual continuity between him and them; that holy Spirit which resides in
him, falls down in a measure upon them: The Scripture signally sets forth this
Union, He dwells in believers, and they in him, Joh. 6.56. He abides in them,
and they in him, Joh. 15.4. He is in them the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. And
they are in him that is true, in Jesus Christ, 1 John 5.20. He lives in them,
and they live by the faith of him, Gal. 2.20. He partakes with them, Heb. 2.14.
And they partake of him, Heb. 3.14. Eternal life is in him; and they having the
Son, have life, 1 John 5.11, 12. He is one flesh with them, and they are one
spirit with him. These things show, that there is a real union between them.

This real union (which is what I aim at) is by Divines styled a mystical one,
and that upon very good reason; the Holy Ghost, in Scripture, calls it a
mystery; that is, it is a Divine Secret, or holy Arcanam, above humane reason,
and only conceivable by a supernatural light. De Eccles. visib. 464.
The Learned Whitaker says of this union, that it is, mystica and plane
mirifica, mystical and plainly wonderful. The noble Sadeel calls it, De spirit.
Mand. 226.
magnum and adorandum mysterium, a mystery great and to be adored, as being
above nature and all humane bonds. Life of Christ. 462.
Dr. Reynolds styles it, one of the deep things of God, which are not
discernable without the Spirit.

There are three admirable Unions; the essential union of three persons in the
Sacred Trinity. These three are one, 1 John 5.7. That is, one in essence. The
hypostatical Union of the Divine and Humane natures in the person of Christ;
Great is the mystery of godliness; God was manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16.
The mystical union which is between Christ and his Church; We are members of
his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; this is a great mystery; but I speak
concerning Christ and the Church, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.30, and 32.
Touching these three unions, Christus habet in se Patrem, cum quo est una
substantia, habet assumptum hominem, cum quo est una persona, habet adhaerentem
sibifidelem animam, cum qua est spiritus unus. Bern. de Verb. Psalm. 23. fol.
415.
an Ancient has observed, That all three may be seen in Christ; he has a
Father (I may add, and a Spirit) with whom he is one substance; he has an
humane nature, with which he is one person; he has adhering Believers, with
whom he is one Spirit: Unto this observation I shall add another; the mystical
Union (which is the last of the three) bears a respect to the two former. Two
or three things will manifest this:

First, The mystical union depends upon the two former; a hint of this we have
in the words of our Savior, who (speaking of himself as God-man, and of giving
his flesh for the life of the World) says, As the living father has sent me,
and I live by the father; so he that eats me, even he shall live by me, Joh.
6.57. Here are, tres viveatis, three livers one under another; the Father, who
is, fons Trinitatis, the fountain of the Trinity, lives of himself; Christ
lives by the Father: as he is the Word, he has life from him by the eternal
generation; as he is man, he has it by the hypostatical union. The believer
who spiritually eats Christ, lives by him: Conjunction with the Father, is that
by which Christ lives; conjunction with Christ is that by which the Believer
lives: were there no essential union, there could be no hypostatical one; which
supposes, that the second Person in the Trinity does assume an humane nature
made by all three. Incarnation (say the Schoolmen) is effective, belonging to
the whole Trinity; but, terminative, it is peculiar to the Son, who is the
alone term unto which the humane nature is assumed: were there no hypostatical
union, there could be no mystical one; which imports, that belivers are united
unto God-man. Were he only God, how should we fallen creatures ever have an
immediate approach unto him? or if we could, what use would there be of a
Mediator? It is through him, as Mediator, that we have access to the Father,
Ephesians. 2.18. The way into the holy of holies, lies through the vail of his flesh.
Were he only man, to what purpose should we be united to a mere creature? or
how should we dare to fix our faith on such an one? To trust in a mere man, is
a curse; to worship a mere creature, a piece of Idolatry: Believers therefore
are united to God-man; the mystical union depends upon the hypostatical, and
the hypostatical upon the essential. Without a Sacred Trinity, there would be
no God-man; without God-man, there would be no fit person for Blievers to be
united unto.

Again, There is in the mystical union, a shadow or dark resemblance of the two
other unions: There is a resemblance of the essential union. This is hinted in
our Saviors Prayer, As thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they also
may be one in us, Joh. 17.21. From which words St. Hilary concludes, De Trinit.
Lib. 8.
That the union between Christ and Believers, is not merely a moral union of
will and affections; for then our Savior (who is the eternal Word, and knew
how to speak) would have prayed thus, Pater, sicut nos unum volumus, ita and
illi unum velint, and unum per concordiam simus omnes. Father, as we will one
and the same thing, so let them also do, and let us all be one by concord; But
(instead thereof) our Savior prays thus, As thou, Father, art in me, and I in
thee; that they also may be one in us. The particle (as) notes some kind of
similitude; the words (thou father art in me, and I in thee) note out the
(...), or mutual inexistence of the Father and Son; a resemblance of which we
have in the mystical union, which in Scripture is expressed by the mutual
inexistence of Christ and Believers; he is in them, and they in him; he dwells
in them, and they in him: Very remarkable are the words of our Savior, I am in
the father, and you in me, and I in you, Joh. 14.20. We have here in one Text
mentioned the high mystery of the Sacred Trinity, and the mystical union
together. First, The inexistence of the Son in the Father, and (which is
implied and to be understood) of the Father in the Son, is signified; and then
immediately follows the mutual inexistence of Christ and Believers; which shows
that in this latter there is a resemblance of the former. Again, there is in
the mystical union a resemblance of the hypostatical one; this I gather from
the likeness of those Scripture-phrases which express both the unions; Christ
was conceived of the Holy Ghost, Matt. 1.20. And Believers are born of the same
holy Spirit, Joh. 3.5. In Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily,
Col. 2.9. And Believers are filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. The
word dwelt or tabernacled among us, Joh. 1.14. And touching Believers it is
said, The tabernacle of God is with men, Rev. 21.3. which is in part attained
in this life, and in full accomplished in the other. In Christ the Godhead
anointed the manhood; and in every supernatural act of Believers, weakness is
anointed with power. The Schoolmen note in Christ a threefold Grace, the grace
of union, in that his human nature was united to the Deity; the grace of
unction, in that his humane nature was anointed with the holy Spirit; the grace
of headship, in that he is head unto the Church. Suitably in believers may be
noted a threefold grace, the grace of union, in that they are united unto
Christ; the grace of unction, in that they are anointed with the holy Spirit;
and the grace of membership, in that they have all their graces from Christ
their Head. Moreover, the three Sacred persons in the blessed Trinity are for
ever perfectly happy in the essential union; nevertheless, it was the eternal
pleasure, that in one of the three there should be an hypostatical one; the Son
of God assumed an humane nature, but he rested not there; Corpus Christi
natural fuit sacramentum corporis mystici; besides his natural body, he would
have a mystical one; he came in the flesh that he might dye for us; and he
died, that he might gather together in one the Children of God that were
scattered abroad, Joh. 11.52. (...), into one mystical body. The hypostatical
union aimed at a satisfactory passion, and that passion aimed at a mystical
union.

This Union being a mystery, and that depending on two greater mysteries than
it self; two conclusions offer themselves to us.

The one is this; The mystical union is not properly to be judged or measured
by humane reason: Nay, a learned man speaking of it, says, Ne Angelica men's,
Came. de Eccl. 222.
the Angelical mind cannot comprehend it in its full dignity. To explain this,
I shall lay down some distinctions:

There is a double sphere, one of mere nature, another of supernatural
revelation; in the first, it is proper for humane reason to search out things,
and dive into the causes and effects thereof; yet in doing of it there is many
a Nonplus, and things are seen rather in their garb and investing accidents,
than in their pure and naked essence. In the second it is proper for faith to
come and subscribe to the sacred Oracle, even in things above Reason, without
so much as asking any how is or why's. It is an argument of infidelity (says an
Ancient) (...), to say, touching God, how can this or that be? it is the genius
of says to seal to all that God says, upon account of his infallible
testimony and veracity.

There is a double state of man; one of primitive integrity, which God set Adam
in at first; another of Apostasy, which is derived from Adam fallen. In the
first there was, (...), right reason; the undeniable dictate of which is, That
nothing can be more just, and purely rational, than for our intellect to do
homage to its original, and to subject it self to infinite truth in all that it
speaks to us: such a Reason, I am sure, cannot without losing its own
rectitude, usurp a dominion over Divine mysteries. In the second there is,
(...), a spurious, adulterate Reason, such as is the black fountain of all
heresies; this is so far from being fit to sit in judgment upon holy mysteries,
that it is worthy to be captivated and crucified, as being indeed not Reason,
but the rust and corruption of it.

There is a double furniture of Reason, one natural, which stands in those
common maxims or principles, whose truth is inviolable, and at the very first
sight apparent to all rational minds; and withal, in those conclusions, which
by consequences and trains of argumentation are duly and regularly inferred
from those principles. Another supernatural, which stands in the irradiations
of the holy Spirit, to make us discern spiritual things spiritually. Take
Reason with its right natural furniture; supernatural mysteries cannot
contradict it, no more than one light can oppose another; yet they do exceed
it, as much as supernatural light does natural: Hence it appears, that Reason
in this sense (being not contradicted by supernatural mysteries) is a kind of
negative measure of them, yet (being much exceeded by them) is not, nor indeed
can be a positive one. Take Reason as illuminated by the Holy Spirit, it has
no propensity or aptitude to sit in judgment upon holy mysteries; it has no
propensity to do so, because the illumination lets in so much of the spiritual
glory of them as commands an intellectual subjection to them; it has no
aptitude to do so, because (the illumination, being but in part) it cannot dive
into the bottom of them, or see them in their full compass and latitude.

There is a double judgment, one discretive or perceptive only; another
authoritative or dictative. Reason in supernatural things may have the first,
but not the second; it may gather up out of Scripture supernatural notions, but
in this it is but a Minister or Instrument, as Hagar upon Sarah, it is to wait
upon the holy Oracles; if it submit not it self to them, then (as an Ancient
advises) ejice ancillam, Clem. Strom.
we are rather to cast it out, than to lose the holy mysteries. It is indeed of
use as it ministers about them; but if once it grow magisterial, all will be
out of frame; the Divine testimony will no longer (as becomes it) go alone or
be received for it self; the holy mysteries, how sublime soever, will be drawn
down to our model; and as seems good to us, they must be mysteries or
nullities. Faith, as excellent a grace as it is, will fall out of its orb, and
no more give God the glory of his Veracity; we will believe mysteries no longer
upon the Divine Testimony, but so far only as they are congruous to Reason;
that is, in plain terms we will not believe at all: our faith (its ultimate
resolution being not into God and his authority, but into our selves and our
own reason) is a mere nothing. Hence St. Austin, when the Manichees would
believe only what they themselves pleased, Contr. Faust. lib. 17. c. 3.
tells them, Vobis potius quam Evangelio creditis, ye believe your selves
rather than the Gospel. This is that horrible confusion which immediately
ensues, as soon as humane Reason gets into the Chair, and falls a judging
supernatural things: the very Heathen teach us much better Divinity than this,
in their fable of the Golden Chain, which did not draw down Jupiter from
Heaven, but attracted men thither. It is not for us to humble and draw down
Divine mysteries to our Reason; but it becomes us to elevate and lift up our
minds in faith unto them.

The other is this; The proper measure and judge of the mystical union, is the
holy Scripture; this is the grand Principle of Divine Knowledge; this is the
infallible Canon of Faith; here God, who is Truth it self, speaks unto us; here
supernatural mysteries are revealed; and in particular that of the mystical
union. Without the Scripture, who could have apprehended a Sacred Trinity? or,
that being known, who could have started a thought of the hypostatical union?
or, that being revealed, who could have carried on his thought from thence to
the mystical one? or, somewhat of that being manifest, who would have presumed,
of his own head, to have expressed it in such high and wonderful terms as the
holy Scripture has done? The Doctrine of this Union purely depends on
Scripture; there is the holy balance which weighs it; the Divine Lamp which
discovers it. If Scripture be silent, who can speak? If that speak, who may
dissent? To speak of mysteries unrevealed is a mere vanity; to receive them
being revealed, is a necessary duty. We see the Sacred Rule, which in this
point we are to apply our selves unto; Nolo argumento credas, Sancte Imperator,
and nostrae disputationi, Scripturas interrogemus; de fide. lib. 1. cap. 4.
St. Ambrose would not have the Emperor believe his Arguments, but ask the
Scriptures; the holy Oracle will give a sure answer to those who ask counsel of
it. St. Chrysostom would not have us to look for another Master, and adds this
Reason, In Coloss. bom. 9.
(...), thou have the Words of God, none teaches thee like them; our plain
duty is to hear and acquiesce in what the holy Scripture tells us; though it
exceed and transcend our capacity, yet are we to subscribe and seal to the
Divine Truth. In super-rational things, Faith succeeds in the place of Reason,
and stands upon that infallible Truth, which is a much surer foundation than
Reason can afford. The incomprehensibleness of the object is no bar to Faith,
which is an (...) for its firmness, even when the thing for its inevidence is
not seen; though the thing exceed our minds, yet Faith will purely rest on the
infallible Word.

To conclude, in all mysteries, and in particular in that of our Union with
Christ, it becomes us to see what the holy Oracle says, and thereupon to
subject our understandings to it. Abraham at Gods call obeyed and went out of
his Country, not knowing whither he went: In like manner Believers, who are
his spiritual Children, are to follow the conduct of Scripture in those things
which are above our capacity, because the Reason of God himself (which is much
greater than our own) comes forth to us in those mysteries, to make us subject
our minds to him who is truth it self.

CHAP. II.
The Scripture uses Metaphors to express holy Mysteries by, because the
mysteries are sublime; because it would make us seek the things above. It sets
forth the mystical union by resemblances. There is an analogy between it and
other unions; an excellency in it above them. It sets forth the mystical union
by that between a King and his Subjects. The mystical union exceeds in the
worthiness and nearness of the persons united; in the rightness of Laws and
Administrations; in the intimacy of the union; in the benefits of government;
particularly in protection and rewards.

THE Mystical Union being found only in holy Scripture, a diligent search must
be made there for it. What the Jewish Rabbis say touching the Law, that I may
say touching the Gospel, turn it over, and again turn it over, for all is in it.

It is the manner of Scripture to speak, not always in proper words, but very
often in Tropes and Figures; among others, it commonly makes use of Metaphors,
that sense may lead to faith, and earthly things insinuate heavenly to us. The
Song of Solomon is an entire Allegory, full of Sacred mysteries: other parts of
Scripture are, in a great measure, like pieces of Arras or Tapestry, beautified
with Metaphorical flowers, and images of Divine things. The reason of this is,
holy mysteries being magnalia Dei, the great things of God, not extracted out
of the principles of humane Reason, but let down from Heaven out of the Fathers
bosom, have a Divine glory and greatness in them: No words can perfectly
express them; no humane minds can fully comprehend them. First, no words can
perfectly express them. Agur in very deep humility, speaking of God, asks, what
is his name? Prove. 30.4. He has many names; yet, as the Schoolman says, he is
innominabilis secundum perfect am expressionem, Bon. in Sent. lib. 1. did. 22.
he cannot be named unto perfection; no name made up of finite Letters can
perfectly express his infinite perfection. St. Austin upon those words, In the
beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God, Joh.
1.1. has this passage, Forsitan necipse Johannes dixit ut est, sed and ipse ut
potuit, Tract in Joh.
quia de Deo ut homo dixit; perhaps St. John, though inspired, did not fully
say as it is, but as he could; because he but a man spoke of God. Christ is
called the Word (says Nazianzen) who is superior to every Word. Holy mysteries
are so great and glorious, that they are beyond words and expressions. Hence
the Holy Ghost in Scripture uses Metaphors, in which names are borrowed from
earthly things, and translated to heavenly, because of some similitude between
them. Again, No humane minds can fully comprehend them; it is but very little
we know of God. We proceed (as the Schoolmen observe) by way of remotion. First
we deny of him all corporal things; then we deny of him intellectual things as
they are in the creature: then it only remains in our minds, that he is, and
nothing more. At last, we remove from him essence it self, as it is in the
creature; and then we are in darkness. In like manner, it is but very little
that we know of holy mysteries; somewhat we apprehend, but we comprehend them
not; some glimmerings of them we have, but we see them not in rota, in their
full compass and latitude. Hence the holy Spirit in Scripture stoops and
accommodates it self to our capacity; and in Metaphors, shadows and paints out
to us heavenly things by earthly. Divine objects, as high as they are in
themselves, are brought down to sense, and seen in an earthly image. Our
Savior (setting forth the work of Grace by a new birth, and the holy Spirit
the author of it by the wind) afterward adds, If I have told you earthly
things, and you believe not; how shall ye believe if I tell you of heavenly
things? Joh. 3.12. That is, if you understand not these Divine things in their
outward images and resemblances, how will you open your eyes upon them in their
pure spiritual glory? Spiritual objects, being represented under sensible, are
much better attempered unto our minds, than they would be, if set forth in a
more proper dialect only. Moreover, Metaphors are of excellent use to make us
seek after the things above; did our minds indeed, take in and digest the
sacred similitudes in Scripture, the very objects of sense would prompt us to
be heavenly; outward things, being but the shadows, would lead us to the true
substance. The Sun would tell us, that there is a more glorious one above which
shines with healing under his wings. The Wind would remember us, that the best
Gales come from the holy Spirit. The Fountains would mind us, that there is a
Well of water which springs up into life everlasting. The old creation would be
a gloss and paraphrase upon the new; every where we should meet with Christ and
holy mysteries. The duct and tendency of these holy Metaphors is such, that a
due improvement of them must needs render our minds very spiritual and Divine.

In particular, The Holy Ghost in Scripture sets forth the mystical union by
many resemblances: Christ (says St. Chrysostom) unites us to him, In 1 Cor.
hom. 8.
(...), by many patterns; and then he goes on, he is the head, we the body; he
the foundation, we the building; he the vine, we the branches; he the husband,
we the spouse; he the shepherd, we the sheep; he the way, we the walkers; we
are the temple, he the inhabitant; he is the firstborn, we brethren; he the
heir, we coheirs; he the life, we the livers; he the resurrection, we the
raised; he the light, we the enlightened; and after all, he concludes thus,
(...), all these things declare union. My first work shall be to consider the
chief resemblances, by which this union is set forth in Scripture. Certain it
is, that the holy Ghost uses no Metaphors or similitudes in Scripture, but such
as have an aptitude and fitness to manifest the mysteries thereby shadowed out
to us: he is so wise, that he knows what forms of speech are most adapted to
promote our knowledge of spiritual things; and so good, that he will in no forms
but such, declare his mind unto us.

Touching these resemblances, I shall first note two things in common to them
all.

There is an Analogy between the mystical union and the other unions, which
resemble it.

There is an excellency in the mystical union above all the other.

There is first an Analogy between them; somewhat in the earthly unions
resembles the mystical one; somewhat in the mystical union answers to the
earthly pattern; there is a correspondence between them. This must needs be so;
because in all Scriptural Metaphors touching this or any other mystery, the
Holy Ghost always speaks aptly. and truly. When there is no propriety in the
words, there is an aptitude in the things to shadow out the mystery; when there
is no truth in the proper sense, there is a truth in the metaphorical one,
because of the similitude which is between the earthly pattern and the heavenly
mystery. If the Scripture say, that the internal work of grace is a new birth,
or a resurrection, or a new creation, it is sure, that there is some act of
power which makes good the resemblance; if it say, that Christ is to believers
a king, or an husband, or a foundation, or a root, or an head, or spiritual
meat and drink; it is sure, that there is somewhat of law, or love, or
supportance, or vital influence, or intimate conjunction which makes good the
Analogy. Two things may be noted touching the Analogy; the one is this, there
is a necessity of it, otherwise the holy Spirit in such Metaphors should not
speak aptly or truly: not aptly; there being no proper aptitude in the very
words, the aptitude must be in the things or no where; take away the Analogy,
and there will be no aptitude at all, the words (which cannot befall so wise a
speaker as the holy Ghost is) will be insignificant and to no purpose: nor yet
truly; there being no truth in the proper sense, the truth must be in a
metaphorical one or no where. Take away the Analogy (which makes the Metaphor a
Metaphor) and there will be no truth at all; the words (which cannot befall so
true a speaker as the Holy Ghost is) will be false and delusive. For instance,
our Savior says, I am the bread of life, Joh. 6.48. I am the door of the
sheep, Joh. 10.7. The first words are apt and true, because by him believers
are spiritually nourished to life. The second are so, because by him believers
go in and find pasture of comfort; but take away these things in which the
similitude consists, and the words will not be apt or true. The other is this;
there is a very good use of the Analogy to be made; it serves (being duly and
regularly taken according to the line and level of Scripture) not only for
illustration, but for very good proof also. For instance, St. Paul sets forth
the union of Christians among themselves, by the union of the members in the
natural body, 1 Cor. 12. And from thence he argues strongly, that Christians
should not differ and despise, but accord and have a care one of another: the
eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor the head to the feet, I
have no need of you; if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; if
one member be honored, all the members rejoice with it. Also the Apostle sets
forth the Union of Believers with Christ, by the union of the members with the
head, Ephesians. 4.16. and Col. 2.19. And from thence he argues strongly, that
Believers have a near conjunction with Christ, and admirable communications
from him; there are joints and bands; there is a body fitly joined and
compacted; there is nourishment ministered; there is an effectual working in the
measure of every part; there is an increasing with the increase of God; all
these are rationally drawn from the Analogy. Thus we see, the Analogy is of
use, not only for illustration, but for proof; only we must by no means stretch
it beyond the scope of Scripture.

The next thing is, There is an excellency in the mystical union, above all,
and every one of the other unions which resemble it. It is more excellent than
any one of them singly taken. The Holy Ghost does not shadow it out by one or
two resemblances, but by many; and those resemblances do not all point it out
in one or two respects, but in more and various ones: if one resemblance or
respect might have reached it, there would have been no use or need of any
more. It is also more excellent than all of them put together; they are but
shadows and resemblances, the mystical union is the truth and substance of them
all; in them mere creatures, and those upon earth are united together; in this
Believers are united to him who is Godman. In some of them there is union
without vital influence; in this there is union with it: in others of them
there is an influence, but it is only of a natural life, and that only while a
local conjunction between the things united is maintained: But in this there is
an influence of a spiritual and Divine life; and this, notwithstanding that the
local distance between Christ and Believers be as vast, as it is between Heaven
and Earth: In them there is nothing but plain Law, or Love, or Art, or Nature;
but in this there is a secret, a mystery of grace, an admirable conjunction of
Believers to Christ, and by him to the Father. I conclude with the excellent
words of Zanchy, De tribus Elok. lib. 4. fol. 180.
Hoc est mirabile hujusce unitatis mysterium, quae constat Deo Patre, Christo
Mediatore, and Ecclesia vinculo Spiritus Sancti cum Christo and cum Patre
conjuncta: This is the admirable mystery of this Union, which is made up of God
the Father, Christ the Mediator, and the Church, by the bond of the holy Spirit
with Christ and with the Father conjoined.

These two things being laid down, which are to be observed in all the after
discourse touching these resemblances; I proceed to consider the resemblances
in particular, in which much profitable matter will offer it self to us.

First, The Union between Christ and Believers is set forth by that which is
between a King and his Subject. In government the humane instinct is gratified
in society, and a multitude is reduced to unity; a King and his Subjects become
politically one; he protects them, they are under his shadow; he governs them,
they are in subjection to him; protection (as the Lawyers speak) draws
subjection, and subjection draws protection. His royal care over them is
returned in their reverence toward him; and their reverence toward him falls
down upon themselves in the benefits of government; Ar. Eth. lib. 5. c. 6.
he is, (...), the keeper of right for them, and they render him the honor due
to his greatness: Thus they are knit together for that common good which is the
great center of Government. In like manner Christ is King, and Believers are
his Subjects. His Kingdom, as it imports power, is over all creatures; but as
it imports union, it is only over Believers. Tyrants (says the Philosopher)
rule over men against their wills, but Kings rule over the willing. The Emperor
Justinus plainly told the great oppressors, Spondan. Ann. Anno. 568.
Ego contumacibus imperare nolo, I will not rule over the disobedient. Our Lord
Christ does not own rebellious sinners, while such, as Subjects, but look upon
them as enemies: Believers only are his Subjects; he is their great Protector,
they are under the wings of his grace and power; he rules and governs them,
they are obedient to him; his care is over them, their obedience is toward
him; he maintains their right, they render him the honor of his government:
Thus they are knit together to promote the glory of Christ, and the salvation
of Believers. It Is true, in this resemblance, the mere Analogy proves no more
than a political Union; but the excellency of that union (which is between the
spiritual King and Believers) shows forth a mystery. For the explaining of
this, I shall lay down several particulars:

1st. The more worthy and near in blood the persons united in government are,
the more excellent is the union. David was an excellent one, worth Ten thousand
others; those over whom he reigned were Gods own peculiar people: the nearness
was such, that the people told him, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh, 2 Samuel 5.1. In these circumstances the union between David and his people could
not but be a very excellent one; much more excellent is that between Christ and
his Subjects, what an one is He! how admirably accomplished for government! he
is higher than the Kings of the earth; it was not a little material oil, but
the Holy Ghost, which anointed him to his office. His wisdom is incomparable,
no secret is hid from his eyes; Solomon's large heart was but a little thing to
the vast treasures of wisdom and knowledge in him. His Wisdom is as much above a
mere man's, as the Fathers bosom, from whence he came, is above man's heart. His
power is exceeding great, he can do every thing; earthly Princes set upon their
thrones here below, he sits above at the right hand of Power. Ahasuerus had
power over an Hundred and seven and twenty Provinces; but he has all the power
in Heaven and Earth. None is so able to save to the uttermost as he; his
goodness and mercy are beyond parallel. His Divine bowels were up very early in
a design of grace toward fallen man; his humane compassions far transcend all
those in the creature. Nay, further, he himself would suffer being tempted,
that he might have an experimental fitness to succor the tempted. His clemency
is such, that he is very tender over those infirm ones, who are as the bruised
reed, and have grace in desire only. His justice is very illustrious, he reigns
in righteousness, he does nothing but what is right; truth may as soon lie, and
rectitude it self decline, as there can be any blot or jeofail in his
government. Such a King is Christ: And what are his Subjects? They are no common
people, but excellent ones; their pure heart has a kind of Oracle in it; the
secret of the Lord is with them; they are wise in the greatest concernments,
strong in the hardest duties; their hearts are melted in acts of love toward
God and man; their hands are ever doing that which is just and right; and the
reason of all is, because some of the holy unction which anointed their Lord,
falls down upon them, and puts a glory on them. Such are the Subjects. And what
is the nearness between the King and them? On the one hand he, though the Son
of God, came down from Heaven, and became partaker of flesh and blood with
them; on the the other, they, though naturally but the sons of fallen Adam,
became through grace, the seed of Christ himself: his blood runs in their
consciences; his Divine Spirit breathes in them; his holy image appears in
their hearts and lives; the Subjects are all Sons, and resemble their Governor:
Here is not a single relation, but one relation upon another: this is the
nearness. The result is this, he being so incomparable a King, they being such
excellent Subjects, the nearness between them being so great, the union must
needs be a very choice one. Who would now live under the power of sin, and not
much rather join himself to the blessed kingdom? A better Ruler or Society
then, there cannot be found.

2dly. The more right the Laws and Administrations of a Kingdom are, the better
is the Union. There are two sorts of Laws, there are Laws of constitution
according to which a King is made; if he be in by election or succession, he
stands upon some positive Law, or consent which amounts to a Law; if he be in
by conquest in a just War, he stands upon the Law of Nature, which says, that
the captive must be subject to the victor. There are also Laws of
Administration according to which a King is to Govern his Subjects; without the
first Laws, there can be no King rightly constituted to have Subjects united to
him; a people may be under a Tyrant, but it is not united to him. Without the
second Laws there will be no rule of government, no right administration of
things in a Kingdom. According to this distinction, I shall lay down two things
touching the Mediatory Kingdom of Christ: The one is this, The Law of
constitution must needs be very righteous, as being no less than the Decree and
Ordinance of God himself; he was made a King immediately by God; his Kingdom
was not (as ordinary ones in part are) an human creature; but a pure Theocracy,
altogether of Divine Ordination. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion,
says God of Christ, Psalm. 2.6. I have done it, not man. The Decree of Heaven
was for it, as the next verse tells us. The Lord said unto my Lord, that is the
Father said to Christ, sit thou at my right hand, Psalm. 110.1. Dicere hic est
discernere, To say here, is to decree, That Christ should sit in Royal state
and Majesty; he is a King merely of Divine Ordination; yet he enters upon his
Kingdom by Conquest; in the Belial heart of fallen man nothing is in a fit
posture to receive this holy King. The carnal mind is not subject to the Law of
God, neither indeed can be; strong holds must be cast down, thoughts must be
captivated, and wills must be overcome, or else Christ cannot have a Kingdom:
Therefore he takes up his spiritual arms, goes forth in the power of his spirit
and word, and subdues the minds and hearts of men to himself; so he enters by
conquest, and that in a very just, nay merciful war, it being to rescue poor
captive creatures, and reduce them back again to their Creator; but though he
come in by conquest, yet there is consensus populi, his people are willing,
they own him as their King, subject to his Scepter, and give up themselves to
his government: Thus he has a Title to his kingdom, as good as a Divine
ordination, a just conquest, and a free consent can make it.

The other is this, the Law of Administration is righteous and gracious;
righteous in that which he commands his subjects to do; gracious in that which
he promises to do for them. His Commands (which call for faith, humility,
holiness, rightiousness, meekness, mercy, temperance, patience) are as right as
any thing can be, they are the counterpanes of Gods heart, the copies of that
Divine Will which is Rectitude it self; they perfect the humane nature, and
being practically embraced, they set man in a true posture toward God,
himself, and his fellow creatures. His Promises (in which he engages himself
that the Believer shall be justified, that the poor in spirit shall have the
kingdom; that the pure in heart shall see God; that the righteous shall be
compassed with Divine favor; that the meek shall be beautified with salvation;
that the merciful shall obtain mercy; that all his obedient subjects shall
enter into Heaven and enjoy the blessed God there) are exceeding gracious and
true, not one of them shall fail; he has will and power enough to make them
all good; this is the Administration. The sum of all is, Christ being a King by
Divine Ordination, entering by just conquest, obtaining a free consent, and
administering his kingdom so admirably, that nothing is in his government but
mere rectitude and grace; the union between him and his subjects bound together
by such right and good Laws must needs be very excellent. Here can be no reason
to complain, no color of occasion to break off from such a King, or to say,
What portion have we in David? Here are no scruples about the Governors Title,
no unjust Laws to be repealed, no grievous burdens to be removed, no heavy
yokes to be taken off, not the least shadow of a maladministration to be
found; nothing is here to be seen but rectitude and goodness, which must needs
make the union very firm and stable.

3dly. The more intimate the union is, and the more internal the bonds of it
are, the more excellent is the union. Between an earthly King and his Subjects
the bonds are external; there are outward thrones and scepters, outward pieces
of state and majesty, outward laws and proclamations; the King looking on his
Subjects, may see the outward man, but no further: He may exact an outward
conformity, but cannot touch or move their hearts; there is not one spirit
between him and them, but several, which may easily run apart and in different
ways. But between Christ and his Subjects the bonds are internal; his kingdom
comes not with observation or outward splendour, but in inward power and
efficacy; his Kingdom is within, his Throne is in the heart; his Laws are not
only without in the Letter, but inwardly engraven in the hearts of his
Subjects; they are the very Epistles of Christ, written not with ink, but with
the spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables
of the heart, 2 Cor. 3.3. Besides the outward literal Edition of the Law, there
is an inward spiritual one which answers thereunto; this spiritual King can not
only look into the hearts of his Subjects, but touch and move them unto
obedience; he can so draw as to make them run after him; it is his Royal
Prerogative to rule wills and hearts; his Subjects have the mind of their Lord;
nay, the same holy Spirit which is in him, is in them also, to inspire a
measure of holiness and obedience into them. O! what a union is here! and how
full of mystery! No King can rule after this sort; neither could he himself,
unless he were God, do so: In a word, his Kingdom and Laws being within, his
Subjects having the same mind and spirit with himself, the union must needs be
very intimate and excellent.

4thly. The greater the benefits of government are, the more secure is the
union; a King resembling God in the doing of good, acting like one given to the
kingdom for a common blessing; his vigilance securing the repose of his
Subjects; his care procuring their quiet; his study being for their good as his
own; his Subjects resting under his shadow, and enjoying the sweet ends of a
well-ordered Government; the union in such a case must needs be very much
confirmed. I shall instance but in two benefits of Government, Protection and
Rewards: As for Protection, it is incomparable in the Kingdom of Christ; no
earthly Kings have such a foresight and care to protect as he has; they may
look here and there, but his eyes are every where, running to and fro through
the earth, to show himself strong on the behalf of his people; they may
sometimes nod with the rains of Government in their hands, and so not provide
against approaching dangers; but he is never surprised, but always provided,
and at hand to defend his people; in every temptation he makes a way to escape;
in every danger he knows a method of deliverance. Again, No earthly Kings have
such a power to protect as he has; they have a power in their own Dominions;
but he has all the power in Heaven and Earth in order to the good and
preservation of his people. They and their Subjects joining together, are not
always able to maintain themselves and their union against a foreign power; but
he is always able to maintain his Kingdom. The Chaldean Empire was left to the
Persian; the Persian to the Grecian; the Grecian to the Roman; but his Kingdom
shall not be left to other people, Dan. 2.44. but by a peculiar privilege it
abides for ever: no foreign power can ruin it; no gates of Hell can prevail
against it; the posture of Christ and the Church does evidence this, Christ is
at the right hand of God, Psalm. 110.1. And the Church is at the right hand of
Christ, Psalm. 45.9. In this posture power cannot be wanting, or protection
fail. Further, As touching Rewards, his bounty is beyond all parallel: Other
Kings may sometimes forget the good services of their Subjects; Joash forgot
the kindness of Jehoiada; the poor wise man, who by his wisdom delivered the
City, was not at all remembered, Eccles. 9.15. Many excellent services have been
buried in oblivion, but the Lord Christ never forgets the services of his
people; their sins are delivered over to oblivion, but not their services; no,
not the least of them. He has a bottle for their tears, a book of remembrance
for their holy thoughts, a reward for a cup of cold water given for his names
sake; nay, he is so far from forgetting their services, that in the very act
they find a secret reward given in to them; the supplies of his spirit, the
irradiating beams of his love, and the sweet calms and serenities in conscience
tell them, that he has them always in remembrance. Earthly Kings may give
their servants some of the shadows here below, and some of those things which
lie round about them; but he gives his Subjects (...), substance, sound wisdom,
durable riches, and real happiness; he gives them himself, and all that train
of good things which accompanies him. Here he gives them tokens and glimpses of
his love; but what great and glorious things are there for them in Heaven?
There their labors end in eternal rest; their holy race arrives at a Crown of
Glory; their Prayers are turned into Hallelujahs; their Alms are repaid in
everlasting Love; their good works shall have a full reward; what they sowed to
the Spirit, shall come up in a crop of glorious immortality; in Heaven they
shall enter into the joy of their Lord, and sit down with him in his throne;
they shall then see and enjoy the blessed God, reading all truths in the
original, and drinking all good at the fountainhead; dwelling in a paradise of
bliss, and for ever reposing themselves in the bosom of infinite sweetness: Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which are prepared for them. To conclude, If Protection and Rewards can
do any thing, the Union between Christ and his Subjects must needs be very
secure.

CHAP. III.
The Mystical Union set forth by the Conjugal one. There is a mutual consent
between Christ and believers. The believers consent imports a right knowledge, a
free choice and a present compliance with Christ. Christ's consent is purely
gratuitous; believers purely supernatural. Christ and believers mutually make
over themselves each to other. The Emphasis of that phrase (one spirit) opened.
There is an intimate love between Christ and believers: he put on an humane
nature for them, they put off a corrupt nature for him. He died for expiation,
they die in mortification. There is a communication of good things from Christ
to the Church; the Church propagates in Believers and good works. The mystical
Union set forth by that of a foundation and a building. Christ laid, and
Believers built on him by Divine Art. The double cement of faith and the holy
Spirit. Christ is a large and strong foundation; he bears up the Church by
Divine influences.

THE Union between a King and his Subjects being in the earthly pattern
political only; the Holy Ghost goes on in Scripture to set forth the mystical
union by that which is between Man and Wife. Marriage is the conjunction of man
and woman in a conjugal society; it is the first primordial society, called
Elementum mundi, the Element of the world; out of it spring Families, out of
these are made Cities and Kingdoms; in these a Church is raised up unto God.
The conjugal union is that which peoples the World, and Saints the Church: in
no earthly society is there a conjunction so great as this is. Eve, the first
Wife, was taken out of Adam; he was created one, then two were made out of one;
and again those two were one in marriage. Man and Wife (says St. Austin) are
prima copula, De bono conj. c. 1.
the first bond or tie of humane society. By this conjugal union, the Scripture
shadows out the mystical one. The Book of Canticles is not (as some profane
ones have fancied) a light Love-song, but an excellent Epithalamium, or Divine
Ditty; which under the parable of a marriage, points out that incomparable
union which is between Christ and the Church. St. Paul in the 5th Chapter to
the Ephesians, exhorts Wives to be subject to their Husbands, as the Church is
to Christ; and Husbands to love their Wives, as Christ loves the Church; and at
last, he adds, This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church, verse. 32. In the original it is, (...), In Christum and Ecclesiam,
respiciens ad Christum and Ecclesiam, says Piscator. Though the last thing the
Apostle said before was touching the earthly marriage, viz. They two shall be
one flesh, verse. 31. yet he looks back to Christ and the Church; the earthly
marriage was but the shadow and image of the mystery; but Christ and the Church
in the mystical union joined together, are the very center and substance of it.
In this resemblance, diverse things may be noted.

First, In Marriage, which though founded in nature, is a voluntary act; there
must be a consent; the conjunction of Bruits is like themselves, out of an
impetus of nature; but the conjunction of Man and Woman is, as becomes rational
creatures, out of counsel and choice; a consent is necessary; Marriage is a
contract, and that cannot be without a consent; he that wants reason, which is
the root of liberty, cannot consent. If there be error personae, a mistake of
the person, there is no consent; errantis voluntas nulla est, he that errs,
consents not; if there be metus gravis ac violentus, a weighty and violent fear
extorting a consent, the consent not being free is as none at all: In all such
cases, the Rule is, Vbi non est consensus non potest esse matrimonium, where
there is no consent, there can be no marriage. Consensus facit matrimonium, the
consent makes the marriage. Answerably, in the spiritual marriage between
Christ and Believers there is a mutual consent, there are arrhae sponsalitiae,
earnests and pledges given on both hands. Quemadmodum nobis arrabonem spiritus
reliquit, ita and a nobis arrabonem carnis accepit. Et vexit in coelum piguus
totius summae illuc redigendae. Tert. de Resur. Carnis.
Christ has carried the earnest of our flesh to Heaven, and from thence sent
down the earnest of his Spirit to us; the consent is mutual: on Christ's part
there is a consent, though it be to espouse not Angels but men; not men in
their primitive beauty and integrity, but men under a stain of sin and
corruption; yet he consents to it, and that not out of error or mistake, but
out of choice and transcendent love, which as early as eternity it self
delighted in the sons of men, and in time calls and draws them into conjunction
with himself: all the sweet wooings, pathetical expostulations, precious
promises, and free offers in the Gospel, are as so many sure testimonies given
to his consent. On the Believers part there is also a consent; they breathe
after him, rest upon him, resign to him, and accept of him upon the terms of
the Gospel: In their consent two or three things may be noted.

First, There must be a right knowledge of Christ; to an unknown Christ there
can be no consent; the knowledge of him must be right in the measure of it.
Under the Old Testament, where Religion was much wrapped up in vails and shadows,
a less measure of knowledge might suffice; but under the New, when men live in
the noonday light, and as it were directly under the Sun of righteousness, a
much greater measure of knowledge is necessary. We should now study to know him
distinctly in his offices and benefits, that we may aptly, and out of judgment
join our selves to him. If a man think, that Christ is a Savior only and not a
Lord; or that one may partake of Christ crucified, and yet not take up his
Cross in mortifications and patient sufferings, nor yet follow him in holiness
and true obedience, here is error personae, such an one knows not the true
Christ, but a Christ of his own fancy; his consent, which is proportioned to
his knowledge, is not to the real Christ, but to the imaginary one: no man can
consent to more than he understands; the knowledge must be right, that the
consent may be so. Again, the knowledge must be right in the nature of it, it
must not be a mere notion, which may be in an heart like Nabals, dead and cold
in spiritual things; but it must be a spiritual knowledge, which discerns Christ
spiritually, and carries with it such a savor of him, as makes the heart choose
and embrace him above all things. Further, As there must be a right knowledge,
so there must be a free choice of Christ. Consensio volentis est, consent is in
the willing; it is not a thing pressed out of the heart by fear, but sweetly
issuing out of it in a free option. When Lewis the Eleventh of France was
pressed under the fears of death, he sent for the holy Hermit, holy Oil, holy
Cross, and what not in his extremity. Many men, when upon their deathbeds they
are turning off from this world and entering upon eternity; or, possibly before
that last hour, when the wrath of God flashes into their consciences, and sets
them a fire with the dread of what is justly due to their iniquities, may in
such a strait seem very willing to have Christ: But alas! all this is but a
force, a mere pressure upon their wills. Nothing like unto that pure genuine
consent which is in true Believers, who choose and set their hearts upon Christ,
as seeing the excellency of his Person, usefulness of his Offices, rectitude of
his Precepts, preciousness of his Promises, and greatness of his Rewards; the
intimate biass and bent of their hearts is such, that leaving the world behind
their back, they embrace and fall in with their dear Jesus above all things.

Moreover, This consent is a present actual one; in Marriage there are words
used, not de futuro, but de praesenti, or else it is no Marriage, but a promise
only. Believers do not say as the sluggard, yet a little sleep, a little
slumber in sin; nor as St. Austin in his delays before conversion did, modo
ecce modo; but they give a present consent to Christ; when he knocks, they say
not, go and come again to morrow (for that is not to consent to day, nay, not
to consent at all, but only to speak of it) but they make haste and delay not,
immediately they open and own him as their Lord; he is their greatest desire,
and they will not put him off, no, not for a world, which is much less in their
eyes than he is: They have to their great shame too long served their
corruptions, now they join themselves unto him in a perpetual covenant never to
be forgotten; without any more ado a present actual consent is given to him. It
is indeed said by Divines, that the true desires of Grace are Grace; and so
they are: but then those desires do at least virtually and seminally contain in
them a present consent; for where those desires are in truth, there the heart
breaks off confederacy with sin, and values Christ as its chief treasure. Were
such an one asked, what he would have in the first place; he would answer, None
but Christ.

Before I pass over the consent between Christ and Believers, two things may be
noted touching the excellency of it above that which is between man and wife.

The one is this; Christ's consent is a pure gratuitous act. When a man chooses a
wife, the reason is in the object, she is fair, or virtuous, or rich in estate,
one attractive or other draws out his consent; but when Christ made his choice,
no attractive was in his Spouse; Believers, no less than others, are naturally
void of holy Graces, and so extremely poor, that they have not of their own to
cover their nakedness, or pay their debts; there was nothing in them to draw
out his love toward them; the only reason of his choice was in his infinite
goodness, his Grace had no other mover but it self. It Is true, he says of his
Church, Behold, thou art fair, my love: behold, thou art fair, Cant. 1.15. But,
as our excellent English Annotator speaks, Locutio verbi infusio doni, to call
her fair is to make her so; her beauty was not a jewel of nature, but a
love-token given from him. Therefore in the next verse the Church breaks out,
Behold, thou art fair my beloved; she gives back all to him, her beauty was but
the reflection of his; she shines not of her self, but radiis mariti, with the
beams of her Husband; and to him may say, I am Japha, because thou art Japhe; I
am fair because thou art so. Indeed he espoused her upon a design of grace, to
change her Ethiopian skin, and put a Divine beauty upon her. Thus his consent
was merely gratuitous.

The other is this; The Believers consent is purely supernatural. Wives consent
to their Husbands out of principles of nature; but Believers consent to Christ
out of principles of grace. They are born, not of blood, of humane seed; not of
the will of the flesh, of carnal concupiscence; not of the will of man, of the
heroical acts of moral virtue; but of God, Joh. 1.13. His Holy Word is the
Seed, his Divine Love the Mover, he himself the Generator of them; their faith,
which is their consent, is not of themselves, but the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. No
ordinary wooing can produce their consent, Christ does not, as common Suitors
do, woo outwardly only, but he speaks to the heart; and that, not merely, as
Shechem did to Dinah, in kind words; but, as God did to Lydia, in the inward
operation of his spirit, which opens the heart, and from thence draws out a
consent. In the fall of man all the faculties fell, and among the rest the
believing faculty fell also; and, as it lies in the ruins, it cannot without
the elevations of supernatural grace lift up it self and give a consent to
Christ: he is a supernatural object, and a consent to him must be from a
supernatural principle, no less than an heavenly suada can draw it out toward
him.

Again, In Marriage Man and Wife do by consent pass over themselves each to
other; hence the Apostle tells us, The wife has not power of her own body, but
the husband: the husband has not power of his own body, but the wife, 1 Cor.
7.4. There is a communion of bodies between them, in re sociali; no one has a
plenary right; each one has a right in the other. In like manner in the
spiritual marriage, Christ and Believers do by consent pass over themselves
each to other: Hence the Church says, My beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant.
2.16. each one of them has a communion and propriety in the other. Christ
gives himself to Believers; his atoning blood is his own, yet they may wash in
it; his resurrection is his own, yet are they raised up, and made to sit
together in heavenly places in him; his intercession is his own in the glory
and excellency of it, yet is it theirs for their singular use and benefit.

Again, Believers give themselves to Christ; their minds are devoted to his
holy light; their wills are resigned to his sacred will; their pious posture
tells the world, That they are not their own, but his; to give him all is their
duty; to keep back the least part from him is no less than sacriledg, because
all is consecrated to him. Thus in both the Marriages there is a giving of
themselves each to other; yet still there is an excellency on the spiritual
side: Man and Wife make over themselves mutually, so as to become one flesh;
but Christ and Believers make over themselves mutually, so as to become one
spirit. It is the Apostles observation, He that is joined to an harlot is one
body; for two (says he) shall be one flesh: But he that is joined unto the
Lord is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.16, 17. A communion of bodies is a great thing;
but what is it to that union which is between Christ and his Church, in which
there is one and the same spirit in both? Man and Wife, however united in love,
have two different souls; but in Christ and Believers there is but one spirit.
I know some Divines interpret this one spirit to be only this, That there is
one temper in Christ and Believers; but this, though a very great truth, is not
the all, or full Emphasis of the Text. When the Scripture tells us, that the
mind of Christ is in us, it may be fairly interpreted of one temper; but when
it tells us of one spirit, it must needs import something more high and
mysterious. To make this appear, the circumstances of the Text must be
considered; the Apostle in this place dehorts them from fornication, not only
because it is a sin against our own bodies, verse. 18. but from three other
reasons: First, our bodies are the members of Christ, and shall we make them
the members of an Harlot? verse. 15. Then we are joined, and one spirit with
Christ; and shall we be joined and one flesh with an Harlot, verse. 16, and 17?
Lastly, our bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; and shall we profane that
Temple by finning against it, verse. 18, and 19? Here it is to be noted, That
these three Reasons are fundamentally but this one, viz. That we have the
Spirit of Christ in us; this Spirit makes us Members; this Spirit being in us,
we are one Spirit with Christ; this Spirit has a Temple in us; therefore upon
the account of this Spirit we should fly fornication. It is also to be noted,
that these Reasons, which are fundamentally one, do depend upon one another;
the first is confirmed by the second, and the second is explained by the third;
that we are members of Christ, is clearly confirmed in that we are one spirit
with him; and that we are one spirit with him, is excellently explained in that
we are the Temples of the Spirit; all three Reasons hang together, and make one
great argument against Fornication. This being the scope and order of the
place, the phrase (one spirit) must be construed in such a way as may suit to
the antecedents and consequents; as to the antecedents, it must import that
spirit which makes us members of Christ; as to the consequents, it must import
that spirit which has a temple in us; either way it must needs be meant of the
holy Spirit. It is that which makes us members of Christ: If any man have not
the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. Non potest vivere corpus
Christi nisi de Spiritu Christi, In Joh. Tract. 26.
says St. Austin, The Body of Christ cannot live but by the Spirit of Christ:
That is no member which has not the same spirit with the head. Also it is that
which has a Temple in us; Deus Templum habet, De spir. sancto. l. 3. c. 13.
creatura Templum non habet, says St. Ambrose; God only has a Temple, the
creature has none. Si Deus Spiritus Sanctus non esset, Templum utique nos
ipsos non haberet, says St. Austin; Cont. Maxim. lib. 1.
If the Holy Spirit were not God, he should not have us for his Temple: it
being (as he there urges) no less than Sacriledg and an Anathema to make a
Temple to a creature. Not then the holy temper which is a creature, but the
Holy Spirit who is God, has a Temple in us. Thus the order and dependence of
things plainly teach us the meaning of the (one Spirit) to be, that the same
Holy Spirit is in Christ and Believers: Nay, omitting the dependence, the words
themselves show the same thing. One Spirit is here immediately opposed to one
flesh; when a man and woman become one flesh, there is more than a likeness of
temper; there are many alike in carnal propensions, who yet were never so
joined as to be one flesh; and if one flesh speak more than alike temper, much
more does one spirit do so: I take it, (...), one spirit, is as high a phrase
as can be to express an intimate union. I conclude therefore, That the Apostle
does not merely intend a likeness of temper, but that the same Holy Spirit is
in Christ and Believers, which indeed is a very high and glorious mystery.

Further, Marriage is a state of Love, and Love has an unitive virtue in it; a
true friend is alter ipse, another self; in respect of love between two
friends, there is, as it were, but one soul in both. Confess. Lib. 4. c. 6.
St. Austin says, That his friend being dead, he did but dimidius vivere, live
but like half a man. If there be such love between friends, how much more is it
so between man and wife? Between them there are the strictest bonds, and
highest degrees of friendship. A man shall leave father and mother, and shall
be joined to his wife, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.31. In the original it is,
(...), he shall be glued to his wife. Conjugal love is the glue, which takes
hold on both sides, and joins them together as if they were but one piece; and
therefore the Apostle there adds, they two shall be one flesh. And a little
before he tells them, He that loves his wife, loves himself, verse. 28. She is
an alter Ego, a piece of himself; and not to love her is as unnatural as to
hate his own flesh; the near relation which is between man and wife, calls for
a mutual and more than ordinary love.

The Parallel is the intimate love which is between Christ and Believers; he
loves them as parts and pieces of himself, they love him as their dearest head
and husband; he loves not their graces only, but their persons; they love not
his gifts only, but himself. Ordinances are his Banquetinghouse, Graces are his
Love Tokens; but himself is the great center of their love: He is ravished,
nay, excordiated with their single eye of faith and chain of obedience, Cant.
4.9. they are ravished in him who is totus desideria, all or wholly desires;
his person, natures, offices, life, death, resurrection, intercession, every
thing in him is amiable in their eyes; his love to them is such, that he eats
his honeycomb with his honey, wax and all, accepting their services
notwithstanding the infirmities cleaving to them; their love to him is such,
that, though sometimes they sleep and nod in humane frailty, yet their heart
waketh; the inward bent and motion of it is to him, the least call or knock
will make them rise and seek after him: There is an intimate love between him
and them; but how far this exceeds that which is between man and wife, the
tongue of men and Angels cannot fully utter. I shall only touch on one or two
things.

On the one hand Christ took an humane nature that he might espouse us to
himself; to him, as mere God, sinful creatures could not be joined, his pure
Majesty could not admit them to approach to him; but that he might have a
Spouse among men, he left his Fathers bosom and came down into an humane
nature; Majesty was put under a vail of flesh, and through that we have access
to him. It would be a very strange thing, for a glorious Angel to come down
into the rank of worms, and espouse matter; much more admirable is it, that the
very Son of God (one infinitely more above an humane nature than an Angel is
above matter) did come down into our frail flesh, upon design to espouse us to
himself: never did love so stoop and condescend as here. On the other hand
Believers are content, as much as may be, to put off their corrupt nature, that
they may be joined to him; he put on a pure humane nature for them, they put
off a corrupt one for him; at his call they leave their own people and their
Fathers House, I mean, the corruption they were born or bred in; nothing is
dearer or nearer to fallen man than his corrupt flesh, and those lusts which are
the members of it; yet they part with it and them for Christ: Their Motto is,
Christus meus est omnia, my Christ is my All.

Again, On the one hand, Christ died in our nature that he might espouse us.
Jacob served for a Wife, David fought for one; but none but our dear Lord died
upon a Cross for us: our match with him could not be dispatched without atoning
blood. A type of this we have in that first Marriage between Adam and Eve; Eve
was taken out of the side of fleeping Adam; the Church is taken out of the side
of a dying Christ. The Jews say, that the woman was taken out of the side of
man, to signify the marriage of the supreme blessed man: While Adam was
sleeping, a rib was taken out of him and made into a woman; when Christ died on
the Cross, there came out of his pierced side blood and water, in these we have
the original of the Church, which rises up out of expiation and regeneration,
to be a Spouse to him. On the other hand, Believers in the power, and after the
pattern of a crucified Christ, dye to themselves and the world; his pure flesh
suffered in a way of expiation; their corrupt flesh suffers in a way of
mortification; by his Cross the world is crucified to them, and they to the
world; his body was nailed to the Cross, and there they hang up their lusts to
dye and expire: Thus there is a transcendent love between him and them.

Moreover, In Marriage two things more may be noted:

The one is this, There is a communication of good things from the Husband to
the Wife. It is an old saying, (...), all things are common among friends; much
more is it so among married persons, a communion of bodies draws a communion of
other things with it: the near relation between man and wife calls for it; his
necessaries serve to supply her, his honor puts a luster upon her, his riches
are seen in her Jewels and attire: If Adam had a world, Eve did participate
with him. Thus it is in the earthly marriage; much more is it so in the
spiritual one; When such an one as Christ is joined to Believers, what, and how
great must the communications be? The earthly Husband according to his state
and degree does communicate to his Wife; what then does Christ, who has a
Deity and unfearchable riches in him, communicate to those who are in
conjunction with him? Want they cannot while he has a Deity; or be without a
supply, till his riches be exhausted: They go no longer in the rags of their
own unworthiness, but are covered with the robe of his pure righteousness;
guilt can no longer abide on them, because they are sprinkled with his aroning
blood: while he has an Holy Spirit they cannot want the Jewels and ornaments
of Grace; their love, meekness, obedience, patience, show that he has put some
of his beauty upon them; his wine-cellar of Scriptures and Ordinances stands
open to them, that they may taste and drink of Divine Consolations; at last
they shall enter into the palace of Heaven, and there partake of his glory: No
Husband but himself can so communicate.

The other is this, That in Marriage there is a due propagation of mankind;
individuals dye, but mankind is preserved; generation supplies what death
devours. Also in the spiritual marriage there is a double propagation; one of
Believers, another of good works: First in the Church there is a propagation of
Believers; such an one as Christ could not but have a seed, his name was to be
continued as long as the Sun, Psalm. 72.17. In the original it is, (...), his
name shall be sonned or childed in a succession of Believers. The Church at
first was in a Believer or two; but being Christ's Spouse, she becomes Mother of
thousands, a spiritual Eve to bring forth Sons unto God. In the power of the
Word and Spirit (which are as the seed and formative virtue in this heavenly
generation) multitudes of Believers come forth as the dew from the womb of the
morning, not in the Jewish Church only, but in the Gentile world also; the
wilderness buds and blossoms, the barren sing for joy, the tent is enlarged,
the curtains are stretched forth, the Church breaks out on the right hand and
on the left in an admirable fertility; this is the fruit of this Divine
Marriage between Christ and his Church. Again, In particular Believers there is
a propagation of good works; as we are in conjunction with Adam we are impotent
and barren; but as soon as we are in conjunction with Christ we have power and
holy fruits. To open this, it will be worth while to consider the words of the
Apostle: Ye are become dead to the law by the body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring
forth fruit unto God. For when we were in the flesh, the motions of sins which
were by the law, did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. But
now we are delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were held, that
we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter,
Romans 7.4, 5, 6. Here we have two sorts of persons, the unregenerate who are in
the flesh of corrupt nature, and the regenerate who have a new spirit or
principle in them. Two sorts of Marriage, one unto the Law in the unregenerate;
and another unto Christ in the regenerate. Two sorts of fruit, one unto death
in sinful actions; another unto God in good works. The unregenerate are married
to the Law, they are under the curse of it as sinners; they have but the naked
letter of it, which commands, but helps not: Nay, their corruption is
accidentally irritated by it; their inward malignity swells and rises against
the holy commands which stand in Scripture, as so many dams and bars to their
impetuous lusts: Hence they bring forth nothing but fruit unto death; what they
seem to do in Gods service, they do only in the oldness of the letter, in the
external work, without a spirit or principle for it. The regenerate are dead to
the Law, and married to Christ; they are not under the curse of the Law, but
pardoned in Christ; they have not the mere outward letter only, but the
quickening spirit; they are not irritated by the command, but delight in it as
in their joy and treasure: Hence they bring forth fruit unto God; they serve
him in newness of spirit, in the suavity of internal holy principles; their
good works are not brought forth in bondage and servility, but by a free
spirit, and in the easiness of the new creature. We see here, that the progeny
of good works issues not out of nature or the letter of the Law, but out of a
conjunction and spiritual marriage with Christ, who by his Holy Spirit quickens
Believers to bear holy fruits.

The conjugal union in the earthly pattern not being enough, the Holy Ghost
goes on to set forth the mystical union by that which is between the foundation
and the building. Christ in Scripture is called a foundation upon a double
account; he is the foundation of Doctrine, Other foundation can no man lay,
than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. Here the Apostle speaks
of a foundation of Doctrine; the consequent words make this appear: the gold,
silver and precious stones are pure and solid Doctrines; the wood, hay and
stubble are vain and frivolous ones; both are called man's work which the fire
shall try. He is also the foundation of Believers; They are built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20. It Is true, the Apostles and Prophets are here called
a foundation; but they are only a doctrinal foundation, Christ is the personal
one; they are a foundation metonymically only, Christ is so properly: upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets is no other than upon Christ, whom they
in their Preaching laid as the foundation of the Church. The Foundation and the
Cornerstone are both one and the same Christ; as a Foundation he bears up and
sustains the Church; as a Cornerstone he joins and holds together the two
walls of it made up of Jews and Gentiles.

In this resemblance three or four things may be considered.

The Foundation and the Building are both framed by Art. First, the pattern is
in the mind of the Builder, and then the thing is set up. In the Spiritual
Foundation and Building the Art was not humane but Divine; the Idea of them was
not in man's mind but in Gods; man, falling off from his bottom of primitive
integrity, could not have a foundation in himself, God in infinite wisdom
contrived that he might have one in another; the way was admirable, the eternal
Word was made flesh; two natures met in one person; an humane, in which he
obeyed and suffered for us; and a Divine, which put an infinite value upon his
obedience and sufferings; in these, full satisfaction was made for sin, a
purchase of grace and glory was obtained for sinners, an incomparable pattern
of sanctity and obedience is set before us, and an Holy Spirit is provided to
quicken us to imitate him: Mercy runs freely in the channel of the Promises;
Proclamations of Grace are made unto men. Here Is the Foundation upon which
fallen man may be built up unto righteousness and life eternal. Oh, riches of
Wisdom! wonder of Love! It Is true, natural and carnal men, while such, are no
more fit among persons, than hay and stubble are among Doctrines, to be built
upon this Foundation; but the same Wisdom which laid the Foundation, will build
the House; the Holy Spirit is sent forth to work faith in men, and thereby to
frame them to be set upon the Foundation: hence the Apostle says, that the
whole Building is (...), fitly framed together, Ephesians. 2.21. each part of the
Building is aptly and congruously united to the Foundation and to the other
parts of it; the Building answers to the Foundation, and both to the Idea in
the infinite Mind. To contrive these, was one of the greatest thoughts that
ever entered into Gods heart; and to effect them, was one of the greatest works
which ever was done in time.

Between the Foundation and Building there is somewhat that joins and cements
them together; between Christ and Believers the cement is not material but
spiritual; these are joined together by Faith and by the Holy Spirit. Faith is
one cement: Behold, I lay in Sion a chief cornerstone, elect, precious: he
that believes on him shall not be confounded, 1 Pet. 2.6. Faith joins the
Believer to the Foundation; that is the Reason, that he shall not be confounded.
Sin, Satan, the World, shall not confound him, because he is built upon a
Foundation, in which is Propitiation, Grace and Victory; the Divine Favor, the
influences of Grace, the Crown of eternal Life shall not fail him, because he
is joined to a Foundation, in which the Promises of these things are Yea, and
Amen.

The Holy Spirit is another cement. In whom, that is, in Christ the Foundation,
you are builded together for an habitation of God through the spirit, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2.22. The earthly Foundation and Building are joined together
by dead matter like themselves; Christus, sive lapis sit in aedificio, sive
radix in arbore, sive vitis in vivea, sive caput in corpore, semper est non
solum vivens, sed vita vivificans. Zanch. in loc.
but Christ who is a living Foundation, and Believers who are lively stones,
are united together by the Holy Spirit; this is a great mystery; the same Holy
Spirit which is in him, is in them also.

Again, The Foundation supports and bears up the Building; in like manner
Christ supports and bears up the Church, the whole weight of it lies upon him;
without him all the spiritual stones would instantly sink, and totter down into
a chaos of emptiness and confusion: To make the excellency of this supportation
appear, we must consider first what manner of Foundation he is; and then in
what manner he bears up the Church.

Touching the first, He is a Foundation able and every way complete to support
and bear up the Church; a short scanty Foundation cannot do its office; but he
is an ample large one, multitudes of Believers in all ages have been built upon
him, and yet there is room for more. Did all the men in the world build upon
him by Faith, he would bear them all up to life eternal; a weak faultring
Foundation cannot do its office; but he is a strong one, a Rock which cannot
fail. When St. Peter made that glorious confession, Thou art Christ the son of
the living God; our Savior answers him, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my Church, Matt. 16.18. The Rock here is not confessing- Peter, but
the confessed Christ; our Savior says not, thou art Peter, and upon thee; but
thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. Peter is not the
Rock, but built upon it. Hence St. Austin observes, Tract. 124. in Joh.
Non a Petro petra, sed Petrus a petra, sicut non Christus a Christiano, sed
Christianus a Christo vocatur; the Rock is not named from Peter, but Peter from
the Rock; as Christ is not named from the Christian, but the Christian from
Christ. All Believers are (...), Stones; Christ only is (...), the Rock, upon
which they are built; they being Stones may be moved, but he being a Rock is
unmovable and for ever the same. Peter fell greatly; had he been the
Foundation, the whole Church must have fell with him; had not Christ been a
Rock to him, his fall would have been final. These words ((...), upon this
Rock) note that one individual Foundation, upon which the whole Church is so
built, that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. To be such a
Foundation, none is capable but Christ only; it is not to be imagined, either
that the whole Church should be built upon a mere man; or if it could, that
being so weakly founded, it should stand against the powers of darkness. Christ
the true Rock is not a mere man, but the Son of the living God; he has the
strength of a Deity which cannot fail. Earthly Foundations may be eat up by
time, or ruined by violence; but he is, (...), a founded foundation, or a
foundation of foundations, Isa. 28.16. No time can deface the eternal One, no
violence set its foot upon the Almighty; he abides ever to support his Church.

Touching the second, The supportation of the Church is in a spiritual way; it
is bore up, not as an earthly building by dead matter, but as a spiritual House
by the influences of Grace; To whom coming as unto a living stone, disallowed
indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious: Ye also as lively stones are
built a spiritual House, 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. He is a Living Foundation, one who has
an endless life of merit, and the Spirit of life above measure. Hence
Believers, who are built upon, and as it were parts of him, are maintained in
life; his Spirit by continual influences and spirations of Grace bears them up
in their spiritual being and life; the Gates of Hell shall never prevail
against them.

CHAP. IV.
The Mystical Union set forth by the Vine and the Branches. Christ has one
nature with Believers; they are as branches in him, and receive juice from him.
The mystical union set forth by the natural head and the body. Those two famous
Texts, Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2.19. considered, which import more than when Christ
is called Head over all things, Head of principality and power, Head of every
man, Head of the Heathen, or Head of the Church as an Husband. Christ as an
Head has the same nature with Believers; but exceeds them in order, as being
first and highest; in perfection, as being full of Grace; in virtue, as
influencing into the Church. The necessity, matter, and way of this influence.
Christ an Head above all other heads, as making of no member a member; and as
having virtue enough for a world.

THE Union between the Foundation and the Building in the earthly pattern
importing only a support, but no vital influence; the Holy Ghost goes on to set
forth the mystical union by that which is between the Vine and the Branches. I
am the Vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing, says our Savior,
Joh. 15.5. In the former Chapter he told them of his going away; here he
comforts them against it, his departure should be no separation, still he would
be closely united to them as the Vine is to the Branches. He is a Vine, one
whose shadow reaches to the ends of the earth, whose precious blood cheereth
the heart of God and man; I mean, it satisfies justice, and quiets conscience.
Believers are Branches in him, not native ones, but insititions, taken off from
the old stock of Adam, and implanted into Christ. Hence they are said to be
(...), Romans 6.5, implanted into him, so as to have juice from him. The union
between him and them is so intimate, that they abide in him by Faith, and he
abides in them by his Spirit; the effect of this union is fruitfulness. Though
the seeming Branches mentioned verse 2. are but pampinarii, such as have leaves
only; yet the real ones are always fructuarii, such as have holy fruit. In this
resemblance some things are to be observed:

The Vine and the Branches have one nature, so have Christ and Believers; he
took an humane nature, that he might be a Vine to us, and we Branches in him;
that he might communicate spiritual sap unto us, and in virtue of it we might
bring forth fruit unto God. The Arrians of old argued from this place against
the Deity of Christ; The Vine (said they) is of the same nature with the
branches, but not of the same nature with the Husbandman; Christ is
consubstantial with us who are the Branches, but not with the Father who is the
Husbandman. To which I answer, this parable of the Vine proves Christ's Deity as
well as his humanity; he must be, not a mere man, but God-man in one person,
else he could not be such a Vine as he is here described to be. Were he only
God, he could not be an homogeneal Vine, and have one nature with us; were he
only man, he could not be an influxive Vine, and communicate spiritual life
unto us, it being beyond the sphere of a mere creature to do it: Were he (as
the Arrians would have him) no more than so, all the Branches in him would be
dry and withered, no sap of Grace or spiritual Life would be found among men.
It Is true, the earthly Vine has not the same nature with the Husbandman, but
the spiritual one has it; here the Husbandman is the root of the Vine it self;
here the Vine calls the Husbandman Father, My Father (says our Savior) is the
Husbandman; this Vine in eternity sprung out of the Fathers bosom, and in time
sprung out of the Virgins womb; so he is consubstantial with the Father as to
his Divinity, and consubstantial with us as to his humanity.

The Branches are in the Vine, so are Believers in Christ. St. Austin says of
every Branch, Si in vite non est, in igne erit; In Job. Tract. 81.
If it be not in the Vine as a living Branch, it shall be in the fire as a dead
one. Naturally all men are in the old stock of Adam, dead and withered
branches, fit to be gathered up and cast into the fire; but the Holy Spirit
(which fills the humane nature of Christ, and will not suffer such a Vine as he
is to be without Branches) works Faith in men, and so implants them into him:
Believers are said to be in him; they are not united to him mediately only, as
being in the Church, which is his body; but immediately, as being mystical
parts of him. A man (says Theophylact) is by faith (...), part of the root,
not merely tied to him by outward ordinances, In Joh. 15.
but intimately joined and incorporated into him.

The Vine communicates juice to the Branches: In Coena. Ser. 10.
Christ (in whom, as St. Bernard speaks, there is totus humor, a fullness of the
Holy Spirit) influences Grace and spiritual Life into Believers. Hence it is
that they bear holy fruits; our Savior emphatically expresses this, The branch
cannot bear fruit (...), of it self, verse 4. To make it bear fruit, two things
are requisite; it must be in the Vine, and it must have sap from thence, else
it is dry and withered; in like manner Believers must be in Christ, and must
have a Divine Spirit from him, else they are good for little or nothing; (...),
severed from me ye can do nothing, says Christ, verse 5. A man off from
Christ, like a branch off from the Tree, is altogether sapless and
unprofitable; whatever blossoms of morality may be, no spiritual fruits can be
found in one separate from Christ; holy fruits are from Divine Influences; and
these are from union with Christ. The Ancient Fathers observe from this
parable, Ita sunt in vite palmites, ut viti nihil conferant, sed inde accipiant
unde vivant, sic quippe vitis est in pulmitibus, ut vitale subministret eis,
non sumat ab eis, ac per hoc and maventum in se habere Christum, and mavere in
Christo, discipulis prodest, and non Christo. Conc. Arans. 2. can. 24.
that the union between Christ and Believers is such, that he communicates life
to them, but receives it not from them; they receive life from him, but
communicate it not to him: We have here a great mystery, Believers are
ingrafted into Christ, and in a sort parts of him; hence the very same Spirit
which is in him, is derived to them, to make them bear good fruit.

The union between the Vine and the Branches importing a vital influence, but
in a low negative life, the Holy Ghost goes on to set forth the mystical union
by that which is between the natural head and the body; we have two excellent
Texts for this. Christ is an head, From whom the whole body fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body
unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4.16. Again, he is an Head, from
which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit
together, increases with the increase of God, Col. 2.19. Here Christ is the
head, and Believers the body; here the body is fitly joined together and
compacted; there is in all the members a congruity and a close conjunction unto
the Head, and unto one another; here are joints and bands, the primary ligature
is the Holy Spirit, which makes Christ and Believers to be as it were
continuous, and to touch one another. Under the Spirit are the bonds of Faith
and Love; Faith unites and incorporates Believers into Christ; Love glues and
cements them one to another; here is an effectual working in the measure of
every part; the holy Spirit stirs up the principles of Grace in Believers, the
principles of Grace stir up the Soul, the Soul in the virtue of those
principles stirs up it self, all is set into motion from Christ the Head.
Lastly, Here Is an edifying of the body, an increasing with the increase of God;
Believers grow up into Christ in all things, their Faith is more radicated,
their Love is more inflamed, their union with Christ becomes closer, their
likeness to him grows more lively than before; in every part of the new
creature there is a Divine increase, and all is because they are united to the
Head: Between Christ and Believers there is an apt and intimate union made by
excellent joints and bands; through these bands there comes to be an effectual
working in Believers; by this working there issues forth an increase of all
holy graces. O what an Head is Christ! how happy are Believers who are in
conjunction with him! the excellency of this union is much beyond what can be
said or thought of it; it is not for us to dive into the bottom of it, or to
see it in the full compass: Nevertheless, that we may know somewhat of it, it
is worth while to compare the headship of Christ in these two excellent Texts,
with his Headship in other Scriptures; he is Head over all things, Ephesians. 1.22.
He is Head of all principality and power, that is, of Angels, Col. 2.10. He is
Head of every man, 1 Cor. 11.3. He is Head of the Heathen, reigning as a King
over them, Psalm. 18.43. He is Head of the Church, as the Husband is head of the
Wife, Ephesians. 5.23. But his Headship in those two famous places imports much
more than the other headships.

Christ is head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. That is, the
Churches Head has a power over all things. God has highly exalted him, says
the Apostle, Phil. 2.9. In the original there is an emphatical Pleonasm, (...),
God exalted him above all exaltation, lifted him up above all altitude; hence
Christ has a name above every name, he sits at the right hand of Power and
Majesty; all creatures in Heaven, in Earth, under the Earth, that is Angels,
Men, Devils, all must bow the knee to him, every tongue must confess him to be
Lord; all things are put under him, not only the lower world as it was to Adam,
but all the Creation, Angels themselves, who are the top of it, not excepted;
he has all the power in Heaven and Earth, thus he is head over all things: But
we must observe here, the Apostle does not say, that he is head unto all
things, but head over all things, which denotes only power, not union; neither
does he simply say, that he is head over all things, but that he is head over
all things to the Church; which imports, that though he be Lord over all, yet
he is a proper peculiar head to the Church; he is united to it as to his body,
not so to all things; though all things be reduced to him as an head of power
over them, yet all things are not his body; he is united to the Church by
joints and bands, not so to all things; he communicates his own spirit to the
Church, not so to all things; he is head over all things, that he might be a
complete allsufficient head to the Church; his universal power makes him meet
to protect and preserve the Church which is his body and chief care; all things
are managed in ordine ad spiritualia, in a subserviency to the Churches good.

Christ is head of all principality and power, Col. 2.10. That is, he is an
head of eminency and power over the Holy Angels; he is made so much better than
the Angels, as he has by inheritance a more excellent name than they, Heb.
1.4. Unto which of the Angels said God the Father at any time, Thou art my Son,
or sit thou at my right hand, verse. 5. and 13? Angels are Sons by creation, but
Christ is (...), the proper Son of the Father; not as creatures, made out of
nullity, but a proper Son begotten out of his substance. Angels, as Courtiers
of Heaven stand in the presence of God, but he sits at his right hand in state
and majesty; Angels and Authorities and Powers being made subject unto him: But
to Believers he is an head of union and influence; the Church made up of them
is his body, homogeneal and of one nature with him, joined to him by the bands
of Faith and a regenerating Spirit, and supplied from him with spiritual life
and motion; thus it is not with Angels.

It is true, some worthy Divines hold, That from Christ God-man, there is an
influence into the holy Angels, not only of illumination and accidental joy
(which may be easily granted), but of confirming and establishing grace: He is
(say they) a Mediator to them, though not of redemption and reconciliation, yet
of preservation and confirmation in their holy estate. The Apostle says, that
God does (...), gather together as into one head in Christ all things in Heaven
and Earth, Ephesians. 1.10. And again, that he does by him reconcile all things in
Heaven and Earth to himself, Col. 1.20. St. Bernard speaking of Christ, says,
In Cantica. ser. 22.
Qui erexit hominem lapsum, dedit stanti Angelo, ne laberetur, he who lifted up
fallen man, gave that grace to the standing Angel, that he should not fall.

But here I crave leave to dissent, and to offer some things by way of answer.

1st. The distinction between a Mediator of Redemption, and a Mediator of
Confirmation only, is not, I think, to be found in Scripture; we read of a
Mediator between God and men, not of a Mediator between God and Angels; A
Mediator is not a Mediator of one, Gal. 3.20. but of more than one, and those
not in amity, as God and Angels are; but at variance, as God and fallen man
are. A Mediator (as the word (...) imports) is a middle person interposing
between parties at variance; but God and holy Angels are not at variance at
all, that any should interpose between them: It is congruous, that a Mediator
should partake of the same nature with those for whom he mediates, the one
Mediator between God and man, is the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. The
substantial mediation must precede the actual one; he that is medium
reconciliationis, must be first medium participationis; he must partake of our
nature, that he may mediate for us. Hence it appears, that Christ not assuming
the nature of Angels, has not a fit nature, in which he may mediate for them;
neither indeed do they want a Mediator. Adam in innocence wanted none, much
less do the holy Angels, much higher in perfections than he, stand in need of
one: It Is true, the Apostle says, that God in Christ does gather together and
reconcile all things in Heaven and Earth; but the (all things) in the Text are
to be limited to men only; the things in Heaven are the Spirits of just men
there, not the holy Angels; who, because they were never scattered, cannot be
gathered; and because they never offended, cannot be reconciled: but if the
things in Heaven should reach to Angels, it would not from thence follow, that
Christ mediates for Angels; but that he so mediates for men, that the Angels,
who before stood off and at a distance from men, are reconciled and at amity
with them.

2dly. Christ the Son of God was incarnate, not for Angels, but for men; Unto
you (says the Angel) is horn a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.11.
Unto you men, and not unto us Angels. Christ came to seek and to save that
which was lost, not among Angels (for what was lost there, was finally so) but
among men; for us men and for our salvation he descended from Heaven, says the
Ancient Creed. Incarnation being a mystery made known by supernatural
revelation only, it is no less than presumption in us to put other ends upon it
than the Holy Scripture has done; the incarnation of the Son of God does
presuppose the fall of man, but the confirmation of Angels does not do so; had
not man fallen, Christ had not come in the flesh, yet had the elect Angels been
confirmed; his coming therefore was not for Angels but for men.

3dly. Christ in our assumed nature obeyed and suffered not for Angels but for
men. The end of his obedience and sufferings was, as the Scripture tells us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, that he might fanctify and cleanse
us, that he might make an end of sin, that he might reconcile us unto God, that
he might purify unto himself a peculiar people, that he might purchase a Church
with his own blood, that he might gather together in one the Children of God
scattered up and down the wide world, all which concern not Angels, but men:
Angels standing in their primitive purity and integrity, are not capable of any
such things as redemption and reconciliation, neither does the Scripture speak
one word or syllable of Christ's dying or giving himself for them; it was lost
man that was aimed at. De Incarn; cap. 8.
Filius Dei pro mortuis natus est ad mortem, says Fulgentius, The Son of God
was born to dye for the dead; not for the living Angels, but for men dead in
Adams. fall; that they who died in the first Adam, might live in the second.

4thly. The holy influence into Angels (which preserves them) is from God, but
not (as the influence into Believers is) from Christ as God-man; the influence
from Christ as God-man, being the fruit of his incarnation and passion, reaches
only to those for whom he was incarnate and suffered; he was incarnate for men
only, therefore this influence is only unto them, not unto Angels. Both he that
sanclifieth, and they who are sanctified, are all of one: for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them brethren, Heb. 2.11. And a little after, he calls them
Children, verse. 13. Those who are sanctified by Christ, have one and the same
nature with him, and upon that account, are his Brethren and Children; Angels
not being such, are not sanctified by him; but men being, such have a
sanctifying influence from him. Again, he suffered for men only, therefore this
influence is only unto them, not unto Angels. For their sakes I sanctify my
self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth, says our Savior,
Joh. 17.19. for their sakes, not for Angels did he consecrate himself to be a
propitiatory sacrifice; they therefore, not Angels, are sanctified by him; the
holy Spirit, which issues out of his meritorious wounds, falls down only on
those whom he died for: Moreover, this influence from Christ as God-man, is
proper only to the Church which is his Body; the word (Church) in Scripture,
notes the Church of men, not of Angels; Upon this rock I will build my Church,
Matt. 16.18. God purchased the Church with his own blood, Act. 20.28. Unto
principalities is known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. The Church of the firstborn, which are written
in heaven, Heb. 12.23. In all these places, by Church is meant the Church of
men, not of Angels. The Greek word ((...)) (which is caetus evocatus, a company
called out of the corrupt mass) is not proper to Angels, but to men only; I
find not in Scripture that it extends any further than so; the Church (which is
Christ's body) must be homogeneral and one nature with him, therefore it is made
up of men, not of Angels.

Thus it appears, That Christ is an Head of eminency over Angels, but of
influence unto men. The very Text (which proves him head of Angels)
demonstrates this, ye are (...), filled in him who is the head of all
principality and power, Col. 2.10. ye are filled, not Angels; to them he is an
head of eminency, but to you of influence.

Christ is head of every man, 1 Cor. 11.3. Not to straiten the words, but to
take them in their full latitude, he is head, not of Believers only, but of all
men; he is an head of eminency to them; never was the humane nature so exalted
and lifted up as in him, in whom it is united to the Deity, and filled with all
grace; he is an head of authority over them; he is Lawgiver and Judge of the
world; nay, in some sort he is an head of influence to them; he is that light,
that lights every man that comes into the world, that is, with the light of
Reason, which is the Candle of the Lord; in the first lighting of it up, it was
a piece of nature coming from Christ as God; in the continuance of it in fallen
man, it is a reprieved thing, owing to the sweet smelling sacrifice of Christ
as God-man and Mediator; sin being an universal forfeiture, not only of the
outward blessings in the world, but of the inward furniture in the soul; it is
through the Mediator, that the world stands unturned into a Chaos, and that
reason continues not extinct and utterly gone out; we are bound to thank
Christ, that our forfeited Reason is not taken away from us. In this sense
Christ is an head of influence to every man; but unto Believers he is an head
in a more excellent way, influencing unto them, not nature or reason only, but
his own Spirit and Grace, to raise them up above nature, and mould them into
his own likeness.

Christ is head of the Heathen, Psalm. 18.43. That is, he reigns as a King over
the Church of the Gentiles; his kingdom is a spiritual one: he does not, as
other Princes, rule merely by outward Laws, but he inspires obedience into his
Subjects, and by a vital influence inclines them to do his will; yet the
mystical union is not so clearly expressed, when in the Psalm he is called the
head of the Heathen, as when in the Apostle he is called the head of the body;
there he is called an head, ex analogia regis in regno, by a resemblance drawn
from a King in a Kingdom; here he is called an head, ex analogia capitis in
corpore naturali, by a resemblance drawn from an head in a natural body; there
the earthly pattern imports only a political union, here it shadows out a
mystical one; as importing a vital influence, which the other pattern does not.

Christ is head of the Church, as the husband is the head of the wife, Ephesians.
5.23. He is such an Husband as never was; the earthly Husband and Spouse are
one flesh, but Christ and Believers are one Spirit, there is a vital influence
between them; yet the mystical union is not so fully expressed, by saying, that
Christ is the head of the Spouse, as by saying, that he is the head of the
Body; there he is called head by a resemblance drawn from the Husband and Wife;
here he is called head by a resemblance drawn from an Head and a natural Body;
there the earthly pattern imports chiefly a moral union, here it shadows out a
mystical one, as importing a vital influence which the other pattern does not.

Thus much touching the headship of Christ comparatively taken.

I shall now consider it absolutely in it self: Christ is the Head, Believers
are his Body; Sir. in festo Magdal.
Duo corpora (says St. Bernard) habet Christus, unum quod suscepit ex virgin,
alterum Ecclesiae, quod charius habet benignitas redimentis: Christ has two
bodies, one that he took of the Virgin, another of the Church, of which he in
his redeemingkindness was more chary than of the other. In an Head two things
may be noted, ratio convenientiae and ratio differentiae, there is somewhat in
which the Head agrees with the Members, somewhat in which the head exceeds them.

First, there is somewhat in which the head agrees with the members, the head
has the same nature with them; Christ has the same nature with Believers; he,
though the eternal word, took an humane nature that he might be an head to
them; the Children being partakers of flesh and blood, he also took part of the
same, Heb. 2.14. that they, in themselves poor fallen creatures, who could not
immediately approach unto his Deity, might through the vail of his flesh come
and be joined to him as their head; that from the fountain of his Deity, all
Graces might flow through his humanity, as through a channel unto them: Here is
admirable encouragement for their Faith; the glorious Son of God came down into
their flesh, that they might join themselves to him, and receive Divine
influences from him. Again, there is somewhat in which the head exceeds them;
the Schoolmen place this excess in three things, in ordine, in perfectione, in
virtute, Aquin. 3. pars Quest. 8. Art. 1.
in order, in perfection, in virtue. The head is in order the first and highest
part; Christ even in his humane nature is first in dignity, and higher than all
men; he is in nearer conjunction with the Deity than all creatures are;
creatures of life are nearer to the Deity than those of mere being; creatures
of sense are nearer to it than those of life; intellectual creatures are nearer
to it than those of sense only; but the humane nature of Christ is nearer to it
than all the rest, as being hypostatically united to it; we are predestined
to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among
many brethren, Romans 8.29. Christ is the firstborn, first in dignity and
prerogative; his image is the prototype and grand sampler according to which
all Believers are formed and fashioned in holiness; the graces of all Saints,
as well those before his incarnation, as those after it, carry a respect to him
as the first and chiefest of all.

The head excels in perfection, all the senses are in it; Christ is an head of
perfection, he is full of Grace, not as the Saints are, in a measure only; but
in an evident superlative way; in them there is plenitudo vasis, the fullness of
a Vessel, but in him there is plenitudo fontis, the fullness of a Fountain; they
have some feathers of the Dove, some first fruits of the Spirit, but he has
the Dove it self, the whole entire Spirit in all the graces of it; the Spirit
was not given to him (...), Descendit super eum omnis fons Spiritus Sancti.
Hier. in 11. cap. Esaiae.
out of a vessel or measure, in a scanty or sparing manner; but the whole
Fountain of it was as it were poured out upon him. He has all Graces;
extensively, all kinds of Grace; nothing, that imports perfection, is wanting;
intensively, all degrees of Grace, the highest top of holiness is no where to
be found but in him; Grace is in him, as water is in the Ocean, or light in the
Sun, in an abundant and indeficient manner; he is the great Element or primary
subject of Grace, so that in all the intellectual world it is no where to be
found in that fullness as in him; his humane nature has as much Grace as it can
hold, its capacity is filled up to the brim, at least in reference to Gods
ordinary power; nay, some of the Schoolmen go higher, and say, that its
capacity is so filled up, that if God should put forth his absolute power to
the utmost, he could not possibly pour into the Soul of Christ one drop of
Grace more than it has already; not out of any defect in the Divine power, but
for want of room in the capacity of the Soul to receive it. But to wave this,
it is enough for us to speak as the Scripture does, It pleased the father, that
in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. Christ has all fullness of Grace,
he has grace in the greatest extent as to all the kinds of it, and in the
greatest excellency as to all the degrees of it; he has whatever appertains to
Grace, and has it, as Aquinas speaks, 3. Part. qu. 7. Artic. 9.
in summo secundam perfectissimum modum quo haberi potest, in the highest
degree, according to the most perfect manner that it could be had; no
intellectual creature has the like, it is only to be found in his humane
nature.

It was requisite that Christ our head should have such a fullness of Grace; the
nearer a creature is to the influent cause, the more abundant is the influx;
the humane nature of Christ was most nearly united to the Deity; therefore it
was congruous, that it should have grace in the supreme degree. From the first
instant of his incarnation he was not a mere viator, but a comprehensor; he
always enjoyed the beatifical vision, therefore all his Graces were in termino,
and at a full point. It Is true, that by special dispensation there was some
restraint of the influence of Gods favor at the time of his Passion, but his
graces were still in the highest degree. Again, Grace was conferred upon
Christ, not as a private person, but as a public one; not for himself only,
but for us; he received gifts for men, that he might give them out to them; he
was to be the head of the Church, a vital and universal principle of Grace to
it; therefore no less than a plenitude of Grace was requisite to make him meet
for it, that of his fullness we all might receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16.
Grace answering to the Grace in him.

The Head excels in virtue, it influences into the whole body. Christ is an
head of incomparable virtue, he influences into the whole Church, even into
that part of it which was before his incarnation, as well as into that which
was after it. Ab Abel justo (says one) usque in finem mundi omnes justi unum
Corpus Christi sunt, from righteous Abel, down to the end of the world all the
righteous are the Body of Christ; all have an influence from him as their head;
From him the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every
joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians.
4.16. the whole body is joined to him, the whole body has an energy from him.
Medina speaking of this famous Text, notes the Phrase, (...), according to the
effectual working, which the members receive from the head, and by virtue of
which they act; and then adds these memorable words, In 3. Part. Thom. Qu. 13.
Art. 2.
Nihil potuit significantius dict ad explicandum, quod omnis operatio, omnis
motus, omnis vis and efficacia and energia, quam habent Christiani homines,
habent a Christo and per Christum, quemadmodum membra a capite vitam, and
efficaciam, and energiam recipient, ratione cujus agunt and vivunt; nothing
could be more significantly said, to express that all the operation, motion,
power, efficacy, and energy, which Christians have, they have from and by
Christ, as the members receive from the head life, and efficacy, and energy, by
virtue of which they do act and live.

Touching this influence from Christ the Head, I shall consider three things,
the necessity of an influencing head, the matter of the influence, and the way
how it comes from Christ.

The first thing is the necessity of an influencing head, I mean not a simple
necessity, but an hypothetical one. God was not bound to raise up a Church out
of the corrupt mass of mankind; but upon supposal that he will do so, it was
requisite that there should be an influencing head. In our first head Adam,
there was once a stock of holiness and righteousness, not merely for himself,
but for us; but in the fall he spent it, and became an utter bankrupt. Had he
stood in his integrity, holiness had come along with nature unto us; but
through his Apostasy nothing comes along with it but pravity and corruption; we
are now void of Grace and full of Sin. And how should there be a Church? which
way should fallen man arrive at inherent Grace? Nature cannot ascend above its
level, or lift up it self to such a thing as Grace, which is altioris ordinis,
of a rank and order above nature. God does not treat with fallen man
immediately, or communicate Grace to him, but in and through a Mediator; it was
therefore meet that the Son of God should in our flesh interpose, and become an
head of influence to us, that so grace might be communicated; nay, and
continued to us. It could not be communicated but through a mediating head, and
he is a complete one; it could not be continued without a perpetual supply, and
he is not as Adam a failing Head, but an everliving one; his satisfaction and
merit have an endless life in them; the holy unction upon him is indeficient,
and ever running down upon Believers; hence the anointing, which they receive
from him, abides in them, 1 John 2.27. because there is a continual supply
from him who has the Spirit above measure; not only the being of the Church,
but the continuance of it requires an influencing Head.

The next thing is the matter of the influence, I mean that which by it is
derived to us; Christ the Head influences a Divine life, sense and motion, into
his believing members.

He influences life into them. As long as they are in old Adam, they are dead
in sin; but as soon as they are in Christ, they live: I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. His spiritual life was not from himself but
from Christ the Head, who communicated the Holy Spirit to him, and in that
respect lived in him; neither was this peculiar to Apostles, but common to all
Christians; Christ is their life, Col. 3.4. a Divine virtue from him makes them
live; this was typed out in Elisha. No sooner did the dead man touch his bones,
but he revived and stood upon his feet, 2 Kings 13.21. No sooner do we by Faith
touch Christ crucified, but there is a vital principle in us, a spirit of life,
which discovers it self in the pulse of heavenly affections, and breath of
spiritual prayer; and is a real proof and demonstration that. we have a living
Head in Heaven, who makes us (in our selves but dead lumps of clay and
corruption) partakers of a Divine life.

Again, he influences sense into them. There are interna (...), internal senses
in them; some quickness in the fear of the Lord, some sight of the beauty and
rectitude of his Holy Commands, some tastes of the Divine Love and Grace, some
savourings of Christ and the Holy Unction, some experimental touches of the
things above, some glimpses of Heaven and Glory; but all these are from the
Head, else Believers would, as well as others, lie in the stupor of the fall,
and be no more concerned about heavenly things, than about mere nullities. It Is
true, a man, not joined to the Head, may have a great notion of these things,
but he has no particular sense of them; the current of his affections is such,
that, one would think, there were no other world but an outward sensible one;
spiritual sensations are not from mere notion, but from Christ the Head.

Further, He influences motion into them. Whether they be melting in repentant
tears, or burning in acts of holy zeal, or drawing out their souls in charity,
or sweating in a lawful calling, or bowing down under an afflicting providence,
all the motion is from the Head; without him all their Graces would lie dormant
in an habit, and be as it were none at all. It is the Head which awakens them
and makes them go forth into act. I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me, says the Apostle, Phil. 4.13. The holy action is in
Believers, but the strength is in the Head only; whatever good they do, they
must thank the Head for it; which not by an outward command only, but by an
inward virtuous influence also, bids them arise and do it.

The last thing is, the way how the influence comes from Christ unto Believers.
We are not to think, that the habits of Grace in Christ's humane nature are
transfused into us; habits go not out of their subjects into another; they
produce acts in their own subjects, but procreate not habits in foreign ones.
But this is the way: Christ being full of all Grace, did by his glorious
satisfaction and merit, procure, that the same Holy Spirit, which is upon
himself the Head, should fall down upon Believers the mystical parts and
members of him: Hence the Apostle says, that the Holy Spirit is shed on us
richly, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.6. Had not he atoned and
merited for us, the Holy Spirit would not have touched upon one fallen Son of
Adam; but in, and through him, there is, as St. Chrysostom speaks, In Ephesians.
cap. 4. bom. 11.
(...), a Spirit flowing from above, which touches every member of his body.
After this sort he is an Head of influence to his Church, communicating his
Spirit to all his members, to unite them one to another, and all of them to
himself the Head: There is one body and one spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. Were there not
one Spirit in Believers, they (being as far distant from one another in time,
as the morning and evening of the world, and in place as the parts and quarters
of the earth) could not possibly be one body; were not the one Spirit from
Christ, he could not be an Head of influence to his Church, or carry himself to
it as his Body; but there being one Spirit in Believers, they are one Body; and
that one Spirit being from Christ, he is an Head of influence to them. Thus the
Apostle says, That he is head over all things to the Church, which is his
body, the fullness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Such an Head
is he, as fills the Body, his Church, with his own Spirit. It Is true, the
Church is his fullness in one respect; though he has all fullness in him, and
fills all in all, yet, as he is an Head (which he deigned to be to us) he is
not full without a body; but he is the Churches fullness in a much higher
resperct; the Church is his outward fullness, supplying him with members,
without which he is not complete as an Head, but is pleased to accoumt himself
maimed; but he is, as I may so say, the Churches inward fullness, by his own
Spirit moving and actuating it as his Body. The Church is his fullness in
respect of integrity of parts, without which he would be as an Head without a
Body; but he is the Churches fullness in respect of virtue and the spirit,
without which the Church would not be a living Body, depending on him as a
living Head. Thus he is an Head of influence to Believers, communicating in a
measure his own spirit to them. Notable is that of Durandus, Nullus actus vitae
est in corpore, qui non sit in capite, In Sext. lib. 3. did. 13. quest. 1
nullus actus gratiae est in tota Ecclesia, ad quam se non extendat gratia
Christi: There is no act of life in the Body which is not in the Head; there is
no act of Grace in the whole Church, to which the Grace of Christ extends not
it self.

It is further to be noted, that Christ is an Head of incomparable excellency;
he is not only Head over all things, but an Head above all other heads; and for
this I shall instance in two things.

The one is this, The natural head cannot make membrum de non membro, a member
of that which was none before; but Christ, such is his excellent virtue, can
draw and gather men off from the old corrupt stock of Adam, and transplant and
incorporate them as members into himself the Head: naturally they were lost,
but he seeks them; dark, but he inlightens them; dead, but he quickens them;
foul, but he washes them; black, but he puts a beauty upon them; all the
members of him may admire infinite Grace, and say, we were not the people of
God, but now we are so; we were not members of Christ, but now we are so. In
Adam the first head, all men were ruined; but Christ the second Head has power
over all flesh, Joh. 17.2. to draw and gather men into union with himself; and
in so doing, to make his Power and Grace illustrious.

The other is this, The natural Head has virtue enough for its own members;
but Christ our Head has virtue enough for a world; did all the men on earth by
Faith come into union with him, there would be no defect, but a supply of grace
for them all; his satisfaction and merit are of an immense value; his Spirit is
a fountain of Grace never to be drawn dry or exhausted; There is in him (as
Bonaventure speaks) not only plenitudo sufficienciae, In Sent. lib. 3. did.
13. qu. 3.
a fullness of sufficiency, as in the Saints; but plenitudo superabundantiae, a
fullness of superabundance; enough to overflow a whole world of men in case they
were by Faith united to him. Oh! what an Head is Christ! there is a famine of
Grace in lapsed nature, but in him there are stores and treasures for our
supply; there is a fullness of sin in us, but in him there is a superabundance
of Grace to overcome it; in him we may see holiness, not in the little Pictures
of it as in the Saints, but in the great Sampler and Origin thereof. That
beautiful thing, Grace, in him appears not in beams and drops, but as in a Sun
or Ocean. Happy are those who are in union with him! they live in the spring
and universal principle of Grace; in all the acts of spiritual life, sense and
motion, they may feel the Power, Virtue, and Divine Efficacy of him the Head.

CHAP. V.
The mystical union set forth by that between the food and the body. Christ is
the true food. He strengthens against the cursing Law. He strengthens unto all
duties. He is united to Believers. He is food by way of eminency. Several
conclusions drawn from the resemblances, viz. That the Union between Christ and
Believers is not merely a political one. That it is not merely a moral one.
Several reasons to prove the same. That this Union affords support to
Believers. That it gives a vital influence to them. That it is a very intimate
Union. That it has a great mystery in it. That it is very lasting and durable.

AFter all these resemblances the Holy Ghost yet proceeds on to set forth the
mystical union by that which is between the food and the body: This resemblance
we have notably opened in the Sixth chapter of St. John, where our Savior, who
used to spiritualize every thing, raises up his discourse above earthly food to
heavenly; above the typical, to the real Manna which is himself, who came down
from Heaven to give life to the world. In this Discourse several things offer
themselves to us:

1st. Christ is the true food of the Soul; The Jews dreamed, that at the coming
of the Messiah they should have a wonderful feast of outward varieties; but he
tells them, that he himself was the feast, My flesh is meat indeed, my blood is
drink indeed, verse. 55, (...), it is, though Metaphorically, yet truly such; it
does (what meat and drink are to do) nourish and strengthen the receiver; nay,
it has not only an analogy to, but an eminency above all corporeal food; it
nourishes and strengthens us in the Soul, the noblest part of man, and that not
for a day, but to all eternity. Hence our Savior tells them, That they should
not labor for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto
everlasting life, which the Son of man should give unto them, verse. 27. He is
the food of the Soul upon a double account.

The one is this, His flesh and blood, as crucified and satisfactory to Divine
justice, do strengthen us against the curse and condemnation of the Law. The
moral Law is immortalized by its own intrinsecal rectitude; the very frame of
man's soul puts him under it; his Reason cannot but be bound to know the supreme
Truth; his Will cannot but be bound to love the supreme Goodness; the respects
in his rational powers toward the Creator, are a Law not to be altered; as
long as God is God, and man man, this Law cannot but be obligatory, one jot or
tittle of it cannot fall to the ground. To make it the more sacred and
venerable, Divine Justice fenced it in with a Threatening, and added a Curse
against the transgressor; Cursed is he that continues not in all the points of
it. The wages of sin is death: All men being transgressors, Conscience, as soon
as it is awakened, tells a man his own; these and these things are sins, thus
and thus thou have done, the offended Law condemns thee, the wrath threatened
hangs over thy head; the consequent of this is, That the heart is full of
inward wounds and terrors, it knows not which way to look or turn it self. Take
a sinful man in these circumstances, where does his strength lie? what plea or
answer has he to the broken Law? How, or which way may the Curse be avoided,
or the Conscience eased? The only thing can be said, is this, Christ was made a
Curse for us; he is the end of the Law for righteousness; he has made a
perfect atonement and satisfaction; this is the Believers hope and confidence,
this is his great plea and answer to the charge of the Law. Ostendo
sidejussorem meum, says Bishop Davenant, when the Law makes its demands
against me, I show my Sponsor Christ who satisfied it. This is lively expressed
in Anselms direction for the visitation of the sick, Si Dominus te voluerit
judicare, dic, Domine, mortem Domini nostri Jesu Christi objicio inter me and
tuum judicium, aliter tecum non contendo; si tibi dixerit, quia peccator es,
dic, mortem Domini nostri Jesu Christi pono inter me and peccata mea, si
dixerii tibi, quod meruisti damnationem, dic, Domine; mortem Domini nostri Jesu
Christi obtendo inter me and mala merita mea, ipsiusque merita offero pro
merito quod ego debuissem habere, nec habeo: That is, if the Lord would judge
thee, say, Lord, I place the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and thy
judgment, otherwise I will not contend with thee; if he say to thee, that thou
art a sinner, say, I place the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and my
sins; if he say to thee, that thou have deserved damnation, say, Lord; I put
the death of our Lord Jesus Christ between me and my evil merits; and I offer
his merits for my own, which I should have, and have not. It is not in our
inherent graces to justify us against the Law, these are not our Christ, these
do not satisfy the Law, these do not make a compensation for sin; no, it is
Christ only that does this; his death, which satisfied Gods heart, must
satisfy ours; his precious body and blood are the food, which, when fed on by
Faith, cheer the Conscience, and fill it with peace. Hence the Noble Luther
tells the menacing Law, O Lex! immergo conscientiam meam in vulnera, sanguinem,
mortem, resurrectionem and victoriam Christi, praeter hunc nihil plane videre
and audire volo; O Law! I drown my Conscience in the wounds, blood, death,
resurrection and victory of Christ; besides him will I see and hear nothing.
This is the true way of peace and holy rest; the oriency of this Divine Truth
is such, that it has extorted a confession from its enemies. The Schoolmen
themselves, as Bishop Andrews has observed, whatever they are in their
Quodlibets and comments on the Sentences, yet in their Soliloquies and
devotional meditations acknowledge Jehovah justitia nostra. Cardinal Contarenus
says, that we must; viti tanquam re stabili justitia Christi nobis donata,
lean on Christ's righteousness communicated to us, as on a stable thing. This is
it which stablishes and strengthens the heart against the accusations and
terrors of the Law.

The other is this, The flesh and blood of Christ, as it is procurative of the
Holy Spirit, does strengthen Believers unto all the duties incumbent on them;
the Spirit is from Christ as an Head; and it is from him as aliment; his
Members have it, and so have the feeders on him. Hence in that sixth Chapter of
John, after a very Divine Discourse touching eating his flesh and drinking his
blood, he adds, It is the spirit that quickens, verse. 63. The feeders on him
have of his Spirit, which strengthens them in the inner man; this strength
notably discovers it self in them; their corruptions, how strong soever, are
subdued: The Spirit of life, which is in Christ, makes them free from the Law
of sin; Satan that evil one is overcome by them; the Spirit, which is in them,
is greater than he that is in the world; they do duties, as becomes them who
live at so high a rate, in a very lively vigorous manner; the free Spirit
stablishes and enlarges their hearts to run in the pure ways of holiness and
obedience; under crosses they do not murmur at the hand of God, but in an holy
silence subject to it; the Spirit strengthens them unto all patience. St. Paul
glories in afflictions, that the Power of Christ may rest upon him, 2 Cor.
12.9. The Noble Potamenia, being by the Persecutors threatened to be cast into a
Vessel of burning Pitch, begged of them, That she might not be cast in all at
once, Spondan. Annal. Anno. 310.
but piecemeal, that they might see how much patience the unknown Christ had
given unto her. The Reason of such acts of power and strength in Believers is,
because they live upon the Body and Blood of Christ; and from thence have a
Divine virtue and power to perform the same.

2dly. Christ as food is united unto believers; there is a very close and
intimate union between the food and the body, and so there is between Christ
and believers: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me,
and I in him, says our Savior, verse. 56. Eating here must not be taken
properly; an oral manducation is capernastical, and indeed a very horrible
thing to be imagined: Hence St. Austin says, That the command of eating his
flesh, and drinking his blood, seems to require an horrible wickedness; and
then concludes, De Doctr. Christ. lib. 3. c. 16.
Figura ergo est; a thing to be done in a spiritual way. Hence Averroes the
Philosopher said, That if Christians devoured their God, he would not have his
soul to be with them. It is a wonder to me that those who are called
Christians, should hold such an eating! Nay, that men on earth should orally
eat the body of Christ in Heaven, or that his glorified body should come into
our earthly mouths and stomachs, is to me a thing utterly impossible; he is and
must for ever remain in glory. The eating therefore is a spiritual one, done by
faith; though Christ be in Heaven, faith flies up and apprehends him. In 1 Cor.
10. Hom. 24.
St. Chrysostom would have us be as Eagles, and so fly to Heaven; and then
adds, Where the carcass is, there will the eagles be. Christ our aliment is
gone to Heaven, and faith follows after him, to draw life and virtue from him.
Faith does spiritually participate of his body and blood, and from thence does
derive a Divine power and strength into the soul. As faith ascends up, so the
holy Spirit comes down upon believers, which compleats the union between him
and them: They dwell in him, and he in them, as our Savior speaks; they dwell
in him by faith, and he in them by his Spirit. There is a mutual indwelling, a
most near and intimate union between them. The learned Grotius takes this
mutual indwelling to be only amore mutuo, by a mutual love. Amans est ubi amat,
quod hic tribuitur manducationi, id alibi tribuitur dilectioni, 1 John 4.16.
The lover is where his love is. What here is attriouted to eating, that in
another place is attributed to love, He that dwells in love, dwells in God,
and God in him. But I take it, there is a difference; our union to Christ is
first and more immediate, and then in and through him we are united unto God.
It Is true, God dwells in the sincere lovers, but he dwells in them as in parts
of Christ, partakers of the atonement; were they not such, the spots of guilt
and imperfection upon them would make the holy one wave dwelling in them:
Christ is united to us as aliment, inlivening and strengthening us; but God is
not as such united to us; though the fountain of life and virtue be in him, yet
are these derived down unto us in and through Christ, of whose body and blood
we do by faith participate. We are (says Bishop Usher) by a mystical and
supernatural union as truly conjoined with Christ, as the meat and drink is
with us, when by the ordinary work of nature it is converted into our own
substance.

3ly. Christ is food by way of eminency: Food above all food; other bread is
comparatively but a shadow or mere figure; but he is the true bread, (...),
living bread, which makes men live for ever; other bread comes but out of the
earth; but he is that bread which came down from Heaven. The Son, very God,
came down into our flesh, and in it was broken upon a Cross, that his body and
blood might become bread for us. He has (says Bishop Usher) by his death made
his flesh broken, Incarnat. fol. 52.
and his blood poured out for us upon the Cross, to be fit food for the
spiritual nourishment of our souls, and the very wellspring from whence by the
power of his Godhead, all life and grace is derived unto us. Thus that
excellent man. Other food being inferior to the body, is changed into our
substance; but Christ the spiritual food being infinitely more excellent than
our souls, turns believers who feed upon him, into his own likeness. Christ's
blood may be read in their serene consciences, his death may be seen in their
continual mortifications; his Spirit shows it self in their holy graces; as
they live at an higher rate, so they live in a more divine manner than other
men. Their humility, meekness, love, zeal, obedience, patience, tell us that
they live upon him; who turns the eater into himself; the eater so participates
of him, as to be assimilated to him.

Thus much touching the resemblances of the Mystical union. I shall now draw
out foam Conclusions from them, because (as is before noted) the Analogy
between the Mystical union and the earthly patterns serves (if genuinely taken)
not only for illustration, but for very good proof.

1. The union between Christ and believers is not merely a Political one, such
as is between a King and his Subjects. It Is true, Christ is a King, believers
are his subjects; there are Laws of constitution, which make him a King over
them, and Laws of administration, according to which he governs them; yet the
union between him and them is not merely Political. To make this appear, I
offer these things.

The manner of his Kingdom is considerable; were his Kingdom such only as
earthly ones are, there might be some color to say, That the union is only
Political: But his Kingdom is not of this world, Joh. 18.36. It is not mundanae
indolis, of an earthly, but of an heavenly nature. Eusebius, Hist. 13.
When the kindred of our Savior were asked touching his Kingdom; they answered
Domitian, That it was not Earthly but Celestial. It comes not in outward pomp
and glory, but in inward efficacy. It stands not merely without in Laws and
Ordinances, but it is within in the very hearts and consciences of men. He
makes a willing people, he inspires obedience into his subjects. His own
Unction does in some measure fall down upon them. Earthly Kings, who yet are
Politically unite to their subjects, cannot rule after this sort, or do any
thing like it: Hence it is clear, that if there had been no other resemblance
of the union between Christ and believers but that of a Kingdom only, yet that
union would not have been merely Political, because his Kingdom is what others
are not, spiritual and of internal efficacy.

In Scripture our union with Christ is not only set forth by the resemblance of
a Kingdom, but by many other; none of which are or can be thought to be in
vain; all of them have their significancy, and that to different purposes. The
conjugal union imports love, the architectonical one shows supportation, that
of the Vine and the Head speak vital influence; that of food expresses a very
intimate conjunction: These fignificancies are not forced, or strained, but
natural and genuine, such as run into our minds at the first sight. The holy
Scripture, the best interpreter of its own resemblances, assures us, that they
are used to this very end and intent, that we might firmly believe that those
things which are genuinely in the outward patterns, are really and after an
eminent manner in Christ: He is an Husband for his dearest Love, Ephesians. 5.25. a
foundation for his never failing support to his Church, Mat. 16.18. a Vine and
an Head for his vital influence, Joh. 15.4, 5. Ephesians. 4.16. aliment for his
near and intimate conjunction with believers, Joh. 6.56. Such is the natural
tendency of these resemblances, such is the interpretation of them in
Scripture; but now if our union with Christ be merely Political, how can these
things stand? what tolerable account can be given of them? It is certain, that
nothing in all the lower world is so apt and proper to declare that union as
merely Political, as the resemblance of a Kingdom; nothing is so significant
and fully expressive of it as that; when therefore the Holy Ghost had set it
forth by a Kingdom, why did not he stay his hand and rest in that resemblance?
why would he go on and set it forth by the love of Espousals, by a building
cemented to its foundation, by the incision of branches into a root, by the
copulation of members to a vital head, by the incorporation of food with the
body? What analogy is there in an union merely Political, to these things?
Which way shall the Scriptural interpretation of them be maintained? a
Political union cannot do it. Were our union with Christ no more than so, these
resemblances would not be apt or true; to say that Christ is an husband, a
foundation, a root, or head, or incorporated food, that is, a Political King,
is not apt or true, but very odd and strange; because in Christ as a mere
Political King, there is nothing that answers to the proper genuine import of
these resemblances; in such a case the Holy Ghost (which is blasphemy to
imagine) would seem to speak very unfitly, nay, and delusively, as if he would
have us believe that to be in Christ, which is indeed not in him; surely it
becomes us much rather to conclude, That our union with Christ is not merely
Political, but such as bears a fit and just correspondence to all the patterns
and resemblances of it in Scripture.

Such as the bonds of union are, such is the union, a mere Political union has
bonds of the same nature, a spiritual union has suitable ligatures; in our
union with Christ the primary bond is the holy spirit: Hereby know we that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his spirit, 1 John
4.13. in Christ's Kingdom, it is the Spirit which makes a willing people, such
as subject themselves to him. In the supernatural marriage believers who are
joined to Christ, become one spirit; in the spiritual edifice, the living
stones are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit. In the
heavenly Vine the Spirit is the juice which makes the branches fruitful in good
works; in the Mystical Head the Spirit is unction which falls down upon the
members, and communicates sense and motion to them. In the divine aliment it is
the Spirit which quickneth the eater, and transforms him into the holy Image of
Christ; the Spirit is the primary ligature in our union with him; that union
therefore is not merely Political, but Spiritual.

A mere Political union is made and continued by some outward Law. Policy is
the Eutaxy or good order of a common society. Multitudes in government conspire
into unity; the bond of conjunction is Law: Hence the Law is called (...), the
soul of a City; without it all the parts and members of the body-politick sink
and dissolve into mere confusion; but to the making and continuance of our
union with Christ, internal influences are requisite. Faith, the great unitive
grace, is not produced by a mere proposal of the object, but by a Divine
efficacy; there must be inward teachings and tractions to make men come and
close with Christ; in like manner other graces, which make the believer bear
the image and resemblance of Christ, are by the Spirit drawn and engraven in
the heart: Hence they are called the fruits of the Spirit. When these graces
are produced, they are still but creatures, and depend upon their original; the
continual spirations of the Spirit bear them up in being: in all respects there
is a necessity of internal influences. Hence it appears that our union with
Christ is more than a Political one; were it no more than so, the outward Law
might have sufficed; that first and rudest draught of Pelagianism (which made
grace to consist only in libero arbitrio and lege, in free will, which is a
thing natural, and in the Law which is a thing Political) might have been a
truth: St. Austin at large disputes against it, and tells us, that God operates
in the hearts of men, De Great. Christi. c. 24.
Non lege atque doctrina insonante foria secus; sed interna atque occulta
mirabili ac ineffabili potestate; not only by Law and Doctrine sounding
without, but by an internal and occult wonderful and ineffable power; yet if
the mere Law might have sufficed, there had been no necessity of internal
operations, the Pelagian heresy might have passed for a very truth. As
therefore we would avoid this great error, we must confess that our union with
Christ is more than a Political one.

2dly, The union between Christ and Believers is not merely a Moral one, such
as consists in a reciprocal Love, in an harmony of Wills, and confederacy of
Affections. Very true it is, that there is a very great Union of Love between
Christ and Believers: All the Loves and Friendships in the world are but
Pictures and little Images, being compared with the Love and Friendship which
is between Christ and Believers; wonderful is his Love toward them; As early
as eternity it self, his eyes and his heart were upon them; he assumed flesh to
espouse them to himself; he shed his Blood to purchase them; he dyed on a Cross
to redeem them; he draws his own Image upon them; he loves and delights in them
as the purchase of his Blood, and the little pictures of himself; he is indeed
wonderfully taken and ravished in them, as if they had unhearted him, or
carried away his heart. In like manner Believers, though not in equal degrees,
have a great Love to him; they put off corrupt self for him; their old earthly
members are crucified with him; their souls thirst and faint in holy desires
after him; so high a rate and value is set upon him, that all other things are
but as dross and dung in comparison; such are the pleasures and complacencies
which they have in him, that they can joy in sufferings, and glory in
reproaches for him, his Presence and Love sweetens every condition: thus there
is an union of Love between Christ and Believers. But this is not all, some of
the ancient Fathers seem to hint somewhat more. De Trinit. lib. 8. in Joh.
St. Hilary and St. Cyril of Alexandria contend that our union with Christ is
not merely per concordiam voluntatis, by a Concord of will. St. Chrysostom
says, That we are not only united to Christ, (...), in a way of Love, In Joh.
Hom. 45.
but (...), in the thing it self. To make it appear that our union with Christ
is not merely a moral one, I shall offer some Considerations.

The conjugal union (which is the highest pattern of Love here below) is not
merely a Moral one. In the first Marriage there was somewhat antecedent to
Love. Eve was taken out of the side of sleeping Adam. Hence he said, That she
was bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. In the spiritual marriage there
is somewhat antecedent to the Churches Love; she was taken out of the side of
Christ dying on the Cross. Hence the Apostle (after he has compared the Love
of Husbands and Wives with that which is between Christ and the Church) does in
allusion to the Primitive Marriage tell us, We are members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. Flesh may be considered either as to its
substance, or as to its sanctity; as to its substance, Christ is of our flesh
and bone; but as to its sanctity, we are of his flesh and bone; all the holy
flesh in the world is from Christ. Again, in common ordinary Marriages there is
not merely Love, but Man and Wife become one flesh: In the spiritual Marriage
there is not merely Love, but Christ and Believers become one Spirit; the same
holy Spirit which is upon Christ the Head, falls down on his Members; there are
continual influences of Grace coming down from him unto them.

Nothing in all the world is more apt or proper to shadow forth our union with
Christ as Moral, than the conjugal Union is; though, as I said but now, there
is more in it than mere Love, yet is it the highest Samplar of Love on Earth;
and on that account very apt to set forth our Moral Union with Christ; but
though it be so, yet the Holy Ghost does not, in showing forth our union with
Christ, rest in that resemblance; but goes on to show it forth by others of a
different tendency; as by a Foundation, a Vine or Head, an Aliment, whose
proper genuine import is not love, but support, or vital influence, or intimate
conjunction: The Holy Ghost in these resemblances speaks like it self, aptly
and truly; though there be no propriety in the words, yet there is an aptitude
in the things to denote Heavenly Mysteries; though the terms be metaphorical,
yet the truths are real; there is a proportion and just Analogy between the
earthly shadow and heavenly mystery; there is that in Christ which answers to
all the resemblances; he is to his Church a foundation for support; a root or
head for vital influence; an Aliment for nourishment and intimate conjunction.
Hence it appears, that our union with Christ is not merely a Moral one, but
such as corresponds to all the resemblances; not only to the conjugal one in
Love, but to all the other in their several imports.

One Christian is united to another in Affection. Love is the badg of
Christianity: The Primitive Christians were of one heart, and one soul, Acts
4.32. They were as it were but one Man: the very Pagans pointed at this,
saying, Tert. Ap.
Vide ut se invicem diligant, see how they love one another: Love is the very
bond of perfection, Col. 3.14. it couples all Virtues together as in a chain;
it conjoins all Christians in the mystical body; where Love is, there are all
other Virtues; where one Christian is, there are all the rest in heart and
affection. Love, which is a sacred fire kindled upon the heart by the Holy
Spirit, first ascends up to God its primary object, who is to be loved for
himself; and then it goes on to our neighbor, its secondary object, who is to
be loved for Gods sake: this is the way of Love; if it ascend to God, it will
go out to our Brother; if it go not out to our Brother, it never ascended to
God. Hence St. John says, He that shuts up his bowels from his brother, how
dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3.17. The Love of God can no more be
severed from the Love of our Brother, than the first Table of the Law can be
rent off from the second. All true Christians are born of the same Father in
Heaven; washed in the blood of the same Savior; inspired by the influences of
the same Holy Spirit; interested in the same Charter of the Gospel, and
instated in the same Inheritance above. Sic muto, quod doletis, amore
diligimus, quoniam odisse non novimus, sic nos, quod invidetis, fratres
vocamus, ut unius Dei parentis homines, ut consortes fidei, ut spei coharedes,
Minuc. Fell. in Oct.
All of them therefore must needs be united together in Love; nothing is more
evident, than that one Christian is united to another in Love; but yet he is
not so united to him, as he is unto Christ; Who? where is the Saint that will
or dare say to his fellow Christians, I am the foundation, ye are the building,
born up by me: I am the vine, ye the branches; without me ye can do nothing: I
am the head, ye are the members; from me is all that effectual working which is
in you? Who can or may speak after such a rate? such words are proper for
Christ only; we are to fix our Faith upon him, not upon our Fellow Christians:
This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, 1 John 3.23. Love is for our Brother, but Faith
for Christ only; no mere creature is an object fit for it: Cursed is the man
that trusts in man, Jer. 17.5. We are united to Christ as an influencing
Head, not so to our Fellow Christians. The Wise Virgins had Oil little enough
for themselves; the most excellent Christians have no Grace to spare; the great
spring of all Grace is in Christ the Head; to go to another than him for it, is
to fall off from him; and, as the Apostle speaks of the Worshippers of Angels,
Not to hold the head, from which all the body by joints and bands, having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God,
Col. 2.19. Might we have Grace from another, He, who is the Head and universal
Principle of Grace, would become useless, and altogether superfluous. The
Romanists, who earnestly contend that the Pope is Head of the Church, do yet
qualify their opinion, Aqu. 3. pars qu. 8.
and say, That the Pope is only Head secundum exteriorem gubernationem,
according to external government; but Christ alone is Head, secundum interiorem
influxum, according to internal influx: Christians are united one to another by
Love; but unto Christ they are united, as unto an Head of influence. Hence the
union is more than a Moral one.

There is an union of Love between Christ and the Holy Angels; they are the top
of the Creation, sublime in Knowledge, unspotted in Sanctity, excellent in
Perfections, ever a ministering to the Church, and doing one piece of the Divine
Will or other; it cannot be otherwise, but that he must have a great Love for
them; he is the brightness of the Fathers Glory; the Character or express Image
of his Person; he made the Angelical World and all its perfections; he came
down into the humane nature to repair us, and raise us up out of the ruins of
the fall; the highest design of Gods Glory was carried on by him; the Divine
Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Mercy, Truth, did show forth themselves upon the
Theater of his humane Nature; the Holy Angels cannot but have a Love for him,
and (because he is an object of Excellency, and they creatures of perfection)
their Love to him must be a very Eminent one: their Intellects have not, as
ours, any blinds or dark shades in them, but are full of pure and celestial
light; they have not, as we, only some glimpses, but a full view of the
attractive Beauties and Excellencies in him; their Love is not as ours, subject
to damps and clogs of corruption, but ever pure, and in holy Orders; they do
not as we, dwell here below in houses of Clay, but stand above, attending upon
his glorious Person: All which must needs promote their Love in a very high
degree. Thus there is an union of Love between Christ and Angels. But if in the
glass of Scripture we look upon the union between Christ and Believers, we
shall find much more in it, than in that between him and Angels; there is a
different foundation: Christ took on him, not the nature of Angels, but of men;
he died on a Cross, not for Angels, but for men; our union with him is founded
on his Incarnation and atoning-Passion, but the union of Angels is not so.
There is also a different way; it is very proper for us fallen creatures to be
joined to a Mediator; not so for Angels, who stand in their integrity without
need of a Mediator; in us there is an unitive Grace, Faith in a Mediator; not
so in Angels, they have a Faith of dependence on God; but, I suppose, they have
not a Faith of recumbence in a Mediator; it is through the satisfactory and
meritorious Sufferings of Christ that the same Holy Spirit which is upon him
the head, comes down upon us his members, to repair the Divine Image in us; but
it is not so with Angels; the Grace given unto them is not repairing, but
confirming; neither does it proceed through the blood of a Mediator, but
immediately from God. These things considered, our union with Christ must needs
be more than a Moral one, as having that in it, which cannot be found in the
union of Angels with him.

3dly, The union between Christ and Believers is such, that he does support
them. The resemblance of the foundation and building is a very lively and
genuine proof of this; the building does not bear up it self, but is supported
by the foundation; Believers do not bear up themselves, but are supported by
Christ: this is a very admirable thing to consider. Adam in Innocence had not
the least seed of corruption in him, yet he fell: Angels, much greater than he,
had no corruption or tempter, yet many of them fell, but Believers are
supported; there are dregs and relics of corruption in them; there are
alluring and flattering objects round about them; there is a subtle Devil,
using many arts and methods to draw out their corruption into act; yet in these
dangerous circumstances they are supported, because they are united to Christ:
there is a very remarkable difference between Angels and men. Angels stood or
fell personally only, not in another, in an head of their own nature; but it is
otherwise with men: All mankind fell in Adam their root or head, and all
believers stand in Christ the root and head of the Church: hence it is that
they are supported: hence they are said to be preserved in Christ Jesus, Jude
1. Adam in Innocence was soon unframed, but they stand in Christ; in him one
sin drove out a stock of pure immaculate Grace in a moment; in them the many
remnants of corruption cannot do so; the reason is, he with his perfect Graces
stood alone, but they with their imperfect ones are in union with Christ: Hence
it is, that their Graces live like a spark in water, and spring up even in the
midst of briars: Corruption is driven out by little and little; and at last
perfection is attained in Heaven; if they stumble and fall in the way thither,
yet they rise again; the Holy Spirit visits them again; fresh acts of Faith and
Repentance are put forth; Aug. de Cor. cap. 9.
Humiliores redeunt and doctiores; they become more humble and learned,
especially in that great point of dependence upon Christ; they see plainly,
that they are weak in themselves, and all their support is in him: One object,
one forbidden tree drew away Adam from God, but many objects cannot draw away
Believers from Christ; though their corrupt flesh (such is its inordinate
propensity to outward and sensible things) would close with every thing, and
turn the whole world into Snares and Idols, yet are they not drawn away; their
Faith is a victory over the World, 1 John 5.4; not merely in it self as it is a
Divine Grace, but as it unites them to Christ, who overcame the world; not as a
private person, but as a public one on their behalf, that it might be but as a
prostrate pinioned enemy to them, that they through his Spirit communicated to
them, might also overcome it; he did not gather them up out of the corrupt
world to himself, that they might return thither again; their union with him is
so near and strong, that the world cannot take them back to it self again; its
flatteries cannot allure; its fears cannot fright them away from him; Satan
overthrew Adam, but he cannot do so with Believers; in assaulting him, he had
only to do with a man; but in assaulting them, he sets upon those who are
mystical parts and members of Christ; he has to do with Christ himself, who is
God as well as man; his hand is too strong for Satan to pluck them away from
him; his Love is too great to lose his own members whom he has purchased at no
less price than his own blood. It Is true, they do sometimes fall under the
temptation, but then they do not fall as Adam did; they do not as he, lose the
very state of Grace, or all the power of a recovery; no, the habits or vital
principles of Grace are not extinct; the Spirit and Grace of Christ will raise
them up again: Satan's conquest is not a total or final one; at last he shall be
bruised under their feet. Christ, who in his own person conquered the Tempter,
conquers him in his members also. Thus Believers are supported, because they
are in union with Christ.

4thly, The union between Christ and Believers is such, that he does influence
into them. The resemblances of the Vine and the Head do naturally teach this: A
Vine communicates to the branches, an Head influences into the members; Christ
could not be (what the Scripture calls him) a Vine or an Head, unless he did
influence into his branches and members. There are two sorts of influences;
some are first and fundamental to our union with Christ, others do in order of
nature follow after.

The first fundamental influences are those which work the unitive Grace of
Faith. Men are not native branches or members of Christ, but insititious ones.
Faith, which implants and incorporates them into him, is not from Nature, but
Grace. The ancient Council tells us, Conc. Arans. Can. 6.
that it is per infusionem and inspirationem Spiritus Sancti, by the infusion
and inspiration of the holy Spirit: Christ therefore sends out the Spirit with
its inward teachings and tractions to work faith in men, to gather them into
union with himself: thus the union begins from him. Faith, the first Grace that
touches upon him, is wrought by his Spirit, and upon account of his Merits; To
you it is given (...), for Christ's sake to believe, Phil. 1.29. Were it not for
this influence, there could be no union, no branches or members in him.

The after-influences are those which serve to perfect the Believer; as in the
Old Creation Light was the firstborn, and then the other parts of the world
were made; so in the New, the first thing is the Light of Faith; and then
follow those Graces which make up the new Creature: Love, Mercy, Meekness,
Zeal, Obedience, Patience, are the fruits of the influencing Spirit, the Rivers
of living water in the Believer: all of them are derived from Christ the Head
through faith (which is called the Churches Neck, Cant. 4.4.) into the mystical
body; after this manner are all Graces formed; without these influences there
would be in Believers no Graces or Conformity to Christ; no fit Temple for the
Holy Spirit to dwell in. Again, there are influences not only to form these
Graces, but to actuate them. As natural Agents live and move in the God of
Nature; so Believers, who are spiritual Agents, live and move in Christ their
Head: the gracious Principles in them do not go alone, but the Holy Spirit
stirs them up, and then the spices flow out: Love and Joy, and all other Graces
show forth themselves in suitable Operations. St. Paul excellently describes
this, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, says he, Gal. 2.20. Take a
Believer burning in Zeal, or melting in Charity, or sweating in Obedience, or
doing ought in an holy manner; still Christ lives in him; the effectual working
is from the Head in Heaven; without these influences, Graces do but sleep in
the principle, and not go forth into act.

Further, There are not only influences to actuate Graces in Believers, but to
make them grow up into Christ in all things; the Believer does not stand at a
stay; no, the first little dawn in his heart increases into a morning; the
small grain of mustardseed becomes a tree; the little Embrio or Babe in Christ
grows to be a man of spiritual stature; his humility is every day lower; his
holy desires rise higher than before; the vitals of Faith and Love become
warmer than ever: and all this increase is from the effectual working; it is no
other than the growing up of the members into their influencing Head; the
flourishing and spreading of the new Creature under the dews of the Spirit.
Without these influences Believers would be at a stand, and never arrive at any
statures in Grace. Thus it appears that these influences are excellent and
necessary. Were it not for the first influences, Christ would have no members,
and so not be what he was ordained to be, an Head to the Church. Were it not
for the after-influences, he would not carry himself as becomes an Head,
neither would his members be such as they ought to be in the point of holy
graces.

5thly. The union between Christ and believers is a very intimate one. The
resemblance of food does notably set forth this; food is very intimately united
to the body, and so is Christ to believers. Our Savior takes notice of this,
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him,
Joh. 6.56. The words import a very near union. St. Cyprian speaking of this, De
Caena Domini.
says, Mansio nosira in ipso est manducatio, and potus quasi quaedam
incorporatio: Our eating of him is mansion; our drinking a kind of
incorporation; we are spiritually incorporated into him. Of the Sacr. Hom. 1.
Our Church calls it a mavelous incorporation wrought by the operation of the
Holy Ghost; Accipientes virtutem caelestis cibi, in carnem ipsius, qui caro
nostra factus est, transeamus. Leo 1. Epist. 22 ad Cler. Constable.
we do as it were pass into his flesh, who was made flesh with us; we dwell in
him, and he in us, and what can be nearer? though he be not, as ordinary food
inferior to the body is, turned into our substance; yet as spiritual food more
excellent than our souls, he turns us into his Divine image. We live by him,
Joh. 6.57. He is our life, Col. 3.4. The very fountain and principle of it;
therefore he must needs be nearly and intimately united to us, Nemo vivit vita
extra se posita, oportet habere Christum in nobis. Zanch. de tribus El. Li. 4.
c. 3.
especially seeing he is so our life, that he communicates his own Spirit to
us; the same holy Spirit which is upon him, falls down upon us as mystical
parts and members of him, to quicken and actuate us in the holy ways of God.
And what an union is this! actuation by one spirit is an union much more high
and close than that which is only by continuity, or a mere adhesion of parts; a
branch, from which the juice retires, rather hangs on, than is properly united
to the root; a member, however adhering, if void and desolate of animal
spirits, is as if it were not knit unto the Head; the most strict and proper
union is from one Spirit. Believers are so joined to Christ as to be one
spirit; if they had not his spirit, they were none of his, Romans 8.9. They are
led by the spirit of God, v. 14. (which is the very same with the Spirit of
Christ, as appears v. 9.) (...), they are acted and moved by the Spirit of
Christ. Thus there is the same Spirit in Christ and believers, and so the union
between them must needs be very close and intimate; in respect of this intimacy
it is, that Christ compares this union with that which is between him and the
Father, Joh. 17. And the Apostle calls Christ and the Church by one name: As
the body is one, and has many members, and all the member- of that one body
being many, are one body; so also is Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. in which place the
Church is called Christ; the Scripture sometimes speaks of Christ and the
Church, the head and the body, as if they were one person. Hence St. Austin
says, that believers are made cum homine Christo unus Christus; De pecc. Mer.
l. 1. c. 31.
One Christ with the man Christ. Hence Aquinas says, That Christ and his
members are una persona mystica, one mystical person. Not that we are Christed
with Christ, as some have said; but that there is a very intimate union between
Christ and believers.

6thly. The union between Christ and believers is a mystical one; there is a
great mystery in it: Hence the Apostle says, This is a great mystery, but I
speak concerning Christ and the Church, Ephesians. 5.32. It is not merely a
mystery, but a great one. In another place he says, The riches of the glory of
this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory, Col.
1.27. He speaks of Christ, not merely as offered in the Gospel, but as dwelling
in the heart; this he calls not barely a mystery, but the riches of the glory
of the mystery; it is such a mystery as has riches and glory in it. Now to
make it appear, that this union is a mystical one, I shall offer some things.

There is that in this union which answers to all the resemblances; the Holy
Ghost in setting forth this union, did not stay in one or two earthly patterns,
but uses many, going on from one thing to another, from Politics to
Oeconomicks, from Oeconomicks to Artificials, from Artificials to Naturals of
diverse kinds, that so from each, somewhat might be borrowed to illustrate it.
In the Political union we have Law and Power; in the Conjugal one, love; in the
Architectonical one, support; in that of the Vine and Head, vital influence; in
that of food, nourishment and intimate conjunction; but in the mystical union
we have all these. It is said of Manna, that it suited to every palate; it is
certain of Christ the true Manna, that he is All to the Church. That union
therefore which fully answers to so many resemblances of different import, must
needs be a very mysterious one.

There is that in this union which highly exceeds all the resemblances. In them
there is but a shadow, but in that is the substance; in them one creature is
united to another, but in that believers are united to God-man. The Mystical
union is built upon the Hypostatical; in each of them there is some import, but
none of them can reach the perfections of Christ. Never was there such a King
as he; he is the most excellent one; his subjects are all Saints, and of the
seed Royal; his Throne and Laws are within; he inspires, as well as commands
his people. Never such an Husband as he! he took an humane nature, that he
might espouse us; nay, he died on a Cross, that his Spouse might come forth out
of his bleeding side. Those who are joined in spiritual marriage, are made one
spirit with him, and have admirable communications from him. No foundation is
like him, who is laid not by humane art, but divine; and bears up the weight of
the whole Church, not as dead matter does, but by his Spirit of life. He is a
Vine, whose juice is the holy Spirit, filling every branch; an Head, who makes
those who were no members, to become members; and afterward actuates them by
the influences of his Spirit. He is such food as turns the eater into himself,
and nourishes him unto life eternal. Every way he has the preeminence over the
earthly patterns. That union therefore which does not only answer unto, but far
exceed all the resemblances of it, must needs be a mysterious one.

This union is such, that no distance of place or time can break or dissolve it.

No distance of place can do it. In merely Political or Moral unions, distance
of place hinders not, but vital influence appertains not to them. In the
natural Vine or Head there is a vital influence, but then there must be a local
conjunction, the Vine does not communicate juice to a distant branch, nor an
Head to a distant member; but though Christ be in Heaven, and believers on
earth, yet he influences life and strength into them. The reason is, because he
does it by a spirit which is infinite; a finite spirit cannot at once move and
actuate distant subjects; yet an infinite one, which is every where, can do it.
The same holy Spirit which is in Christ above, is communicated to us here
below, to move and actuate us; the vital influence is not at all hindered by
local distance. When our Lord discoursed of eating his flesh, and drinking his
blood, Joh. 6. they murmured, and said, This is an hard saying, who can bear
it? Our Savior knowing this, returns them this answer, Does this offend you?
What if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? It is the
spirit that quickneth, ver. 61, 62, 63. There was no reason to be offended at
his Doctrine, He would ascend up to heaven; and then his flesh would be as
distant from men as heaven is from earth, yet this hinders not eating of, or
union with him. The Spirit would be in and with the eater to quicken and
strengthen him. No local distance can interrupt this union or influence. I
conclude this with the words of the Reverend Usher: Sermon before the Commons,
1620.
The union between Christ and believers is altogether spiritual and
supernatural; no Physical or Mathematical continuity or contiguity is any ways
requisite thereunto; it is sufficient for the making of this union, that Christ
and we be knit together by those spiritual ligatures, the quickening spirit, and
a lively faith.

Again, no distance of time can do it. In all the earthly patterns, the united
are together in time; but the ancient Saints under the Old Testament, who were
in time before the Incarnation of our Savior, were yet united to him; saved
they were, and by whom, but by him who is the only Savior of the world?
Salvation is not in any other; his name is the only name under heaven for that
end. A Mediator they had, and who could that be, but the one Mediator between
God and men, the man Christ Jesus? no other but he could be really such. A
pardon they had, and not without shedding of blood; the blood of bulls and
goats could not take away sin, it was only the blood of Christ could do it. At
the last day they shall be raised up to life, and that because they are members
of Christ: As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor.
15.22. In these words both the (Alls) respect members only, the last (All)
refers only to Christ's members; this is very evident, Christ is opposed to
Adam; in Adam members only die, in Christ members only are made alive. In the
next verse it is said, That Christ rose as the first fruits, and afterward
they that are Christ's; that is, the members of Christ, who are the sanctified
lump. Wicked men rise again by virtue of the threatening of eternal death; but
all the Saints ancient or latter, rise as parts and members of Christ.

In the Mystical union, two things may be noted, the foundation of it, and the
bonds. The foundation is the satisfactory and meritorious Passion of Christ;
out of which springs the Church which is his body; the bonds are faith and the
holy Spirit: Faith ascends up to him, the holy Spirit comes down upon
believers. If we apply these things to the ancient Saints, it will appear that
they were united to Christ; his Death, which is the foundation, was for them.
He died, as the Scripture tells us, for all, for every man: He gave himself for
the world, the whole world. Which phrases must needs take in those under the
Old Testament as well as those under the New; and which is most express, he is
a Mediator for the redemption of transgressions under the first Testament, Heb.
9.15. The Ancients were not saved by types and shadows, but by Christ. Their
Moral guilt was not done away by the blood of brutes, but by his only
sacrifice, which though offered up but once in the end of the world, was in
virtue all one as if he had been slain from the beginning of time. Thus the
foundation did reach unto them. Neither were the bonds of union wanting; they
had faith in Christ: the first promise of the Messiah, Genesis 3.15. did point out
his humane nature in the seed of the Woman, his sufferings therein in the
bruise of the heel; his victory over Satan in the breaking of the head; there
was much of Christ in that first Gospel: I doubt not but Adam had his eyes
opened to see him there. Abel by faith offered up a Sacrifice to God, Heb.
11.4. that is, by a faith proper to a sacrifice, such as did look through it to
the great Sacrifice of the Messiah. Abraham is a great pattern of believing,
even to us who live under the Gospel. His faith and ours have not variant
objects or centers, but both are set upon one and the same Christ. He saw
Christ a coming at a very great distance; we see him come in the flesh:
Venturus and vexit, De Vtilit. Panit.
diversa verba sunt, sed idem Christus; to come, and come, are two different
words, but it is the same Christ, says St. Austin. It is the same faith for
substance in both; the Fathers in Moses's time did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.
The unbelievers did look only at the figure, the Manna and the Rock; but the
believers did by faith feed upon Christ: Erant ibi (says St. Austin) qui quod
manducabant, De Vtilit. Panit.
intelligebant; erant ibi, quibus plus Christus in cord quam Manna in ore
sapiebat; there were there those who understood what they eat; there were those
who did more relish Christ in the heart, than Manna in the mouth. Thus the
Ancients had faith in Christ; and, which ever accompanies it, they had the holy
Spirit also. What were Moses's Meekness, David's Zeal, Abraham's Obedience,
Job's Patience, but the fruits of the holy Spirit communicated from Christ the
head? He is void of the holy Spirit, who denies it to be there where such
eminent graces are; Gods ancient people had the good Spirit to instruct them,
Neh. 9.20. David prays, Take not thy holy Spirit from me, Psalm. 51.11. The holy
Spirit was communicated under the Old Testament. These things make it appear,
that the Ancients were united unto Christ.

But possibly it may be objected, The mystical union is to Christ, God-man; in
the time of those Ancients he was not man, they therefore were not united unto
him; union cannot be to a nonentity, De Ver, Relig. l. 4. c. 3.
a thing that is not; quis non videt, in eum qui non est, credi minime posse?
who sees not, that a man cannot believe in him who is not? So Volkelius. The
like may be said of union, a man cannot be united to him who is not.

In answer to this objection, I shall offer two or three things.

Were that of the Socinians true, That Christ was not in being till he was
conceived of the Virgin, this objection might be something; but before the
Incarnation he was a Divine person; after it, he was the very same person in
our assumed flesh; so the union of the Ancients was not to a nonentity, or to
one not in being.

Christ's humane nature, though not in actual being in those times, was yet
present in such sort, that the Ancients were capable of being united to him; it
was present with their Faith; though it had not an absolute existence, as a
thing put forth out of its causes; yet it had a relative existence in the
promise, so as to be an object of their Faith; which, being the hypostasis or
subsistence of things hoped for, could not but presentiate the Messiah to them,
he being one of the prime things they looked for, and upon that account called
the hope of Israel, Acts 28.20. It was also present with God in his Decree, as
sure to be as the eternal Rolls could make it. Its satisfactory and meritorious
blood did operate before it was shed; upon the account of it, Pardons and the
Holy Spirit were communicated unto the ancient believers. That presence, which
made them capable of the bonds of union, made them capable of the union it self.

There is a difference between the natural body and the mystical; in the
natural body the members are simultaneous; but in the mystical one they are
successive. Some members are before others, yet they are all but one body; some
were before Christ incarnate, yet were they united unto him as their Head. St.
Austin elegantly sets forth this from Jacob, whose hand came out first, and
then his head; De Catech. rud. cap. 3. and 19. in Psalm. 61.
Manus a capite praemitti potest, connexio tamen ejus sub capite est, the hand
may be first sent forth by the head, yet is it united to the head; all the
ancient Saints were but, as it were, manus Christi, the hand of Christ; though
they came forth before he the Head came in the flesh, yet they were united to
him, and had a virtue and Divine Spirit from him; though they were first in
time, yet he was first in dignity and power: Had these not been members of him,
there would have been after the fall some holy flesh not in conjunction with
him; which to imagine, is to render him useless, as if the forfeited sanctity
in man might have been recovered without him.

The sum of all is this, That Union, which no distance of place or time can
break or dissolve, must needs have a great deal of mystery in it.

7thly. The Union between Christ and Believers is lasting and durable; were it
not so, very black consequences must needs ensue. There might possibly be no
Church at all; that Article of our Creed, which concerns the Holy Catholic
Church and the Communion of Saints, might cease and become no object of Faith;
the death of Christ might be in vain; his precious sufferings might be without
fruit; the great Promises, as well those which are made to Christ touching a
seed, as those which are made to Christians touching perseverance, might
utterly fail and come to nothing. These are very momentous things; yet passing
them over, it will suffice to consider what a King, Husband, Foundation, Vine,
Head, Food, Christ is; the excellency of him above all the earthly patterns,
will evidently prove the perpetuity of this Union.

He is such a King as never was; his Kingdom stands upon foundations that
cannot be shaken. Earthly kingdoms may be dissolved by a defection of Subjects,
the Prince cannot command their minds and wills; the outward Thrones and Laws
may be too weak to keep them in due order; a jealousy of yokes and burdens may
blow the coal; a fancy of being better under a change may kindle a fatal
Rebellion; (...), the present Government is ever grievous. But it is not thus
in Christ's Kingdom; his Subjects never fall off; he inspires obedience into
their wills and hearts; his Throne and Law are within; there are no blots or
errata's in his government; all is mere rectitude and Grace, they cannot be
better than under him; in such circumstances no room is left for a revolt. The
kingdoms of this world may be broken by a foreign invasion; one earthly power
may eat up another; the great Empire rolled about from the Chaldean to the
Persian, from thence to the Grecian, from thence to the Roman; but in the
Kingdom of Christ it is not so; his Kingdom shall not be left to other people,
Dan. 2.44. No invasion can be upon him who has all the power in Heaven and
Earth; he sits at Gods right hand till his enemies be made his footstool, Psalm.
110.1. till Sin, Satan, the World, Death, Hell be subdued under him; no foreign
power therefore can overturn his Kingdom, who is universal Conqueror. Earthly
kingdoms have their periods, there is a mean wrote upon each of them; the Gold,
Silver, Brass, Iron, Clay, in the great Image, must at last be all broken to
pieces, and become like the chaff of the Summer threshing-floor, Dan. 2.35. But
it is not so with Christ; his Throne is as the Sun, and as the faithful witness
in Heaven, Psalm. 89.36, 37. Of his Kingdom there is no end, Luke 1.33. It is a
thing of perpetuity. But if his Subjects might fall off, where, what would his
Kingdom be? A Kingdom without Subjects, is but an umbra, a mere shadow. It may
be therefore noted, that in that 89th Psalm, there is not only a Throne
continuing, but a seed enduring for ever. And in that first of St. Luke, there
is not only an endless Kingdom, but an House of Jacob, a Church for him to
regin over for ever; without this, his Kingdom would soon be at an end for want
of Subjects. If then his Kingdom be, as it is, perpetual, then there must needs
be a continuance of Subjects under him.

He is such an Husband as never was, his conjunction with his Spouse is never
dissolved; the earthly marriage may be dissolved by Adultery, but in the
spiritual Marriage between Christ and Believers no such thing falls out; truth
and faithfulness are found on all hands; he will never forsake them; they will
not forsake him; his fear in their heart keeps them from a departure; his love
is toward them; their love is toward him; if it cool or slack, his love
(which is the fountain and first mover) will come and inflame theirs afresh;
nay, there is not only love, or a likeness of temper between them, but they are
so joined to him as to be one spirit; two spirits may vary and go different
ways, but one spirit must needs keep them together; here is no room for
spiritual fornication or departure from Christ. Further, Death parts man and
wife, but not Christ and Believers; he died, but it was that he might purchase
a Church, that a Spouse might come out of his bleeding side; they dye, but
their death is a sleep in Jesus, their union to him continues; in Death there
is a separation of body and soul; but as in Christ it did not break the
hypostatical union, so in Christians it does not break the mystical one; his
body in the grave was not separate from his Divine person; their bodies there
are not separate from Christ the Head; his Spirit will not leave them in the
dust, but raise them up to a glorious life, as a sure token, that they are in
conjunction with him. The perpetuity of this conjunction is excellently set
forth by the Prophet; I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth
thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercies. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know
the Lord, Hos. 2.19, 20. In this famous Text (which, as I take it, respects the
spiritual Marriage between Christ and the Church) two or three things may be
noted: Here we have (I will betroth, I will betroth, I will betroth) thrice
repeated, to note out the fureness of the Promise; here it is said in express
terms, That the espousal is not for a time, but for ever; here Christ engages
his Righteousness, Truth, Love, Mercy, Faithfulness, to make good the perpetual
espousal. In the close it is added, Thou shall know the Lord; the espoused
shall know, that their Lord Christ has effected this great work.

He is such a Foundation as never was; all those who are builded upon him shall
stand; he is that Rock upon which the Church is built; The gates of hell, that
is, the powers of darkness, shall not prevail against it, Matt. 16.18. This
excellent Promise does signify the perpetuity of the union between Christ and
Believers; if they were severed from him, then the Gates of Hell would prevail;
but if (as the Promise is) the Gates of Hell shall not prevail, then the union
shall be perpetual. It may possibly be here objected, That this Promise
concerns not particular Believers, but the Church in general. I answer, This
Promise reaches to all that are built on the Rock by Faith, and so are
particular Believers; if some particular Believers may fall off from the Rock,
so may all; and then where is the Church? what is that but a body made up of
particular Believers? All Believers failing, the Church must needs do so. It
may yet be objected, That the meaning of that Promise is, That the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against Believers without their own consent. But I
answer, It is not possible they should prevail in any other way than that of
consent; a temptation may come, but without a consent it prevails not: to say,
that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail without a consent, is to say, That the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail in any other way than that which is possible;
and, this being true, without any Promise at all, the Promise thus interpreted
signifies just nothing, as being only of that which was so before. We are not
then to take it so, but in the plain sense; which gives us an high assurance,
that those who are built upon the Rock, shall never be removed from thence; no,
not by all the powers of darkness. St. Paul speaking of Christ the
Cornerstone, says, In him all the building fitly framed together, grows
unto an holy temple in the-Lord. The apt and harmonious framing of the
building, shows the firmness of it; the growing of it tells us, That it is not
as corruptible buildings, bore up by dead matter, but by that which is much
more durable, the everliving Spirit of Christ. St. Peter, speaking of the same
Cornerstone, says, He that believes on him shall not be confounded, 1 Pet.
2.6. If Believers, who are built upon him, might be severed from him, they must
be confounded; but if they shall not be confounded, they shall not be severed;
in union with him is salvation, but in separation from him is nothing but
confusion: such a Foundation is he, that he bears up all that are built upon
him; and prevents their confusion by maintaining their union with him: None of
the lively Stones shall totally, finally, fall off from him.

He is such a Vine and Head as never was; his juice never ceases; his vital
influences never fail: Hence the Branches and Members ever remain in union with
him. To make this appear, I shall offer two or three things:

There is a supply of the Holy Spirit from Christ unto Believers; he is made
sanctification to them; he lives in them; there is an effectual working in
every one of them; and all this is by the Spirit communicated from him the Root
and Head of all Grace. Hence he tells us, that the rivers of living water flow
in the Believer, Joh. 7.38.

The supply of the Spirit from Christ unto Believers, In Sanctorum cordibus
secundum quasdam virtutes semper manet spiritus, secundum quasdam recessurus
venit, and venturus recedit; in his virtutibus, sine quibus ad vitam non
pervenitur, in electorum suorum cordibus permanct. Greg. Mor.
does ever continue in some measure; it is true, it does not ever continue as to
the accessaries of Grace; but it ever continues as to the vitals and essentials
of it; it does not keep them from all acts of sin, but under their greatest
falls it ever upholds a state of grace and spiritual life in them: They may
fall, and that grievously; yet still there is a lamp, the habits and principles
of Grace are not extinct in them; He that is born of God cannot sin, 1 John
3.9. That is, he cannot sin so as to unframe the new creature; he cannot sin
so, as to lose the remaining seed in him; the Reason is, because the Spirit
continues to bear him up in a state of Grace. This continuance of the Spirit is
upon a double account, the one is the durable foundation of it; the
communication of the Spirit is founded upon the satisfactory and meritorious
sufferings of Christ; there is an endless life of merit in him; his blood is of
an eternal efficacy: Hence the supplies of the Spirit procured thereby, never
fail. Very remarkable is the difference between the case of Adam and the case
of Believers; in him one act of sin drove out a stock of pure holiness; in them
many sins do not drive out their imperfect graces; the Reason is, their graces
respect a great foundation, an infinite treasure of merit, which moves the
Spirit to bear them up in being; but his holiness does not do so. For them, as
under the second Covenant there is a ransom, a satisfaction of immense value to
interpose, that the forfeiture of their habitual graces made by sin may not be
taken; but for, him as under the first Covenant there was nothing to interpose,
nothing to bear off justice from taking the forfeiture. The other thing is the
office of Christ; a Vine is to communicate juice to the Branches; an Head is to
communicate vital influences to the Members; the rich anointing of the Spirit
was upon Christ not as a mere private person, but as a Trustee and a Treasurer
for Believers, that out of his fullness they might have grace for grace. It lies
upon his truth and faithfulness to perform his trust and office; if he did not
communicate the Spirit to his Branches and Members, he should cease to act like
a Root and Head; but, because he never does what unbecomes him, the
communication must continue as long as he is a Root or Head. Upon these sure
grounds does stand the continuance of the Spirit in its supplies; it may be
sometimes grieved by the sins of Believers, yet it does not depart from them,
because Christ is a Priest after the power of an endless life; and it is his
trust and office to communicate the Spirit to them.

The supply of the Spirit unto Believers ever continuing, their union with
Christ must needs continue also. The Spirit is the primary bond of the Union;
where the Spirit is, there is the Union; where the Spirit is continued, there
is the Union continued. Our Savior speaking of the water given to Believers,
says, that it is in them a Well of water springing up to everlasting life,
Joh. 4.14. The Spirit is a Well that is never dried up; it is a Spring of water
whose waters fail not; it springs and never leaves springing till the Believer
be in Heaven; the union therefore, which depends upon such an excellent
communication of the Spirit, must needs be perpetual. I conclude with the
judgment of St. Austin, speaking of Christ and Believers, he says, Illius
capitis membra sumus, In Psalm. 88.
non potest hoc corpus decollari, si in aeternum caput, in aeternum gloriantur
and membra, ut sit ille Christus integer in aeternum. We are members of him the
Head; this body cannot be beheaded; if the head be for ever, the members also
glory for ever, that Christ may be entire for ever. In another place, reproving
the rule of Ticonius touching the bipartite body of Christ, he says, De Doct.
Christ. lib. 3. cap. 32.
Non revera Domini corpus est, quod cum illo non erit in aeternum: It is not
truly the body of Christ, which shall not be with him for ever.

In the last place, Christ is most excellent food; he is so in union with
believers, that he nourishes them in their very souls: This union is so set
forth in the 6th chapter of St. John, that it appears to be perpetual. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, verse. 56.
These words point out, not only the intimacy of the union, but the perpetuity
of it: Here is not merely an inbeing, but an indwelling, which imports
duration. In a former verse the perpetuity is more plainly set down; He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, verse 54. Christ
nourishes him not to a temporal life, but to an eternal one; and how is this
done but by an union with him? All food nourishes by union; earthly food by
union with the body; Christ the spiritual food by union with the soul: without
union can be no nutrition; he therefore, who nourishes Believers, not to a
temporal, but to an eternal life, must needs be united to them, not for a time,
but perpetually. There is in that Chapter one thing more to be noted; we have
in it both the bonds of union; Faith is included in the eating and drinking
there often repeated; the quickening Spirit is mentioned, verse 63. Faith
cannot fail, because the Spirit continues to uphold it; the supplies of the
Spirit cannot fail, because the flesh and blood of Christ has in it an endless
life of merit to procure the same: It remains therefore, that the union is
perpetual, because the bonds of it are so.

Thus far touching the resemblances of the mystical union, and the conclusions
drawn from them.

CHAP. VI.
There are two Bonds of this Union, Faith and the Holy Spirit. Faith sees and
presentiates Christ to the Believer; it puts the soul into an apt posture for
him; it gives a right to him; it intimately unites to him. The Spirit it self
is in some sort communicated to Believers; he is sent to them; he is given to
them; he dwells in them; his special, operative, immediate presence is with
them; he forms Holy Graces in them; he actuates and preserves those Graces; he
sheds abroad Gods Love in their heart. In all these Operations, two things are
noted, viz. somewhat of Union with Christ, and somewhat of the Inhabitation of
the Spirit.

HAving treated of the Resemblances of the Mystical Union, I now proceed to the
Bonds of it, which (as the Reverend Usher has it) are on Christ's part the
quickening Spirit; Immanuel, p. 50.
and on ours, Faith. Christus (says one of the Ancients) per fidem ingreditur
in vos, Cyril. in Joh.
and per Spiritum Sanctum inhabitat. Christ enters into us by Faith, and
inhabits in us by his Holy Spirit. Of these two Bonds, the Spirit is the
primary one, as being the Author of the other; it begins the union by operating
Faith, and carries it on by turning the Believer into a Temple for himself to
dwell in.

I shall first speak of the Bond of Faith, and then of that of the Spirit.

Faith does in an admirable manner unite unto Christ; the Scripture sets it
forth, as if it had all motions, postures, and sensations spiritually in it
self, to take in Christ with his incomparable benefits into the soul; it is
there called, a seeing, a coming to, a receiving of, a leaning on, a putting
on, a feeding upon Christ; it sees and looks to him as a Savior; it comes to
him as a center of rest; it receives him as a precious gift; it leans on him as
a sure foundation; it puts him on as an heavenly covering; it feeds on him as
the very food and life of the soul. In St. Ambrose (speaking of the Woman who
had an Issue of blood) Faith is called a touching of Christ: In Luc. lib. 6.
Non credunt qui comprimunt, credunt qui tangunt, fide tangitur Christus; Many
press upon Christ in outward Ordinances, but Believers touch him; it is by
Faith that he is touched, so as to have virtue from him. In St. Austin it is
not merely a touching, but a taking hold of Christ: In Joh. Tract. 50.
Quomodo in coelum manum mittam, ut ibi sedentem teneam? fidem mitte and
tenuisti. How may I put up my hand into Heaven, that I may take hold of Christ
sitting there? send up thy Faith and thou hold him. In St. Basil it is
called (...), an intellectual mouth in the inner man, whereby we feed upon
Christ the bread of life. In St. Chrysostom, Faith is that by which (...) we
are begotten and consubstantiated with Christ. In Hebr. cap. 3.
In Theophylact it is that by which a man is (...), a part of Christ the root,
united to, and incorporated in him. The import of all these various expressions
in Scriptures and Fathers, is this: That Faith is the great capacity which
takes in Christ into the Soul.

Touching this Bond of Faith, I shall offer three or four things.

1st, Faith does see Christ in a spiritual manner. Humane reason, with the
Gospel before it, may gather up a notion of Christ, but it does not of it self
spiritually discern him. A notion may be gathered up out of the words and
sentences in Scripture, but a spiritual discerning there is not. This is clear
upon a double account. The one is this: In fallen man, no natural faculty
(unless elevated by a grace proper to it) does act spiritually; the
Understanding, the supreme faculty in man (unless enlightened by the Spirit)
does not do so; it acts upon Christ, as upon other objects in a natural way
only. The other is this: To a spiritual discerning there is requisite a due
proportion between the object and the faculty: such a proportion there is
between Christ, an object supernaturally revealed, and a mind supernaturally
enlightened; there the Holy Spirit is on both hands; I mean, outwardly revealing
the object in Scripture, and inwardly inlightning the mind to make it fit for
the object; but between Christ a supernatural object, and a natural mind, there
is not such a proportion; the Holy Spirit is but on one hand, revealing the
object; but on the other, there is only the humane Spirit; which without inward
illumination, does not spiritually discern the things of God. If a mere natural
mind might spiritually discern them, there would need no opening of eyes, no
renewing in the spirit of the mind: the new Creature would be new but in part;
the old understanding (though that faculty first erred in the fall) might serve
the turn. Faith, as far as it is in the Intellect, would not be the Gift of
God, but of our selves; the external proposal of the object (which is what
grace Pelagius allowed) would be enough. But such things as these being never
to be admitted, it is evident, that spiritual discerning is not a thing common
to Reason, but proper to Faith; which, having a divine Light in it, does
elevate the mind above it self, and make it apt to discern spiritual things in
a spiritual manner.

There being in Faith a spiritual discerning, Christ is intellectually present
with the Believer in an excellent manner; he is in some sort intellectually
present with a man of notion; but with the Believer, he is present in a more
divine manner; he appears in spiritual beauty; the Spirit glorifies him in the
heart. Oh! what an one is our Immanuel? how sweet is his Name? how rich his
Merits? how full his treasures of Grace? Every thing in him appears in a kind
of ravishing glory; he is no longer looked on as a mere matter of speculation,
but as an object to be for ever loved, chosen, embraced, adored by us; the
notion of him does not lie dead upon the heart, but lives and warms the inner
man into holy admirations and affections toward him; we have not a light
opinion, but a firm persuasion touching him and his Sufferings, we can
certainly pronounce, This is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the World. This
is the Blood of the Covenant which made an atonement for us; we are as sure of
it, as if these things were before our corporeal eyes and senses: nay, we are
more sure than so; we see them in lumine veritatis primae, in the light of the
first Truth revealing himself in the Gospel. This is the first step of Union.
Christ is spiritually discerned; he is intellectually present with our minds in
a very excellent manner.

2dly, Faith does put the soul into an apt and fit posture for Christ; it sets
all ready and in order for him.

In general, it does this by making us poor in spirit: A natural man, though a
fallen creature, is very high; in his own eyes he is as well as if he had had
no bruise at all in the fall; as rich, as if nothing of man's Primitive
excellency were lost; he dreams and flatters himself, as if his reason could
span all Mysteries, and his will teem out all Virtues; he stands upon his own
bottom, and wraps up himself in his own false Righteousness; he is every way
full, and wants nothing; complete in himself, and knows no dependence. And why
should such an one go to Christ, or seek Union with him? or what may be done
for such an one, who has all in himself? This temper is not only at a vast
distance from Christ, but it carries in it an utter enmity to him; when it
speaks out, it blasphemes in some such language, as that Pagan did, who cried
out, Aust. in Psalm. 31. Praef.
Jam been vivo, quid mihi necessarius est Christus? I live well of my self; how
is Christ necessary to me? But as soon as Faith comes, a man reflects and sees
nothing in natural self, but poverty, emptiness, impotency, uncleanness,
perdition; he looks up to Christ, and sees all riches, fullness, power,
sanctity, salvation to be in him; he humbles himself as knowing his dependence;
he puts off his Ornaments, that Christ may do somewhat for him; he goes down
into his own nothingness and desolate self-waiting, to have some Communications
of Grace from Christ: this is the right posture of the soul. Poverty here looks
up to unsearchable riches. Emptiness opens the heart for the effusions of
grace. Conscience cries out to be cooled with the blood of atonement. Impotence
waits for the arm of a Savior to be revealed. Nothingness calls for a new
Creation to be erected upon the ruins of a lapsed nature. All things are ready
for Christ to show forth his Glory in the Believer.

More particularly, Faith puts the soul into an apt posture for Christ; in that
it has that in it which answers to all his Offices; he is an excellent Priest;
he offered up himself as a propitiating sacrifice for us; he satisfied the Law
and Justice of God; he made a full and perfect compensation for the sin of the
world. Unto this, Faith answers by its recumbency; it ventures all upon Christ;
it runs under the wings of its Savior; it hides it self in his precious
wounds; it casts the Believer on him who bore the sin of a World; it rolls the
soul on his atoning blood, and leaves it there for acceptance with God; it
commits the whole concern of Justification as to the Law, to his Plenary
satisfaction; it has no other bottom to stand upon but this; no other answer
to the Law; no other plea to divine Justice; no other refuge or hiding place
for the soul to repose it self in: This is the right posture; it is called
receiving the atonement, Romans 5.11. because the Believer is in the very instant
made partaker of Christ's sacrifice; His atoning blood is sprinkled on him; the
great satisfaction covers him as a mystical part of Christ, that the Curse of
the Law may not seize him, or the wrath of God burn him up. Again, Christ is a
great Prophet, he brought the holy Mysteries out of his Fathers bosom; he
speaks outwardly by his Word; and by his Spirit he is an inward Ecclesiastes,
who can enter into the heart, and there express himself in words of Life and
Power. Unto this, Faith answers by an humble docibleness; it softens and
meekens the heart; it makes the Believer sit down at Christ's feet, and hear him
in the hardest Lectures; if Christ talk of a Cross, the Believer is ready to
take it up upon his back; if of super-rational Mysteries, he is ready to
subscribe to them; he becomes as a little child, ruleable by every holy beam or
motion; he yields up himself to the Spirit and Word to be instructed by them:
this is the apt posture; it is called an hearing of the Prophet, Acts 3.22. The
Believer in this posture is sure to hear of him; he shall be more and more led
into holy Truths; his ear is opened, and his mind in a readiness for further
instruction. The Spirit will make deeper impressions, and seal divine Truths
upon his heart. The rich Mines of Precepts and Promises shall lie more open
before his eyes. Again, Christ is a great King, higher than the Kings of the
Earth; he was anointed with the Holy Ghost; he has all the power in Heaven and
Earth; his Laws are all rectitude and grace; his Throne must be set up in the
hearts and spirits of men. Unto this Faith answers by that obediential temper
which is in it; It owns his Sovereignty; it kisses his Scepter; it chooses him
as a Lord; ^t loves to live in his Dominions; if he come forth in his Royal
Command, it opens the everlasting doors, that he may reign within: This is a
fit posture; it is called receiving Christ Jesus the Lord, Col. 2.6. Christ
will own such as his Subjects; he will more and more lift up his Throne in
their hearts; he will let them see more of his power and glory; he will make
them taste the fruits of his Government in protection and excellent rewards:
This is the second step of union between Christ and Believers. There is that in
Faith which answers to all his Offices; there is satisfaction in him, and
recumbency in them; instruction in him, and docibleness in them; Royalty in
him, and obedientialness in them.

3ly. There is by faith a right unto Christ: God did not only send his Son in
the flesh to satisfy and merit for us, but he has let down from Heaven a
Charter of Promises, that we might see upon what terms we may have a title to
Christ. By that Charter sealed with his blood, the believer (who also seals to
it by faith) has a clear right unto him: My beloved is mine, says the Church,
Cant. 2.16. Believers have a right to claim him as their own, though he be an
infinite person, one who is a center of Perfections, a treasury of merits;
having in himself enough to satisfy the heart of God, and supply the wants of
men, yet may they claim him as their own. His blood is theirs; it is the blood
of their Sponsor and Head; it was shed on purpose to justify them as to the
Law, to cleanse away their sins. His Spirit is theirs, it is upon him as an
Head and Trustee, accordingly it is to be communicated to them; it is to flow
in their hearts in rivers of living graces. They have also a right to become
the sons of God. It Is true, they are not as he is, natural Sons, but they are
adopted ones. In their adoptive Sonship there is, as Aquinas observes, a shadow
of the Eternal One. He is the (...), Sum. 3. part, q. 23. Ar. 2.
or brightness of his Father, and in them there is a splendour of grace
resembling God in a measure; at last they shall as sons enter into his joy, and
sit down with him in his Throne; and there not only behold his glory, but have
a share in the blessed region; and all this is made good by the Gospel; one jot
or tittle of which can no more fail, than God can forfeit his truth and
faithfulness. This is another step, there is by faith a true right unto Christ.

4thly. There is by faith more than a mere right to Christ; there is an
intimate union with him; believers are built upon him as a foundation, inserted
into him as a Vine, incorporated with him as an Head. To understand which of a
mere right, is utterly to evacuate these Metaphors, which were planted in
Scripture on purpose to signify a very near union with him. It is said in
Scripture, That we are in him, and he is in us. We dwell in him, and he dwells
in us. We abide in him, and he abides in us. To interpret these phrases of a
mere right, as if all the meaning were but this: We have a right to him, and he
has a right to us; is to dispirit those expressions, which do as Emphatically
speak a very near union, as any words can possibly do. No man ever used such
words to express a right; no man can use higher to express an union. In those
phrases therefore we have an intimate union set forth unto us; so also we have
in that of the Apostle, We are made partakers of Christ, Heb. 3.14. Not merely
of his benefits, but of himself. When the same Apostle would set forth the
Hypostatical union of our nature to Christ, he says, That (...), he did
partake of our flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. When in this place he would set
forth the Mystical union of believers to him, he says, That we are (...),
partakers of him; we do in a sort possess him, we partake of him as members do
of their head. His satisfaction reaches down to us, to make us stand before
God; his Spirit is communicated to us, to make us a fit Temple for himself. By
faith we come to be in intimate union with him, and in a spiritual manner
possessed of him.

Thus much touching Faith as a bond of union with Christ.

The other bond is the holy Spirit: The Scripture speaks of it negatively and
positively: Negatively, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his, Romans 8.9. The Spirit of Christ is that which just before is called the
Spirit of God, which quickens our mortal bodies, ver. 11. which leads the sons
of God, ver. 14. which makes them cry, Abba Father, ver. 15. which bears
witness with their spirit, ver. 16. He that has not this Spirit in such
measure as is necessary to Salvation, he is none of Christ's; he is not united
to him as a member, none of his members are void of the Spirit. Positively, He
that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. Hereby know we that
we dwell in him, and he is in us, because he has given us of his spirit, 1 John 4.13. The same holy Spirit which is upon Christ the Head, falls down upon
believers as members of him; though Christ an infinite person assumed an humane
nature, though his humane nature was in the same person with his Divine; yet,
(which is admirable to consider) the holy Spirit had a special hand in uniting
the humane nature to his person, and in sanctifying it; the holy Spirit came
upon the Virgin, Luke 1.35. The holy Spirit descended like a Dove and lighted
upon him, Mat. 3.16. His Divine Nature was alsufficient and near enough to the
humane, yet was he anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power, Act. 10.38. The
sanctifying of his humane nature is in a peculiar manner attributed to the holy
Spirit: The reason (I take it) is this, God in his wise counsel would have it
to be so, that the same Spirit which united the two Natures in the Person of
Christ, might unite us to him, being God-man in one Person, that the same
Spirit which sanctified his humane nature, might sanctify us members of him.
It may yet further be observed, that that very Spirit, which, as St. Austin
speaks, Spiritus Sanctus ineffabilis est quaedam Patris Filiique communio.
Aust. de Trin. lib. 5. cap. 11. Insinuatur nobis in Patre authoritas, in Filio
nativitas, in Spiritu Sancto Patris Filiique communitas, in tribus aequalitas;
quod ergo commune est Patri and Filio, per hoc nos voluerunt babere communionem
and inter nos and secum; and per illud donum nos colligere in unun, quod ambo
habent unum, hoc est, per Spiritum Sanctum, Deum and Dei donum. Aust. de Verb.
Domini in Math. Ser. 11.
is the communion of the Father and the Son, does unite us to Christ. If we put
all together, we shall see the Spirit to be a most excellent bond: In the
Trinity it is the communion of the Father and the Son; in Christ it is that
which united the two natures, and sanctified the humane; in us it is that which
unites us to Christ. This is the primary Bond between Christ and Believers.

Touching this bond, it is first to be noted, that in Scripture, not only the
graces of the Spirit, but the Spirit it self is said to be communicated to
Believers. To quote some places for this, The love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given unto us, Romans 5.5. He that raised up
Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit that
dwells in you, Romans 8.11. As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are
the sons of God, verse 14. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit,
that we are the children of God, verse. 16. Know ye not, that your body is the
temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you? 1 Cor. 6.19. God has sent forth the
spirit of his son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father, Gal. 4.6. In these
Texts two things may be observed: The one is this, the Spirit it self is meant;
it is the Spirit it self, which sheds abroad the love of God in the heart,
which quickens the mortal body, which leads the sons of God, which bears
witness with our spirit; the Text is, (...), the Spirit it self in express
terms: it is also the Spirit it self, which has a Temple in us, which makes us
cry, Abba, Father. The other is this, The Spirit it self is communicated; it is
given to us, it dwells in us, it leads and acts us, it bears witness with our
spirit, it is in us as in its Temple, it is sent forth into our hearts; all
which do import communication. Also, we may note as much in that Apostolical
Prayer, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13.14. Here are all
the persons in the Sacred Trinity named; here the Holy Ghost must needs be the
Spirit it self; none other but he is capable of being ranked with the Father
and the Son: yet there is a (...), a communication of him. Also we may gather
the same thing from the Promises of the Spirit made by our Savior, in the 14,
15, 16 Chapters of St. John; there it is the Spirit it self which is promised;
it is the comforter, the spirit of truth; it is that spirit, which proceeds
from the Father, which teaches all things, and brings all things to
remembrance; which convinces of sin, and glorifies Christ; which takes the
things of Christ, and shows them unto men; all which show that it is the Spirit
it self. Also there it is promised to be communicated; it was to be sent to
them, to guide them into all truth, to dwell in them, to be in them, to abide
with them for ever; all which do show a communication of it. When the Greeks
erroneously held, That the Spirit did proceed, not from the Father and the Son,
but from the Father only; one argument used against them was this, If the
Spirit was sent from the Father and the Son, then it did proceed from both. To
this the Greeks replied, That this sending, merely concerned the gifts of the
Spirit, not himself: but this is directly contrary to the scope of those
chapters in St. John; if the Spirit be sent merely because we have his gifts,
then the Father (which we no where read) may be said to be sent, because we
have his gifts; when the Scripture says, that the Son was sent, it was
himself, not merely his benefits; in like manner, when it says, that the
Spirit is sent, it is himself, not merely his gifts.

I may here add somewhat out of the Fathers: Ignatius tells them, that they
were blessed, being (...), Epist. ad Ephesians.
such as carried God, the Spirit, a Temple within them. St. Ambrose says, that
the Holy Spirit dwells in us, as in his Temple; Non quasi Minister, De Spir.
Sancto. lib. 3.13.
sed quasi Deus inhabitat; he dwells in us, not as a Minister, but as a God.
St. Austin speaking of the gift of the Spirit, says, De fide and sym. cap. 9.
that God does not give seipso inferius donum, a gift less than himself. And
again, Euch. cap. 37.
that the Spirit is donum aequale donanti, a gift equal to the giver. And in
another place, That the Spirit; seipsum dat sicut Deus, De Trin. lib. 15. cap.
19. In Oct. Pasc. Sermon. 1.
gives himself as God. St. Bernard has this passage, Est enim Spiritus ipse
indissolubile vinculum Trinitatis, per quem, sicut pater and filius unum sunt,
sic and nos unum sumus in ipsis; the Spirit it self is that indissoluble bond,
by which, as the Father and the Son are one, so also are we one in them. I
might add much more out of the Schoolmen, but this may suffice.

It seems by these things to be clear, that the Spirit it self is communicated
to Believers; neverthelss it is a Quaere, how, or in what sense the Spirit it
self is communicated to them?

In answer to this, I shall first take notice of three memorable expressions in
Scripture; That is, the sending of the Spirit, the giving of the Spirit, the
dwelling or inhabiting of the Spirit in us.

The first expression is the sending of the Spirit; It may seem strange, that
an Almighty, Alwise, Alpresent Spirit should be sent; but this mission is not
per imperium, as from one more potent than himself commanding him; he is as
high in power and majesty as the other two persons are; it is not per
consilium, as from one more wise than himself counselling him, he is one of the
Domus judicii, as some Rabbis call the Trinity, one of the Three who fit in
counsel together in Heaven: Here is no local motion, which cannot be in an
immense one, but an excellent manifestation. The Spirit, as St. Austin
observes, De Trin. lib. 2. c. 5.
illuc mittitur ubi erat, is sent thither where it was; but being sent, he is
there in such sort as he was not; he is present there, novo modo, in a new
manner, where he was not so present; he appears there in gracious operations,
where he did not so appear; he is raising up a new creature, or actuating the
graces, or letting out his glory in some supernatural work; but this is not all
that is in mission; this may be in a coming: the Father is said to come, but
never said to be sent: there is therefore somewhat more in mission; the Spirit
does not only operate, but it operates secundum originem; as he subsists from
the Father and the Son, so he operates from them; as he is (...), in the manner
of subsisting, so he is (...), in the manner of operating: He is therefore said
to be sent by the Father and Son, because he subsists and operates from them.

The second expression is the giving of the Spirit. This in some respect
differs from the former; mission imports a procession of the person sent from
the Sender; giving imports the free bounty of the donor in communicating
something. The Spirit did not send himself, for he did not proceed from
himself; but he may and does give himself, because he is sui juris, and may
communicate himself as he pleases. In giving, a thing is communicated ad
utendum vel fruendum, to be used or enjoyed. The Spirit is communicated to
Believers in his graces, and in himself; in his graces he is communicated to be
used, in himself he is communicated to be enjoyed; he is now had, as he was not
before, in knowledge and love; by these the Believer does in mind and heart
possess him, as an object able to make every one, who has him, happy for ever.

The third expression is the dwelling or inhabiting of the Spirit; he is in
Believers as in his House or Temple; he is there in the tokens of his special
presence; the love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance that is there, show him to be the inhabitant; he has not
a more proper place here below, than an heart furnished with those graces.
Also, he is there as an object of inward Worship; there is a mind which knows
him, a will which subjects to him, a love which embraces him, a fear which
reverences him; there without question is a Sanctuary, an holy place for him;
there it is that his Honor dwells. But I shall here add no more touching
this inhabitation; only it must be remembered, that where the Spirit dwells,
there the Father and the Son dwell also; the blessed Three are inseparable, one
of them cannot be separated from the other; where the Spirit dwells, there
dwell also the Father and the Son with him.

Besides these three expressions, there is one more, that is the operation of
the Spirit; All these works one and the selfsame spirit, dividing to every
man severally, as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. Touching this, I shall at present only
observe, that this operation does in several respects fall in with the other
three; as it is the operation of the Spirit proceeding from the Father and the
Son, so it falls in with mission; as it concerns the using the Spirit in its
graces, or enjoying him in himself, it falls in with giving; as it relates to
the tokens of his presence, or the inward worship done to him, it falls in with
inhabitation.

Further, In answer to the Quaere, it is to be considered, that there is a
double presence of God; one universal in all things, another special in the
Saints; the first is in respect of his essence, which is immense and every
where; the second is in respect of his operations, which are peculiarly here,
and not there. Those special operations are not every where, where the essence
is, for the there could be no special presence; but the essence is wherever
those are, else the universal presence would fail. When Vorstius said, That God
was in the Saints, per gratiosam praesentiam, by a gracious presence; Piscator
notes, That there is another there presence, namely a substantial one; Operatio
Dei a substantia divelli non potest, the operation of God cannot be divided
from his essence. When Crellius says, that we live and move, not in the Divine
substance, but in his virtue and efficacy; the Learned Maresius answers him,
Inepta est oppositio inter virtutem and substantiam, illa hanc praesentem
supponit, Deus nusquam operatur visi essentialiter praesens; It is a foolish
thing to oppose the Virtue of God to his Substance; that supposes this
present; God no where operates unless he be essentially present: Thus he. To me
it is plain, that wherever there is a work of God, there he is essentially
present; for his Immensity has no stint: we cannot say, it goes hither and no
further. His Power, which reaches every work, is not distinct from his Essence,
nor can no more reach beyond it, than a thing can exceed it self. These things
may give some light to the point in hand; the Spirit is very God; his special
presence is not every where, where his essential one is; but his essential
presence is every where, where his special one is: his essential presence is
that, without which there could be no special one at all; his special presence
is that, in which the essential one appears in some excellent operation. When
the Spirit is communicated to Believers, Est Spiritus Sanctus in regeneratis,
non tantum, ut in omnibus rebus, Immensitate essentiae, sed prasentia gratiae
and effectorum. Par. in Romans cap. 8.
there is not merely an essential presence, but an essential presence, and a
special operation waiting on it; such as He, who is every where, puts forth no
where but in Believers; there is not a mere simple presence, but an actuous
vigorous one, such as discovers it self in excellent supernatural operations;
he is not here moving upon the waters to bring forth an outward sensible world;
but he is moving upon the heart to bring forth a spiritual one, a glorious new
creature, in which more of himself appears than in all other things besides:
and when it is brought forth, he sweetly presses in upon it by motions,
impulses and influences, to actuate the holy principles, to make the spicy
graces flow out; to quicken, strengthen, and enlarge the soul to every good
work; and all this against the bias and contradiction of the corrupt flesh,
which, however cross and repugnant it be, is potently overborn and overset by
his excellent presence. At last he seals up the Believer, marks him out for his
own, irradiates him with the beams of his favor, and sheds the sweetness of
his incomparable love in his heart; and, which is much to be observed, he does
in all these glorious appearances operate intimately and immediately; he
penetrates into the inmost spirit, and is more intimate to it, than that is to
it self; he operates not only by an immediation of virtue, but by an
immediation of essence; for his virtue is not distinct from his essence: Thus
there is a communication of the Spirit, an excellent, operative, intimate
presence with Believers, as if he were a kind of soul to them, to quicken them
unto every good work. But alas! how short are our thoughts in this point! how
little a portion of it do we know! The Master of the Sentences out of St.
Chrysostom asserts, That we cannot comprehend how God is every where; much less
can we comprehend, how he, who is every where, is in a special manner in
Believers. I verily think, that those Phrases of Scripture, which express the
Spirit to be communicated to them, have in them a mystery much deeper than we
can dive into: I shall therefore make no further answer to the Quaere, it is
enough for me to say, with Fulgentius, That the inhabitation of the Holy
Trinity in us, De Pers. Christ.
is non localis, sed immensa, non comprehensibilis cogitatione, sed venerabilis
fide; not local, but immense; not comprehensible in thought, but venerable in
Faith. I conclude with that of Zanchy, De trib. El. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Spiritus Sanctus, quia immensus est, ideo ubique est; maxim in omnibus
fidelibus, speciali quodam, sed incomprehensibili modo. The Holy Spirit,
because he is immense, therefore he is everywhere; most of all, he is in all
the faithful after a certain, special, but incomprehensible manner.

The next thing, which comes to be considered in this discourse, is the
Operations of the Spirit. I touched upon this before, but now I will speak a
little more to it. It Is true, these Operations, being among the opera ad extra,
are common to the whole Trinity, yet in Scripture they are in a peculiar manner
attributed to the Spirit; the reason of which is, because of that order which
is among the persons in the Sacred Trinity: the Father is of himself, fons
Deitatis, the fountain of the Deity; the Son is from the Father, lumen de
lumine, light of light; the Holy Spirit is from the Father and the Son; he
proceeds by an eternal spiration from both of them. And as is the order of
subsisting, so is the order of operating; the Father operates from himself; the
Son from the Father; the Holy Spirit from both: Hence in the three great Works
of God; Creation, which is the first rise of things out of nothing, is in a
special manner attributed to the Father. Redemption, which helps up a poor
fallen creature, is in a special manner attributed to the Son. Sanctification,
which perfects the redeemed, is in a special manner attributed to the Holy
Spirit. Hence in the great Work of Salvation; the Father laid the counsel and
platform of it; the Son carries on the work in a middle mediating way; the Holy
Spirit, according to his place, in order consummates it by working Faith, and
all other Graces: But this is only by the way. In treating of these Operations,
I shall note two things; that is, what is in them of respect to union with
Christ, and what is in them of respect to the Inhabitation of the Spirit; or,
which is all one, to the Inhabitation of the whole Sacred Trinity.

The first Operation of the Spirit in Believers, is this; He forms all holy
Graces in them; he draws the very Picture of Christ upon them, in humility,
love, meekness, mercy, goodness, heavenliness, patience: this operation is
requisite upon a double account: One, that Christ may have a seed; the Father
promised him a seed; he himself merited one; yet a seed he could not have,
unless the Spirit did work these Graces, which make us to bear a resemblance of
him. Another, that God might have a Temple; under the Old Testament he had an
outward Temple, but even then he would have an inward one, a Sanctuary in the
heart; under the New Testament he had a Temple in the humane nature of Christ;
but even in that he aimed to have a Tabernacle in men; but this could not be,
unless the Spirit did come and turn the heart into an holy place for him.

As touching this Operation, the holy Graces may be considered under a double
notion, either as they make us to have one common nature with Christ; and thus
they import union with him: or else as they are tokens of the divine Presence:
and thus they import the Inhabitation of God in us.

These Graces make us to have one common nature with Christ: and thus they
import union with him; there is, as the learned Camero observes, a double
union, one ab uno communi simpliciter, from one common nature simply
considered: thus all men are united, there being one humane nature in them:
another ab uno communicato, from one nature communicated: thus a Father and a
Son are united, the Son having the same nature communicated from the Father. To
apply this distinction. First, Believers have one common humane nature with
Christ; not only in that large sense, in which all men have the same nature
with him; but in a more strict sense peculiar to believers only; He that
sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, Hebr. 2.11. (...), of
one, not of one God: so Angels also are not of one Adam: so wicked men also
are, but of one nature and condition: Christ has an humane nature sanctified
by the Spirit, and so have Believers: this is one peculiar thing in which he
and they meet; there is no other holy flesh in all the world, but what is in
him and them: This tells us, that they are so united to him in one common
nature, as no other creature in Heaven or Earth is. Angels are not so; they are
holy, but not flesh; unregenerate men are not so, they are flesh, but not holy;
Believers only have, as Christ has, an humane nature sanctified by the Spirit.
Further, which advances the Union, they have this sanctified nature from him;
we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30. In this
sanctified nature there are two things; a carnal substance, and an holy
quality; as to the carnal substance, he is of our flesh, and of our bones; he
did partake of flesh and blood with us: As to the holy quality, we are of his
flesh, and of his bones; by him we are partakers of the divine nature: Thus
believers are joined to him, as to the Fountan of their Sanctity; their holy
Graces all hang upon him, as beams upon the Sun. If the Children of Reuben and
Gad had been asked, What part have you in the Lord? they would have showed the
pattern of the Altar. If Believers be asked, What part have you in Christ? they
can show forth their holy Graces. These are Copies drawn after him the great
Samplar of Holiness; nay, they are drawn by him, by the finger of his own
Spirit.

Again, These Graces are tokens of the divine Presence, and so import the
Inhabitation of God in us: these are tokens of the divine Presence. When nature
exceeds it self, and rises above its own level, as the Sea did, when the waters
were as a Wall to Israel on both hands, it is a sure sign that God is there.
When poor lapsed men are lifted up above their natural self, and elevated into
a divine Life (as it always is, when the holy Graces are wrought in them) it is
a sure sign that God is there of a truth. Humane nature cannot of it self
ascend into the sphere of Grace, only a supernatural power can do such a thing.
These Graces are such tokens of Presence, that, wherever they are, there God
does inhabit. In the old Temple there were diverse tokens of Presence; such as
the Vrim and Thummim; the Ark with the Tables in it; the Lamps, the fire from
Heaven, and the Holy of Holies were. Hence it is said, that God did dwell in
it; but in Believers there are better tokens of Presence than those; if we look
to the intrinsecal value of things, the breast plate of Faith and Love is
before the Vrim and Thummim: the Law in the heart exceeds the Tables in the
Ark; an illuminated mind is more excellent than outward Lamps; an holy ardor of
affections, is more valuable than the fire from Heaven; a pure heart is above
any outward Oracle; those tokens in the Temple were material things, akin in
the matter of them to this lower world; the Sanctuary it self was but a worldly
Sanctuary; but these Graces are spiritual things, their birth are as high as
Heaven: Believers; in whom they are, are (...), a spiritual house for God to
dwell in: those were typical tokens, made such by mere institution, without
which they would be but as other parts of matter; but these are real tokens, in
their own nature bearing the very image and resemblance of God himself; where
these are, there God dwells in an eminent manner: the Shechinah, or habitation
of God in the Saints, is a middle thing, between the hypostatical dwelling of
the Godhead in Christ, and the typical dwelling of it in the Temple; it is much
higher than all types and shadows; and in excellency next unto God in the flesh.

The next Operation of the Spirit in Believers, is this: He actuates their holy
Graces; he moves the new Creature by divine Influences: there is an effectual
working in every part of it: Love in the Spirit, as it is said, Col. 1.8. and
other Graces in the Spirit: all of them go forth in the power of that Spirit
which formed them at first.

As touching this Operation, the Spirit may be considered either as the
principle and first mover that actuates these Graces; and this speaks union
with Christ: or else as the terminus or ultimate object of these Graces
actuated; and this speaks the Inhabitation of God in us.

The Spirit is the principle or first mover that actuates these Graces: and
this speaks union with Christ; the Spirit, which is upon him, falls down upon
believers to actuate the Graces in them; Believers are all one body, and, as
one body, they have one spirit in them from Christ the Head; they are all one
new man in Christ, Ephesians. 2.15. Though the Apostle there speak of Jews and
Gentiles, yet he says not, one people; but, which is more emphatical, one new
man in Christ: they are one new man, because, as one man, they are acted by one
spirit; they are one new man in Christ, because the Holy Spirit, which is upon
him, is that one Spirit which acts them; the Sons of God, (...), are acted and
moved by the Spirit, Romans 8.14. That Spirit, which anointed the humane nature
of Christ the natural Son, falls down upon the adopted ones, to act and move
them: Actuation by one spirit proves, that they are in intimate union with him;
that they are indeed mystical parts and members of him, who acts and moves them
by his own Spirit. This may be illustrated by that in the first Chapter of
Ezekiel, when the wheels went as the living creatures did, and were lifted up
as they were; it was plain, that there were some invisible bands between them;
the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels, verse. 21. In like manner,
when believers show forth the virtues of Christ, and walk as he walked; it is
very plain, that they are in near conjunction with him; the Spirit does act
them in ways of conformity to him, who as an Head is joined unto them. That
phrase, of walking in Christ, Col. 2.6. points out a walking not merely after
his pattern and command, but in his power and spirit, as becomes those who have
received him, and are united to him.

Again, The Spirit is the terminus, or ultimate object of these graces
actuated: and this speaks the Inhabitation of God in us. As these Graces come
from God as the fountain, so they terminate in him as the ultimate object. Holy
fear terminates in his Majesty and Greatness. Faith terminates in his Truth and
Mercy. Love terminates in his Goodness and Excellency. Every Grace moves to him
as its great Center. Where these Graces are actuated, there an Honor, an
inward Worship is done to him; where that is in truth, there he has a Temple
in the heart, and objectively dwells there as in an holy place. Hence Aquinas
says, that God is in the Saints, sicut cognitum in cognoscente and amatum in
amante; 1. Pars, q. 43. Art. 3.
as an object known is in the knower, and an object loved is in the lover; by
knowledge and love a man, attingit ad ipsum Deum, reaches to God himself; his
heart becomes a Sanctuary for the Holy One. This is that inward Temple which
the Primitive Christians gloried in. Nonne melius in nostra dedicandus est
mente? in nostro imo consecrandus est pectore? -- litabilis hostia bonus
animus, pura men's, sinceraconscientia. Min. Fell.
When Pagans objected against them, that they had no Temples, no Altars, no
Sacrifices; they made this answer, That they had all within, in themselves, in
mental Consecrations, in a pure mind and heart. What was said of the Temple,
that may be said of a Pious soul; There is Gods Name; there he is consecrated
and sanctified; there he dwells as in a sanctuary or holy place.

The next Operation of the Spirit in believers, is this: He preserves believers
in their spiritual being; he bears up their graces by continual influences,
that they fail not in the way to Heaven.

As touching this Operation, Believers are preserved either as Members of
Christ; and this shows union: or as Temples of God, and this shows Inhabitation.

Believers are preserved as Members of Christ; and this shows union. Adam fell,
Angels fell, but Believers are preserved; in themselves they are but poor weak
creatures; without are temptations, within corruptions; yet they stand: there
is but a little Oil in the Cruse; a small stock of grace in the heart, yet it
fails not; they have many wants, yet never become bankrupt. This tells us, that
they are not alone, but in union with Christ; they are, what Angels and Adam in
innocence were not, joined to a Mediator, mighty to save: Weakness here is in
conjunction with Power; Power is made perfect in weakness; there is in them one
greater than he that is in the world; nay, than the corruption in the heart;
their little stock of grace depends upon infinite treasures; their many wants
are supplied out of infinite fullness: this preservation declares union.

Again, Believers are preserved as Temples of God: and this shows Inhabitation;
they are in the midst of winds, storms, temptations, corruptions, wants,
weaknesses, yet they fall not: This tells us, that God has a Temple in them;
the Inhabitant bears them up; he is in the midst of them; they shall not be
moved; his eyes and his heart are upon them to protect them; he will not suffer
his habitation to be blown down in a storm, or to be undermined by Sin and
Satan, or to run to ruin through want or weakness: This preservation declares
Inhabitation.

The last Operation of the Spirit in Believers, is this: He seals up Believers;
he witnesses their adoption; he sheds abroad the Love of God in their hearts. I
instance in this, not that it is so in all Believers, but that it is so in some.

As touching this Operation, these favors are afforded to Believers either as
Members of Christ; and this imports union: or as Temples of the Holy Ghost; and
this imports Inhabitation.

These favors are afforded to them as Members of Christ; and this imports
union. After that ye believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1.13. First there is Faith, and then Sealing; First men are Members of
Christ, and then they are irradiated with the beams of divine Favor; there are
great favors promised to Gods People; he dwells in the humble; he is seen in
the pure heart; his secret is with them that fear him; his countenance does
behold the upright: but all these favors are communicated to them as Members
of Christ. It Is true, the Graces, to which these promises are made, are in
their own nature and intrinsecal goodness grateful and acceptable unto God;
but, because they are defective, and dwelling under the same roof with inherent
corruption, which taints and soils them in their going forth into act;
therefore they are favored and accepted in us as being members of Christ; and
having an interest in his glorious satisfaction, which is able to cover all our
spots and imperfections; it is Christ, that is, (...), the Article is doubled,
that Son, that beloved, in whom the Father is infinitely pleased; we are
beloved only as parts of him.

Again, These favors are afforded to them as Temples of the Holy Ghost; and
this imports Inhabitation. In the outward Temple God did make himself known,
much more does he do so in the inward Sanctuary; I mean, in a pure heart: there
he sheds abroad his Love, and lets out his Glory; there he dwells and walks as
in a place of pleasure and delight.

Thus much touching the other Bond of Union, viz. the Holy Spirit.

To shut up this Chapter, the order of things touching this union stands thus.
It was the great design of God to raise up a Church to himself out of the
ruins of the fall; his heart was more set upon this, than upon all the world
besides To promote this, the Son of God leaves his Fathers bosom, and comes
down into our flesh; in it he satisfied Justice, and merited to have a body
gathered in, and anointed with that Holy Spirit, which operated in the uniting
and sanctifying of his own humane nature. Upon account of this satisfaction and
merit, the Holy Spirit comes down; and not only proposes the Gospel to men, but
operates in them first Faith, the grace of Union; and then, in a second instant
of nature, all other graces which may make them meet Members of Christ, and
Temples of the Holy Ghost. And after this is done, he carries on the work by
continual influences upon Believers, quickening and preserving their Graces,
dwelling in them, and manifesting himself to them.

CHAP. VII.
The Seals of the mystical Union are Baptism and the Lords Supper. Baptism is a
Seal of Union, not to all, but to Believers. Some Infants are in their infancy
in union with Christ; some come to it afterward: some never attain to it. The
Lords Supper is a Seal to confirm and exhibit Christ to us. The presence of
Christ in the Eucharist is not a corporal one. The Bread and Wine are not (as
the Papists say) turned into his Body and Blood. His Body and Blood are not (as
the Lutherans say) in, with, and under the Bread and Wine. The presence of
Christ is Spiritual. He is present objectively to our Faith, and virtually in
the communicated Spirit. Also the eating of Christ is not oral, but spiritual.

HAving treated of the bonds of this Union; I now proceed to the Seals of it,
Baptism and the Lords Supper. Baptism is the Sacrament of Initiation; the
Supper is the Sacrament of Nutrition. Baptism is the first entrance into Gods
Family; the Supper is the spiritual Banquet, unto which the baptized, after
washing, pass to feed upon Christ there: both of them are Seals of union with
him.

Baptism is not, as the Socinians would have it to be, a nude rite, but an
obsignative one; it is not a mere picture of spiritual Grace, but a Seal of it.
Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of Faith; Baptism, which succeeds
in the room of it, can be no less. (...). Nazian.
In man there is a body and a soul: to answer both, there is in Baptism an
outward part and an inward one; the outward part is water, which cleanses the
body; the inward part is Christ, who by his Blood and Spirit cleanses the Soul:
in both cleansings, union is requisite. Water, unless applied, cleanses not the
Body; Christ, unless applied, cleanses not the Soul. Where Baptism is in the
right use, there is a seal of union with Christ, who communicates the spiritual
cleansing to those who are in him as parts of his mystical body: Hence are
those Phrases in Scripture touching baptized persons; they are baptized into
Christ, Romans 6.3. So united to him, as to be in him; they are baptized into one
body, 1 Cor. 12.13. So united to him, as to be parts of his mystical body; they
have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. So united to him, as a man is to a garment; his
satisfaction covers them, his Spirit adorns them with holy Graces, they are in
Baptism buried with him, and risen with him, Col. 2.12. So united to him, that
they have the power of his death in mortification, and the power of his
resurrection in a Divine life; the one is notably adumbrated in the baptismal
immersion into the Water; the other in the eduction out of it: Thus Baptism is
a seal to confirm Christ with his benefits to us. But this is not all; it is
also a seal to convey him with his benefits to us. Hence in Scripture, it is
for the remission of sins, Acts 2.38. It is the Laver of regeneration, Tit.
3.5. Hence in the Fathers it is called, the investiture of Christianity, the
genital Water; the spiritual Nativity; the divine Generation, with the like;
which import, that it is a sacred Medium, by which divine Grace is communicated
to us; only it is to be remembered, that Baptism does not this ex opere operato,
out of the work done; it is not the Physical cause of Grace, but the Moral; it
is Idolatry to imagine, that a mere creature should physically, by its own
intrinsecal virtue, cause such a thing as Regeneration, which is only proper
for God to do; we are all apt to be led by Sense rather than by Faith; we had
much rather have Grace enclosed in a visible element, than be in a dependence
upon God for it; but Grace is not in Baptism as Wine is in a Vessel; it is not
insistent in the Water, but assistent; it lodges not by the way in the element,
but comes immediately from the eternal fountain: In the right use of Baptism,
it never is wanting; but, In Esaias. cap. 4.
as St. Jerome has it, Homo tantum aquam tribuit, Deus autem Spiritum Sanctum;
Man only gives the Water, God gives the Holy Ghost.

Baptism is a seal of union with Christ; only the Quaere is, to whom it is so?
In answer to this, I shall speak a little; first touching the Baptism of adult
persons, then touching the Baptism of Infants.

As touching the Adult; Baptism is a seal of union not to all, but to Believers
only. Bonaventure says, that faith is necessary in all Sacraments, In sent.
lib. 4. d. 3. qu. 3.
especially in Baptism; Quoniam Baptismus est janua Sacramentorum, sicut fides
est janua virtutum; because Baptism is the gate of Sacraments, as Faith is the
gate of virtues: Baptism is the seal of the Covenant, therefore it appertains
to those who by Faith are within it. It is clear in Scripture, that Faith is
pre-required to Baptism; They that gladly received the word, were baptized,
Acts 2.41. When they believed Philip, they were baptized, Acts 8.12. If thou
believe with all thine heart, thou may, says Philip to the Eunuch, Act.
8.37. Anciently, before Baptism, Interrogatories were put unto the person to be
baptized, and answers made by him in this manner; Renuncias Satanae? Renuncio.
Credis in Christum? Credo. Do thou renounce Satan? I renounce him. Do thou
believe in Christ? I believe. Hence Tertullian says, De Resur.
Anima non lavatione, sed responsione sancitur; the Soul is established not by
washing but by answering. In the due use of Sacraments there must be an hand on
both sides; manus Dei offerentis, the hand of God offering; and manus fidei
accipientis, the hand of faith receiving; though a Sacrament has its essential
integrity, though there be a real offer on Gods part, yet without a
receiving-Faith, there is Sacramentum sine re, a sign without Grace. Were Faith
always present, the Grace as well as the Sign would ever be communicated; but
Faith being absent, nothing but the mere Sign passes to the receiver. Hence the
Scripture distinguishes, touching Circumcision, between that in the flesh, and
that in the heart, Romans 2.28, 29. and touching Baptism, between the putting
away the filth of the flesh, and the answer of a good conscience toward God, 1
Pet. 3.21. The House of Israel was not, as other Nations, uncircumcised in
flesh, yet were they uncircumcised in heart, Jer. 9.26. Simon Magus was
baptized with Water, but not with the Holy Ghost; for he was in the gall of
bitterness, Acts 8.13, 23. Believers are the men, to whom Baptism is a seal of
union, they are in truth baptized into Christ and into one body, while others
are so in show and appearance only; they do indeed put on Christ, while others,
as St. Austin speaks, Contr. Don. lib. 5. c. 24.
put him on, only usque ad Sacramenti perceptionem, non usque ad vitae
Sanctificationem, unto a perception of the Sacrament, not unto sanctification
of life. They are buried with Christ, and risen with him; feeling his death in
their mortification, his resurrection in their Divine Life. Baptism is for the
remission of sins, but it is to those who by Faith are capable of it; it is a
Laver of regeneration, as the Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation, not to
all, but to Believers.

As touching Infants, the Learned Professors of Leyden require Faith not only
in the Adult, Synops. Theo. de Baptismo.
but in Infants too, in order to Baptism. Infants may be put into three ranks:
Some Infants are in their infancy in union with Christ; they have Faith in the
seed, though not in the fruit; Grace in the gift, though not in the use; they
have the Spirit dwelling in them, Aust. Epist. 57.
and are a part of his Temple, though they know him not: Neither needs this
seem strange, it is very reasonable to believe, that a supernatural power may
do as much as a natural one; the Image of God, which, if Adam had stood, would
have passed to Infants by natural generation, may well be derived to them by
spiritual regeneration. It Is granted on all hands, that some Infants at least
enter into life eternal; But what? do they do so unjustified, unsanctified?
Surely no, in Heaven there is not so much as the guilt of one unremitted sin;
those Infants, who go thither, must be justified; if they be justified, they
must have Faith and Sanctification; Faith, because justification is by it. The
Scripture knows not two ways of justification, one by Faith, another without
it; Sanctification, because Justification is never separate from it; But you
are sanctified, but you are justified, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.11. These
twins of Grace can never be parted; where the justifying blood is sprinkled,
there the sanctifying spirit is communicated; where the binding guilt of sin is
dissolved, there the polluting spot is done away; both are to be found in those
Infants that are saved. Hence the Fathers in the Milenitan Council, Can. 2. do
say, That Infants are baptized, in peccatorum remissionem, ut in eis
regeneratione mundetur, quod generatione traxerunt, for the remission of sin,
that, that in them may be cleansed in regeneration, which they drew in
generation: Here they mention both, remission and regeneration in them. Again,
In Heaven there is not, there cannot be the least spot of pollution. Infants,
which go thither, must be sanctified; without the new birth there is no entry,
Joh. 3.5. Without holiness no seeing of God, Heb. 12.14. Hence it appears that
Infants have sanctifying graces; to these Baptism does immediately seal union.

Some Infants, though baptized, are not in their infancy in union with Christ;
but the work of Grace comes afterward; both Baptisms are not always together,
the Spirit does not always cleanse in the same moment as the Water does: The
virtue of Baptism is not always immediately, but it follows us, as the waters
of the Rock did the Israelites; in some the effect is earlier, in some later;
these Infants are sealed from the moment of Faith, not of Baptism; their
Baptism does point at a future union, but it seals not an actual one where it
is not, but where it is.

Some Infants, though baptized, never are in union with Christ; some Divines
conceive that all baptized Infants are regenerate, but common observation
opposes this; multitudes there are of Infants baptized, who at years of
understanding show forth nothing at all of a Divine principle; Reason and Will
appear, but nothing of Grace. It may be reasonably expected in regenerate
persons, that the Seed of God should spring up, that the supernatural
principles should come forth into act in some measure; but when there is no
print or footstep of Grace, no dye or tincture of it in the life, it cannot
well be imagined, that there is any such thing as regeneration in them: To such
Infants as these, Baptism does not seal union. I conclude with the Learned
Bishop Abbot, In Thoms. Diatr. cap. 7.
In Christo baptizantur omnes qui baptizati sunt, in Christum non baptizantur
nisi qui transeunt in Christum, corpusque ejus and membra fiunt. All that are
baptized, are baptized in Christ; but none are baptized into Christ, but those
who pass into him, and are made his body and members.

The other seal is that of the Lords Supper; here Bread and Wine stand before
our senses; and Christ with his Body and Blood stands before our Faith, as if
he were crucified among us. The Seventh General Council at Constantinople, who
beat down all other Images, says of this Sacrament, That it is Vera Christi
Imago, the true Crucifix or Image of Christ; nay, it is more than a mere Image,
it is a seal to confirm and exhibit Christ with his benefits unto us. The cup
of blessing, which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?
The bread, which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? 1
Cor. 10.16. Upon these words Theophylact observes, That the Apostle did not
say, (...), a participation; but (...), a communion, that he might declare
something more excellent, namely, a very high union. In this Ordinance we eat
the flesh and drink the blood of Christ; we dwell in him and he in us; a very
intimate union there is between him and us; only it must be remembered, that
union is not sealed to all, but to Believers: Faith is requisite, that we may
partake not merely of the outward elements, ^ut of Christ himself. This appears
in 1 Cor. 11. in these words, Take, eat, this is my body; Drink, this is the
New Testament in my blood, verse 24, 25. There is an express command to feed on
the elements; and an implied one, to feed on Christ; all Receivers can do the
first, but only Believers can do the second: what we do in this Ordinance, we
are to do in remembrance of Christ, verse 24, 25. Not only in an historical
remembrance which is common to all Receivers; but in a fiducial one, which is
proper to Believers. The unworthy Receiver does not discern the Lords body,
verse 29. but Believers have a spiritual eye for it; to them Christ is
communicated. Others have the elements only, panem Domini, non panem Dominum;
the bread of the Lord, not the Bread the Lord. Were I for Transubstantiation at
all, I should think it reasonable to be of their mind, who, as Bellarmine
relates, held, De Euch. lib. 3: c. 11.
that only that part of the Bread, which the pious receive, was turned into the
Body of Christ: It is to me without doubt, that impious men do not receive it
or feed upon it. Our Savior says, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has eternal life, Joh. 6.54. Hence that of St. Ambrose, In Psalm. 118.
Ser. 18.
Hic est panis vitae, qui ergo vitam manducat, mori non potest; he is the Bread
of Life; he therefore, who eats Life, cannot dye; impious men, who eat him not,
dye eternally.

The great thing in this Sacrament is the eating of Christ; eating cannot be of
a thing absent, it is an unmovable axiom; that which is eaten, must be some
way present. I shall therefore, first discourse touching the Presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, and then speak touching the eating of him. The Papists and
Lutherans do both assert a corporal presence of the Body and Blood of Christ in
the Eucharist, but upon different grounds; the one upon account of a
transubstantiation of elements; the other upon account of an ubiquity
communicated to the humane nature of Christ.

The Papists assert such a presence upon account of a Transubstantiation of
elements; they explain it thus, those words, This is my body, this is my blood,
are consecratory and operative; by virtue of them, and in the last instant of
pronouncing them, the Bread and Wine are turned into the Body and Blood of
Christ; the substance of the Bread and Wine remains no longer; but under the
accidents thereof, are the very Body and Blood of Christ.

In answer to this, I shall consider the words, this is my body; (this) is the
subject, (is) the copula, (my body) the predicate; touching the predicate, it
is on all hands granted to be the Body of Christ; the only question is in the
two other.

The word (this) imports clearly the Bread; this appears by the precedent
words: And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them,
saying, this is my body, Luke 22.19. What did he say was his body, but that
which he gave to his Disciples? what did he give unto them, but what he brake?
what brake he, but what he took? And does not the Text expressly say, that he
took Bread? Of the Bread therefore he said, This is my body; the order of the
words shows it to be bread; this will more appear if we compare these words,
this is my body, with those which are a fair commentary on them, The bread
which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16. In
the one we have the word (this), in the other the bread in express terms; in
the one we have the body of Christ, in the other the communion of it: In both,
Bread is the thing spoken of, as a thing distinct from the body, of which it is
the communion. If the word (this) be not bread, what can we make of it? Is it
the accidents of the Bread? The Greek word, (...), imports not accidents, but a
substance; accidents are not a body, neither are these converted, but remain.
Is it the Body of Christ? That is not in the Eucharist till all the words be
uttered, it is not there at the pronouncing of the first word (this); the
Proposition is not identical, the words run not thus, my body is my body;
neither, if they did, could they any more work a conversion, than a thing can
be turned into it self. Is it an substantia vaga, an indefinite substance, such
as is neither Bread, nor the Body of Christ? This is such a vagrant, that all
the world knows not where to find it: Christ did not take, bless, break, give
an indefinite substance, but the Bread: It remains therefore, that the Bread is
the thing pointed at. The words in effect are thus; the Bread is the Body of
Christ; and then, as Bellarmine himself confesses, De Euch. lib. 1. c. 1.
the words must be taken tropically, or else they are plainly absurd and
impossible.

The Copula (is) does in Propositions import such a conjunction, as the subject
and predicate coupled together are capable of; when it stands between the sign
and the thing signified, it is not to be taken essentially, but
significatively; the sign is not the very thing, but a sign. In Scripture we
read not of a sign turned into the thing signified, but we ordinarily find the
name of the thing signified given to the sign: Circumcision is the covenant,
Genesis 17.10. That is, a sign of it, as the next verse tells us; The Lamb is the
passover, Exodus 12.11. that is, a sign of it. The Cup, that is, the Wine in in
it, is the New Testament, 1 Cor. 11.25. that is, it is Sacramentally such;
after the same manner the Bread is the Body of Christ; that is, it is
significatively such: this is the plain natural interpretation of the words.
Usher, An. to a Jes. 61.
Hence in the ancient Fathers, the Bread is called the figure, memorial,
symbol, image, type, sign, similitude of Christ's Body. It is the excellent
observation of St. Austin, That Sacraments should not be Sacraments, unless
they did resemble the things signified; and for that resemblance they do often
bear the names of the things themselves: Epist. 23.
Secundum quendam modum Sacramentum Corporis Christi Corpus Christi est,
Sacramentum Sanguinis Christi Sanguis Christi est; after a certain manner the
Sacrament of Christ's Body is his Body, the Sacrament of his Blood is his Blood:
The Bread and Wine are figuratively and sacramantally such.

Two things may be noted touching the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

The one is this; It is a Doctrine cross to the description of the Eucharist
which we have in 1 Cor. 11. The Bread was not blessed that it might be
destroyed; nor given to be eaten, that it might cease to be before it was
eaten. Never did God put forth his miraculous power to make his command
impossible, such as the eating of Bread, which is not, must needs be; in those
words (this is my body) in which, if in any, Transubstantiation may be found,
there is no imperative word, no mention at all of conversion, which yet, being
a very wonderful thing, would in all reason, if it were true, be fully opened:
it is not only said, this is my body, but it is added, which is broken for you;
this do in remembrance of me. In the Eucharist Christ's Body is not considered
as a glorious Body, but as broken and crucified; neither is there only his
Body, but the memorial of it; And how should there be a conversion of the Bread
into the Body? A conversion of it into the glorious Body, does not suit with
the Sacrament; a conversion of it into a broken crucified Body does not suit
with a state of glory; or, if there were a conversion, how should there be a
memorial? the Bread, which is not, cannot be a memorial of the Body, neither
can the Body be a memorial of it self: after all, it is no less than three
times called Bread, to assure us, that it is Bread after consecration, as well
as before.

The other is this: It is a Doctrine attended with very great absurdities; it
puts things into such a posture as here follows.

Here Is a Sacrament without a sign. It is essential to a Sacrament, that there
be an earthly part as well as an heavenly; somewhat for the body, as well as
for the soul: but here is a Sacrament of mere accidents; no Bread, no Wine to
figure out the body and blood of Christ; no corporal nourishment to signify a
spiritual one.

Here Is accidents without a subject; the bread vanishes, but the accidents
remain and face our senses, yet they stand all alone without a substance to
inhere in; under their roof is no less than the body of Christ, yet they lean
upon nothing.

Here Is a thing made, which before was made; which is all one, as if a Father
should beget a Son already begotten, or an Architect build an house already
built; the body of Christ, which was before the Conversion, is produced by
turning the bread into it; he that was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of
the Virgin, is made again by pronouncing a few words; to make that which is
made, is impossible. Bellarmine to salve this, says, De Euch. lib. 3.18.
That it is not conversio productiva, sed adductiva; which distinction
overturns it self; if it be only adductive, it is no conversion; if Christ had
only destroyed the substance of the Water, and set Wine, that was extant
before, in the room of it, there had been no conversion; no more is there, if
the bread cease to be; and the body of Christ, that was before in being, came
in the room of it: Here is no Transubstantiation, but Translocation only.

Here Is a body in many places; the body of Christ is entire in Heaven; it is
also entire in the Eucharist; it is therefore above it self, below it self, at
a distance from it self: all which are impossible.

Here Is a mistake of the Senses; the bread appears to be bread, it looks,
touches, smells, tastes like bread, yet it is not so; in other things our
senses are right, but in the Eucharist (in which the design is by sense to lead
our Faith to spiritual objects) they are in a fatal error, much less tolerable
than if there were a mistake about other objects; it being, not in a thing
merely natural or speculative, but in a sacred or practical sign ordained on
purpose to figure out and exhibit Christ unto us. Thus much touching the
Doctrine of the Papists in this point.

The Lutherans assert a corporal presence upon account of an Ubiquity in
Christ's humane nature: They explain themselves more fully thus. Two things may
be noted touching this Presence, the Will of Christ, and his Power. Touching
his Will, it appears in the words of Institution, This is my body; that is, in,
with, and under this bread is my body; this is (...), the literal sense of it.
Touching his Power to do it, they say, there is an hypostatical union of the
divine and humane natures in Christ; his Hypostasis is communicated to the
humane nature, therefore so are the divine Properties, such as Immensity is; he
sits in the humane nature at the right hand of God; and that right hand is
everywhere. The union of the two natures is inseparable; therefore where his
Deity is, there is his Humanity; he is everywhere God incarnate, therefore
nowhere excarnate, or out of the flesh.

In answer unto this, I shall offer some things.

As touching the Will of Christ, expressed in those words, This is my body. The
Lutherans seem to stand for the (...), the Letter of the Text; but their
Interpretation is not a litteral one, (This) is not properly (in, with, and
under this) in propriety (This is my body) is one thing, (in, with, and under,
This is my body) is another; neither is their Interpretation true. Baptism is a
Sacrament of the New Testament as well as the Lords Supper; as in the one, the
blood of Christ is not in, with, and under the water; so in the other, the body
is not in, with and under the bread; the reason is alike in both Sacraments. If
in the Eucharist the body be in, with, and under the bread, then the blood is
in, with, and under the wine; consequently the blood is separate from the body.
There is put upon Christ now in Glory, not to say, a second passion, but as
many passions as there are Eucharists. It is not easy to imagine how the bread
should be broken, and the body under it, not be so; or how the body should be
broken on Earth, and at the same time glorious in Heaven; or how the same body
at the same instant can be present in as many distant places as there are
Eucharists in the world; or, if such a Presence might be, how the body could be
finite, or indeed a body. All which strange Riddles the Lutherans must maintain
to make good their opinion.

As touching the Power of Christ to do it, the particulars must be considered.

First, The Hypostasis is communicated to the humane nature; therefore so are
the divine Properties; such as Immensity is. Theol. Ancil. 51.
I answer, with the learned Baronius, the Hypostasis of the Word is
communicated to the humane nature; not inhaesive or denominative, but
sustentative: the humane nature of Christ is not a Person; it may no more be
called a person, than Christ may have two persons; it does not subsist, but
exist in the person of the Word; there is no personality in it, but it is
received and taken into the person of the Word, and the person of the Word does
stay and sustain it. Hence it is evident, that the hypostasis not being
communicated to the humane nature inhesively or denominatively, the divine
Properties are not so communicated to it, neither is there any immensity
therein. It Is true, from the hypostatical union of the divine and humane
natures in Christ, there does issue a (...), a communication of Properties; the
Properies of both natures are truly and really attributed to the Person; the
Person subsists in both natures; both natures are united together in the
Person; but the Properties of the divine nature are not communicated to the
humane; for then the humane should be not immense only, but infinite and
eternal, nay, God himself, because the divine Properties are all one with the
divine Essence.

The second thing is, Christ in his humane nature sits at Gods right hand, and
that right hand is everywhere. I answer, This argument supposes, that the body
of Christ is as the right hand of God is, which is utterly untrue; the right
hand of God is incorporeal; is the body of Christ so? or can it be so, and not
cease to be a body? The right hand of God is infinite; is the humane nature of
Christ so? or can it be so, and not become a God? In like manner, the right
hand is everywhere; must the humane nature be so too? Scripture opposes it in
those very Texts which mention Christ's Session. Christ sits at the right hand
of God; but where? It is (...), in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20. (...), in the
high places, Heb. 1.3. (...), in the Heavens, Hebr. 8.1. The Session therefore
notes out his state of Glory in Heaven, not his universal Presence. The Apostle
tells the Colossians, that Christ sits on the right hand of God; and from
thence presses them to set their affections on things above, not on things on
the earth, Col. 3.1, 2. But if the Session note an universal Presence, the
Apostles exhortation vanishes into nothing. Stephen looks up, and saw the
heavens opened, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, Acts 7.55, 56. But
if the being at the right hand did point out an universal Presence, what needed
any looking up, or opening of Heaven to see him, who in his humane nature is
everywhere? Again, If the Ubiquity of Christ's humane nature be from his
Session, then it is not from the hypostatical Union, which was long before in
the first moment of his Incarnation; or if it be from the hypostatical union,
then it is not from the Session, which was after his Passion and Resurrection.

The next thing is, the union of the two natures in Christ is inseparable;
therefore where his Deity is, there is his Humanity. I answer, There may be an
union, and yet the united may not co-exist in all places; a Star is united to
its Orb, yet the Orb is where the Star is not: The humane nature of Christ is
united to the divine, yet the divine nature is where the humane is not; the
reason is evident; where the united are equal, there may be a full co-existence
in place; but where they are unequal, as the two natures in Christ must needs
be, there it cannot be so; the infinite nature is not put into finite straits;
the finite one is not stretched into an infinity; the union joins not, destroys
the natures; the humane nature must have its limits, the divine can have none.
Hence it appears, that the divine nature must needs be where the humane is not.

The last thing is, Christ is everywhere God incarnate, nowhere excarnate, or
out of the flesh. I answer, As to that, he is every where God incarnate; it may
be taken two ways, either thus, God who is in the flesh, is every where; and
this is true, but proves not the ubiquity of the flesh: or thus, the flesh, in
which God is, is every where; and this would make for ubiquity, but it is
untrue.

As to the other, He is no where excarnate or out of the flesh; he may be said
to be out of the flesh two ways; either thus, The union of the natures is
dissolved, the divine nature is separated from the humane, and this never is or
can be; though the divine nature be where the humane is not, yet the union
remains, it being made cum (...), non cum loco, with the word, not with place;
the Divine nature, being immense, cannot possibly by distance be separated from
any thing; if in the least point it were separated, it should cease to be
immense: or else thus, The Divine Nature is not shut up in the limits of the
flesh, but does transcendently exceed them; and thus the Divine Nature is not
so properly out of the flesh as beyond it; according to its Infinity it is
where the humane is not. Thus much touching the Doctrine of the Lutherans in
this point.

But if there is not a corporal presence of the body of Christ in the
Eucharist, is there no presence at all? Are the Sacraments (...), naked signs
and empty figures of Christ crucified? This indeed is charged upon us by the
Papists and Lutherans. When Calvin says, that the body of Christ is exhibited
to us in the Sacrament, De Euch. lib. 1. c. 1.
Bellarmine cries out, that it is but mera ludificatio. When Wendilin speaks of
the presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, Wend. Ex. 103.
the Lutherans cry out, fucus est, dolus est, it is a color, a cheat.
Nevertheless we say, that the body and blood of Christ are truly, though
spiritually, present, not as contained in the elements, but as exhibited to our
Faith. Thus Reverend Calvin has it, Inst. lib. 4. c. 17. s. 11.
Dico in coenae mysterio per symbola panis and vini Christum vere nobis
exhiberi; in the mystery of the Supper, by the Symbols of bread and wine,
Christ is truly exhibited to us. Thus the excellent Usher, Sermon before the
Commons. 1620.
Of his precious body and blood we are really made partakers; (that is, in
truth and in deed, and not in imagination only) although in a spiritual, and
not a corporal manner. Thus the Church of England, Hom. 1st. of the Sacrament.
In the Supper of the Lord there is no vain ceremony, no bare sign, no untrue
figure of a thing absent; but the Table of the Lord, the bread and cup of the
Lord, the memory of Christ, the annunciation of his death; yea, the communion
of the body and blood of the Lord, in a marvelous incorporation; which by the
operation of the Holy Ghost (the very bond of our conjunction with Christ) is
through Faith wrought in the Souls of the faithful. And again, The body of
Christ is given, Art. the 28.
taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after an heavenly and spiritual manner.
It Is true, the Papists and Lutherans make light of this spiritual presence:
Gregory de Valentia calls it, merum somnium Calvinisticum, a mere Calvinistical
dream. The Lutherans say, that this is not a true presence of Christ's body, but
(...) and imago, a spectrum or image. In answer to this, I shall offer two or
three things.

The Papists and Lutherans, who cast off this spiritual presence as a fancy, do
yet in explaining a corporal presence make the notion too fine to consist with
the nature of a body. De Euch. Lib. 1. c. 2. Lib. 3. c. 4.
Bellarmine will not have the body of Christ in the Eucharist to be visible,
sensible, tangible; it exists after the manner of Spirits, nay, it is present
after the manner of God. The Lutherans will not have the body of Christ in the
Eucharist to be visible, palpable, local, circumscribed with place; it exists
in a supernatural manner; it is present praesentia divina, by a Divine
presence: Thus they, who slight the spiritual presence, do make the corporal
one so fine, that the body of Christ, after they have stripped it of its
essential properties, is more like a Spirit than a Body.

The presence of Christ in the Eucharist is a spiritual one. This is clear; the
presence is such as the faculty is to which the thing is presented; the Bread
and Wine (which are the outward symbols of the Sacrament) are presented to our
sense; the Body and Blood of Christ (which are the inward marrow of it) are
presented to our Faith: In the former a corporal presence is necessary; in the
latter a spiritual one. Again, The presence is such as the eating is; the
eating of Christ is spiritual; it is (as appears in the sixth chapter of St.
John) from spiritual principles to a spiritual end; from the quickening spirit
to life eternal: the presence therefore must be a spiritual one, that it may
suit to the eating. Further, The presence is as the union is; the union between
Christ and us is spiritual, he dwells in us by Faith, he lives in us by his
Spirit; the presence therefore must be a spiritual one, that it may agree with
the union.

The Fathers are not for a corporal, but a spiritual presence. St. Cyprian
treating of the Eucharist says, Non tam corporali, quam spiritali transitione
Christo nos uniri: de Caena.
That we are united to Christ, not by a corporal, but spiritual transition. St.
Ambrose says, In illo Sacramento Christus est, quia corpus est Christi, non
ergo corporalis esca, sed spiritalis est: De iis qui initiantur. cap. 9.
In the Sacrament is Christ, because it is the Body of Christ; it is not
therefore corporal food, but spiritual. St. Athanasius says of the Body of
Christ, Corpus meum in cibum dabitur, ut spiritualiter unicuique tribuatur: In
illud, qui dixerit Verbum.
That it is given for food, that it may be spiritually distributed to every
one. St. Austin says, Habuit Christum Ecclesia secundum praesentiam carnis
paucis diebus, modo fide tenet. Tract. in Joh. 50.
The Church had Christ according to the presence of flesh a few days; now she
holds him by faith. St. Bernard says, Eadem caro nobis, sed spiritualiter, non
carnaliter, exhibeatur. in fest. Mart.
That the flesh of Christ is exhibited to us spiritually, not carnally. Thus
the Ancients are not for a corporal presence, but a spiritual one.

This spiritual presence is so great a mystery, that reverend Calvin says,
Instit. lib. 4. c. 17.
Nec men's plane cogitando, nec lingua explicando par esse potest; the mind
cannot conceive it, the tongue cannot utter it. Where mysteries are deep, to
speak a little is enough. I shall therefore only touch on two things.

The one is this; the body of Christ is objectively present to our faith. St.
Paul tells the Galatians, that before their eyes Jesus Christ had been
evidently set forth crucified among them; his Cross was at Jerusalem, his
glorious residence in Heaven; yet he is before our faith in the Gospel, and
particularly in the Eucharist, in which, as in a sacred Crucifix, we see him as
it were a suffering for us. It is here to be noted, that there is a double
existence of things; the one absolute, which is coufined to time and place; the
other relative and objective, which is not so. The Sun in its absolute
existence is in its orb; but as an object it is present to the eye, which sees
not merely the visible species, but the Sun it self. The Body of Christ in its
absolute existence is in Heaven; but as an object it is present to Faith, which
sees not merely the outward figures and symbols in the Eucharist, but Christ
himself sweating, bleeding, dying on a Cross, satisfying Divine justice for
sin; which is such a sight, as makes the Soul hide in his wounds, wash in his
blood, rest on his at onement, and triumph in his salvation. The phylact upon
that passage, Gal. 3.1. enquiring how Christ, who was crucified at Jerusalem,
could be said to be crucified among the Galatians? Answers thus, Praedicationi
fidem praebentes perinde ac praesentem vidistis; believing the Gospel preached,
ye saw him as present with you. St. Jerome upon that Text says, it was with you
quasi apud nos omnia facta sint, as if all things had been done with you, as if
you had seen Christ hanging on the Cross: Thus Christ as an object is present
to our Faith. It Is true, the Lutherans say, this presence is not a real one,
but in fancy and imagination only; but may that faith, which is (...), the
subsistence of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. be called a fancy? Was it a fancy,
by which Abel offered his excellent sacrifice? Enoch was translated into
Heaven? Noah prepared an Ark? Abraham offered up his beloved Isaac? Moses saw
him that is invisible? Is it by a fancy, that we are justified before God? that
we overcome the World? that we are inserted and incorporated into Christ? that
we eat his flesh and drink his blood? that we have him dwelling and living in
our hearts? These things are not done by fancy, but by faith; that spiritual
presence, which is to our faith, is not imaginary but real; no needless thing,
but simply necessary to the spiritual eating of Christ unto life eternal.
Without a presence there can be no eating; without a spiritual presence there
can be no spiritual eating; that cannot be corporally eaten which is not
present to sense; that cannot be spiritually eaten which is not present to
Faith: the spiritual presence therefore is so far from being a fancy, that it
is necessary to that spiritual eating, which is necessary to life eternal.

The other is this; The Body of Christ is present virtually, and in the Holy
Spirit communicated to us. St. Cyprian sets out Christ by the Sun, the great
Luminary of the world; De Caena. Domini.
Totum apud se manens totum se omnibus commodat, remaining whole in himself, he
communicates himself whole to all his members. His Sacred Body, which is
locally in Heaven, comes down to us in healing and quickening beams, in the
special presence and operations of the Spirit; there goes out from it a divine
virtue, which reaches down to all the Believers in the world, and upon every
touch of Faith is present to heal them: Evigilet fides and praesto est
Christus; let Faith awake, and Christ is at hand. Aquinas, a great man among
the Papists, asserts, that the passion of Christ operates per spiritualem
contactum, by a spiritual contact. Scheckius, 3. Pars. q. 48. art. 6.
a learned Lutheran. says, that the Body of Christ is present with us, not
locally and corporally, but spiritually and in Energy. But here it will be
said, that thus the body of Christ is present in its effect only. To which I
answer, there is more in it than so; the Spirit communicated is not a mere
effect, but a copula or unitive bond; it operates not merely upon believers as
objects, but in them as parts of Christ. When the Sun lets down his rays to the
earth, those rays are effects, and operate upon the earth as an object; but
when the head lets down the animal spirits to the feet, those spirits are an
unitive bond, and operate in them as parts of the body. Thus it is between
Christ and Believers; the Spirit is not a mere effect, but an unitive bond; it
joins them intimately to Christ, it makes them members of his body, of his
flesh, and of his bones, mystical parts of him, and a kind of appendants of his
humane nature, not indeed hypostatically, but spiritually joined to it; the
distance between Heaven and Earth can no more impede this conjunction, than the
distance between the head and feet can impede that union which is between them.
The Immense Spirit can more easily unite at a vast distance, then finite
spirits can at a less; the humane nature of Christ cannot by local distance be
separated from the Divine, because the Divine is Immense; Believers cannot by
local distance be separated from Christ, because the uniting Spirit is Immense.
Again, The Spirit operates not merely upon Believers as objects, but in them as
parts of Christ; first it makes them parts, and then it operates in them as
such: 'Two things eminently show them to be parts of him, that is, his
Satisfaction is imputatively derived down upon them; his Spirit does by a
special presence operate in them; in the one they are as parts covered, in the
other as parts acted: That the curse of the Law does not seize upon them, it is
because the Head covers them with his satisfaction; that they walk in holiness
and obedience, it is because the Head moves and acts them by his Spirit. Thus
we are in intimate conjunction with him; and so, as St. Chrysostom speaks,
(...), In 1 Cor. cap. 10.
by union we partake of him; his body, which is united to him hypostatically,
is united to us mystically; we have his flesh in the uniting and operating
Spirit. We know his fiesh (says St. Austin) Non secundum carnem, De Verb.
Domini. ser. 60.
sed secundum spiritum; not according to the flesh, but according to the
Spirit: his corporal presence being gone from us, there succeeds a spiritual
one in the room of it.

The next thing is the eating of Christ. The Papists and Lutherans, who stand
for a corporal presence, are for an eating suitable, that is, an oral one; but
this is a great mistake. In the Eucharist there is an earthly part before our
sense, and an heavenly one before our faith; in the one an oral eating is
proper; in the other it is impossible, vain, nay, a very horrible thing: It is
impossible; the body of Christ cannot be eaten orally without suffering;
neither can it suffer while it is in glory; it would not, if torn into pieces,
serve all the communicants in the Church; neither can it (being finite) be
received entirely by all. It is also vain; could we take the body of Christ
into our mouths, how should it spiritually profit us? which way should it
nourish our Souls to life eternal? The Throat is the road of corruptible food,
Faith is the only organ that takes in the incorruptible; a Capernatical eating
is to no purpose. It is also a very horrible thing; In Joh. cap. 6.
Theophylact, speaking of eating Christ's flesh, says, Christians are not
devoratores carnis, devourers of humane flesh; but our Saviors words are to be
understood spiritually.

The Ancient Fathers were not for an oral eating, De Caena Domini.
but a spiritual one; Non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fide sincera panem
sanctum frangimus, says St. Cyprian, We do not sharpen our teeth to bite; but
we break the Holy Bread with a sincere Faith. The Fathers in the first Council
of Nice say, That we receive the Body of Christ (...), truly, but they mean,
spiritually; for they call upon us to lift up our minds in Faith. St. Austin
says, That the true eater, who never dies, Manducat intus, non foris, In Joh.
tract. 26.
manducat in cord, non premit dente, eats within, not without; eats with the
heart, presses not with the tooth.

This spiritual eating stands in two or three things; it imports intimate union
with Christ; the Bread is united to the Body, Christ is united to the Soul.
Hence St. Austin, Ad fratr. in Erem. Ser. 28.
Sacramentum illud ideo hominibus datur, ut corpus in terris capiti coadunetur;
This Sacrament is therefore given to men, that the body on earth may be united
to the head: It Is true, Believers before they receive the Eucharist are united
to Christ; but in the use of it their union is increased, their faith comes to
have more life and activity, they grow up into the head in a further
conjunction with, and assimilation to him. Again, It imports a derivation of
strength and life from Christ; Bread strengthens the outward man, Christ the
inward one; his Satisfaction strengthens it against the fears of wrath; his
Spirit strengthens it unto all duties and sufferings: Believers have some
strength before, but here they renew their strength; they have fresh tastes and
savours of Christ's precious blood, high and rich anointings of the Holy Spirit;
they do not only eat Christ, but feast upon him; his flesh is as spiritual
marrow; his blood is as celestial wine to cheer their inner man; his Spirit
comes down upon them in further communications of grace and comfort, in pure
discoveries of the love and kindness of God, which cannot but put life and
vigor into their Souls. Further, It imports that this derivation of strength
from Christ is continued; we eat, not once or twice, but often, to repair the
frail body; Believers daily feed upon Christ, daily derive strength from him to
keep up their Souls in a state of Grace. Some of the Ancient Fathers interpret
the daily Bread in the Lords Prayer to be no other than Christ; the
supersubstantial Bread, which we daily feed on by Faith. De Orat. Dom.
Tertullian says, That in begging daily Bread, we beg Perpetuitatem in
Christo, a perpetuity in Christ. St. Cyprian says, That in it we beg, Vt a
corpore Christi non recedamus, that we may not depart from his body. Every day
we stand in need of Christ; we are not always at the Lords Table, feeding on
the elements; but upon Christ, the spiritual substance of the Sacrament, we are
daily to feed, that we may receive such a Divine vigor from him, as may
preserve our union with him.

Thus much touching the Seals of this union, Baptism and the Lords Supper.

CHAP. VIII.
The Privileges of those that are in Christ are great. Christ's righteousness
is imputatively derived upon them, to deliver them from wrath, to entitle them
to life eternal. Christ is their Advocate above; he pleads for them, that they
may have pardon, the spirit, access to God. They are adopted in him; as sons
they have a freedom in holy things, a continual indulgence from God, an
heavenly inheritance. They have the Holy Spirit in them, it lives, breathes,
moves, operates in them. They have communion with God; their services answer to
his call; his communications answer to their services. They are happy in every
condition; in prosperity their mercies are pure; in adversity they have God
with them; and admirably appearing to them. Our great work is Union with Christ.

HAving treated of the Seals of the mystical Union; I now come to the
Privileges of it, which are great enough, if seen, to attract all men unto
Christ. St. Paul was very illustrious in Jewish Privileges; he was Circumcised
the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of
the Hebrews, as touching the law, a Pharisee: Concerning zeal persecuting the
Church: touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless, Phil. 3.5,
6. Yet he counted all these but loss and dung, that he might win Christ and be
found in him, verse. 7, 8, 9. There was a (...), an excellency of privileges
above all other to be had in Christ; by union with him the Apostle had an
inward circumcision made without hands, he became one of the spiritual stock
and tribe of Christ, a Christian so named from Christ his Head and Master, an
heavenly Pharisee separated to the Gospel, a right zealot for the Faith which
before he destroyed, a person invested with a better righteousness than his
own, even with the righteousness of Christ; in comparison of such things as
these, all other things were but as dross in his eyes. To be in union with
Christ, is to be a subject, spouse, building, branch, member of his; to have
the privileges of union, is to have all the good things which the spiritual
King, Husband, Foundation, Root, Head affords to those that are joined to him:
Christ gives himself to us, and with himself all other good things. Memorable
are the Words of Dr. Reynolds touching the crucified body of Christ, Medit. on
the Lords Supper. fol. 28.
It was his body by his hypostatical and real; but it is ours by a spiritual
and mystical union; whatsoever fullness is in him, of it have we all received.
Scivit Latro, quod illa in corpore Christi vulnera non essent Christi vulnera,
sed Latronis. Ambr. de Sancto Latrone. Ser. 44.
Whatsoever graces and merits flow from him as the Head, they trickle down as
far as the skirts of his garment, the meanest of his chosen. The pains of his
wounds were his, but ours is the benefit; the sufferings of his death were his,
but ours is the mercy; the stripes on his back were his, but the balm that
issued from them, ours; the thorns on his head were his, but the crown is ours;
the holes in his hands and side were his, but the blood that ran out was ours;
in a word, the price was his, but the purchase ours. Thus that excellent man.
The excellency of these privileges will best appear by particulars; I shall
therefore instance in several things.

The first Privilege is this; Those that are in union with Christ, have his
satisfactory righteousness imputatively derived upon them; Christ obeyed unto
death, the death of the Cross, not as a private person, but as a Sponsor or
Surety for us; he stood in our room, he suffered in our stead, he was a second
Adam, an head no less communicating to his seed than the first Adam was to his
posterity; as Adams sin comes upon each one of us as soon as he is proles Adae,
so Christ's Righteousness comes upon each one of us as soon as he is proles
Christi. Thus the Apostle, As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, Romans 5.19. Hence those
many phrases in Scripture, Christ is our Righteousness; we are the
Righteousness of God in him; he is the end of the Law for Righteousness to us;
his stripes heal us; his blood cleanses us from all sin: All which show, that
his Righteousness is communicated to us: this is an exceeding great privilege.
Two things will evidence this:

The one is this; The Righteousness of Christ delivers us from the curse and
wrath of God; There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ: Their being
in him is a security; it is with them, as it was with those Servants of
Pharaoh, which were within when the storm came; they are under the cover of
Christ's satisfaction, when the fire and brimstone and horrible tempests comes
down upon a Christless world; they are in a Sanctuary in the wounds of Christ;
Vindictive Justice (once satisfied there) cannot come there again for a second
satisfaction; their sin was condemned in the flesh of Christ, Romans 8.3. It was
fully punished there; it is not to be condemned again, or punished a second
time in his members; no, the Apostle does in that place immediately add, The
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us, (...). Ar. Eth. lib. 5. c. 7.
verse. 4. The (...), the satisfaction that Christ made to the violated Law,
becomes imputatively ours; the Law cannot demand another satisfaction: Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us, Gal.
3.13. It was never meant, that the curse should fall upon the head and members
too; it was upon the head, that the members might escape: This is such a
privilege, that those who have it, are happy in every condition; their troubles
are single, and without a curse in them; their cup is pure, and without any
dregs of wrath in it; Death to them is but a dark entry into life-eternal; it
unties their bodies and souls, but it separates neither from their Head; they
sleep in Jesus, in a state of conjunction with him; the great day of judgment
need not alarm their fears; the trumpet of God does not sound death to them,
but life; the world may be wrapped up in a winding sheet of flames; the
Christless inhabitants may cry to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them,
and cover them; but Believers are safe with Christ, as members with the head;
his Righteousness is as a rich Robe to cover them; Christ will come in glorious
Majesty; a train of Angels will attend him; but Believers need not be afraid;
being head, he will not condemn his members; being Author of his own
Righteousness, he will not deny the plea of it; they shall be for ever
discharged from the wrath to come.

The other is this; The Righteousness of Christ intitles us unto favor and
lifeeternal.

It intitles us to the favor of God; Our Savior prays to his Father for
Believers, That the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in
them, John 17.26. That is, that the Fathers love might be not only toward him,
but might in a measure be derived upon his members, in whom he is by a mystical
conjunction; the words (I in them) point out that conjunction, as the reason of
extending love to them: God favors us as mystical parts of Christ; he is with
us through Immanuel; he shines on us in the face of Christ; he tells us in
Scripture, that he takes pleasure in them that fear him; looks to a contrite
Spirit, compasses the righteous with favor; but all this respect is unto them
as being in Christ; it is only for persons in innocence, and graces in
perfection to be accepted in themselves; fallen persons and defective graces
must be accepted in and through a Mediator: Here Is the privilege of those in
Christ, notwithstanding all their defects they are favorites of Heaven; Gods
eye is upon them; his pleasure is in them; his favor irradiates them; the
light of his countenance is a kind of Heaven unto them.

It also entitles us to life-eternal; Justification of life is (...), by one
righteousness, Romans 5.18; not by many righteousnesses, but by one, which is
that of Christ; by the same blood by which he entered into the holy place, Hebr.
9.12. do his members enter also; his blood removes obstacles, it purges away
guilt, which would have barred them out of Heaven; it satisfies Justice, which
would have been like a flaming sword to keep them out of Paradise; neither is
this all, it is a full price for Heaven, it merits all the glory above. St.
Bernard therefore observes, that Christ has a double right to Heaven,
haereditate patris and merito passionis, De Vita. S. Vern. lib. 1. cap. 12.
by the inheritance of his Father, and by the merit of his Passion: the one is
enough for him, the other for us; those that are in Christ shall enter Heaven,
and see the blessed One there; in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. This is a privilege not fully to
be known till it be enjoyed; a thing too excellent to be seen in this dark and
fluctuating world; when we are in the region of light, and in the eternal
center, then we shall understand what an heavenly purchase Christ has made for
us, and what a privilege it is to be in union with him.

Another privilege is this; Christ, who suffered on earth for those that are in
him, does intercede for them in Heaven; he is an Agent for them above, to
maintain their peace and intercourse with Heaven; he bears their Names upon his
Humeral and upon his Pectoral, spiritually sustaining, and intimately loving
them; he appears in the presence of God for them; he is their Advocate with the
Father, and pleads, though not orally, yet really, by his Blood and
Righteousness, that all the good and excellent blessings thereby purchased may
come down upon them; he is the Lamb that stands as if it were slain, Rev. 5.6
His wounds and blood cry in the ears of God to be returned unto his members in
pardons and graces; he, who satisfied justice, now pleads for grace; he, who
dying laid the foundation of Salvation, now lives to perfect the work, to save
(...), Hebr. 7.25; not by halves, but altogether; to give our Salvation its
last act and complement; he is a Priest for ever, his Sacrifice, but once
offered up, is in his Intercession virtually continued, to perfect for ever
them that are sanctified: Here believers have a tree of life, bearing as many
excellent fruits as Christ paid for in his Death. To instance in some of them.

Here Is a pardon for them. He, that on earth made satisfaction for sin, in
Heaven pleads for the pardon of it; his Blood cries, That the sin which is
satisfied for in the head, may not be charged upon the members: If any man sin,
we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1. He
pleads that righteousness, which, being put into the opposite balance,
outweighs all the sins of his people.

Here Is the supply of the Holy Spirit given to them; he, that here below dyed
to merit the communication of the Spirit, lives and intercedes above to have it
done: I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he
may abide with you for ever, John 14.16. Our Savior prays in the force of an
infinite price, therefore the Spirit is given to them; he lives for ever, and
continues praying; therefore the Spirit abides with them; that, which he by
Prayer obtains for us, by Power he confers upon us: therefore (as Dr. Reynolds
observes) in the Psalm he is said to receive gifts for men, noting the fruit of
his Intercession, On the 110 Psalm, fol. 438.
Psalm. 68.18. And in the Apostle, to give gifts to men, noting the power and
fullness of his Person, Ephesians. 4.8. Having received of the Father the promise of
the Holy Ghost, he has shed forth this which you now see and hear, Acts 2.33.
The Intercession of Christ never fails to communicate the Spirit to his members.

Here Is an access to God, a free ingress for them unto the Mercy-seat; whilst
he is at Gods right hand, none can bar them out from the divine Presence: The
Apostle tells us, That we have a great High Priest passed into the Heavens, one
no less than the very Son of God; and withal, one as man touched with the
feeling of our infirmities; no less willing and compassionate, than able to
help us. And from thence he concludes, Let us therefore come (...), with
boldness, with a liberty to speak all our mind, unto the throne of grace, that
we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, Hebr. 4.14, 15,
16. Believers need not fear to approach unto the great God; his Glory will not
swallow them up; his Justice will not be a devouring fire to them; they may
freely open their wants before him; their regular prayers shall surely speed in
Heaven; Christ intercedes there for them; and, which is the Echo of that
Intercession, the Spirit makes intercession in their hearts; the success
therefore cannot fail: though their prayers, as they are in their bosoms, have
much weakness and imperfections; yet as soon as they are put into the hand of
Christ, and perfumed with the sweet incense of his Merits, they are glorified
prayers, and have power with God to procure the thing desired.

Another privilege is Adoption. All men in a sense are the offspring of God;
the immortal Spirit in them had in the very make of it the natural Image of
God, which was a nobler print of the Deity, than that which was upon all the
material world besides. Adam in Innocence was in an higher way the Son of God;
the holy Graces in him, which made up the Moral Image, had more of the divine
Beauty shining in them, than that which was to be found in the Essence of the
Soul: but Believers are the Sons of God in a more excellent manner; To as many
as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, John 1.12. By
conjunction with Christ the natural Son, they become adopted ones. Adam was a
Son only by Creation; his Soul had in the Essence of it a natural Image of God,
and in the holy Graces of it a Moral one; but Believers are sons by mystical
union with Christ the natural Son; neither is this a mere empty title, but they
are born of God, they are of the seed-royal of Heaven; the Blood of God runs in
their consciences; the divine Spirit, which formed Christ in the womb, does by
a supernatural overshadowing, form him in their heart; in their adoptive
Sonship there is a shadow of the eternal one; the splendour of grace in them,
resembling God in a measure, is a little picture of Christ, who is the
brightness of his Fathers glory. This privilege, as it is from God, is a piece
of admirable love: Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon
us, that we should be called the Sons of God, 1 John 3.1. The Apostle stands
and wonders at it as an object of glorious and amazing Eminence: Also, as it is
upon Believers, it is a piece of incomparable Dignity, such as does far
outshine all that luster which is upon the Potentates of this world; all the
glory of earthly Princes is but fumus seculi, the smoke of this lower Region,
their titles glitter only in carnal eyes; but adoption is radius coeli, a ray
of heavenly glory, making believers, though but worms in themselves, shine to
the eyes of Angels, who look upon them as mystical parts of Christ. Touching
this privilege, I shall only touch on two or three things.

Believers as Sons have an heavenly freedom in the ways of God. They are not
dragged to holy things by the cords of Hell and Death; they do not bring forth
their duties merely under the pressure of the Lawletter, or in the power of
fallen nature, in a dead, carnal, servile manner; no, they are spirited for
holy things; the Law is in their hearts; the rectitude of the commands attracts
them; the Love of Christ constrains them; the great rewards in Heaven ravish
them; the Holy Spirit inspires obedience into them; Holiness becomes natural to
them; Duties are brought forth in the easiness of the new creature; they can
walk, run, fly on, in the pure ways toward eternal happiness: this is a very
choice privilege indeed; they are no longer in the straits of sin and earth,
but in a divine amplitude and liberty; their hearts rest not in Liber ab
infinito, ad infinitum, super infinitum, movetur.
finite things, but go out to the infinite One; their thoughts are upon the
first Good, their aims at the last End; their liberty is joined to its great
fountain; their motion is to the true center: this is a right, noble, royal
posture of Soul toward God, in whom all our happiness is.

Believers as Sons live under the continual Indulgences of God; in temptations
he bears them up upon the wings of grace; in a world of snares he plucks their
feet out of the net; when the flesh hangs back, and cumbers them in holy
Duties, he helps them on by the sweet supplies of his Spirit; when they totter,
and are ready to fall, he upholds them with his Almighty hand; that their
persons may not be hurt, he will keep them night and day; that their graces may
not decay, he will water them every moment; in their wants his treasures are at
hand to supply them; in their afflictions he himself is afflicted, as taking
them to his heart; in fainting fits he has rich cordials for them; in the
midst of encompassing infirmities, he spares them as a man spares his own Son
that serves him; goodness and mercy follow them all their days; a stream of
graces and comforts perpetually accompany them, to supply and refresh them in
the way to Heaven.

Believers as Sons shall have the heavenly Inheritance; If children, then
heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. All the children
are heirs of God as their Father, and joint-heirs with Christ as their elder
Brother; the Father would not have his natural Son only inherit the blessed
Kingdom, but his adopted ones too. Christ the elder brother would not reign
alone there, but have all his brethren come and partake of his Glory with him:
Here Is Honor in the highest pitch; Happiness in the utmost perfection;
admirable is that Grace which gives it; precious is that Merit that procures it
for us.

Another privilege is this; They that are in union with Christ, have the Holy
Spirit in them; it is the Dignity of man, that he has an immortal Spirit in
him; touching which, the Philosophers speak at a very high rate; it is (say
they) a Particle of the divine Breath, a bud or blossom of the Deity, a kind of
Demon, or God in us: but, which is a much greater thing, it is the Dignity of
a man in Christ, that he has an higher Spirit than his own, no less than the
Holy Spirit of God in him: If the Spirit of wisdom and understanding be upon
Christ, Isa. 11.2. then it follows, That the earth is full of the knowledge of
the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, verse. 9. The Holy Spirit, which is upon
him, is diffused unto his members: The Oil of gladness, Psalm. 45.7. does not
only glad him, but his fellows too; though not in equal excellency with him,
yet in a fit proportion for them as members of him: this is a wonderful
privilege. The Holy Spirit works the great work in them; it inspires a divine
life into them; it does as in the first Creation command the light to shine out
of darkness; it calls the holy Graces, which before were not, into being; it
raises up the new creature out of nothing; nay, as it were, in mighty waters,
in the midst of that torrent of corruption which is in the heart; putting back
the stream of nature, it sets up a noble structure of grace in them; it
accommodates graces to every faculty, as the dew is white in the Lilly, and red
in the Rose; so the Holy Spirit in its Graces is light in the mind, liberty in
the will, order in the affections; also it accommodates suitable influences to
every grace; it gives such sweet touches upon their holy love, fear. meekness,
patience, as makes them go forth into act in a free spontaneous manner; it acts
so powerfully, as if there were no room left for humane liberty; and yet so
connaturally, as if there were no power at all in it. Further, It accommodates
it self to them at every turn; it is a Spirit of Grace in their penitential
meltings; a Spirit of supplication in their ardent Devotions; a Spirit of
Revelation in their Evangelical Studies; a Spirit of Love in their Charities; a
Spirit of Power in their Infirmities; a Spirit of Fear in their holy Walkings;
a Spirit of Meekness in their carriage toward others; a Spirit of Comfort in
their Afflictions; a Spirit of Glory in their Reproaches; a Spirit of Holiness
in all their Converses; it lives, breathes, moves, aptly operates in them.
Hence in all their good actions, they are lifted up above themselves, and
carried beyond the line of a mere humane Spirit; they walk in a divine circle
from God as the first cause, to God as the last end; they center on nothing
less than God himself, and take an aim no lower than his Glory; whether they
eat, or drink, or pray, or hear, or whatever good thing they do, they are still
carrying on the great design, that God in all things may be glorified; the
great Alpha is their Omega; the supreme good is their ultimate end; they dare
not center in a creature, or make God a Medium: this is practical blasphemy;
and in effect it says, That God is not God, or that there is something better
than he; it is their study how to serve the blessed God; how to show forth his
praise in an holy, humble, righteous, heavenly conversation; still there is
oculus in metam, a pure intention at his glory, as the great end of all; by
that intention they are so joined unto him, that all their works are
spiritualized, and attain a kind of Immortality. This is an excellent privilege
indeed, they are acted by the Holy Spirit, and walk as Christ walked; he, as
became the great Samplar of Sanctity, sought his Fathers glory; they, as
mystical parts of him, tread in his divine steps; no flesh on earth, but that
which is spiritually joined to him, does so; all others are off from the great
Center; their best works putrify; one inferior end or other, like a worm at
the root, makes them moulder into nothing; not being terminated in God, they
are not accepted as done to him.

Another privilege is this; They that are in Christ, have not merely
Ordinances, but communion with God in them. They see his goings in the
Sanctuary; they have the golden Oil of the Spirit communicating it self through
the golden Pipes: this communion is a divine intercourse and correspondence
between God and them. There are two things, somewhat on their part answering to
somewhat of Gods, and somewhat on Gods part answering to somewhat of theirs.

On their part there is a service answering to the call of God; God says, Seek
ye my face: they answer, Thy face, Lord, will we seek. God appoints Ordinances,
they perform Services in correspondence thereunto. There are two things in
Ordinances, Matter and Manner: there is that in their Services which complies
with both. As to Matter, an Ordinance is a thing appointed by God, accordingly
they go to it as such: A worship of humane invention is to them as nothing,
nay, worse than nothing; it is as strange fire, or as a graven Image, a kind of
Teraphim, expressing, though not, as they did, an humane shape, yet an humane
device or invention: But where there is an Ordinance of Gods institution, where
he has set his own seal and stamp, there they fly as Doves to the windows,
thither they repair to meet the Holy God; they know assuredly, that there is
the way in which he is to be found; there he records his name, and commands the
blessing, even life for evermore; the call is that which makes them run; the
institution is that which makes them wait for the benediction. As to Manner, an
Ordinance is to be used like it self, in an holy way, accordingly they treat it
as a sacred thing; their hearts are in such a posture as corresponds to the
Presence of God in it: He is the great Majesty of Heaven; they lie low before
him; their reverence shows Him, whom they serve, to be an Infinite one: Oh!
what abasing thoughts are there in their bosom! Dust here approaches to Majesty
it self, nay, sinful dust to the holy One. What a little, very little thing is
the soul to him, though it were entirely given up to him! And how much less is
it, when corruption holds back, and the world steals away a great part of it
from him? He is a Spirit, they serve him in Spirit and Truth; they endeavor to
give him their highest and purest intention; they bid the world stand by, and
not to interrupt them; were it possible, they would not have so much as a
glance or a broken thought toward carnal objects; he is Mercy and Love it
self; their Faith in and through the great Mediator ascends up to him for
pardon and acceptance; their Love takes fire at his, and inflames their hearts
toward him; He is the great Author of the Ordinance; he only can bless it;
their eyes are up to him; their hearts cry out for him; Oh! that he would fill
the Ordinance with his Spirit; that he would cast their minds into the mould of
the Gospel! this is all their expectation, to meet with him in his ways. Here
is the first correspondence.

On Gods part there are such divine Communications, as do in a way of Grace
answer to their Services; as they draw near to him, so he draws near to them;
as they come to Ordinances as Ordinances appointed by him, so he comes down
into Ordinances as his own Institutions, to fill them with his gracious
Presence: there are such spirations and influences of the Spirit; such openings
of Evangelical Glories and Mysteries; such deep and intimate impressions of
Truth; such delights and spiritual suavities in holy things; such prospects of
rectitude and beauty in the commands; such sweet tastes and favors of Grace in
the promises; such sheddings of the divine Love and Favor; such a Shechinah, a
presence and glory in the Ordinance, that they can do no less than break out,
and say, God is in it of a truth. Before, they did by the word know the
Ordinance to be of God: but now they know it by experience; God shows a
wonderful respect to their services; I may add, to the pious mode of them. The
more low and humble they are, the nearer is the high One to them; their
humility and penitential frame sets his Mercies a melting and working toward
them; when Israel was repenting, his Soul was grieved for them, Judge. 10.16.
When Ephraim bemoaned himself, the divine bowels were troubled for him, Jer.
31.20. The more upright they are, the more does his countenance behold them;
With the upright he will show himself upright; their pure intentions shall have
a Crown of pure Mercies; while they are serving him in heart and spirit, he
will do them good with all his heart and soul; they lift up their faith and
love toward him; and the issue is, Mercy comes down upon them in greater
riches and plenty: Love appears in clearer and higher manifestations than
before; they lift up their eyes to the great Author of Ordinances, and it is
not in vain; he manifests himself to them in every duty; in Prayer they meet
with gales and divine Enlargements; they have a free access and manuduction to
the Mercy-seat; they have sweet returns of their Petitions; if not in specie,
in the very thing desired, yet in something else fitter and better for them;
there is an inward support, which is tantamount to the blessing desired; or
else there is a wise transmutation of the blessing into something more
profitable. In the hearing of the word, they have an effectual working in their
hearts; they do not only hear outwardly, but inwardly too; there are such
Illuminations, as are more precious than all the lights in nature: The word,
like a beam of Omniscience, penetrates into the very inward parts; the savours
of Christ, are as if there were a box of heavenly Spikenard broken in their
hearts; the divine Spirit breathes life and power into them, to quicken them to
all Obediende; in every Ordinance they have a practical and experimental proof,
that God is in the Ordinance. This is the second correspondence; both evidence
a sweet communion with God, in which stands much of our happiness here below;
it being certain, that there is no greater good to be enjoyed than himself.

The last privilege I shall name, is this: They that are in Christ, are happy
in every conditio; Eth. lib. 1. c. 10.
a virtuous man in Aristotle, is (...), a foursquare man; cast him which way
you will, still he is upon his bottom. I may much more say so of men in Christ;
their happiness is so internal and divine, that it does not wheel or roll about
with the mutable world, but stands unmovable in every condition; whether the
times be prosperous or adverse, still they are happy.

They are happy in times of prosperity; they have outward good things in a more
excellent way than others; they have a special title to them; they have them
not only by Providence, but by Promise; they claim not upon mere Creation, but
in and through Christ. All are yours, and you are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.22. They
have not merely the things themselves, but the favor of God with them. In the
blessing of Joseph, there are the dew and the deep; the precious things of the
Heaven, Sun, and Moon; the precious things of the Earth, Hills, and Mountains;
and, to sweeten all, there comes in at last, The good will of him that dwelt in
the bush, Deuteronomy. 33.13, 14, 15, 16, verses. This good will is that which makes
the stream of blessings run pure; Believers have blessings, and no curse in
them; a table, and no snare in it; a prosperous state, and no sorrow added to
it; the light of Gods Providence, and the light of his countenance are met in
conjunction. Again, They look upon outward blessings in their dependence upon
the original; they know the true sense of them to be this, That their hearts
may be guided to the fountain of Goodness; the little beams, being rightly
understood, point to the Father of Lights; the smallest drops of good here
below, lead to the Ocean of sweetness above; no sooner do Believers open their
eyes upon the creatures, but they see the stamps and signatures of the first
cause; they behold the rare Idea's of the divine Power and Goodness; every
thing calls upon them to fall down and adore him, who is (...), the Fountain
and Principle of all things. Further, They know the right use of blessings;
they do not take Creature Comforts into their heart, which is an holy place for
God, but bid them stand without, and minister to the body; they do not rest and
center in them, but as Pilgrims and Strangers march on to the heavenly
Country: in the fullest affluence of outward things, still they cry out,
Dulcius ex ipso font, a single God is sweeter than all: they look upon them
not as fuel to lust, but as incentives to holy Love and Obedience; they do not
as absolute Proprietors, ingross all to themselves, but as faithful Stewards
distribute to others; they know, they receive outward things, not to have and
to hold, but to communicate; Mercies in their hands are, as blood in the Veins,
or water in the Conduit, for public use; the goodness of God to them, makes
them good to others; the open hand of the great Donor, makes them ashamed to
shut their own.

Also they are happy in times of adversity. If a storm of persecution come,
their happiness is not diminished, but increased; they never had their Souls in
such a posture, they never had such appearances of God, as at such a time; they
melt in fresh acts of repentance; God draws their pardon afresh, and more
legible than ever; they sigh and cry for the abominations in the Land; God sets
a mark and a seal of distinction upon them; their hearts tremble for the Ark;
his bowels are moved for them; their care is for his interest and great name;
his care is to make up his Jewels; their Faith ascends up, and fixes it self
upon him; his Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, come down and command Salvation
for them; they cry and wrestle with him in their prayers, that that Gospel, the
glory may not depart away from them; he hears them in one measure of grace or
other; the Gospel, it may be, shall not depart from the Land, at least, not
from their hearts; they are tossed in a Sea of troubles, but there is a calm
within, and an Haven of rest (to which every wave gives them a lift) near at
hand; they may look to Heaven, and sing, as the Martyr Babylas did, Return unto
thy rest, O my soul. They are poor weak creatures, but the power of Christ
rests upon them; that divine Power, which bore up his humane nature in his
Sufferings, bears up them in theirs; being in the true Immanuel, they are sure
to have God with them; how heavy soever the Cross be, his everlasting Arms are
under them; how bloody soever the Persecutor be, his rich Mercies are toward
them; when great men leave them naked to their Enemies, he covers them with his
wings; when outward comforts depart from them, he will never, never leave them,
no more than Christ's Divinity did forsake his Humanity; the joy of the Holy
Ghost is their cordial in the greatest troubles; the Love of God shed abroad in
their hearts, is able to sweeten Prisons and fiery Furnaces to them; when they
have least of Earth, then they have most of Heaven; there are some sparkles of
glory let down into their hearts; they taste some drops of the pure Rivers of
pleasure which are above. Valeat vita, vileart faculltates, inquit Julitta.
Mart. Cent. 4. Magdeb.
This makes them able to bid farewell to life, and all things here, that they
may go, though through the greatest losses and sufferings, to be with Christ.
Thus much touching the Privileges of union with Christ.

It is a notable passage in Antoninus, Every thing (says he) is designed for
some work, Beasts, and Plants, and Sun, and Stars; (...)? and what are you for?
what is your great business? It is a shame for a man, much more for a
Christian, not to know the (...), the great work he is to do. Our Savior tells
us, that it is Faith in himself, John 6.29. St. Paul made it his chief
business, to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. Sit down, O Christian, and consider
where thy interest lies: Is it not thy interest to be delivered from the wrath
to come, and to enjoy the blessed God in Heaven? Do not the pangs in
conscience, and the sense of a Deity tell thee, that it is so? To be saved for
ever, must needs be a great thing; and how can thou be saved, but by Christ
the only Savior? or whom does he save, but those that are in conjunction with
him? Is it not thy interest to have such an Advocate as Christ, to appear in
the Presence of God, and to plead for all good things for thee? Art thou not at
a vast distance from God? and are not thy Righteousnesses as a filthy rag
before him? Sure it must be well for thee, to have a Mediator to plead and
intercede for thee, that thou may have the returns of his Blood in Pardons
and Graces: And how can this be, unless thou art joined to him? For whom does
he so intercede, but for those that come unto God by him? Is it not thy
interest, to be made a Son of God, to have the Holy Spirit living and breathing
in thee? How desirable must Adoption be to a Child of wrath? how much does thy
natural spirit want a better one to new-frame and actuate it? and how can
thou be adopted, unless thou art united to the natural Son? or which way can
thou expect to have the Holy Spirit moving and dwelling in thee, unless thou
become a Member of Christ? Is it not thy interest to have communion with the
great God? how excellent a thing is it, to have thy Services answer to Gods
call, and his divine Communications answer to thy Services? This is a little
Heaven here below; but without union with Christ it cannot be. Is it not thy
interest to be happy in every condition? how admirable is it to have pure
Mercies and comfortable Sufferings? to have the love and gracious Presence of
God in every estate? This is a choice benefit, but not to be attained but in
and through Christ; to have him, is to have all things; to want him, is a
misery worse than nothing: Union with him therefore is the great work of all.
How earnest should our pursuits of it be? how ardent our prayers for it? how
constant our endeavors after it? how should we gad up and down from Ordinance
to Ordinance seeking of Christ, breathing after union with him, running,
sweating, striving with all our might to be joined to him? This is totum
hominis, the All of man; a matter of that consequence, that it infinitely
out-ballances all things here below, it being the only thing that raises up our
nature to its utmost perfection. Let us by no means suffer a vanity, or a lust,
or indeed a world to stop us in our pursuit after it; without it we cannot be
happy; with it we cannot be miserable.

CHAP. IX.
The Marks of Union considered. In general, the marks are internal, no mere
outward thing is a mark; the marks are cordial, no mere notion is a mark; the
marks are supernatural, no mere moral virtue is a mark. In particular, The
first mark is poverty of Spirit; the second is an high estimation of Christ;
the third is a tender respect to the Bonds of Union, the Spirit and Faith; the
fourth is a conformity to Christ; a conformity to him in Graces, in the rise of
them, and in the kinds; a conformity to him in Sufferings, in the mortification
of Sin, and in bearing of the Cross; a conformity to him in his resurrection,
in heavenliness of mind, and newness of life in matter and manner. The
conclusion in two words of advice; one to those that are not in union with him,
the other to those that are in union with him.

AS Union with Christ gives a title to great Privileges, so the knowledge of
that Union gives the comfort of them; those, who know themselves to be in
Christ, do read their pardon, and live in the borders of Paradise; the Holy
Spirit gives them a prospect of Heaven, and seals them up for it: it is
therefore worth our labor to enquire into the Marks of this Union. In doing
this, I shall first note three things in general, and then come to particulars.
In general three things may be noted.

The first is this: The marks of this Union are internal, no mere outward thing
can amount to a mark. I shall give two instances of it.

The one is this; No mere outward privilege can amount to a mark: It was the
ancient humor of the Jews to rest upon external privileges; they gloried in
this, that they were Jews, the seed of that great Saint, Abraham, who (as they
say) performed every jot and tittle of the Law; they cried up their
circumcision as a very great thing; it was (say they) equal to all Precepts,
nay, Heaven and Earth could not stand without it; they magnified the Temple,
saying, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord
are these: that was the perfection of Beauty, made such by the special Presence
of God in it. Dr. Lightf. Har. fo. 39.
These Privileges lifted them up to such an height, that they looked upon all
the nations of the world but as so many Dogs in comparison of themselves. But
all those, who had these Privileges, had not an interest in Christ; the true
Jew is not merely an outward one, but an inward; the right seed are not the
children of Abraham's flesh, but the children of the promise; the great
circumcision is not in the flesh, but the heart; it was not the outward Temple,
but the inward Sanctity which God looked at. Hence the Apostle returns upon the
Jews, which were void of Christ, the name of Dogs, and calls them in an holy
mockery, the Concision; and asserts, that Christians (who rejoice in Christ,
and have no confidence in the flesh, of outward privileges) are the true
circumcision, Phil. 3.2, 3. In like manner Christians are very apt to rest upon
outward Privileges; they are in the bosom of the Church; they are baptized in
the name of the Sacred Trinity; they hear the sound of the glorious Gospel;
they receive the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper. These great Privileges
make them imagine themselves to be Christians indeed; but all those who have
these Privileges, are not in union with Christ; all are not in his mystical
body; all have not the inward washing of Regeneration; all do not hear and
learn of the Father; all do not eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ; in
the midst of their outward Privileges, there is nothing within to prove them
real Christians; though they be in the Church visible, yet, as St. Austin
says, Cont. Donat. lib. 1. c. 17.
Quod palea est, palea est; that which is chaff is chaff; and, as soon as the
wind comes, it will fly away, and show it self not to be in true unity with the
Church.

The other is this; No mere outward acts of obedience can amount to a mark.
It Is true, acts of Obedience, when done in a right spiritual manner, are sure
signs of union with Christ; there is in them an holy respect to Gods command; a
pure intention directs them to his glory; the fountain of them is internal and
supernatural; they are right issues of Faith and Love: He that keeps his
Commandments, dwells in him, and he in them; and hereby we know, that he
abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3.24. It is here to
be noted, that to prove a man to be in union with Christ, it is not only
requisite that there be Obedience, but also that there be the Holy Spirit to
quicken us thereunto. Acts of obedience (which are good, not in the manner, but
in the matter only) do not amount to a mark; they are but as a body without a
soul, or a picture without life; a man may hear, read, pray, give alms, live
soberly, deal honestly; yet in all these move only in the sphere of nature:
Natural conscience may prompt him to them; servile fear may drive him on; vain
glory may allure him; but he does them in a carnal, not in a spiritual manner;
in animo non facit, he does them to himself, and to the world, but not to God;
there is no Faith or holy Love at the bottom of them; no pure intention at the
great End; no vital activity in the performance: Acts of obedience are not
evidences, merely as they are in opere operato, in the work done, but as they
are done in a spiritual manner. Hence our Savior tells them, Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall
in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5.20. Scribes were men of the
greatest learning; Pharisees were men of the strictest Sect among the Jews; yet
because their righteousness was a mere external one, we must go beyond them, or
else we shall fall short of that Heaven, into which all the members of Christ
enter.

The second is this; The marks of this union are cordial; no mere notion, no,
not that of divine things, can amount to a mark; a man may have a great stock
of notions, yet not be in union with Christ; he may know the literal sense and
meaning of divine Truths, yet have nothing of the spiritual effect and power of
them upon his heart; a man of mere notions, druges in the service of sin, as if
there were no redemption; walks in his corrupt ways, as if there were no better
to be found; cleaves to earth, as if there were no Heaven; hangs about time, as
if there were no eternity; chooses his lusts, as if there were no God to set his
heart upon; and falls in with every vanity, as if there were no Christ to be
united unto. His notions all lie dead, there is no impression made upon the
will, no vital influence upon the heart, no savouring or spiritual sensation of
heavenly things; it is but a form of knowledge, a figure or appearance only
without any life in it; he knows holy truths, only to know them; he does not
love, choose, embrace, practice them; he has them only in notion, not in a
practical way; the holy Precepts, as full of rectitude as they are, move him
not to obedience; the precious Promises, which flow with admirable grace,
attract him not into faith and love; the dreadful threatenings, in which Gods
wrath appears like devouring fire, drive him not out of his iniquity; all his
knowledge is by a practical error blasted and turned away from its true end; in
effect it withers and nomes to nothing. But in a man in Christ, the knowledge is
not a mere form or appearance, but the substance or spiritual subsistence of
holy things in the heart; the notions do not lie dead, but rise up in life and
power in the soul; holy truths do not merely float in the brain, or stay in the
intellect, but fall down upon the will to make it free in the ways of God, and
upon the affections to inflame them toward him; the things of Heaven do now
appear in such glory and excellency, that they cast the balance in heart and
life the right way; Christ, with whom they are united, makes every truth
effectual.

The third is this; The marks of this union are supernatural. No mere moral
virrues, such as are under a common blessing extracted out of principles of
reason, can amount to a mark. In moral virtues Reason is the great Moderator;
in acts of Justice it weighs out to every man his own; in acts of temperance it
proportions out how far a man may drink of sensitive delights; in acts of
fortitude it sets down the just measures how far fear may be heard; in all,
Reason is the chief Umpire and Empress, regulating and commanding every thing:
In these moral virtues a man is in union with his Reason, as the supreme
faculty in him; this is indeed highly commendable; but if we might rest here,
Christ would not be necessary to us. However necessary he might be for
expiation; yet he would not be necessary for fanctification; he need not be a
vital head to us, we might be an head to our selves; he need not pour out his
Holy Spirit upon us, our own spirit might serve the turn; we need not be in
union with him, it is enough for us to be in union with our own Reason: All
which being very absurd, it is to be noted, that union with Christ is a thing
of a much higher nature than union with Reason. The mere Moralist moves in an
orb much lower than the true Christian; the Moralist in a kind of
self-sufficiency stays at home, and drinks out of the cistern which is in his
own Reason; but the Christian in a way of self emptiness goes out of himself
and partakes of influences of Grace from Christ. The Moralist is prudentially
regulated in his passions, that they are subject to his mind; but the Christian
is divinely renewed throughout, that the whole man becomes subject unto God.
The Moralist does his virtuous actions in compliance with his Reason as being
the highest faculty in him; but the Christian, does his gracious acts in
compliance with the divine will, as being the supreme rule to him. The Moralist
acting out of natural principles, aims at nothing higher than himself; but the
Christian acting out of supernatural principles, directs all to the glory of
God as the chief end. These things make it appear, that moral virtues, though
good in their kind, are so far short of spiritual graces, that they cannot in
themselves be marks of our union with Christ.

Having laid down these three things, I shall now proceed to the particular
marks of this union.

The first mark of this union is poverty of spirit. Every man naturally is poor
in spirituals, his humane nature lies in the ruins of the fall; there is a
Tohu and Bohu, a voidness and Spiritual emptiness in it; his mind is empty of
spiritual light, and has only some few relics left to make him a man; his
will is void of divine freedom, and has only such fragments of liberty, as may
declare him a free agent; his affections have lost their wings, and creep only
upon the things here below; corruption is very strong, and there is a mere
Vacuum of grace: it is with him, as if the Divine Image or likeness had never
been stamped upon him; a vast debt of original and actual guilt lies upon him,
and he has nothing to pay; or, if Divine Justice seize him, he has nothing to
say against it; he is shut up under wrath and cannot but deserve it: Thus every
man, is very poor in spirituals; yet, alas! he is not naturally poor in spirit;
no, on the contrary he presumes all is well; he is, as he dreams, happy in his
ruins, full in his emptiness, seeing in his darkness, free in his chains, and
rich in his debts and wants; a man poor in spirit, is one who is poor in sense
and reflection upon his poverty; he considers his lost and undone condition; he
feels and groans under his spiritual wants; the deep sense of them makes his
heart cry out, Oh! I am lost, I am in the ruins of the fall, there I must lie,
unless Christ lift me up, and bring forth a new Creation out of the Chaos; my
mind is dark, my will fettered with corruption; so it must be, unless Christ
shine into my heart, and make me free indeed; my poor affections lie in the
dust and vanity of this lower world, and there is no help, unless Christ come
and raise them up to the things above. I find nothing but an emptiness and
voidness of grace; neither is there any hope, unless the Spirit of Christ
communicate a furniture of graces and comforts; my debts are great and never to
be discharged, unless the blood of Christ, which paid for the sin of a world,
do it for me. After some such manner as this he lies at the feet of Christ; he
is poor, empty, forlorn, destitute in himself; the very frame of his heart
prays for a Savior; such an one is in a right posture for him. His poverty
cries for an Alms out of the infinite treasures in Christ; his weariness pants
after the true rest which is in a Mediator; the broken heart begs for a
compassionate hand to bind it up; the wounds in conscience open for the atoning
blood to be poured into them; the sin sick soul calls for the great Physician,
Lord, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee; the lamented ruins invite
the Divine Builder to set up his own Temple there; the spiritual nothingness
importunes for a new Creation to be brought forth; Create in me a clean heart,
O God: Every want, being felt to the quick, has a voice in it, and cries out
for a supply; such an one, though he know it not, is indeed in union with
Christ; our Savior pronounces him a blessed man, one to whom the Kingdom of
Heaven belongs, which could never be in a state separate from him who purchased
it for us; there are some rays of Faith in him which unite him to Christ; some
touches of the Holy Spirit, which make him look toward salvation.

The next mark of this union, is an high estimation of Christ. In the Spouses
eye he is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand, altogether lovely,
Cant. 5.10, and 16. To them that believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. every
thing in him is attractive.

He is precious in his person; he is Immanuel, God and man in one; his Deity is
infinite perfection; his humanity is full of the rich anointings of the Spirit;
the union of the two natures is a pledge that God would be at one with us; the
rich anointings of the Spirit make his humane nature to be a fountain of Grace,
to run over and fill all the Believers in the world; every thing in his person
is amiable, none neglect him but those that are at a distance from him: all
that are in union with him, set the highest rate upon him; in their eyes other
things are but dross in comparison of him; they put by all the world to set
their hearts upon him; they cast away all their Idols to make room for him in
their inner man; they part with carnal self, to espouse him in the highest
love; they choose him not merely for his excellent benefits, but chiefly for his
incomparable person; they rest not in his choicest gifts, but lift their
affections up to him the great donor: nothing is so valuable to them as he.

He is precious in his active and passive obedience; he fulfilled
righteousness, and bare the curse for us; he did bleed and dye upon a Cross to
make an atonement for us; his sufferings (being by his Deity elevated into a
kind of Infinity) were of value enough to pay for the sin of a world; he has
satisfied Justice to the full, and withal has opened a door of mercy to us.
And what things are these! how highly to be valued! to slight them, is to say
we have no part in them; all, who by union with him share in them, prize them
above a world; the very life of their souls is bound up in them; here is their
refuge against the storm of wrath which hangs over them as sinners; here is the
only plea to the Law which pronounces a Curse on them as transgressors; here is
the only compensation for sin, the only sat is faction to justice; here is their
trust, confidence, prop, center of rest; no tears, prayers, services, good
works, nothing can satisfy their hearts, but that which satisfied Gods. Luther
said, That Christ was as fresh to him now, ac^si hac hora fudisset sanguinem,
as if he had shed his blood this very hour. Those that are in Christ, find as
much sweetness in his blood, as if they had stood by the Cross, and seen the
shedding of it for them.

He is precious in his Words. Neverman spoke as he did; what he declared, was
brought down out of the Fathers bosom; his mysteries are heights and depths;
his commands all rectitude and equity; his promises the effluxes of infinite
grace and mercy; every thing that dropped from his lips was divine; not to taste
such things as these, is to be without sense; those that are in Christ, set an
high rate upon them; they sit at his feet to hear him; they do not only hang
his words about their heads, but keep them in the midst of their hearts, as
being their life, they hold them, and will not let them go; no not in suffering
times, in which their own lives may be called for to be laid down in pawn for
them. The high Mysteries which are above the sphere of their reason, are meat
for their faith; the righteous commands which the carnal heart would turn off,
are the only Canon of their lives; the precious Promises, though chiefly they
concern the things of another world, are to them as so many Honey-combs of
grace to sweeten every condition; every truth of Christ is dear to them.

He is precious in the influences of grace; he received gifts to give them out
to men; he had the Spirit above measure, that he might communicate it to them.
He is an Head ever working in his members; a fountain of grace ever running out
toward them. Those that are separate from him, make nothing of this; but all
that are joined to him highly esteem of it. He is to them as the wind to the
sails, to fill them with holy gales; and as the Sun and rain to the flowers to
make a spring of graces in them. Whilst he is influencing on them, all is
well; they live, and their holy Principles are in motion. Should he withdraw
from them, there would be nothing but dying and withering, they would soon be
as a branch without a root, or a member without an head. The influences of
grace from him are as dear to them as the breath in their nostrils. He that
thus values Christ, may be sure that he is in him; none that are out of him do
so.

Another mark of this Union is a tender respect to the bonds of it. The Spouse
in the Canticles held Christ, and would not let him go. St. Paul did follow
after to apprehend that for which he was apprehended of Christ, Phil. 3.12.
Those that are in union with him, are unwilling to leave him. In him they have
light, life, grace, peace, salvation, heaven, and where can they be better? It
is in their heart never to part with him, but always to abide in him. To this
end they make it their care to maintain the bonds of union, they carry a tender
respect to faith, and to the holy Spirit.

They have a tender respect to faith; it is not enough to them to have faith,
but they use all means to strengthen it; they are much in the Scriptures to
refresh it there; they go to the Lord's Supper to feed it there; they cry out in
ardent devotions for the increase of it; they put forth often acts of it to
make it more vigorous; and all this is, because it is the choice unitive grace,
the golden pipe that lies at the fountain of grace, the sacred bond that ties
them to the Head in Heaven. Should this fail, they would be broken off from
Christ; it would be all one with them, as if there were no Christ, no fountain
or head of grace; as if there were no influences or streams of grace from him.
What Julian the Apostate in a scoff said of the faith of Christians, Naz. Orat.
1. in Jul.
That it was their only wisdom; that they find true in good earnest. Faith is
their great concern, to strengthen it is their daily work. They call upon their
souls to adhere unto Christ for ever; they cry out unto God to increase their
faith, to help their unbelief; they never think their faith strong enough, nor
their union with Christ near enough. They would be more grounded and settled in
faith, they would be in more close and intimate conjunction with Christ. This
is the temper of those that are in him.

Also they have a tender respect to the holy Spirit, the other bond of union:
It is the holy Spirit which first takes hold on them; which works faith and
other graces in them; which is the very life of their souls and graces; which
makes them breathe in prayer, melt in charity, move in obedience; act like
mystical parts of Christ in conformity to him; such operations as these endear
the Spirit to them. They would not grieve him for a world, they will not wallow
in sensual pleasures, that they may be filled with him. They put away all
bitterness, envy, malice, hatred out of their hearts, that the good Spirit may
dwell in them. They will not suffer worldly things to throng and make a noise
in their minds, that the Holy One who has a Temple there, may not be
disturbed. They would do nothing to cause him to withdraw his Presence from
them; it being more tolerable in their eyes to have their own souls part from
their bodies, than to have him depart from their souls. He cannot depart, but
their light, life, grace, peace, will be all gone. It Is a grievous thing to
them to quench him. The light which he lets in, is to them more precious than
that of the Sun, Moon, and Stars. The motions which he inspires, are to them
more dear than the breath in their nostrils. The still voice which he utters,
is to them more sweet than all the charms of the world. It is one of their
great cares to walk in his light, yield to his motions, and obey his voice. He
comes, velut imber sanctificationis, as a shower of Sanctification from Christ
their Head; he comes to inlighten, strengthen, quicken, actuate, comfort, guide
them to the blessed region above; and how welcome do they make him? All the
dews and distillations of grace find their hearts open, every gale and
inspiration meets with a compliance in them. When they have most of him, they
still desire more of him; that corruptions may be more subdued, Ordinances more
filled, Truths more illustrated, Holiness more imprinted, Promises more sealed,
the love of God more shed abroad in their hearts. They never think themselves
to have enough of him. This is the right temper of those that are in Christ.

Another mark of this Union is conformity to Christ. A wicked man while such,
cannot be in union with him: What communion has light with darkness? What
concord has Christ with Belial? Can his blood save those that are void of his
Spirit? May his Promises comfort those that trample his Laws under their feet?
No surely, such are indeed not members of Christ, but of Satan; not heirs of
Salvation, but children of wrath. All that are in union, with Christ, are
conformed to his Image. Every branch in him answers to the root. Every member
suits to the Head in Heaven; all that are in him do in a measure resemble him.
In this Conformity three things may be noted.

The first is this, There is a Conformity in graces, Beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, we are changed into the same image, from glory to glory,
as by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. We have here the two bonds of Union,
faith set forth by a transformative view of Christ, and the Spirit called the
Spirit of the Lord. And withal we have here mention of a change into the Divine
Image, which ever accompanies the Union^ and is a sure mark of it. In this
Conformity two things may be observed.

There is a conformity of their graces in the rise of them, to the conception
of Christ his humane nature was not brought forth generatione sed jussione, not
in an ordinary way by knowing a man, but in an extrordinary, by the power of
the Highest, and the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost; i^ conformity to this the
new Creature with its graces is not born of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man but of God, Joh. 1.13. It is not by an humane,
but by a Divine power; It is not from man's Spirit, but from Gods overshadowin^
the heart. The same Spirit which form Christ in the womb, forms him in the
hear. All the graces of believers are produced like their Saviors flesh, in a
pure supernatural way.

Again, there is a conformity of their graces in the kinds of them to the
graces in Christ; the same holy Spirit which anointed his humane nature in an
Hypostatical union, anoints believers in the Mystical one. Of his fullness they
receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. Grace in a measure answering to the grace
in him. Was he meek and lowly? they have a measure of those lovely graces. Did
he burn with zeal for the glory of God? some of the same holy fire is in their
hearts. Was he full of love to God and man? their love inflamed by his, goes
out toward both. Was he holy in perfection? they are so in sincerity. Had he
large bowels of mercy and compassion unto men in misery? their hearts also melt
with the same graces. Was he perfectly obedient to his Fathers will? they are
upright and endeavor to do it; their graces answer to those in him, this is an
infallible sign of union. If a man would know, whether he be in Christ or not,
he must look within, and ask his own heart, what is there, has the holy Spirit
been there? Is there any thing above nature wrought? Are there any pieces of
the new Creature, or Divine Image? What is there of humility, zeal or holy
love? What of purity, mercy or obedience? See how it is within; if a mere
vacuum be there, if the heart be void of these graces, it is a vain presumption
to think that he is in union with Christ; that there should be humility in the
Head, and pride in the members; zeal and love in the Head, and coldness and
hatred in the members; purity, mercy, and obedience in the Head, and
uncleanness, cruelty and rebellion in the members, is a thing too absurd to be
imagined by any considering man. That Christ should be an Head, and not
communicate his Spirit, or men should be members, and not receive it; that he
should be Head, and not rule his members; or they should be members, and of a
contrary temper to the Head, is utterly impossible. The beams of the Sun may
sooner be dark, than the members of Christ be unlike him. The streams of a
sweet fountain may sooner be bitter, than those that are united to the fountain
of Grace can want it. All that are in him have grace answering to his. This is
the first Conformity.

The second is this, there is a conformity in sufferings; they that are in
Christ are made conformable to his death, Phil. 3.10. There are two things in
this conformity; There is a conformity to his sufferings in the mortification
of sin, Our old man is crucified with him, Romans 6.6. We suffer in the flesh,
ceasing from sin, 1 Pet. 4.1. What Christ suffered in his pure flesh by way of
expiation, that those that are in him suffer in their corrupt flesh by way of
mortification. Was he arraigned and condemned to die? they serve sin so. He was
charged with blasphemy, they charge it upon sin, which in its rebellion
blasphemes Gods Sovereignty; in its turpitude, his Holiness; in its secrecy,
his Omniscience; in its ingratitude, his Goodness; in its folly, his Wisdom;
and in all, his glory. He was charged to say, That he could destroy the Temple;
they charge it upon sin, which has laid those souls, which were made to be
Temples of the Holy Ghost, in spiritual ruins. The mind of fallen man lies in
darkness; the will in the chains of concupiscence; the affections in the grave
of earthly things. They adjudg sin unto death as being the greatest of evils.
Was he stripped? they deal so with sin. They unvail and undress it, pluck off its
false colors, disrobe it of all its pomps and shadows of seeminggoodness, and
make it appear in its ugly hue and nakedness, so that it looks as it is, sinful
sin, and an evil of evils, a thing most worthy to be crucified. Was he nailed
to the Cross? they nail sin there, they restrain the inward corruption, that it
cannot go at large, and riot in open scandals; no, nor steal out in an evil
thought, but it will be arrested in its passage to the will; they set guards
within and without, that it may not creep in by the ports of sense, nor rise up
out of the deep of the heart. Within there is a watch over the thoughts, and
without over the sensible objects. There are such nails of restraint, that it
cannot move or stir it self, but it dies away by little and little. Was he
pierced? they pierce sin, and let out the vital blood; I mean the love and joy,
and delight of it. It is a prodigious thing in their eyes to love that which
crucified their dear Savior, and makes war upon their good God; to joy in that
which has been their sorrow, and set the whole Creation a groaning about their
ears; or to delight in that which in it self is a mere ataxy and confusion, and
in the soul is an hellish blot and turpitude. It is their daily work to cast it
out of their hearts as an accursed thing, and in an holy hatred to pursue it to
the death. The violence done to Christ they put upon it, till it do, like one
upon a Cross, give up the Ghost. This is a sure mark of union with him; They
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, Gal.
5.24. They have done it; and because sin is long a dying, they are still a
doing of it more and more. If a man indulge his lusts, it is a mere vanity for
him to imagine that he is in Christ, he cannot at the same time be a subject of
Christ, and a drudg to sin; he cannot be joined to a crucified Savior, and to
the Crucifier too; his heart cannot at once be a Temple of the Holy Ghost, and
a stable of unclean lusts; these things are utterly inconsistent. All that are
in Christ die to sin, having in his death the great pattern of Mortification,
and from it a spirit for the work.

Also there is a conformity to his sufferings in bearing the Cross; they that
are in him in their first Espousals, did receive him entirely, Cross and all;
and so virtually and in purpose, did swallow down all the persecutions that
were to go along with the Gospel. And if God call them out to it, they are
ready to take up the Cross, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions
of Christ in their flesh; the satisfactory sufferings of Christ in his natural
body were full and perfect, but the sufferings of Christ in his Mystical body
are daily to be filled up, and all that are in him are content to bear their
part in them. Christ has sanctified the way of affliction by going himself in
it to glory; and they are willing to follow him in thither. He drunk up the cup
of wrath to the bottom, and they are content to take such drops of it as are
allotted to them. In the midst of afflictions and bloody sufferings they carry
themselves as parts of the holy Lamb, some of his meekness and patience rests
upon them to tell the world that they are his; they do not murmur at
instruments, but submit to the will of their Father, who sits in Heaven and
orders all; they do not wave the Cross, but accept it as a piece of conformity
to their Head, who died on a Cross to sweeten it to his members. To them
reproaches for Christ are as marks of honor. Sufferings for the Gospel as
pledges of future glory. Some of the Martyrs have styled their Prisons a
Paradise; their Chains an ornament. This is an high proof of union with Christ.
They that suffer with him shall be sure to reign with him. If a man be not
willing to suffer for him, he has not any part in him; he does not accept of
him upon the terms of the Gospel. Such an one would have a Christ of his own
fancy, not a crucified one; a Gospel and no Cross in it; and an Heaven and no
sufferings in the way to it, which can never be. In suffering times the leaves
of his profession will fall off, he will appear as a mere man of this world;
one who loves the world above Christ, and fears temporal sufferings more than
eternal. A true Christian he cannot be; omnis Christianus est crucianus, all
that are in Christ learn the lesson of the Cross. This is the second Conformity.

The third is this; There is a conformity to the Resurrection of Christ; what
was done in the flesh of Christ in his corporeal Resurrection, that is done in
the spirits of true Christians in a spiritual One; there the stone was rolled
away from the Sepulcher, here from the heart; there the flesh of Christ was
raised up by an Almighty Power; here the Spirits of Christians are raised up by
it. In this conformity, two things may be noted:

There is a conformity to his Resurrection in heavenliness of mind: Thus the
Apostle, If ye then be risen with Christ; seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God, Col. 3.1. As long as men are in
the old Adam, their center is here below, their affections are buried in
earthly things; but as soon as they are in union with Christ, they are not here
any longer, but they are risen; their affections do not creep upon the earth,
but are lifted up to heaven; their Faith puts back the things of time, and
looks into eternity; theirchope takes its leave of this world, and enters in
within the Vail; their Love is inflamed, and ascends up to him who is Goodness
it self; their Souls empty out themselves in holy Pantings and Anhelations
after him; their hearts follow hard after him, and can find no Sabbath of rest
but in him; every part of the newcreature looks up, and breathes after its
original; Heaven, from whence their graces descend, becomes an attractive
Center to them; Christ, who is at the right hand of Majesty, gives such holy
touches upon their hearts, as lifts them up to himself; the main stream of
their desires and affections runs out toward the things above; They first seek
the kingdom of God and his righteousness, that other things may be cast in to
them: This is the temper of those that are in Christ. An eminent instance of
this we have in the Primitive Christians, who talked so much of the Kingdom,
the Kingdom, that the Heathen Emperors were jealous, as if the Christians had
aimed at a Kingdom here below: Indeed it is for Heathens to seek after this
world, but Christians look for a better; their treasures and their hearts too
are above; it is but mere vanity for a man, who sets his heart upon earthly
things, to say, that he is in Christ; to espouse him and the world too; to be
joined to the Head in Heaven, and to Earth here below, is a thing utterly
impossible; all that are in him, seek after the things above; as his Death
morrifies them to Earth, so his Resurrection quickens them to Heaven.

Also there is a Conformity to his Resurrection in newness of life. Thus the
Apostle, Like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father;
even so we also should walk in newness of life, Rom 6.4. Those that are in him
walk in newness of life; they do not walk, as they did, in the way of sin, but,
as becomes them, in a way of Holiness. In this new life, two things may be
noted, the Matter of it, and the Manner.

As for the Matter of it, those that are in him apply themselves to do that
which God commands; they do not walk after the flesh, but after the spirit;
they do not walk after their own wills, but after Gods; like David, they are
for all the wills of God; like Zachary and Elizabeth, they walk in all his
Commandments; they are for both Tables, not only for Piety toward God, but for
Charity and Justice toward men; their Piety is not hypocrisy, for it has
Justice and Charity joined with it; their Justice and Charity are not mere
Morality, for they have Piety joined with them; as God has coupled his
Commands together in the Law, so they couple them together in Obedience; it is
a never-failing rule, Quicquid propter Deum fit, aequaliter fit. True
obedience, as it disputes not the command, but obeys immediately; so neither
does it divide the command, but obeys equally; those that are in Christ, have
an universal respect to the holy Precepts; the same Holy Spirit which led
Christ to a sinless obedience, leads them to a sincere one: This is the matter
of a new life, it stands in doing that which God commands.

As for the Manner of it, two things may be observed.

The one is a pure intention toward the glory of God: As God is Alpha, so he
must be Omega; as he is the first Good, so he must be the ultimate End; in all
reason a creature should be referred to its Creator, and a finite good should
terminate in an infinite one; to center in a creature is Idolatry; to make God
a Medium, is Practical blasphemy, as if there were something better than he to
be enjoyed for it self. St. Austin observes it as an essential defect in the
Moral Virtues of the Pagans, that in them they did not look at the glory of
God, but at themselves. Hence he observes, Contr. Jul. lib. 4. c. 3.
that the whole body of their virtuous Works, for want of a single eye at the
great End, was full of darkness; he pronounces their Virtues to be no true
Virtues; he cannot be just who is without the Faith of Christ; there cannot be
true Purity in a Soul fornicating from God, nor true Virtue in which God is not
served; he asserts, De Civ: Dei, lib. 19. c. 25.
that Virtutes, cum ad seipsas referuntur, inflatae and superbae sunt; they are
no longer Virtues, but pieces of pride and presumption. Neither need we wonder
at this, the Pagans, not being in union with Christ, nor having any touches
from his Resurrection, had but a mere humane Spirit in them, which elevates a
man no higher than himself. Our Savior charges them with hypocrisy, who fast,
pray, and give alms, (...), to be seen of men, Matthew. 6. They do but set
themselves upon the Stage to act a part, not to God, but to men; accordingly
they have their reward not from him, but from them; who seeing only the outside
commend them; neither need we admire at this; these hypocrites believe not;
they are not in union with him who elevates humane nature above it self;
therefore all that they do, terminates in themselves; but those that are in
Christ, have an higher Spirit than their own; his Spirit does direct them in
all their good works to aim at the glory of God; there is a pure intention to
consecrate all to him; their Holiness is to shine as a little beam or spark
from the holy One; the drops of Mercy in them are to point out the infinite
Ocean of Goodness in him; their Obedience is to tell the world that he is the
Supreme Lord of all; their Sincerity is to testify his Omniscience; all that
good they do, is to serve his interest, and show forth his praise; still there
is oculus in metam, a pure intention at his Glory. The Church tells us, that
all her fruits were laid up for Christ, Cant. 7.13. Propter te, Domine propter
te, is the Christians Motto in all his good Works. Now, if we look into our
hearts, and see the spring of actions there, we may clearly see, whether we are
in Christ or not. Whose Will do we look at, Gods or our own? What is our Rule
and Center? Do we aim at the great End? Do we indeed desire, that God in all
things may be glorified? If we do so, it is a sure sign, that we are united to
Christ; we know the power of his Resurrection, and by his Spirit are lifted up
above our selves to the great End of all things.

The other is an humble dependence upon the influences of Christ the Head; as
in Christ personal, the humane nature depends upon the divine; so in Christ
mystical, the members depend upon the head; as Christ's humane nature acted in
union with the divine, so Christians do all in union with Christ; there is a
Spirit flowing from Christ, which touches and moves all his members. Hence they
are said to live in the spirit, pray in the spirit, walk in the spirit, do all
in the spirit which descends upon them from the Head. Hence St. Paul says, I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. He lived an holy life, but
it was in dependence upon Christ; he did the Will of God, but he was acted by
the Spirit of Christ in the doing of it: there is a vast difference between a
mere Moralist and a right Christian; the Moralist cries up the Fountain of
Virtue in his own reason and will; the Christian cries up the Fountain of Grace
in Christ; there are the full treasures of Grace; there are the rich anointings
of the Spirit. The Moralist expects all, Epict. Ench. c. 17. Sen. Ep. 31.
(...), from himself; and in all does sibi fidere, trust to himself. The
Christian hangs upon Christ, and adheres to him, that he may have continual
supplies of grace from him; the Moralist is a self-subsister, he stands upon
his own bottom, works out of his own stock, and is All to himself; the
Christian subsists in Christ, he is a branch in him; in the root he flourishes,
off from it he withers; he is a member of him, in union with the head he acts
and moves in holy Works, in separation from him he can do nothing; he waits and
looks up to him, that he by the influences of his Spirit, may inlighten him
when dark, quicken him when dead, draw him when back ward, strengthen him when
weak, hold him when falling, enlarge him when in straits, and actuate him to do
Gods Will in the midst of infirmities; in all the good works that he does, he
acts in dependence upon the influences of grace. Here again we may try our
selves whether we be in Christ or not; how is it with us? what is the posture
of our inward man? do we live in dependence upon Christ our Head? do we
sanctify the Fountain of grace in our hearts? do we look up to him to move and
act us by his Spirit? if so, it is sure that we are members of him, and live
like such in dependence upon him.

I will no longer insist upon the marks of union, but conclude all with two
things:

The one is this; Those that are not in union with Christ, had need to consider
their condition, what poor forlorn creatures are they? what a world of guilt is
there lying at their door? what omissions, comissions, ignorances,
presumptions, impieties, iniquities, what smothered light, abused love,
forfeited creatures, buried talents, broken promises have they to answer for?
and for these things, what black clouds and storms of wrath hang over their
heads? what dooms and fearful curses does the broken Law pronounce against
them? at death and judgment what will they do? how will they appear before the
Holy God? or what can they say or plead why his wrath should not be poured out
upon them? may they be saved without a Savior, or by a neglected one? will the
great and merciful Jesus deliver those that would not join themselves to him?
may his glorious satisfaction cover those that are none of his members? or his
precious atonement discharge those that would never receive it? will the Law
spare those that refuse the Gospel? or the dreadful curse pass over those who
have none of the blood of the Covenant sprinkled upon them? It cannot be; not
being in union with Christ their condition is as forlorn, as if there were no
Christ, no sacrifice or atonement, no Gospel or promises at all, the wrath of
God abides upon them, there is but a moment, a little span of life between them
and the bottomless pit; as soon as death blows out their Candle, they are in
utter darkness: It may be a matter of just wonder, how it is possible, that
they should have any rest or quiet of mind in such a dreadful condition; the
very thought of the wrath to come, is enough to dampall the joy and comfort of
their lives. Again, Would they put dive into their own hearts, it would be a
weary thing to them, to see their immortal spirits lie as they do, in ruins and
spiritual desolations; to have minds, and no practical light in them; wills,
and no holy rectitude there; to have love and joy, and none for Christ; hatred
and sorrow, and none for sin: It would be grievous in their eyes to see their
precious souls lie in the turpitude and pollution of sin, in a sink of
pleasure, or a cave of covetousness, or some other lust, which like an unclean
place miserably defiles it whilst it abides therein: In such a doleful state,
what help or relief is there but in Christ? Is not he the great repairer of
breaches? Is it not he that sets up the Divine Image and all its furniture in
the Soul? is not he the only one, that cleanses us from the stains and
turpitudes of sin? There i, salvation in no other but in him alone. Were but
men awakened, they would never rest in a Christless condition; the scores of
guilt in conscience, the wrath of God hanging over their heads, the forlorn and
desperate state of their own souls, the wretched pollutions and defilements
which they lie under, would make them cry out for Christ; oh! give us Christ or
else we dye; nothing can wash out our guilt but his atoning blood; nothing can
cover us from wrath, but his glorious satisfaction; nothing can purge out our
stains, and set our hearts in order, but his spirit: the fearful condition of
being without Christ would prompt them to breathe, and endeavor after union
with him, as the only necessary and desirable thing in the world.

The other is this; Those that are in union with Christ, should carry
themselves in a just decorum to that blessed state. How should they study and
admire the transcendent excellencies of their head! what a glorious and
incomparable person is he! Creatures are but vanity, the whole world is but a
poor nothing in comparison of him; what a sight is God in the flesh, in whom
the distance between God and man is, as it were, filled up in a wonderful
incarnation! how infinite is that love which moved him to come down into an
humane nature, to stand in it under the rules of his own Law; nay, to bleed and
die upon a Cross to make a full satisfaction for the sin of the world? How
should those that are in him stand and adore him? What rapes and ecstasies of
affection are due to him, who is all over beauty and amenity? With what joys
and triumphs of faith should they look upon that precious blood, which cheers
the heart of God and man? Here they may lie down in ease and rest, no fears of
death or hell shall disturb them. And what are the rich anointings and
over-measures of the Spirit which are upon him! How vast an Ocean of grace is
he! and what wonders are to be seen there! Those that are in him have reason to
stand and admire at the continual illapses of the Spirit, and supplies of grace
which come from him. Israel could sing at an earthly fountain, Spring up O
well, Numb. 21.17. How should Christians joy in the fountain of Grace, and say,
Flow out, O infinite Well, let thy streams make us glad for ever! What precious
thoughts should they have of him! What firm adherences of will to him! What
total dependences upon him? What pure intimate affections toward him! How
should their love feed and feast upon the delicious suavities and plenitudes in
him! Earthly things should be but as so many beautiful shadows and gilded
nothings; their affections should be entirely set upon him as the most amiable
object of all; carnal self should be left and forsaken, that they may be
swallowed up in him. How should they study and earnestly affect to resemble
him! his will should be theirs, theirs should be broken to pieces, that it may
be made one with his; his mind should be in them, and theirs should have pure
aims at his glory; they should never think that they have enough of his Image,
but every day endeavor to have more lively stamps and impresses of it upon
their souls; nay, they should not rest in a mere interne assimilation to him,
but strive after an externe imitation of him, to talk and act, and live as he
did; as there is one Spirit in him and them, so there should be the same steps
in both. When they go about any thing, they should ask their own hearts, would
he if on earth do so? Do we herein imitate him who is the grand copy and Idea
of Virtue? To hunt after the world, or drown in sensuality, or boil in hatred
and malice, is not to act as mystical parts of the great Samplar. And how
should they seek communion with him in Duties, Providence, in
Creature Comforts! Christ alone should be the matter of their fruition, all
other things should be subservient to him, nothing should be good to them but
what tends to him. And how should they endeavor to give all content to him!
the least dalliances with sin are a grief to him. The Physician tells us, that
all grief in the body proceeds from the solution of the continuum; it holds
good in his members; nothing is more grievous to him, than to have them
backslide and be out of joint. If they should fall off from his Mysteries to
their own reason, or from his precepts to their own will, or from his
righteousness to their own works, it would be a thing no less displeasing to
him than unbecoming to them. And how should they labor to find all content in
him? He is a King for power, an Husband for love, a foundation for support, a
Priest for atonement, an Head for influence. Nay, he is (...), all things, Col.
3.11. It is safe to be under his protection, sweet to be in his embraces, sure
to be upon his bottom; comfortable to have peace by his blood; excellent to
have continual supplys and emanations of grace from him. Nay, to have him, is
to have all things; all that are in him have reason to rest satisfied in him,
and to begin that Song of the Lamb, which they shall be ever singing in Heaven
to him.

FINNIS.

