THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN EXPLAINED. And the way to Glory Manifested.

By Christ Jesus, the Lord and King of that Kingdom.

Held forth in a Parable, in Mat. 22. from verse, 1. to ver. 13.

With some Brief Meditations upon the said Parable.

By James Pope.

If I have told you Earthly things and ye believe not: How shall ye believe if
I tell you of Heavenly things. And he spoke many things to them in Parables.
Mat. 13. 3. London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Samuel Sprint
at the Bell in Little-Brittain. 1675.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber
bookplate of University of Cambridge

THE PREFACE.
I Have been Young, and now am Old, having lived to the account (almost) that
Moses gives of the Age of a Man; Psalm. 90. 10. Unto which but few attain; and
being therefore now in expectation that I may quickly be called hence; it was
with great desire upon my heart, that I might leave something with my Friends
and Family; and my loving Neighbors: That if the will of the Lord be so it
might be of some advantage to them, when they shall see me no more.

The Subject of the ensuing discourse is weighty; though the Instrument is
weak; for which cause some perhaps may say, Could not this man have found
something else to do, then to Write a Book, se^ing this Nation does abound with
good Books that have been Written by Learned and able persons, both Ancient and
Modern.

It is true, and blessed be God for plenty: Yet nevertheless, this may be of
some advantage at least to some, who have neither Money to buy, nor time to
Read the Books, the Objection mentioned; and for such this may be of use.

And besides, though the Nation does abound with good Books, yet the houses of
(at least) many People, do not abound with them; nor their minds with the
knowledge of them: Who perhaps will have a mind to hear what this Babbler will
say; and it is possible some one or other may gain something thereby: Which if
it might be so, it would make amends for all my trouble in Writing.

I know my end is to Alarm some poor souls, and to persuade them to hearken to
the invitation of the Gospel; that so they may come and be welcome to the
Marriage; for they and they only are Blessed, Revel. 19. 9. There will be;
but, Come ye Blessed, receive the Kingdom; and Go ye Cursed into everlasting
fire: Which will certainly be the Portion of all those that neglect to hear,
and make ready to come; upon the bidding to the Wedding, by the Servants that
are sent out to that end and purpose:

I shall subject the following Discourse to the perusal and censure of the
Reader, for whose sake I have Written it: and especially my Neighbors of the
Town of Hempsted; whom I could be glad to serve in any thing within my power;
in thankful remembranc^ of their Kindness showed to me and my Friends, which I
do not forget.

I would also commend it to my Friends and dear Relations; committing you all
to the Grace of God, with my poor Mite now cast into the Treasury, remaining,

Your suppliant at the Throne of Grace. J. P.

THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN EXPLAINED
Matthew. 22. 2. The Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain King, that made a
Marriage for his Son.
THe Lord Jesus spoke much to the Jews in Parables, and in a foregoing Parable,
he shows them what would be the event of their dealing with himself, and his
Servants, which he sent unto them: and they themselves passes Sentence. Chap.
21. 41. He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and let out the Vinyard to
other Husbandmen; that will render the Fruit in their Season, Which has been
fully accomplished both to them and to us: they are destroyed, and we Gentiles
saved; they are broken off, and we if we believe shall be Grafted in.

They are deprived of the Gospel, and we enjoy it: which is the sum of the
Parable now under consideration.

And I shall take notes of three things.

First, What the Kingdom of Heaven is.

Secondly, How it may be compared to a Marriage.

Thirdly, Wherein the Parable does not hold; for in all things Parables do not
hold.

And then I shall desire to consider wherein the whole may be profitable to us.

As to the first; a Kingdom does impose a King and Subjects, and so do the
Kingdom of Heaven, supposes a Heavenly King, and Heavenly Subjects; and then
Christ and his Church are to be taken for the Kingdom of Heaven.

But then the Question is, what is the Church? The answer is, it is to be
considered First, In its Militant, or else, Secondly, In its Triumphant state;
and in both these it will fall under a two fold consideration.

The First, viz. The Militant or warring state; we must consider it as it is
Catholic, consisting of the universal Body: Among whom there is no Profane,
nor Hypocritical Person.

And in this sense they are called, The General Assembly, and Church of the
first born, that are written in Heaven. Heb. 12. 23. My Dove, my undefiled; is
but one Song of Songs, 6. 8. They are that whole Family in Heaven and Earth.
Ephesians. 3. 15. So all the Saints make up but one Church in this sense.

But in a second sense, the Church is divided into particular Churches, as 7 in
Asia, Rev. 1. 4. In Galacia diverse, Gal. 1. 22. As also at Corinth, at Rome, at
Antioch, and more that might be mentioned.

Now in the Church in this sense there were in the primitive days, and have
been since, and will be so to the last; some Hypocrites John 2. 19 Jude 4. Esaias
33. 14. Sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulness surpriseth the Hypocrites. Which
seems to be at the last day: There were foolish Virgins among the Wise, when
the Midnight cry is made, Mat. 25. For the Net of the Gospel does bring to
shore bad Fish as well as good. Mat. 13. 47, 48. But it greatly concerns the
Churches to take care that such be not there by their allowance, if they are
made manifest to be such.

But the Church Triumphant, is also the Kingdom of Heaven, and falls under a
twofold consideration also; and First, We may consider it as with respect to
the first state of Glory, in which state Christ and his Saints shall Reign
Gloriously together, according to, Dan. 7. 9, 10. I beheld, till the Thrones
were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose Garment was as White as
Snow, and the Hair of his Head as the pure Wool; his Throne was like the
burning flame, and his Wheels as burning fire: A fiery stream issued and came
forth from before him; thousand thousands Ministered unto him; and ten thousand
times ten thousand stood before him; the Judgment was set and the Books were
opened.

This must needs be a day of great Glory, when this glorious King shall come,
with his Glorious attendants, to sit upon his Glorious Throne, when all other
Thrones must be cast down. But what is this to the Saints? I answer, When
Christ shall possess the Kingdom, his Saints shall possess it with him, as
appears by comparing Dan. 7. 14. with the 22, and 27 verses together: in ver.
14. There was given him (viz. the Son of Man that came with the Clouds of
Heaven) Dominion and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and
Languages, should serve and obey him. And in ver. 21. 22. It is said, The Horns
made War with the Saints, and prevailed against them, until the ancient of days
came, and judgment was given to the Saints of the most high; and the time came
that the Saints possessed the Kingdom. And ver. 27. And the Kingdom, and
Domion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the People of the Saints of the most high.

Quest. When shall this be accomplished?

Answ. I think I may safely say, Of that day and hour knows no Man.

But this we know, that it is to be after the Seventh Angel sounds his Trumpet;
and the Mystery of the Kingdom of God is finished. Rev. 10. 7. and, 11, 15.
compared; but let it suffice, that we know it shall be a state of very great
Glory.

And whether it shall be a thousand years Glory, before Christ's visible
coming; as some say, or that it shall begin when he shall come from Heaven to
judge the World, as others say; is a Mystery too great for me to hold forth,
but it will be the first state of the Church Triumphant; a state of
Transcendent Glory: And blessed are they that are called to the Marriage Supper
of the Lamb. Rev. 19 9.

Again, The final state of the Church Triumphant is, When the Lord Jesus shall
deliver up the Kingdom to God his Father, that God may be all in all. 1 Cor.
15. 24. Which will be when the Lord Christ has finished the Judgment, and the
final Sentence is past, of Come ye Blessed of my Father, and receive the
Kingdom.

And go ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Now both these states, are so Glorious, as can no way be conceived of by
Mortal man. 1 Cor. 2. 9.

And thus briefly I have passed through the first thing propounded; viz. what
the Kingdom is.

The second thing is, Wherein it resembles a Princely Marriage.

First, In the Marriage of Great Persons, the Father does determine to provide
a Match for his Son: Even so God the Father did determine, to take a Wife for
his Son Christ. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. According as he has chosen us in him, before
the Foundation of the World. Romans 8. 29, 30.

Secondly, As the Father intends; so the Son accepts, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
Christ the Son gave himself for his Church, to wash it, to cleanse it, and to
present it to himself a glorious Church, etc.

Thirdly, There is a time appointed for the Marriage Solemnity. Revel. 19. 7.
The Marriage of the Lamb is come, etc.

Fourthly. Some are sent out to invite: and hear we may take notice; who were
the first intended Guests, and that was the Jews: To whom Christ sent, First,
The Apostles; Mat. 10. 1, 5, 6, 7.

Secondly, He sent the Seventy. Luke 10. 1. They were they that first were
called to come; of whom, some slited the invitation; preferring their Worldly
occasions, before Gospel privileges. Luke 14. 18, 19, 20. And others of them
abused; yea, slew the Messengers that were sent; yea, even the Son himself.
Mat. 21. 35, 36, 37, 38. And when the Jews Blasphem'a; and spoke against the
things which Paul Preached, Acts 13. 45, 46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold,
and said, it is meet the word of God should first be spoken to you; but seeing
ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life: Lo, we
turn to the Gentiles.

These were the Church to whom the lively Oracles were given. These were the
Mura^rers whom GOD destroyed, whose City was burnt, Mat. 22. 7. Which was
fulfilled by Vespatian, and Titus, the Roman Emperors; about 40 years after
Christ: When they and their City were in a most dreadful manner destroyed, by
Fire, Famine, Sword, and Pestilence, fulfilling the Words of Christ. Matthew. 24.
21.

But to whom did the King send when the Jews were rejected?

Answer. To the Gentiles: Who were as the Blind, the Halt, and the Maimed, like
poor Vagrant Beggars, in the Highways, and under the Hedges. Ephesians. 2. 12. Being
without Christ, Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the
Covenants of Promise, without Hope, and without God in the World.

Poor Sinners of the Gentiles were called, of whom was Constituted the first
Gentile Church, to wit, at Antioch, Acts 11. 26. the Churches in Galatia. Gal.
1. 2. From these came the 7 Churches in Asia, with many more.

Against a great Wedding there is great preparation beforehand, against the
time appointed.

First, Of suitable Apparel, so in this also, the Bride must have her Glorious
Apparel; The Kings Daughter is all Glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13, 14. Rev. 19.
8, 9. To her was granted she should be arrayed with fine Linen, clean and
White; and the fine Linen is the Righteousness of Saints.

Secondly, There must be preparation by the Guests; they must have Wedding
Garments. Mat. 22. 11 12.

Thirdly, There must be preparation of provision, for entertainment; so it must
be in the Spiritual Marriage; as it resembles the Kingdom of Heaven. Prove. 1 2,
3 4, 5 Esa^, 25 6 And it is the custom to have something for the Guests to
refresh themselves with, before the Dinner be ready; and before the Bridegroom
comes to sit down at Table: So is it here, the blessed Bridegroom does prepare
good things for his Guests before the great Dinner be served in; he has
appointed for them his Laws, and blessed. Ordinances; to comfort and cheer them
beforehand; Wherein they have Communion not only one with another; but with
the Father and his Son Jesus Christ. 1 John 3. 4. 1 Cor. 10 16, 17. The Cup of
Blessing which we Bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? the
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? for we
being many, are one Body: for we are all partakers of that one Bread.

Little do the poor World think what the people of the Lord do enjoy in
Corners; They can say at sometimes, They have meat to eat that the World knows
not of: They can get into a Corner, and pour out their souls to God, when
their Enemies persecute them. 142. Psalm. 2. 5, 6, 7. Compare Psalm. 102. 17. He
will regard the Prayer of the Destitute, and will not despise their Prayer. The
Lord makes the hearts of his Guests to rejoice, before they come to sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of their Fathers.

Sixthly, There must be a set time for to Solemnize the Marriage; so it is in
this Spiritual; as it resembles the Kingdom of Heaven. Rev. 19. 7. The Marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. Psalm. 45. 9. Kings
Daughters were among thy Honorable Women, upon thy right hand, did stand the
Queen in Gold of Ophir, ver. 14. She shall be brought unto the King in Raiment
of Needle Work.

It will be very Glorious Raiment, That shall cause her to shine as the Sun in
the Kingdom. Mat. 13. 43.

Seventhly. There is great joy in the Marriage Chamber; so will it be in this
Spiritual Marriage; as it resembles the Kingdom of Heaven. Revel. 19. 7. Let us
rejoice and be glad, and give Honor to him; for the Marriage of the Lamb is
come.

No Tongue can express the Glorious rejoicing of that day, the Heavenly Music
will then strike up, Rev. 5. 8, 9, 10. Chap. 15. 3. 4. Now shall the Bride and
Bridegroom solace themselves in each others love; unspeakably, beyond the Joy
of any other Bridegroom, and Bride in all the World.

The third thing propounded, is to note some things wherein this, and other
Marriages do not resemble each other.

As first, All the appointing, inviting, preparing, rejoicing, completing, and
finishing; is all upon a natural account: and the other all upon a Spiritual
account; as has been already shown.

And as it is natural and not spiritual, so also it is temporal and not
perpetual.

First, All other Wedding days have an end, but this shall never end; For those
that dye before Christ's coming, shall be both caught up to meet the Lord in
the Air; and so shall be ever with the Lord: These are words to comfort one
another withal. 1 These. 4. 17, 18.

Secondly In other Weddings they put off their Wedding Apparel again; but it
is not so here. Daniel 13. 3. They that be Wise shall shine as the brightness
of the Firmament, and those turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever
and ever.

Thirdly, In all other wedding feasts, those that partake thereof will hunger
again, and thirst again; but not so in this Spiritual Marriage. Isa. 49. read
from ver. 8. to ver. 13. Rev. 7. 16, 17.

Fourthly, In other Marriages the joy and the sound of the Music ceases; but
in this Spiritual Marriage, they shall sing the Song of Moses and the Lamb
eternally. Rev. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Fifthly, In other Marriages the beauty and comeliness of the Bride decays in a
little time; but not so here, in the Kingdom there shall be no withered faces;
nor eyes sunk in their holes; no aching Backs, nor feeble Limbs. Zach. 12. 8

Sixthly, All other Bridegrooms and their Brides, must part again in a little
time? Oh how soon is their days of Feasting and joy, turned into sorrow and
mourning! and those that did follow them to the Wedding, in a little time
follow them to the Grave? This daily experience proves. But this Heavenly
Bridegroom, never shall; never will, part with his lovely Bride. No, Death is
now Conquered; and were it not; it could not separate between the Bridegroom
Christ, and his Bride the Church; no, nor with any one Member of it. Rom 8. 35.
36, 37, 38, 39.

Seventhly, In other Marriages, the Guests and the Bride, are distinct; but not
so in this, for every one that comes to the Marriage upon the call or
invitation, shall be a Member of the Bride, and shall enjoy full Communion with
the Bridegroom. 1 John 1. 3, 4. That which we have seen and heard, declare we
unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is
with the Father; and with his Son Jesus Christ. These things Write we unto you,
that your joy may be full. Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence is fullness of Joy, and
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

Fourthly, The fourth thing, and the last, is to consider how we may improve
this Parable, to our own Advantage.

1. Use, And first, It shows us how we ought to admire the goodness of God, in
sending to invite us poor blind, lame, highway Vagrants to come to the
Glorious Marriage, That we who were Children of Wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. And
had been long treasuring up Wrath against the day of Wrath, and Revelation of
the Righteous Judgment of God, should be invited in. Romans 2. 5. Oh, infinite
mercy! that we, Who were dead in trespasses and sins, should be quickened; and
that together with Christ, and saved by Grace.

Oh that the Lord should pass by the wide World! and send his Gospel into this
poor Island; and plant it here, and continue i^ here so long a time as he has
done: notwithstanding all the opposition to the contrary; nay, notwithstanding
the slight esteem of it, and the little improvement that has been made by this
poor Nation, of this so Rich a mercy: Oh! how has the Lord been sending his
Servants among us? raising them up, and furnishing them with the Choice Gifts
of his Spirit; who have spent their time and strength to serve the Lord, in the
Ministry of the Gospel but Oh! How few have hearkened to the Call? Do not most
say with the Jew^, we cannot come? we have other work to do? and have not many
evil (...) them that have been sent unto them? to say no worse of it: but let
those that fear the Lord, and have been moderate to come in at the Call, say
let the Lord be praised: seeing he has left a great part of the world to
worship the Devil; a great part to worship Mahomet; and a great part of the
world to worship the Beast. Rev. 13 8. All these are without the Gospel,
without any means to come to the right knowledge of God, and Christ; Nay, they
have that which is a great deal worse then nothing, being deceived by those
Impostures, whose work it is to bewitch poor souls, and to prevent them of
good, any good; and make them seven fold more the Children of Wrath, by their
means.

But blessed be your Eyes, that you see, and your Ears that you hear. Oh let it
be the care of every one that has tasted that the Lord is gracious to be by
all means endeavoring to show forth the praises of him that has called you
out of darkness, into his mavelous light. 1 Pet. 2. 9

Secondly, A second use to be made of this Parable, is to examine whether we
have hearkened to the invitation or no; and to help herein, the Scripture does
afford us many rules to try by; I shall name some.

First, Note, As first, If we have indeed hearkened to the Lords Call, then your
understanding is enlightened, which before was dark; Compare Ephesians. 1. 18. with
the 4. 18. By this we come to know what is the riches of the Glory of his
inheritance, in the Saints; and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
usward that believe; which we understood not before; by this new Light, we
come to see how miserable our estate was by nature; and what necessity of being
brought out of that state, or else that eternal. Wrath must have been our
Portion: By this we come to see an excellency in the Gospel, and the knowledge
of God thereby: Now we see a Glorious beauty in Holiness; and in the the ways
of God: before we counted them Fools that made much ado about Religion, To know
how they might walk and please God: But now I see they were wiser then we: Now
we can prize a Crucified Christ, and an interest in him above the world, and
all that is in it: as Paul did, Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9.

2. Note, A second Note, If we have embraced the Call of God in the Gospel, our
affections are set upon other Objects then they were before; for before the
world; either in the pleasures of it, or the riches of it, or the honor of it,
carried away our joy, our delight, our desire, our love, but now we can rejoice
in Gods word above all. Ps. 119 162. I rejoice in thy word as he that finds
great spoil. This is more to be desired by a Gracious soul, then much fine
Gold; and is sweeter then Honey, and the Honey Comb. Psalm. 19. 10.

Now the desire is after the knowledge of God and Christ, which before was
after earthly things; which carries the soul out to the use of such means as
tends to the attaining thereof; as praying, reading, hearing, conversing; and
though others may do the same thing, yet not to the same end, they do it to
grow thereby. 1 Pet. 2. 2. To wit, That they may grow in grace, and the
knowlede of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Their love is now set on God, and the ways of God, and the People of God,
which before were despised. But I do but hint those things, which will be found
in those that have embraced the Call.

3. Note, Again, When Souls have embraced the Call, they can never more after
that; sin with full consent of the will: If any Evil be committed, it is by
means of the Law of the Members, that does rebel against the Law of the Mind;
which causes a continual War between the flesh, and the Spirit; which carries
the Soul to God to cry out for help against this Rebel, this Law in the
Members; as David, in Psalm. 19. 12, 13. It will be the great care of such Souls
to keep their Garment undefiled. R^v. 3. 4. He that has this hope, purifieth
himself even as he is pure. Joh. 3. 3.

Let us carefully, and faithfully, prove our selves by these things, and by
what else the Lord may help us in, that we may not miscarry in this matter,
that is of such wonderful concernment, as relates to our eternal weal, or woe;
our eternal life, or eternal death; for a little time will bring to the gates
of Eternity; and time will be no more: Then it will be too late for foolish
Virgins, to cry, Lord, open to us: Now is the time for us to hear, that our
Souls may live. Isa. 55. 3.

But suppose we have all this while neglected to hear, and have had our excuses
as the bidden Guest had: Let me admire the patience of God that has spared us
so long, while we have provoked him by delaying to hear: O doubtless, he might
have said long ago, They shall not taste of my Supper: But seeing it is no
worse, but that the Lord is still sending after us; let us take heed of delays,
lest we come to the Gate of Mercy when it is shut, and must never more be
opened.

3. Use, A Third use therefore, that we may, and ought to make use of this
Parable, is to persuade, and exhort, poor Souls to come at in the Call.

1. Motive, And for Motives, consider that Eternity of weal or woe, depends
upon the well or ill spending of a little time. Exodus 11. 3. If the Tree
falls toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where it falls,
there it shall be: A little moment let slipped may lose Heaven and happiness, and
plunge us under the unsupportable Vengeance of an infinite God: Oh, While it is
called to day, harden not your hearts so long, till God swear in his Wrath, you
shall not enter into his Rest. Heb. 3. 11, 15. After the Lord had Sworn in his
wrath they should not enter; it was then too late to attempt it, as appears,
Numb. 14. 42. 43, 44, 45 Let us not say, we have bought a Farm, bought Oxen, or
Married a Wife; but come at the first invitation, lest the door be shut, and
you stand and knock to no purpose. Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. It will be a
dreadful thing, for the great God to laugh at poor Souls in their misery:
surely that will increase their misery.

If one were in great distress, and should see one that had power to help, that
would only look upon him, but not pity him, nor yield any relief to him; it
would be very grievous to him. But if he should stand and mock at him; it would
be much more grievous. To hear such a one say, Nay, you are served well enough.
I called upon you to avoid the danger, but you slited my Advice, though I
profer'd to save you out of it; yea, I prayed you, and entreated you, to let me
help you out of this horrible Pit, but ye refused, Psalm. 40. 2. No entreaty
would serve, therefore if you can now save your self do; I Will have nothing to
do with you. This will greatly increase their woe; even so, and much more will
be the aggravations of their torment, who shall have the Lord speak so to them
as Prove. 1. 20, 22, 23, 24. O that poor Souls would not let slip the day of
Grace; My spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that he also is flesh.
Genesis 6. 3.

Shall God in pity say, as he did to Ispael of old, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that they
were Wise, that they would consider this, that they would remember their latter
end.

And shall we not regard it: it will be sad with those Souls that shall make
light of the Call, till God will send no more after them; but shall send to
those that will come; and for ever exclude those bidden ones: and they forced
to cry out, as they in Jeremy, Jer. 8. 20. The Harvest is past, and the Summer
is ended, and we are not saved.

2 Motive, To come at the Call of God, is because we are every day further off
from God then other; we are like a Ship under Sail, driven by fierce Winds; it
cannot stand still, but is in perpetual motion, toward some Port or other; and
is every hour nearer to the place whither they are bound, so long as the Wind
is for them. Those that are bound for Hell (as all Men and Women in the World
are before Conversion) they get nearer and nearer Hell every day; and they run
a very swift Courage, the Devil trims the Sails, and raises the wind of
temptation, and makes good the Proverb, They must needs go, that the Devil
drives: But he persuades them they were bound for Heaven, that blessed Country
that Abraham sought after; for the Devil in this, is like those Men that are
called Spirits, that flatters Children with fair words, and fine toys, to go
with them, till they have got them out of the reach of all relief; and then,
and not till then; they will let them see they are certainly Slaves past all
Recovery.

Oh be not such Children, as to be flattered with worldly toys, out of the
hope of Heavenly joys; and so suffer your selves to be carried into endless
woes: For remember, till you tack about, you are nearer Hell every day; and so
consequently, further off from God, and Christ, and Glory: O ^emember whither
you are going, and turn again before it be too late: Let not Christ say of you
as of the Jews, Ye will not come to me, that you might have life, John 5. 40. O
that poor men and women, would take Counsel of Wisdom, crying after them, Prove.
1. 20, 21, 22 23, 24. Turn as my Reproof. I will pour out my Spirit unto you; I
will make known my words unto you. O harken, before it be too late, hear that
your Souls may live, Isa. 55. 3. Let not Satan get you one step nearer Hell,
before you turn.

3. Motive, Those Souls that delay to return and come in upon the invitation,
will make their work more hard and difficult, if ever they do reform.

First, Because the longer they go on in sin, the more hardened they will be in
sin, Heb. 3. 13. But exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, viz.
(While the day of Grace and opportunity last) lest any of you be hardened by the
deceitfulness of sin. Sin is deceitful, and the Devil is deceitful, and man's
heart is deceitful; and these three agree in one. Jer. 17. 9. Even to deceive
poor Souls with the Golden Baits of worldly enjoyments, till Repentance be hid
from their Eyes: And so their Oil be to seek when the Bridegroom comes, and
the door be shut.

Secondly, It will be difficult to return after long delays because Custom is
as it were a second nature. Jer. 13. 25. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin? or
the Leopard his Spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil. We know Old Ulcers, are hardly, hardly, Cleansed, and Cured; when an ease
and speedy Cure may be made of a Green Wound. Poison when it is first taken,
may be expelled; but by continuance in the body, till it have insected the
Vitals, the Cure will be very difficult and hazardous.

3 ly. The longer we go on in sin, the more difficult will be our return,
because one sin draws on another; and so we shall have more sins to repent of,
and the more work we have to do, the more discouragement will be as to the
undertaking of it: Repentance is of necessity, and seeing it is so, it will be
easier to repent of sin betime: It is a kind of madness for a man to go on in a
Trade, that he knows he must repent that ever he meddled with it; and must throw
it off, or else it will utterly undo him; every one will say, The sooner the
better. Better to be rid of such an Employment that a man loses by every day;
we lose by sin every day, and treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. If a
fire kindle upon our House, the way to quench it, is not to add more fuel to
it. Now Sin sets Soul and Body on fire; And the breath of the Lord, as a stream
of Brimstone, does kindle it. Isa. 30. 33. The Devil knows what he does, in
persuading Souls to delay their coming in at the first Call; he knows that the
work of returning will be more difficult: If a Nail be but entered, it may be
easier pulled out, then if by continual knocking it is driven up to the head:
To add sin to sin, is as to add to a burden, to make it to be carried the more
easily. This is like what is said, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. When the Curse of God is
pronounced against sin, and one say, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imaginations of my own heart; to add Drunkerness to Thirst. See what the Lord
says, ver. 20. The Lord will not spare him, but his anger and his Jealousy,
shall smoke against him; and all the Curses that are Written in this Book,
shall lie upon him. O then take heed of delays; for the work will be more
difficult to morrow, then it is to day: O then while it is called to day,
harden not thy heart.

4. Motive, Come in quickly, for else thou may not have so much time to
serve the Lord, as thou have spent in serving the Devil, who is thy deadly
Enemy, who intends nothing but thy eternal Ruin.

5. Motive, Consider thou have run a great hazard all this while; the Lord
might have cut asunder the thread of thy life before now, and thou might have
dropped into Hell, from whence there is no Redemption; and will thou venture
still; if once he strike, he will strike home.

6. Motive, Consider what thou losest by delays.

First, Thou losest the presence of God; the Communion of Saints, the comfort
of the Holy Spirit, which although the wicked men count the Godly fools, and
think they live a mopish, uncomfortable life, yet is their joy as the joy of
Harvest; and as those that find a great spoil. Isa. 9. 3. see 1 John 1. 4.
Psalm. 16. 11. see, 1 Pet. 1. 8. So that by delaying to come at the first,
although at last thou do come, yet thou art a great loser, in regard of that
early joy, which thou might have had by coming in sooner. For the Lord does
not call upon thee to come and make thy condition worse than before. It is a
madness to think that the Devils service is more comfortable then Gods.

Secondly, Thou losest the advantage of becoming famous in grace and holiness;
if a man be in a thriving way, yet if he fall into it but a little before he
dye, he is not like to be very Rich. Oh, therefore hearken to the Call betime,
that so thou may be rich in Grace, rich in good Works, and then thou shall
have a rich Reward in the Kingdom of Glory.

Thirdly, By delays thou may lose all, and come as the Foolish Virgins did.
Mat. 25. When the Door was shut; and as those Mat. 7. 22. That Prophesied in
the Name of Christ, and cast out Devils in his Name; an^ yet cannot be
admitted: When once the Master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the
Door, Luke 13. 25. It will be then no boot (...) knock; and this is a loss
indeed: to lose the favor of God, the love of Christ, the fellowship of the
Holy Spirit, the Communion of all the blessed Angels, and Saints; thou losest
Heaven, and happiness, and all the Glory and Felicity, which was tendered to
thee in the invitation.

But that is not all; but those that lose God, gain the Devil; those that lose
Heaven, gain Hell; which gain is a dreadful loss: as will more fully appear, by
setting forth some of the properties of Heaven, and Hell, and setting the one
against the other.

1. As first, In Heaven there is God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; in Hell
is the Devil and all his Angels.

2. In Heaven there is an innumerable Company of Glorified Saints, and Angels;
in Hell there is an innumerable Company of wicked, damned Spirits.

3. In Heaven there is nothing but Joy and Singing; in Hell is nothing but
weeping, and wailing.

4. In Heaven there is Glorious Light, that no Mortal Eye can approach unto; in
Hell there is outer Darkness, Mat. 22. 13. Blackness of Darkness, of Darkness
for ever. Jude. 3. Oh what a disparity is here? between these two! the Darkness
of Egypt was but a Figure of this Black Darkness: And as it is very comfortable
to behold the Light, so it is very dreadful to be deprived of all Light; to be
alone in the Dark is frightful; especially if it be outer Darkness; but ten
thousand times better to be quite alone, then to be in the midst of innumerable
Devils, and frightful damned Spirits.

5. In Heaven is whatever may delight both Soul, and Body; but in Hell there is
whatever may add to misery and torment, of soul and body.

1. As first, There is fire into which they shall be cast, that have their
portion there.

2. And as it is Fire (which in it self is dreadful) even so it is the worst
fire; viz. Brimstone, and Fire; even as God when he would pour out his wrath
upon Sodom (who suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire) Jude, 7. It was with
Brimstone, and fire from the Lord out of Heaven. Genesis 19. 24. And it is hard to
endure the stink of Brimstone and fire, though we feel not the burning of it.
But some may say it is not material Fire; to which one make answer, and says,
Then it is worse; because that the Figure is not answerable to the substance:
So that at the best, it is Fire and Brimstone; Oh, how dreadful will it be to
endure it? When I have had the Smoke of Brimstone ascend into my Nostrils, it
has been terrible, though but for a moment: And when I have stood by a flaming
Oven; I have thought, Oh how dreadful would it be to be alive in that flame?
though but for a very little space.

3. This fire is dark fire, the comfortable property of Light is taken from it,
for in Hell there must be nothing that can yield any comfort.

4. Again, It is such fire that will not consume the matter that is laid into
it; but the fire and the Fuel (to wit, Devils and wicked men) must remain and
abide in that fire together.

5. And therefore this Fire is Eternal. Jude, 7. Everlasting, Mat. 25. 41. And
this makes it dreadful indeed: All the miseries of this life will quickly end,
they are but light and momentary. 2 Cor. 4 17. But these shall never end; and
this does complete the misery of the Damned: There will be no end of their
misery; no ease in their misery, no mitigation of their misery; no delivering
out of their, nor relief in their misery. No end as is said before; and as one
says, If the Damned did know, that he should suffer no more thousands of
years, then there be Sands in the Sea: or no more Millions of Ages, then there
be Sands in the Sea; it would much comfort him; but alas, it is ever still.
Another Writes thus, suppose the whole Globe of the Earth were a Mountain of
Sand; and filled up with Sand to the Imperial Heavens, and a Wren should come
once in an hundred years, and fetch away the tenth part of a Grain of this
Sand; if when all this Sand was fetched away, the Damned might come out of Hell,
it would be some comfort to them: But still it is as before, it is for ever
still; Oh, what an amazing consideration is this; and yet how few lay it to
heart.

Now considering these things, is it not folly and madness to reject, or but
neglect to come to the Marriage upon the first Call, of the Lords Servants that
are sent to invite thee. How shall they escape, that neglect so great
Salvation; All must come to the Wedding, or go to the Dungeon, Where the Worm
never dies, nor the Fire goes not out.

Consider there is no ease, as there is no end; if one did know certainly, that
he must endure the pain but of an aching Tooth, without any ease, for the space
of one whole Year: Oh! how grievous would the very thoughts of it be! How long
does one night seem to one in misery? What shall we say to Eternity, when not
any one Member shall be in pain; but the whole Man, Soul, and Body, shall be in
pain; in torment, not only for a Night, or a Year, but for ever; in which there
is no intermission, no hope, no relief, no not a drop of water for ever, to
cool a flaming Tongue: all hope of help being cut off for ever: Lay all these
Motives together (to which many might be added) for a speedy coming in; and
then tell me, whether even reason it self, will not conclude it is best to
hear, that your Souls may live. Isa. 55. 3.

Will a Months living in pleasure, in pride, in the eager persute of Riches;
make amends for the loss of the Glory mentioned before; and for undergoing of
wrath and vengeance in Hell fire. Man being in honor, abides not. Psalm. 49.
12. Yet in ver. 11, it is said, Their inward thoughts is their houses shall
continue for ever; and they call their Lands after their own Names, v^r. 13.
This then is their folly: Indeed it is egredious folly to lose Heaven, for a
little Earth; Heavenly treasure, for Earthly pleasure, for a Barley Corn, to
lose the Pearl of great price. Alas, All flesh is Grass, and all the Glory of
Man, as the flowers of the Grass, the Grass withers, and the Flower fades
away: How often do we see the Flower wither before the Sith come to cut down the
Grass: How often do we see the Glory of Man issue, before he leave the World? And
yet what a little, little time, do they abide in the World. The Sith comes and
Mows down this Grass speedily. I my self have seen in some Families two, and in
some three, Generations pass away; few attaining to Moses account, of
threescore years and ten, as Psalm. 90 10. But if they do, it quickly comes
about; and it will be our great Mercy, If the Lord so teach us to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom.

Quest. What is to be done?

Answ. The first step is to see our selves utterly lost: First, By natural
defilement. Secondly. By actual sin, by which we have made our selves more vile
in the sight of God, then the vilest of the Creatures upon Earth: Those in the
Acts, never cried out, What shall we do; till they were pricked at their hearts;
and they were not pricked at their hearts, till they saw themselves lost by sin,
and obnoxious to the Wrath of God by reason thereof: We will never go to the
Physicians till we be sick: Labor to affect thy heart with the filthy nature
of sin, it made Glorious Angels, ugly Devils; if man that was made after the
Image of God, more vile then a Toad, or Serpent: Yea, one Sin brought a Curse
upon the whole World, then consider what a World of Sins will do to one man.

Again consider, that although thou have forgot most of thy sins, which are
without number: God has not forgot any of them, but they are all charged in
Gods Book, till Repentance wipe out the Score.

Again consider, That so long as thou continuest in thy sinful state, thou art
pleasing and serving the Devil, instead of God, and he is thy God, though thou
think not so it may be.

Again consider, How little time thou have for so great a work, as to make thy
Calling and Election sure; and it may be a great deal less then thou art aware
of.

Then again consider, The infinite Grace and patience of God, thou might
have been in Hell; stand and wonder thou art not: O let mercy melt thee; let
Grace move thee; let this love of Christ constrain thee: he that dyed for
sinners to save them from their sins, and from the Wrath of God. 1 Pet. 3. 18.
1 These. 1. 10. He has sent his Servants to compel thee to come in, by Wooings,
beseechings, intreatings, then why will thou famish among the Swine? seeing
there is a plentiful Marrriage Feast prepared for thee, if thou will but come
and accept of it. Come then without delay, for all things are ready. God has
given Christ, Christ has given himself, he has ascended up on high, and given
Gifts unto Men; for the perfecting of the Saints; for the work of the Ministry.
Ephesians. 4. And he has made his Ministers willing to spend, and be spent, for the
good of poor Souls in all Ages. Many of which have witnessed a good Confession
unto Death, for the sake of poor Souls. He has given us his Laws, his
Ordinances, his Scriptures; Yea, and will give us his Spirit also, if we will
but come and ask it. Prove. 1. 22. Come therefore, for all things are ready,
Prove. 9. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Quest. But what must I do that I may be welcome when I do come?

Answ. First, Come willingly, and cheerfully, come as a hungry man goes to a
Rich Dinner; for such are invited. Rev. 22. 17. Joh. 7. 37. Luke 1. 53. Such
have the promise, Mat. 5. 6.

Secondly, Come prepared with a Wedding Garment.

1. Direct. First* Be sure put off all thy Old Rags of Sin, and Ungodliness,
Isa. 55. 6. 7.

2. Direct. Secondly, Put off all the Rags of thy Unrighteousness, Isa. 64. 6.
For although thou must do good works to glorify God* and do good to men; yet
take heed of making this thy Wedding Garment, for which thou would*st be
accepted.

Secondly, Having put off thy old Rags, put on the New Robe of Christ's
Righteousness, that fine Linnin. Rev. 19. 8. Put ye on the Lord Jesus, Romans 13.
14.

3. Direct. Thirdly, Take heed of defiling thy Garments, for those that are
careful in this, Shall walk with the Bride groom in White, in the Marriage
Chamber. Rev. 3. 4. We see among People, a great care to have the body adorned;
but, O the little care of keeping themselves unspotted of the World; that is to
be found among many: When they are to go into the presence of the King; to
stand before him, and to hear his voice in the Ministry of his Word. I am
afraid, many professing Godliness, take more care, and spend more time to have
their Garments fashionable and complete; and their Attire neatly set, then they
do to have their Souls trimmed for to come before the Bridegroom; the time
spent in Prayer is but little, which many before they go before the Lord, that
they might be helped to serve God acceptably, with Reverence and Godly fear; as
Heb. 12. 28. I desire that our fine fashionable People, would Read
conscionably, 1 Pet. 3. 3. 4. 5. That they might lay aside their bables, and
learn of the Holy Women that trusted in God, to adorn themselves. I fear indeed
that while so much care is taken for the Body, to adorn it; it is no other then
the Fruit of a proud heart; which renders a person more odious in the Eyes of
the King of Heaven, then the nastiest Beggar, with his Lousie Rags, would be in
the presence of an Earthly King.

Pride is not the only defiling sin, there are more attending it; for there
must be Covetousness to maintain pride: and as pride promotes Covetousness, so
also Uncharitableness, is Prides Handmaid: But in a word, every sin is a stain
in the White Linen; O therefore, watch against evil words with David, 93.
Psalm. 1. VVatch against thoughts. Jer. 4. 14. VVatch against evil actions. And
in order hereunto; labor against a Carnal frame, a Dead frame, a Backsliding
frame; and labor after Calebs frame, Who followed the Lord fully, and the Lord
brought him unto the promised Land; when others fell in the Wilderness. Even so
the Lord, (if thou follow him fully, and faithfully) will certainly bring thee
into Eternal Rest with the Bride Croom; when others are shut out among the
Dogs. see Rev. 21. 7, 8. and Chap. 22. 14, 15.

Again, As thou art careful to have admittance into the Marriage-Chamber, to
have a Wedding Garment, and to have it clean; so be careful of thy Family;
would thou not be glad to have thy Friends and Relations admitted? take heed
thou do not promote sin, nor countenance sin in any: It is grievous to see how
many Parents promote Pride in their Children, dressing them up with toys; which
is as it was a watering of that Cursed Root: You may observe how the Child will
mince and jet, when it is made more fine then ordinary: And so by this means,
instead of bringing them up in the nurture and Admonition of the Lord; They
further them in the service of the Devil. But I must close all; Now therefore
to that end, thee and thine may not fail of entertainment in the Marriage
Chamber; pray often and earnestly, not only publicly* but also privately: Hear
the word of God constantly, conscionably, and diligently; labor to retain it
carefully, prove what thou hear knowingly; and what thou find to be the
mind of God, practice it faithfully, bring duty into practice effectually, and
zealously, and God shall make thee happy eternally.

FINIS.

