A SOVEREIGN BALSOM TO CURE THE LANGUISHING DISEASES OF THIS Corrupt Age.

By C. PORA a Well-wisher to all Persons.

We and our Fathers languish with such Diseases, but thou for sinners shall be
called Merciful; 4 Esdras 8. v. 31. PERMISSU SUPERIORUM. 1678.

TO His Truly and Ever Honored PATRON MILES STAPELTON Knight and Baronet, etc.
Of Carleton in the County of York. AND To his Right Honorable Lady ELIZABETH
STAPELTON Alias BARTU, Daughter to the Earl of LINDSY, etc. Peace, Health, and
Happiness.
MOST HONORED SIR,
IF King David, one of the greatest Monarchs that ever was in the World, sound
himself so much obli^ed to Abigail for a few Victuals, it is no mervail if I be
^^r more obliged to You; ^aving received so many favors, innumerable benefits,
and civilities from your No^^e Person, while I had the honor of being one of
you^ Renowned Family. There^^re do not think me pre^^mptuous, if I offer to yo^
^^ese Fruits of my Labors which I have judged fit an^ p^oper for the Cure of
the L^nguishing Diseases of th^^ Corrupted Age. I hope it will not seem strange
to You, nor to any others, that I make so happy choic^ in presenting this my
poor Industry to your Worthy Person; to whom in all re^pects the right of it
belongs; having sprung, and been partly conceived, during ^he time of my abode
in ^our Family. Receive therefore, Most Noble and Worthy Patron, this my Offer,
not as a thing wor^hy of your Deserts; but as a small token of my love and
affection to You.

I do not doubt (though my Work be not much polished with Eloquence, nor
replenished with Courtly Expressions) but You will reap some spiritual benefi^
by it. Although You be most Virtuous, yet sure I am, You do not conceive your
self exempt, or altogether free from all the Spiritual Diseases and Languishing
Distempers of thi^ present Age. For, according to that of our Blessed Savior
in the Evangelist, Nemo bonus, nisi solus Deus; Luc. 18. v. 19. There is none
(absolutely) good, save God alone. It is not therefore my intention here to
extend my self in your praises, or to make any long Rehearsal of your known
Heroical Virtues and Pious Actions, which surpass my slender capacity to
express as they deserve. I must pass over in silence the manifold Perfections
and Graces with which the Holy Ghost has adorned You. And especially with a
great Charity, which you extend and practice daily to the Poor in several
effects, both for their Bodies and Souls: And o^ the great Zeal and constan^
Practice of your Faith and Religion, which neithe^ Glory nor Persecution^ could
ever shake in the least*

Neither dare I be so bold as to honor my Pen with the Relation of your
Affinities and near Relations, who were most Loyal Subjects and Chief Officers
in the Service of their King; adventuring both their Estates and Lives in
adhering to Him. It is in vain for me to declare, How they behaved themselves
in the last unhappy War, how often and how valiantly they fought against those
Rebels, losing their lives for the just Cause and Quarrel of their Sovereign:
how often they were taken and re-taken Prisoners, your and their Houses
plundered, themselves wounded and left among the dead Soldiers. All these I
will leave in silence, with many other Valourous Acts done by them; knowing
your humility to be such, that it abhors to be praised; and other your
Allies exalted in your behalf.

Therefore I will, and that most willingly, condescend to your humble
inclination; craving pardon for this boldness in offering so small a Token to
your great Deserts. And thus, with your leave, I will cease to write, though I
will not cease to wish, That all Prosperity and Happiness may never cease to
You and Yours; and with this desire I remain,

Most honored Patron Your most humble Servant, CHARLES PORA.

TO THE READER.
HAving written these Treatises of the Chief Languishing Diseases of this
Corrupted Age, upon no other account than for my own satisfaction; with the
sole intention to improve my self as well in the English Tongue, as to apply
readily the Antidote of all Spiritual Diseases and Languishing Distempers, to
my poor corrupted disposition: Not thinking in the least to let it pass any
further in the view of the World; yet the earnest entreaties of my friends (who
accidentally perused the same) prevailed so far, that I could not but
condescend to their desires in the publishing of it.

Accept therefore, Courteous Reader, my good will and hearty desire to do
something that might tend to the perfect cure of those Spiritual Infirmities
that chiefly corrupt this present Age. I confess (and you will easily perceive
by reading) that neither the Style, nor the Conceits, are set out to the full;
yet my hope is that you will never find the language so barren and fruitless,
but you may find likewise a Balsom for prevention, or at the least to give ease
to your Languishing Infirmities. Expect not Mellifluous Eloquencies, Vain
Opinions, nor Worldly Expressions; but the plain Conceits of a well-meaning
Mind, suitable to the Subject, which tends only for your spiritual good and
interest. Neither do I pretend to entertain you with Novelties: I shall allege
nothing, that I can so properly term my own, as to exclude all others from any
Title to it.

Know therefore, Good Reader, that I have selected the substance of these
Treatises out of the Sacred Scripture, ^ith the confirmation both of the
An^^ent Fathers, and of other Learned ^ivines. Wherefore if you find any ^^ing
amiss or superfluous, as unpo^^shed Phrases, hard or harsh Sen^^nces, any false
Orthographics, or ^ot true English; impute the same to ^^y own Errors, and
excuse me as not ^^^ing perfect in the English Expressi^^s. Thus wishing you
the absolute ^^re of all those Languishing Diseases and Distempers, both of
Mind and spirit here spoken of. I do not doubt, ^ut by Gods assistance you will
find it, ^^ the reading of these Treatises, or ^^ least some help, as well to
prevent, ^^ to heal the same. Adieu.

The First Treatise OF THE LANGUISHING DISEASES OF CHRISTIANS Proceeding from
Self-Love.
We and our Fathers languish under such Diseases; but thou for sinners shall be
called Merciful. 4 Esdr. 8. 31.
SECTION I. Of Self-Love.
SECT. 1. The Introduction to Self-Love. 2. Three several sorts of Love. 3.
Self-Love contrary to the Love of God. 4. How Self-Love opposes the Love of
God.

SECT. 1. Introduction to Self-Love.
IT is not without cause (most beloved Reader) nor reason, tha^ the Wise
Solomon did exalt, in his Canticles so highly that which Almighty God did
ordain, namely Love; of which I will say, that if the Rules of it be not
exactly kept and observed, without question it will cause infinite confusion,
even to the total ruin of Mankind.

Love, in the highest degree and perfection, is due to God alone; as being that
which he absolutely commands us. Diliges Dominum Deum tu^m ex toto cord tuo,
etc. Deuteronomy. 6. v. 5. Thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole heart, with
thy whole soul and with thy whole mind. This is the greatest and the First
Commandment; and the second to it is, Diliges proximum tuum sicut teipsum,
Matthew. 22. 39. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. From which precepts
we may absolutely say, That Love is the only end of our salvation, and that
God does therefore save us, that we may be perfected in love. Nevertheless give
me leave to tell you, that this love must be to the utmost regulated; that is,
performed with all due exactness both toward God, our Neighbor, and our
selves, for fear, least otherwise, in stead of making us agreeable to God and
being advantageous to us, it prove much prejudicial to our souls, and render us
difforme to him.

Since then we are bound so strictly to use and exercise Love in a right
manner, it behooves us to hear what ^s said of the same, that we may proceed in
it accordingly. The Master of the Sentences (lib. 3. Distinct. 28.) does not
only confirm, that we ought to love God above all things without exception, but
says also, that we are to love our selves, that is to say, the health of our
souls and our neighbors; as for my part I take his meaning to be, and must
confess, that I never yet observed, that God does any where positively, or in
express terms command, that Man should love himself, as being naturally
inclined and fully enough affected to do that as well in what is good or
pleasing to his nature, as also i^ what is evil and prejudicial to his soul.
Therefore to know how far we may lawfully love our selves (and our neighbors)
without being entangled with that Vice which is properly called Self-love, will
be the whole subject and matter for us to enquire of in this present Treatise.

SECT. 2. Three several sorts of Love.
To the end that every man may know, and likewise have strength and courage to
perform all things well in order to please Almighty God, in returning love for
his love, as also the better to withdraw himself from all sorts of Self-love
that are evil, I would have him consider and observe the Saying of a most
learned Divine, to wit the R. F. Bernardin. de Siena, who in one of his Sermons
De Amore proprio and privato, tells us, That there are three several sorts of
Loves; the first whereof is lawful, the second to be rejected, but the third
totally to be abhorred, as being cause of the general destruction and ruin of
Mankind. Wherefore, that every one may discern the one from the other, and
discover which are the most pernicious, and to be avoided; I will in few words
declare and speak of them one by one.

In the first place there is a Love which is natural and reasonable; This is
lawful to be observed by every one. This love appears when a person seeks
and desires only that which is lawful, good, profitable, and meet for him,
without prejudice to any other: For seeing, according to reason, no man should
have in hatred his own nature, substance, or being, it is therefore lawful for
him to procure all such things as are good and convenient for him, and to
dispose of them to his best advantage for the good of his soul. We are also to
love our Neighbor, because the Law of Nature obliges and commands us to do
unto others that which we would desire should be done to our selves in like
case: Yet nevertheless we are to be vigilant, and consider well how we do love
our Neighbor, to the end we may love him well, and so as may be both for hi^
and for our spiritual profit, and that our love to God suffer no prejudice by
it. Now to declare the love we owe unto God, there are many things requisite
and to be observed, since we are to love him above all things, with all our
understanding, that is, without any error contrary to what he has revealed for
our Belief; with all our will, that is, without any opposition or contradiction
to what he requires of us; with all our mind and memory, that is, without any
oblivion or forgetfulness of him, or of our duty toward him; lastly, with all
our endeavor and power; that is, without all sloth or negligence in performing
his holy Service, Commandments, Divine Counsels and Inspirations.

The second sort of Love beforementioned, which is to berejected, may be said
to be Venial Sin; to wit, when (as we have said before) the passion of Love
over-reacheth the Rule of Reason, as also when the order to be observed in the
exercise and performance of Love, is not punctually and exactly kept and
fulfilled: As for example, according to reason, and the great obligation we
have to Almighty God, we are to love him above all things, and we are only to
love our selves and our neighbors purely for the love of him, and not for any
other respect. Yet sometimes, yea very often, experience shows that Self-love
and proper will (such is our frailty and weakness) do exceed their limits, and
become more or less extravagant, being carried with a desire not so suitable to
reason and our obligation, as it ought to be. And although, considering Divine
Clemency, it may well enough be thought, that such extravagant or inordinate
desires, affections, actions, do not always come to such a height as to be
mortal sin, and consequently may remain (though not perfectly) with Charity;
yet for this reason, that is, because they do render our Charity (or Love to
God) less perfect then it should be all the Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
Church do unanimously counsel and advise, that all such Loves be rejected and
totally avoided by all in general; but more especially by those who tend to
perfection, and in order thereto have by Vow entered the state of a Religious
Life. And the reason hereof is, because if men will voluntarily give way and
suffer themselves to take pleasure in such inordinate desires, affections,
loves, of what kind soever they be, they expose themselves and their souls to
danger of falling most deeply and desperately into such spiritual Disease;
seeing the soul thereby grows every day more and more weak and faint in the
love of God, and inordinate Self-love grows so strong, that in the end it
becomes mortal and hardly capable of Cure.

As concerning the third and last sort of Love, which we are to declare and
speak of more at large in this present Treatise, it is that which Divines call
Mortal Self-love and Mortal Sin; a thing even noisome and of the highest
offense to God, and more than all other evils whatsoever (beside such as it
self is) hurtful and prejudicial to man. For this Self-love is so immoderate
and inordinate, that it causes men so to forget themselves, that they
undervalue even Almighty God, and by consequence their own salvation. Of this
Self-love Saint Augustine tells us, that Satan has built his great City of
Babylon, lib. 1. De Civit. Dei, and in Psalm. 74. For as the True and Divine
Love, which reigns in the Citizens of Jerusalem, that is, in the Servants of
God, takes its original spring from the Charity of God, and makes them humble,
and to undervalue themselves for the honor and praise of God; so in the same
manner the Self-love of the Citizens of Babylon takes its original spring from
their proper will, and they raise themselves so high by reason of it, that they
come to undervalue and despise even God himself, their own salvation and
eternal interest.

We see in men diverse sorts of affections, diverse sorts of judgments,
o^inions, wills; in so much that they ^re not more different in feature and ^n
the frame and fashion of their Bo^ies and natural Humors, then they ^re in
their proper Wills and Self-love: and the reason hereof is, because they ^o not
regard to conform themselves, ^or to adjust their proper loves to the True
Divine Love. This is the source from whence so much Self-love pro^eeds; men do
not their endeavor to perform the will of God as they ought, put follow too
much (every one) their proper sensualities and private wills. Oh, would to God,
the only true and perfect Love were well rooted and engraven in the hearts of
men! how would it make them true Followers and Imitators of those that live now
^n the Celestial Jerusalem ^ Without question they would then be all of one
mind, as the Apostles and Disciples of Christ were; who so conformed
themselves, that as the Holy Text says of them, Acts 4. 32. they were Cor unum
and anima una, all one sou^ and one heart.

SECT. 3. Self-Love contrary to the Love o^ God.
Egredere de terratua, de cognatione tua, and de domo patris tui; Genesis 12. 1.
Go forth of thy Country, from thy kindred and thy Fathers house; said Almighty
God unto us all, in the person of the Patriarch Abraham ou^ Father: insinuating
hereby, that you must all go forth, and give over the love of worldly
Creatures, if you mean to love Celestial; you must pluck out of your selves
all the weeds of Self-love, and so root them out of your hearts, that they may
never grow up again. Self-love is displeasing to God, and altogether contrary
to his love. Self-love is the cause of all evils; it perverteth the judgment,
overthrows and disturbs the mind, stops and perverts reason, dulls ^he
understanding, empoisons the will, and shuts up the way to Eternal ^alvation.
He that loves not well, does not know God, injures his neighbor, ^orsaketh
Virtue, and seeks after honor, riches, and such like things; ^oves the world
and himself, but not God. Take heed therefore; since it ^s this Self-love that
destroys all, commands, and leads, by it self, all sinners ^o eternal damnation.

Why do you love Honor, Riches, and other Corporal Objects of the World so
much? Why do you seek, why do you hunt after them with so much greediness? It
is only because you love your selves inordinately. Yet are you to leave all,
and forsake all, even your selves and your own ^ife, for the Love of God, if
you pre^end to be everlastingly happy. And ^he reason is, because if the Love
of God be not the first and chief in your affections, sensual desires will
usurp the prerogatives of Reason and get the chief place, which is due to God
alone: and so by consequence you forsake God for the love of your self, and for
the enjoying of your own prope^ will and fancy, you rob God of the honor which
is due only to him, a^ the Creator and Maker of all Creatures.

To mortify and subdue Self-love and our proper wills, is not only the
Counsel, but was also the Practice o^ all the Ancient Fathers, who used all
their endeavors to weed and pluck out Self-love from themselves, and to
withdraw it also from the hearts of others, especially of those who pretend to
the perfection of Christian Virtue and Piety, and have the state of a Religious
Life in honor and esteem. Now our proper will in this place signifies that
absolute Self-love which men use, and whereby they always take complacency in
themselves, and ordain and refer all things to the satisfaction of themselves
and of their own mind; whereas on the ^ontrary true and perfect Christians
^enounce whatsoever is contrary to God, and give themselves totally to Divine
Love, and to the performance ^f Gods Will and Commandments, ^rdaining all to
God, and in a man^er denying all to themselves.

Seeing then, that these two Loves ^re so contrary and opposite the one against
the other, it follows, that such ^ikewise must be all the affections and ^he
operations that proceed from them; that is, opposite and quite contrary one to
another: in so much that ^t is impossible these two Loves should ever reign at
once or together at the ^ame time, in one and the same heart; ^eeing they are
altogether incompati^le. You will never find the Love of God agree with the
love of the world, ^he love of Earthly Things with the love of Celestial, the
Carnal with the Spiritual. And as it is impossible for Truth and Falsity to
agree, or Mor^ality with Immortality, Sweetness with Bitterness in a high
degree, o^ Peace with War; so in the same manner, impossible it is to reconcile
Self-love with the Love of God. We cannot with one and the same eye, a^ the
same instant look up to Heaven and down to Earth; so neither is it i^ our
power, at the same time, to lov^ God and this world.

Therefore to humble and get the Victory over Self-love, we are fir^^ to
overcome our selves, and shake o^ the yoke and tyrannizing power o^ our proper
will; which is the spring of all evil to us. We must absolutely reject that, if
ever we mean to embrace Virtue as we ought; and submit our selves wholly unto
God, being mindful of all the graces and benefit^ we have received, and do
still everyday receive from him; following herein the good counsel of Saint
Augustine, great Pillar and Doctor of the Church, Recordare, quomodo creavi^ te
non existentem; redemit te, etc* Remember (says he) how God create^ thee of
nothing; how he redeemed ^ee with his own blood, how he did ^ee thee being
captive, how he pro^^cted thee in thy infirmity, how he ^riched thee being poor
and naked, and how he will happily reward and ^own thee, if thou remainest a
true ^ver to him.

SECT. 4. How Self-love opposes the Love of God.
Upon the apprehension you might ^^t (perhaps) be satisfied with me in ^^ving
only declared, That Self-love contrary to the Love of God; but ^ould willingly
know some particu^^rities, how and in what manner this ^^lf-love repugns and
opposes that which is divine; to comply in some ^easure, with your desires and
in^^nations, I say in the first place, that as Divine Love does afford ^^d
cause to mankind all manner of ^^iritual comforts, consolations, and ^ kind of
happiness; so on the contrary, Self-love being a Self-seeker ^^ all things,
never rests, never cease troubling and intaingling it self an^ others in all
sorts of inconvenience^ dangers, and evils; being the O^ man, which reigns in
mankind and causes so great disorders an^ confusions amongst men, and so many
spiritual diseases in Christianity that even St. Paul himself (Doctor ^^ the
Gentiles) could not restrain from crying out, desiring to be freed from it,
Infaelix Ego homo, quis me liber^ bit de corpore mortis hujus, Romans 7. ^^
Unhappy man that I am, who sh^^^ deliver me from the body of this dea^^ This
Self-love therefore may be sa^^ to be as a wioked Monster in us, the totally
ruins and destroys mankind; in another place I shall further decla^^ and at
present, though it be imp^sible to unfold and discover the wi^^edness of this
pernicious Monster ^^ the full, I will endeavor in part ^^ make it appear how
horrid and frig^^ful he is, by the opposition which ^^ has against the Charity
or Love of God.

Saint Paul does much encourage ^e to this design, having so incom^arably well
demonstrated and decla^ed the excellencies of Charity, or Divine Love (so
lively, so fair, so love^y, and so agreeable, that nothing ^an be desired nor
wished more per^ect and accomplished) in these expres^ions, Charitas patiens
est, benigna ^st. Charitas non aemulatur, etc. 1 Cor. ^ 3. 4. Charity, or the
Love of God ^s patient, is benign; gentle, kind; Charity envieth not, deals
not per^^ersly, is not puffed up, is not ambi^ious, seeks not her own,
provok^th not to anger, thinks no evil, ^ejoyceth not in iniquity, but
rejoyc^th in the truth; Charity suffers all things, believes all things, and
^eareth all things: In a word, Cha^ity abides all ways free, constant,
^ively, simple or sincere, without any doubleness or disguizement, caus^ng no
deceit, nor using any dissimulation; for having God only for h^ last end, in
that respect she total^^ rests and sweetly reposeth in him.

But Self-love proves quite contr^ry both within and without, bei^^ always
deceitful and disguized ^^ all her proceedings; blaming th^^ which should be
praised and praisi^^ that which deserves blame: estee^ing her self better than
all others, y^^ sometimes feignedly undervaluin^ and speaking meanly of her
self, ^^ the intent she may be the more prai^ed, and exalted by others: If s^^
speaks well of her neighbor, it is only ^^ bring him upon discourse (or make
hi^ talked of) that afterward she may fi^^ occasion to traduce and slander him
^ for Self-love is subtle, and seldom ^^ at any time wants ground (true ^^
false) to maintain or excuse, to pa^liate or hide the naughtiness of he^
proceedings; being like to a Squin^ey'd man, who being bidden to loo^ on one
side, looks on the other. ^^ wicked and deceitful Self-love! t^ whom it must be
said what the Pro^het Ahias said to the Wife of Jero^oam, that came to see him
disguized, ^xor Jeroboam, curte aliam esse si^ulas? 3 Reg. 14. 8. Jeroboams
^ife, why do feign thy self to be another woman?

Secondly, Charity, or the Love of ^od, makes a man value nothing, ^or esteem
any thing in this world, ^ut virtue; for which reason he lov^th all perfections
and virtues in ^eneral, but in a singular manner the ^ertue of Humility, by
which he al^ayes submits, despises, and un^ervalueth himself, suffers
injuries, ^pprobrious and abusive speeches, con^^sions, and bears all
mortificati^ns for Jesus Christ's sake, patiently and meekly, without commotion
or ^esentment; attributes no good acti^ns to himself, but to God alone; and
^nstead of praising, commending, and thinking better of himself for do^ng well,
he humbles himself, flies honor, declines and refuses the praises and
applaudings of men, wha^ possible he can; not seeking riches, nor worldly
pleasures, or perferments, but desiring rather to be commanded, than to
command, or to have any power, authority, or dominion over others; and in sine
so content^ himself to live in all due submissio^ under God and men, that for
ou^ Lords sake, he is always ready to obey every humane creature that ha^
authority to command.

But on the contrary, Self-love, by ways quite opposite to these, causes a man
to affect greatness, honour^ riches and plenty of all things, to glorify
himself in his Extraction, Nobility, Friends, Estate, Power an^ Dominion over
others; to deligh^ much in the society and acquaintanc^ of great men, and to
take his pleasur^ in all sensual vanities, so as ver^ often to offend God
through frailty, an^ undue complacence with the world Self-love causes men to
be proud, so that they love to be praised, considered, honored and respected;
makes them desire to be employed in great Offices, and in things of great
concern: ^t makes one to equalize himself to great Persons, and often times to
prefer himself before his Superiors and Betters, and to despise all he thinks
under him or inferior to him. This makes him glory in what he possesses, and
of what he can do; but sad and dejected, and full of melancholy, when he falls
into any want, or necessity: This makes us angry and full of fury, when our
conceits and discourses are not well taken, or not approved; and finally
through Self-love it is, that we are so easily and so much troubled in mind at
every small thing that happens contrary to our desire and expectation.

Thirdly, Charity, or the Love of God, causes a man, not to regard so much his
proper utility and conveniences, as those that concern the common and public
good, or are profitable to many; for which cause he does not take so much pains
and labor for his own interest, as he will do for others: he is in a sor^
common to all, and upon that accoun^ loves a common life, abhoring al^
singularities at all times; being contented with little, and giving willingly
of what he has. But on the contrary, Self-love causes men to be chiefly
solicitous in what they undertake, that it may be for their own convenience,
interest, and proper utility; makes them unwilling and slow to do any thing
gratis, or for nothing: They will be rewarded to the full, and whether it be in
praise, favor, or goods, they always pretend to a full value of recompense*
Those who are led by Self-love, love to be praised in all their actions, be
they either good or bad: such men love Singularities, and desire in all things
to be treated better then others, and applauded above the rest; envying their
equals above measure, more especially, if honor, place, employments, or
charges be given to ^^em; for then they grow discontent^d, grudge, murmur, and
complain, ^retending that themselves had been ^ore fit for such a great place,
and ^ore deserved to have had such a ^reat Office, Honor, or Dignity,
con^erred on them; yea sometimes plead^^g not only their greater Merits,
great^r Parts and Sufficiency, but rather then ^il, even greater need and want
^f it, then others. Behold here but ^ne of the least parcels of the evil
^ffects which proceed from Self-love. ^ehold a glimpse of what a Self-lover ^s
always ready to say and do, being altogether for himself, and scarce ^or any
body else. But alas! the time ^s coming, when they must repent of ^his their
inordinate Love, if not in ^his world, yet assuredly in the next, ^or all
eternity.

SECTION II. Self-love the original spring of all Spiritual Diseases.
SECT. 1. All the Spiritual Diseases of Christians from Self-love. 2. Self-love
(it self) a most dangerous Disease. 3. A Description of the same. 4. The
beginning and continuance of that pernicious Disease. 5. How that pernicious
Disease corrupts all Virtues an^ good Actions.

SECT. 1. All Spiritual Diseases of Christian^ from Self-love.
FOr the most part, as soon as ^ man finds himself weak and sickly, he
presently does his endeavor to know the original cause of ^^at his corporal
Disease and infirmi^^; consulting with Physicians, that ^y their means and
prescriptions a ^resent and fit remedy may be ap^lied for the ease of his pain.
I say ^e same of the Spiritual Diseases of ^hristians; If any of them would now
from whence the Languishing ^nfirmities of their Souls (which hold and torment
them daily) do proceed, Divines will unanimously tell them, ^^ is a continual
Fever of Self-love ^^at troubles them; which according ^^ Saint Augustine, is
the root of all ^^ns, and consequently of all the Spi^^tual Diseases,
Distempers, Sick^esses, and Infirmities, which afflict ^^em; being the source
and spring of ^ll evil, and the plague of humane ^^^fe; in so much as it may be
said to ^^e that Trojan Horse, bearing fire and swords, saccage and rapin in
its ^owels. This Self-love may be well ^ompared to a Malignant Fever, of which
as there be several sorts, and all of them for the most part morta^ and deadly;
so are there several sort of Self-love, all in their kind, pernicious and
dangerous; consisting some in pride, some in ambition, some i^ vanity and
presumption: there a^^ Self-esteemings, Self-admirings, Self-complacencies and
pleasings, Self-delights, Self-praisings, Self-interests* Self-wills; with
innumerable other^ of like nature, which apparently spring from the main root
of Self-love*

Saint Ambrose one of the chiefes^ and greatest Physicians of Souls ^ writing
upon Saint Lukes Gospel (Luk^ 4. 38.) speaks of Seven sorts of these
Pestilential Fevers, which are mos^ dangerous to Christians. The first rises
from pride, ambition, and hypocrisy, etc. The Second from covetousness, the
unsatiable desire o^ money, or worldly things. The Third^^ from sensuality and
prodigality i^ meat and drink. The Fourth from the concupiscence of the flesh,
wantonness in unlawful desires and pleasures. The Fifth, from troublesome
humors, and bad conditions, as anger. and other disorderly passions. The Sixth
^^om a great negligence in good works, and carelessness in the performances ^f
good purposes and resolutions. The Seventh (and last) from envy, and
displeasure taken at others properties, happiness, good, etc. All which
properties are fully contained ^^ Self-love: for from thence proceed ^mbitions,
rebellions, sacriledges, ^reacheries, rapines, in a word, all that which is
most horrid in Nature.

For it being the root of all sin, ^here must of necessity grow up from ^^, as
from their Tree and Stock, ^he Boughs and Branches of all ^orts of Iniquity and
Vice; of which ^lso the Apostle Saint John takes no^ice in his Epistle, namely,
1 Joan. ^^. 16. where he mentions the concu^iscence of the flesh, that is, all
bodi^y and carnal pleasures, the concupi^cence of the eyes, by which may be
^nderstood the inordinate desire of understanding, knowledge, etc. an^ pride of
life; which may also be called the concupiscence of the Will ^ breaking out
into all inordinate act^ons. So that under these three co^cupiscences, are
contained and comprehended the whole sinful state ^^ Mankind: and by the
Catholiq^^ Church, and all Divines of the sam^ are commonly sorted or divided
in^^ Seven branches, namely, Pride, C^vetousness, Lechery, Anger, Envy*
Gluttony, and Sloth. All which is fu^ly agreeable to the saying of the
S^raphical Doctor Saint Bonaventur^ who speaking of Self-love, uses the^
expressions, It must be confessed (sait^ he) that Self-love is the original
ca^^^ of all evil and wickedness, and th^^ by means thereof, all sinful actio^^
come forth, or show themselves, wit^ all the Languishing Infirmities, tha^
attend our Spiritual Estate.

As for Example, Does not pri^^ and ambition proceed from Self-love* Have they
any other original fountai^ or spring, are they any thing else but an
inordinate Love of our own proper excellencies, and a desire to be commended in
all our actions above and before others? Does not envy rise up from the same
root? Is it any thing but the inordinate Love of our selves, that makes us
grieve and be displeased at others felicity, good parts, virtue, etc. when we
compare our selves with them; and to grudge that others should be equal to us,
or to proceed in dignities before us? Whence comes sloth, negigence, and
remissness in Gods service, but from hence; namely, that out of inordinate Love
to the pleasures and delights of the Palate; we pamper our selves and our
carcasses so much, that we become idle thereupon, unapt and unwilling to take
any pains, care or diligence in things that concern the good of our souls, and
our spiritual interests? Does not anger come from hence? Is it for any other
reason then that of Self-love and inordinate esteem of our selves that we are
so full of wrath and passion, so easy to be provoked and s^ ready to take
revenge upon very frivolous accounts, and that with every one? Whence comes
lechery, o^ the intemperate pursuing of sensual^ or carnal pleasures? It is an
effect o^ Self-love, though one of the ignoblest and least worthy of man; that
we are transported so far beyond measure with those wanton concupiscences of
the flesh. The same I mus^ say of gluttony; it is from an inordinate (and no
due) love of our selves, that we exceed so much in our appetite and affections
toward meat and drink: From this disorderly love it is that we affect so much
to feed on delicacies and dainties, even to the making a God of our Belly.
Lastly, As concerning covetousness, it proceeds most apparently from hence, and
from the inordinate love of our selves it comes, that we are so unsatiably
greedy and desirous of Riches, Wealth, money, and all other world^^
possessions; so that for conclusion, ^ith infalible truth it may be said, ^^at
this Self-love is a Mother vice, and that from thence, all the vices, ^^nnes,
evils, and spiritual maladies, that so unhappily infest Men's Souls, ^ave their
original, and do spring, ^s Branches do from their proper Tree and Stock, and
as Rivers flow from their Springs and Fountains.

SECT. 2. Self-love (it self) a most dangerous Disease.
It is not without just cause and reason, that these Seven Branches of
^elf-love are commonly called, and ^ear the Title of Mortal or Deadly, ^eeing
all the vicious and corrupt in^erests and practices of men are re^uced to some
one or other of them, ^s we have already declared; and if ^^ happens that the
objects of any of these branches, or several kinds of inordinate Self-love, be
very predominant and prevailing in our affections, it must of necessity be,
because the Love of God is proportionably weak and at a very low ebb in us; and
consequently it either puts us into, or shows us to be in a most dangerous and
sickly condition of soul, even in the state of habitual mortal sin; being
withal deprived of Gods Grace for so long time as we remain in such estate: so
that we do not only languish but perish, being destitute both of the Remedy and
Physicians, and although (peradventure) many notwithstanding their being in
this bad condition, through habitual Self-love, do either by reason of their
natural inclination, or through the power of some other worldly interest,
forbear to commit those gross and palpable sins, which Self-love and vicious
affections do usually draw other men unto, yet this will not excuse them, nor
put them in a good state toward, so long as they ^re guilty, and their hearts
infect^d with Self-love.

But what shall we say now of those, who are so much subject, and ^iven up to
this vice, that they set their thoughts and endeavors whol^ upon honors,
vanities, pleasures ^^ as feasting and gaming) or otherwise ^ngage themselves
in Contentions or ^^ its at Law, or siding with Factions ^n State, so as that
they seem to place their whole delight in such things: ^or although the
particular actions of ^hese men, considered singly, may ^eem only to be venial,
yet let me ^ell them, the whole number, with ^nnumerable other aggravating
cir^umstances, renders them damnable, and that with great reason: because ^t
shows, that through the vehemence ^f Self-love, their affections are placed and
fixed in those objects as in their ^ast end; which is to transgress the Ho^y
Commandments of God in the high^st and most grievous manner: besides the
scandal they give. We judge of their inward affections by their outward
actions: Wherefore if these worldly objects of Honors, Vanities, Pleasures,
and the like, take up their whole employment, or the greatest part of their
time, it is evident that they are predominant over their affections, and that
God is not so much the object of their minds and thought^ as he should be;
namely to reign i^ them by Holy Love, and to be the principal and chiefest end
they aim at. So that being destitute of Gods Grace and giving so great scandal
by their life and manners they must needs be in a dangerous condition.

Certainly they do grossly deceive themselves, in imagining that they love God
above all things, or that the Love of him is the most cordial of all their
loves; when as reflecting well upon themselves, they would find that all their
Love-actions and all the designs of their heart were so wholly bent and set
upon worldly things, that the service of God and salvation of their Souls, were
the least ^n all their thoughts, least spoken of and least attended unto. For
the love by which they are bound to prefer God above themselves, does not
consist in discourse and merely talking of ^t, but in doing what we are
commanded, and in doing it with real and hearty affection; therefore if they
^ntend to be cured of this dangerous Disease, this languishing and
Soul-^estroying distemper of Self-love, it must be as the Christian Doctrine
^oth teach and advise us to do; name^y, that our Love of God be the most
absolute, the most affectionate and cordial, the most general and ^redominant
of all other loves, and that it reign in us above and more ^han all other
passions. We must love God more then our own selves and ^ur own lives; we must
love him generally, and in all things without ^xception, that he commands us to
love; desiring to please him more than to please our selves: And besid^ this,
we must be truly and sincere disposed to lose all things, even tho^ which are
most dear unto us, and ^ suffer the greatest indignities, if ^^casion require,
rather than to forsa^^ him or lose his grace and favor; a^ consequently, we
must be ready ^ embrace all persecutions, sufferance yea death it self, rather
than to commit one mortal sin. And this deg^^^ of Divine Love, is the only cure
the Languishing Disease and Diste^per of Self-love, and is absolutely ^^quisite
for the Salvation of our So^^

SECT. 3. A Description of the same.
The Wise Hippocrates, (accordi^^ as it is reported of him) deplored his time
very much the evil effects ^^ Avarice, saying, The Life of M^^ is rendered
miserable by the same. ^ may say the like (with Father Causs^^ of Self-love,
since it is the most fatal plague amongst all the passions: It is not a simple
malady, but a complex; a malady composed of all the evils in the World: it has
the shivering and heats of Feavors, the ach and prickings of the Meagrim, the
rage of Toothache, the stupefaction of a Vertigo, the furies of Phrenzy or
Madness, the black vapors of the Hypochondry, the disturbances of the Waking
and Fits of the Fallingsickness; it has the stupidities of the Lethargy, the
heaviness of Hearts-greif, the pangs of the Colic, the infections of the
Leprosy, the venom of Ulcers, the malignity of the Plague, the putrefaction
of the Gangreen, and whatsoever else is horrible in Nature.

Since therefore Self-love is such a strange and pestilent Disease in Morality,
that there is none like it in Nature, nor more hurtful to Mankind; I will
dilate my self more at large with the same Father upon the Disasters that are
daily in the sight ^^ the World caused by it. Alas! the^^ are millions of Men
who would b^ most fortunate and flourishing, if the knew how to avoid the
mischievo^^ power of this passion: but using ^^ consideration, nor endeavor to
the end, they abandon their Bodies ^^ dishonor, their Reputation to inf^my,
their Estates to waste and mi^*spending, and their whole lives to a^ infinity
of disturbances and torment* For from hence it comes (as we da^ly see the
experience) that Virgins ^^ Noble Blood and Families are stolen ^way, Families
dishonored and d^solated, and grieved parents precipitated into untimely Tombs
by ungrateful Children.

From the same it follows, that s^ many Young Widows make shipwrac^ of their
Honor in the World, an^ suffer themselves to be corrupted by incontinency,
that so many miserable Creatures, that otherwise with the grace of God might
have lived and died honorably; after they have ser^ed for a matter of talk to
a City for time, by reason of their evil and ^^fortunate courses, very often at
last ^e in an Hospital. Hence also it ^^mes, that so many Innocents are ^ade
away by a death which pre^ented their birth, and many of them ^urthered and
destroyed after their ^rth, as it appears more or less, at ^l Assizes and
Sessions, to the great ^ame of Christianity.

Besides all these, how many poor ^fants are brought into this Life, as ^recks
at Sea are thrown upon the ^ocks, or brought to shore; so expo^^d to poverty
and miseries, that con^^dering the matter well, we may ^nclude and say, that
through Self-^^ve many chaste Wedlocks are disturb^d, many Poisons mingled,
produc^^g wicked effects; that many Hal^ers are put about the Necks of
Self-^^vers, many Swords drawn, and ^any sad Tragedies begun in the night, that
are ended at high-noon-day upon a Scaffold. Oh how happy are tho^ Souls, which
through the grace o^ God, are exempt and free from the Vice of Self-lave, which
produces suc^ mischiefs and disasters in the world* Let us therefore follow
and use a^ our endeavor to put in practice the Wise Counsel of Solomon, in the
Book of Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 21. ^ 2. As from the Face of a Serpent ^^ from
sin, fly from Self-love; because as a Serpent comes slily upon us an^ stingeth
the Body, so all sin, an^ consequently Self-love, steals upon an^ hurts the
Soul.

SECT. 4. The beginning and continuance of this pernicious Disease.
Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, gives a true account of thi^ old
inveterate malady of our Souls, saying, Romans 5. v. 12. Sicut per ^num hominem
peccatum in hunc mundum intravit, et per peccatum mors, ^ta and in omnes
homines mors pertran^it, in quo omnes peccaverunt. As ^^ the Doctor of the
Gentiles would ^ave said, That sin (which proceeds ^^om Self-love, as we have
before ^emonstrated) entered into this world from the beginning, and from the
^reation of the same; by that sin of ^elf-love, death passed unto all men, ^n
which they have all sinned; for even in the Law of Nature sin was in ^he World
from old, and death did ^eign until Moses, even on them that ^ad not (actually)
sin ed: which is ^s much as to say, that from Adam, ^n the time of the Law of
Nature, ^here was sin in the world, and though in a manner they knew it not,
^et this Spiritual Disease we speak of, ^eigned even then, as likewise in the
^ime of Moses, when the Command^ents or Law of God taught the contrary: to wit,
that God was displeas^d therewith; and therefore men ^ught to avoid the same:
But by reason that all mankind were maculate with original sin, they had no
streng^^ of themselves-nor grace, to be fr^^ from Self-love.

So that thereupon sin did reign ^ver men and also death and damna^tion by
reason of Self-love. Infant that did never actually offend, being conceived and
born in original sin were nevertheless liable to death an^ subject to all
Spiritual Diseases, an^ to all the Maladies and Corruptions o^ the Soul, having
their Nature defile^ and destitute of Original Justice; being averted from God
by means of Adams transgression, Christ only excepted; who was conceived by the
Holy Ghost without the Seed of Man and his blessed Mother, the Virgi^ Mary, who
was preserved from contracting the guilt of original sin, by special grace and
the extraordinary perfection of God; as many godly men judge: but as for all
the rest ^^ mankind; they were born in a weak and sickly condition of Soul, by
reason of that sin ever since men were ^^eated; having been holden and
tor^ented by all sorts of Spiritual Di^^empers, even the most dangerous, ^ost
pestilent, most violent, and ^^ntinual; insomuch that by the ^^me they were all
subject to Satan ^^d liable to eternal sorrows; they ^ere all made the Children
of wrath, ^e slaves of sin, and every way most ^^serable: Yea, these infectious
^^seases came to such a height upon ^^e whole race of mankind, that ^^e few
only excepted, they were ^ swept away and perished in the ^^neral Flood; as is
to be seen in ^enesis Chap. 7. v. 1, 2. etc.

These most violent fits of sin and ^^traordinary punishments for the ^^me,
were not so soon passed over, ^t many great pains and labors fol^^wed upon
men, and that for the ^ace of four hundred years together, ^^der the slavery of
King Pharaoh ^ the Land of Egypt: after which ^^ing delivered and freed from
that cruel bondage, they were soon afte^ visited and afflicted with other
grievous calamities and miseries, for the space of more than Threescore Yea^
together, to wit, in the Babyloni^ Captivity; where the Royal Prophe^^ David,
by the Spirit of Prophecy describes them lamenting and be moaning themselves,
Psalm. 136. ^ 1. Super flumina Babylonis, illi^ sedimus and flevimus, etc. Upon
the Rivers of Babylon there it w^ that we sale and bewailed the a^flicted
estate of Sion. They could no^ refrain to mourn, remembering the great
calamities which for their si^ God had brought even upon his ow^ Sanctuary. How
many other Feaver^ sometimes continual, sometimes intermitting; how many heats
of burning torments and pain, how man^ cold fits of desolation and want have
men at several times been subject unto, and made to undergo upon this account?
Have we not heard ^^ those surprises of sudden destruction which came upon the
people of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all the adjacent ^ountries, when they were
wholly ^onsumed by Fire; as it is described, ^en, 19 v. 24. Do we not read
also, ^ow in the time of Elias the Prophet, ^^d at his Prayers, Fire came down
^om Heaven and consumed those un^^dly wretches that were sent to ap^^ehend him?
4 Reg. 1. v. 10. How ^any cold and comfortless long fits of ^mine, Pestilence
and Mortality ^ere others exercised and plagued ^ith for their sins; the
Heavens ^ing so shut, that it rained not for ^any years together, and the earth
^ parched with drought that it yield^^ no water, and people forced there^^, in
a languishing and perishing ^^ndition to wander up and down, ^^king water to
drink and finding ^e? as we read Hierem. 14. 1, 2, 3. ^. and in many other
places of holy ^ipture.

In the sacred Gospel of Saint John ^hap. 5. v. 5.) we read of a man that had
been diseased in body the space of Thirty Eight Years in Jerusalem, and had
for a long time wa^^ed the stirring of the water there, b^ which an Angel from
Heaven cur^ those which first came into the wat^^ after the stirring, of
whatsoever ^^sease they had. This poor man h^^ lain there expecting his cure
eig^^ and thirty years together, being ^^ reason of his great weakness
contin^ally prevented by some other bo^^ that stepped into the water before
him; and therefore deserved at leng^^ to be pitied by our Lord Jesus Christ
and cured by his Almighty Word a^ Command. But alas, How mu^^ more was the
whole universal wo^^ (all mankind) to be mourned for, a^ compassionated, which
had lain l^guishing, not only the space of Thi^ Eight Years, but ever since the
Cr^^tion of Adam, that is by the acco^^^ of some more than Five Thous^^^ Six
Hundred and Twenty Years; ^^ing all that time infected and conti^^^ly vexed
with the feavor of original ^^ which lay upon all and every one, ^^d with a
Thousand other actual di^^empers, maladies and diseases of the ^^ul, which held
and afflicted par^^cular persons; some in one kind, ^^me in another. As for
Example, ^ow many distempers of wilful ig^^rance and error in the mind? How
^any ulcers of envy and malice in ^e will? How many fallings and of^^nces
happened through frailty of con^^piscences? It would be endless to ^^ckon all
the Infirmities and Lan^^ishings of Soul, that lay upon and ^pressed mankind,
in such a manner ^ was even incurable before the com^^g of Christ, and till he
came to ^ply his Grace and the Merits of ^s Death and Passion for their Cure;
^aving after him the Balsome of the ^^craments to that end: as namely, ^e Water
of Holy Baptism, for the ^ashing away that foul stain of Ori^^nal sin in every
one, and of all a^^ual sin committed before Baptism, in such as were rightly
Baptized; a^^ the other Sacraments, especially the Holy Eucharist and Penance
for the healing of all actual wounds man in the Soul by sin, committed aft^^
Baptism: Insomuch, that before t^^ coming of Christ, and also since, ^^ all
those that are through sin depriv^ of the merits of his passion, and ^^ those
two Sacramental Antidotes ^bove-mentioned, it may be right^ said, even now at
this present, wh^ the Prophet Isaias of old said of t^^ Israelites, Omne caput
languidu^ et omne cor, moerens; a planta pe^ usque ad verticem non est in eo
sanit^ (Isa. 5. v. 5.) Every Head is s^^ and every Heart in heaviness: fr^^ the
Sole of the Foot even to the Cro^ of the Head, there is no Health ^^ Soundness.
All their Kings, all the Princes, all their Priests, Proph^^ and People, were
Soul-sick, all ^ them, from the highest to the lowe^ languished through
ingratitude a^ other innumerable iniquities comm^^^ed against God; there was
none of them of what condition soever but ^ad defiled themselves by sin, had
corrupted their ways, and were subject to many spiritual imperfections; and
that which rendered their condition most deplorable and despe^ate, was (as it
follows in the Prophet, Ibid.) because that, Vulnus, and li^vor, and plaga
tumens, etc. their Wounds, and Bruises, and Putrified Swelling Sores, which sin
had bred in them, were not bound up by the Care and Skill of any Spiritual
Physician: They would not repent of their sins, they would do no Penance, they
would hearken to no good Counsel (the Holy Oil which should have mollified
their hard hearts, and brought health unto them;) infine, they would make no
use of any of those Remedies which were prescribed for recovery of their
Spiritual Health, and for the staying of further judgments; whence the Prophet
adds in the same place (v. 7, 9.) Therefore is your Land still desolate, your
Cities bur^ with Fire: Et nisi dominus exerc^ tuum reliquisset nobis semen,
etc. V^less the Lord of Hosts had left us ^ Seed, we should have been ere now ^
Sodom and been like unto Gomorrah ^ but blessed be God, who of his inf^nite
mercy does still preserve some good and holy people in the World that his
Church may never fail.

SECT. 5. How this pernicious Disease of Sel^-love corrupeth also all Virtue
and good Actions.
The Exercise and practice of Virtues is observed and done divers^ ways; and
therefore Plotinus the Philosopher distinguishes the rational Virtues of the
Soul in two gener^^ kinds, making some merely more or civil; to wit, such as
polish an^ adorn the manners and outward conversation; others he make purgativ^
of the Mind, Spirit and Understand^^g of Men, from errors, perverse ^udgments
and opinions. Those of the ^^rst sort are not so absolute Virtues ^s those of
the second are; by which ^e are after a sort made to the like^ess of God. All
the Virtues that are ^ertues indeed are purgative. O^^ers distinguish the same
Virtues in^^ imperfect and perfect, supposing ^^at such division serves better
for the ^eclaration of their several natures; ^ut it comes much to one and the
^^me: For under those which they ^le imperfect, they include all those which
others call moral or civil, and ^arce any other: for those which ^^ey call
natural and humane, are ^ally moral virtues, and pertain to ^e polishing of the
civil life; not ^^rightly indeed styled and accounted ^^perfect: seeing that if
they do not ^^oceed from Self-love, as very of^^n they do, yet they are always
^^nsistent with it and tend only to ^^me worldly object. Others they call
perfect, because they perfect us i^ order to God; having God for the^ principal
object and end, and makin^ us pure and holy, after our prop^^ measure and
degree in his sight which are all by another name righ^ly called purgative,
because they purg^ and cleanse our Souls of those Vices which bar our sight of
God and ma^^ us seem unpleasing to him. In furth^^ Confirmation of what has
been sai^ we are to know it is the general op^nion of Divines, That Virtues of
t^^ first sort, to wit, those we call N^tural, Civil and Moral, consider^^ in
themselves alone, or in their ow^ Nature, are of no effect nor estee^ with God,
as being imperfect, a^ practiced by a certain instinct a^ inclination of
nature, whereto ^^ the most part Self-love and private i^terest, or (at the
best) humane r^^son and prudence, that is, world wisdom carries us. As for
Examp^^* How exactly do many men) yea ^ wise and well grounded persons) o^serve
the Civil and Temporal Laws ^ the Land! The cause is, they ^ar to do otherwise,
reflecting upon ^e penalties and punishments inflict^ upon transgressors. How
many ^omen live chaste and contain them^^lves in the bounds of Wedlock, not ^
much minding to fulfill Gods Com^andment, or to be chaste, continent ^r Gods
sake, but merely for the ^ame and ignominy which they ap^rehend would follow
and happen to ^^em, should they abandon them^^lves to sin and to an unlawful
li^erty in that kind? How many ex^rcise patience, not for the Love of ^ertue,
but for fear either to disturb themselves to little purpose, or to dis^lease
the party that gives the occa^^on?

Morover, How many are there to ^e found in the world that seem to love their
Friends, their Kindred and ^elations, that seem most dutiful and ^bservant to
their Parents, as in du^y all are obliged to be; and yet how often is it
likewise found, that all ^^ most of these observances, dutifulness,
complacency, proceed meetly from Self-love, and not out of the Love of God, or
from any principle ^^ true Piety, Love, Duty, etc. W^ fear that if we should
not seem loving, dutiful, kind, etc. we should lose the good will of others, w^
should be deprived of some great estate great fortune, or great hopes; an^ thus
it is for interest only and for o^^ own ends, for the most part, that w^ are
dutiful and observant toward P^rents: As much may be said of many that make
great show of affect^on and of great Love to those of an ^ther Sex; it may be
feared such kin^nesses and courtships carry with the^ much abuse and
corruption; and the if the chief object or end be not lust ^^ some sinful
complacency, as most commonly it is, yet Self-love and Vanit^ is for certain
the principal motive a^ cause of such pretensions; to wit because the party is
exteriourly fair amiable, delightsome, discreet, ^^vise, affable, and of good
humor, ^s they call it, good company, a ^ood disposition, or that some other
^ke quality commends her to our fan^y; all which are but the repasts of
Self-love, and do render all the Acts ^f Humane or seeming Moral Virtue,
^xercised upon such occasions, mere Vanities and Imperfections, in no sort
meritorious; because they have not God but Self-love for their aim and object.

Whence it follows, That be the Actions or Works which we do, never so good in
their own Nature, never so Just, never so Chaste, Temperate, and never so
commendable in the sight of the World, yet proceeding or being done only upon
the account of Self-love, Self-interest, Self-complacency, and not for the Love
of God more than all, instead of being valued, or accounted perfect Virtue,
Meritorious Works, etc. they will rather be discommended and condemned for sin,
as the holy Scripture shows clearly in the Example of those Hypocrites, who
fasting for exterior show only, exterminant vultus suos, disfigure their
Faces, that they may appear to the World for to fast. For what says our
Savior of them? Amen dico vobis, quia receperunt mercedem suam, Matthew. 6. v.
16. Of a truth I say unto you, they have received their reward. As much is to
be said of those that give Alms to the Poor, as many of the Pharisees used to
do in their Synagogues and in the Streets, Markets and open Places, having a
Trumpet blown before them, to show what they were going to do: they doing all
this to be seen of men and that they might be honored of men for their
Charity, Holiness, and good Works; all that they did was nothing worth. Their
doom is the same with the other, Receperunt mercedem suam. They sought their
reward in Self-love, in Vain Glory and Proper Will, and therein they shall find
it.

The condition therefore which such Men do expose themselves unto, cannot ^ut
be very dangerous; which I shall ^onfirm by one further Example: Sup^ose one be
really a covetous Man, that is, inordinately greedy and desi^ous of worldly
wealth and to heap ^p Riches; yet for fear of the Tem^oral Laws or being
unwilling to lose his reputation, by being a known no^ed Usurer, or for some
worldly respects, he forbears that particular sin, he does not put out his
Money to use, nor rob his neighbor in that particu^ar way and kind of robbery;
but yet his heart is as much set upon Riches, and his mind as wholly occupied
and taken up in getting and gathering worldly wealth; he is as pinching,
sparing and close-handed toward the poor, gives as little Alms as he that is
a professed Usurer: Will it serve this Man's turn think you, will it save him
from the Snares of his Ghostly Enemy that he does not put out his Money to use?
No verily, If he hoards up without measure or end, if he refuses to lend freely
and to give liberally, when just occasion and the necessity of his poor
neighbor requires it of him, being able, he sins, and its much to be feared,
will be found one day in the number of those whom Saint Paul (Ephesians. 5. 5.)
declares to be excluded the Kingdom of Heaven: For though he does not commit
usury nor rob outwardly, yet he is covetous in heart, and that is enough to work
his ruin: witness those words of the Apostle, Neque fures, neque avari, etc.
Neither Thieves nor Covetous Persons shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

SECTION III. Of the fatal Ruin of Mankind by Self-love.
SECT. 1. By taking more Pleasure and putting more Confidence in Worldly things
than in God. 2. By taking Delight in all manner of Sensualities of the Flesh.
3. By their Glorying and Boasting themselves in Malice and Iniquities.

SECT. 1. By taking more Pleasure and putting more Confidence in Worldly things
than in God.
SAint Paul the Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles, writing to Timothy, says,
That the time will come, That Men shall be Lovers of them selves; and having
said that, subjoynes a List of innumerable sins to wit, of Covetousness,
Pride Blasphemy against God, Disobedien^ to Parents, Ingratitudes, Incontinency
Impieties, and what not? all issuin^ from the root of Self-love: he fo^gets not
to put into this Black Ro^^ that Saint-seeming Vice (or dead^ sin) of
Hypocrisy; telling us, the notwithstanding Men should be reall^ guilty of so
many and great Vices yet they will make much profession of Virtue; though there
be no tr^^ fear of God in their Hearts, yet the will pretend to Piety, having a
For of Godliness, but denying the Pow^^ thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. ^
if he had said, they are so man Wolves in Lamb-skins; they will see^ outwardly
Holy and Virtuous, b^ in their interior are mere Hypocrit^ and great enemies
of Virtue, wh^ it will stand with their private In^^rests, and Self-love to be
so; in^^much that I cannot but remember ^here what our Savior says in the
Gospel (Joan. 12. v. 25.) Qui amat ^animam suam, perdet eam, and qui o^dit
animam suam in hoc mundo, in vitam aeternam custodit eam. He that loves his
Soul shall lose it, and he that loses or hates his Soul in this world, does
keep it to life eternal. His meaning is, that whosoever loves his Soul
inordinately and otherwise then he should, and not in due order to God, shall
surely lose it to all eternity. Take heed therefore how you Love your selves
and blame not me for telling you plainly the truth; which is, that the eternal
Ruin of Mankind consists and is caused chiefly through these disorderly
affections; that is, because we do neither place our Love where we ought, nor
exercise it as we ought; which for the most part happens to us three manner of
ways:

The First is, When a man does as ^t were Cast and drown himself in the
Delights and Pleasures of the World and puts more confidence in his Riches and
Worldly Pelf then he does i^ God. The Second is, When he ru^ headlong into all
manner of Carn^^ Concupiscences, permitting himse^^ to sink in the deepest
abyss of sin i^ that kind. The Third is, When Me^ Glory and Boast of their
Sins a^ Iniquities. As to the first of these to wit, that a Man exposes
himse^^ to great danger and commits a grievous oversight in suffering himself
^^ be so carried away with the va^^ things of this World; whethe^ Riches,
Honors, Pleasures and Fruition of them; nay so much as to fo^get himself and
his own condition ^ his own nature and excellency; re^dring himself thereby
like unto the Bruit Beasts, who have no reason and exercise no Understanding,
Di^cretion, Prudence, in the pursuit ^^ what they love; and finally in having
more confidence in Creature than in God the only Creator: An^ that which is
worst of all is, that ^aving thus tasted the inordinate ^ensualities and
Delights of the World, they come by degrees to be ^isaffected and to take no
pleasure in things Celestial. For as Saint Paul ^ith (1 Cor. 2* v. 14.)
Animalis ho^o non percipit ea, quae sunt Spiritus ^ei. The sensual Man
petceiveth not those things that are of the Spirit of ^od. It is therefore a
certain Truth, ^^at the more a Man approaches by ^elight and pleasure to
worldly things, he less his affections are to things of ^eaven, and the more
backward he ^oes daily from them. Ah: would ^ God Men were as well rooted and
^xed in the Love of God as they are ^^ the Love of the World! How ^ould the
Pleasures and Possessions of ^e World seem tedious to them, and ^ther a
perpetual torment than a peretual delight, joy, etc. For so Saint ^ugustine
judges, Lib. 13. of his ^onfessions, saying, The effects of ^^ue Love (that
is, the Love of God) is sweetness, but the effects of Self-lo^^ is bitterness.

This is also manifest and furth^^ confirmed in the Gospel, by the E^ample of
the Rich Man, who as ^^ read in St. Luke (Chap. 12. v. 1^. trusted so much to
his wealth and the abundance which he had gather together, that he said thus to
^^ Soul, O anima mea, quid time^ habes multa bona posita in annos ^^rimos';
requiesce, comede, bibe, ^^ lare. O my Soul what fear th^^ thou have much
Goods laid up for m^ Years, take thine Ease; Eat, Dr^^^ and make good Cheer,
Eat good M^ Drink good Liquor, Banquet ^^ fill; nothing shall be wanting to the
See how this unhappy Man, alto^^ther destitute of the Comforts wh^ come from
God, resolves to have ^^ to take his Humane Consolation his Riches and in the
Wealth he ^^ gathered; but to his eternal grief ^ sorrow he sound that he propt
him up, and rested upon a broken St^^ ^r the next night that followed ^ade him
see how much he was de^ived; the Devil (his and Mankinds ^eat Enemy) coming and
taking his ^^ul from him. Alas! What good, that benefit did this miserable
wretch ^^ceive of all the Wealth and Goods ^ had laid up; he only heaped up
^^series and eternal damnation upon ^^mself, while he put more confi^^nce in
the Creature, that is, in his ^ods, Riches and Wealth, than he did ^^ the
Creator, and relied more secure ^^on his treasures than in God; for which cause
at length the enemy of ^^uls was permitted to take possession him.

SECT 2. By taking Delight in all manner of Sensualities of the Flesh.
In the second place, it is no less cer^^n hat man exposes himself to most
^^ident and great danger of his Soul, in running headlong into all mann^^ of
Fleshly Concupiscences and Lust^ and permitting himself to sink into t^^
deepest abyss of sin, through th^^ filthy kind of Self-love; it being in o^
Vice the most absolute defiance the can be given to Virtue and Honest^ and in
one kind of sin the greatest pr^varication and contempt that can ^^ declared
against Gods Comman^ments, which require Holiness in ^^ and Sanctification both
of the Spi^ and Flesh; whereas through the pr^valency of this Vice, we see even
^^ daily experience, many worldly m^ loving themselves, their ease and
ple^sures over much, in effect to renoun^^ their very Baptism and all the Ho^
Vows and Promises, which eith^^ there or at any other time they ev^^ made to
God and his Saints, and ^ to enjoy their present pleasure, a^^ to have their
carnal affections and v^luptuousness satisfied: yea for ^^ part I cannot but
profess to belie^^ concerning many men, that with^^ their hearts they would
become A^heists, Epicures, Turks and Infidels, ^r what you will (any thing or
nothing) in point of Religion, pro^ided they could be morally and well ^ssured
of the Fruition of their tem^oral pleasures, and that notwith^^anding they
should have all their de^^res in that kind accomplished in ^is world: as that
unfortunate A^^ila is said to have done, who be^^g born and educated in
Christianity and taken for the most Learned Man ^f his time, having translated
both ^e Old and New Testament, also ^ritten and Composed several good ^orks or
Books full of Sound and ^hristian Doctrine, yet (unhappy man) ^ length he
forsook Christianity, re^ounced his Baptism and declared him^^lf a Jew; for no
other reason but ^^ly to marry a Wife that was one of ^^at profession.

Alas! How many are to be seen every day that do the same or like thing ^on the
same or like account; namely, for to live at liberty in the common road of the
most notorious sinners* Especially if they be such persons a^ stand in danger
of being corrected and rebuked for their faults, either by Bishop, Superior,
or Prelate of the Church.

SECT. 3. By their Glorying and Boasting themselves in Malice and Iniquities.
Having in the two foregoing Paragraphs made evidently appear, bot^ by
Scripture, Reason and sad Examples the general Ruin of Mankind by Self-love; I
shall not doubt in the which follows in like manner to mak^ evident the dangers
and manifold inconveniences that men expose them selves unto, by glorying in
their si^ and iniquities, as some do, and by justifying themselves when they
have do^ amiss, as others. Saint John the b^ loved Disciple of Jesus Christ
has this ^einous crime in so great detestation, that he will not have the
Faithful to ^ray for them who take delight in ^in and remain obstinately and
impe^itently therein; avouching the same ^o be a sin unto death. Est pecca^um
ad mortem: non dico ut pro eo ^^uis rogit, 1 Joan. 5. v. 16. There ^s a sin
(says he) unto death: I do ^ot say that any should pray for that ^in. And
verily it is no wonder that ^o great a sin (to wit, as the glory^ng in and
boasting of sin is) should be greatly detested, seeing the same has been
abhorred in all Ages, both under the Ancient Law and the New: The Prophet David
enveyeth very much against those that were addicted to this sin; saying unto
them in ^ way of correction and reproof, Quid gloriaris in malitia, etc. Psalm.
^1. v. 3. Sinner why do thou glory in thy Malice? why do thou boast ^hy
self thou which art mighty in ini^uity? As if he had said, Why dareest thou be
so bold, so presumptuous, so impudent, as not only to transgress Gods Holy
Commandments and thereby to offend him, but to persevere obstinately therein;
and so far from true repentance and an humble acknowledgement of thy fault,
that thou take a vain glory therein and boastest thy self for having
committed so many sins, so great and grievous wickedness.

Verily, if it be (as it is commonly said) humanum quid, a humane thing (or
infirmity) to fail sometimes i^ our duty and to offend God, and d^ abolicum
quid, a devilish thing, to persevere and continue in sin; how much more
devilish and detestable must it be to rejoice, to take pride and boast of our
iniquities before others! And with great reason has the Wise Solomon rejected
and condemn ^ for ever those vain and perverse boasters, who not only leave the
righ^ way to walk in darkness, but are also glad when they have done evil and
rejoice in most wicked things. Let an^ur, cum male fecerint, and exullant ^n
rebus pessimis: quorum viae per^ersae sunt, and infames gressus eorum. Prove. 2.
v. 14. Their ways are in^eed perverse and their steps infamous, not only to
themselves, but ^o a great multitude of people, who ^re led by their Examples
to do the ^ame. But in conclusion they are all ^o know (Leaders and Followers)
that they walk in the dark way of Hell; they are posting to destruction and
know it not. The reason of which ^gnorance is given in another place, Impius,
cum in profundum venerit peccatorum, contemnit. The wicked when they are come
into the deepest abyss of sin, have least sense of sin; howbeit for their
reward, ignominy and eternal reproaches follow them, Prove. 18. v. 3.

Do you ask me whence it comes to pass to be so common a thing for men to boast
of their sins and to glory in that which is their shame, I answer, It comes
from the frequency of si^ Sin is become so common, that m^ are past shame and
none blush for what they see every man do. Sin i^ it self is doubtless an
odious thing* a shameful thing, yea and a fearfu^ thing, to all that well
consider it; ye^ when it comes once to be common amongst men, it is little or
nothing made of* as the ugliness of Monster^ and loathsomness of Diseases, by
being daily or continually in our eye, cease to be offensive, and we easily
endure them. Hence it is that me^ take pleasure and delight in the discourse of
their own vileness, and when flatterers are wanting, applaud^ and praise
themselves in their wickedness, according to that which is said, Psalm. 10. 3.
Laudatur peccator in disideriis animae suae, etc. Be the desires of his heart
never so bad, yet the sinner applauds himself in them, being no way ashamed of
them; but the more pleasing that sin is to the sinner, so much the more
detestable for the most part, it is, and displeasing to God; and consequently
this sin, to wit of glorying in sin and of recounting with pleasure our
devilish and unholy exploits, must needs be most abominable and heinous in
Gods sight; yea so heinous, that scarce any iniquity which this world affords
may be compared to it; and cannot be expiated but by a grief and detestation on
our parts proportionable thereto: as we see in the Example of all good
Penitents, Saint Mary Magdalen, King David, Saint Peter, the Prodigal Son, the
Publican, and several others contained in the holy Scriptures; whose sin having
been exceedingly great or numerous, or both, their penitential sorrow, their
contrition, their confusion, trouble, and grief of heart, their detestation,
dislike, and loathing of themselves and of their former actings, was likewise
proportionably great, both interiourly and exteriourly, both as to their inward
sense and their outward expression; their hearts being ^ much dejected as their
countenance and their countenance no less tha^ their hearts. Now this being the
way of expiating all sins and no other means of reconciliation wit^ God to be
thought of, but only tha^ of godly sorrow for them, peniten^ and humble
confessing of them; who can doubt, but that sinners, so long as they applaud
themselves for sinning, so long as they take Pride, Pleasure, or any
Vain-delight and Vainglory in recounting their sins; so long as they canor do,
in the least manner, sport themselves in the remembrance of them, are in a bad
condition, and do give an evident sign of their Souls fatal ruin through
Self-love and want of a true cordial repentance of their sins; as we have now
(completely, as I suppose) declared by Scripture and Reason.

For conclusion I shall add an Example or two, to show what an excess of
impudence and immodesty it is possible, through want of the grace of God, for
people to arrive ^t in this kind of wickedness, name^y, of glorying and taking
Pride in their sins. Athenaeus (lib. 13.) tells of Phryne, that famous
Impudique ^n her time, and one of the most ^mmodest Women that ever was born
upon earth; that being a Common Strumpet, yet very beautiful, she had by her
lewd Trade and inveig^ing practices upon such as haunted her company, ammass'd
and got together such a vast Treasure, that to perpetuate her Infamous Name and
Crimes, she offered of her self, and at her own charge, to repair the Walls of
Thebes, that great City, which no meaner person than Alexander the Great had
some time before demolished and caused to be pulled down. These Walls, though
the charge of them were held to be almost inestimable and far beyond the reach
of any private wealth, this Woman would rebuild only with the price of her
Whoredom; requiring no other reward but the immortalizing of her Name, and that
this Inscription might be engraven upon the Walls for a perpetual memory of her
self and her naughty practices, Alexander quidem subvertit, sed Phryne
restituit. 'Twas the work of an Alexander (that is, of a great General and his
Army) to pull these Walls down; but one Phryne has set them up.

And yet in this Example there may perhaps be observed some show of a generous
mind; in that which follows there will be found nothing but the prodigious
lewdness of a Woman madded with lust, and therefore past shame. I think of
Messalina, Wife to Claudius Caesar the Emperor, a Woman of such an irregular
pride and lust, as (if Historians wrong her not) she was not ashamed publicly
to boast of it (as of some Feat of Honor) that she had committed Adultery with
twenty five several men, one after another; being forced at length through
weari^ess to give over, but not satisfied ^n her lust.

Lassata viris, sed non satiata, recessit. This most strange Impudique took
such a perverse glory in what she had done, that she defied all the unchaste
and lewd Females that were in Rome to do as much if they could. Yea such was
her wicked confidence and boldness, that she spared not to blame the Vestal
Virgins and all other persons of her Sex, that had vowed Chastity, as people
not well informed. And now, alas! are there not many in the world, that with
this Cursed Messaline, stick not to blame and cast all manner of unjust
reproaches upon those persons (Men or Women) that vow Chastity and the state of
a single life to our Lord Jesus Christ; thereby barring themselves of the
liberties which otherwise they might lawfully take in the world? Al^ how many
are yet to be seen eve^^day, who make it their business a^ the subject of their
chiefest glory, ^ pursue the designs and recount t^^ exploits of carnal lust;
not mindin^ that those who glory and boast the^ selves in sin, are absolutely
uncap^ble of doing any good work pleas^^^ to God or meritorious of eternal
^ward. The reason is, because the^ take pleasure, they delight, and spo^
themselves in sin; then which n^thing can be more sinful. No man can make
himself sport with the which he really hates. If therefore we can play with
sin, whether ^^ our selves or others, it is certain w^ do not hate it as we
ought. I ad^ moreover, that though we should grant that some good, in order t^
God, might be done by these Self-lovers, Self-praisers, and Self-pleasers, yet
certain it is, little or none would be done, for the reason abovementioned, to
wit, because they place their chiefest pleasure in wick^d actions, and all
their endeavors ^re so bent and fixed upon their Vani^ies, and in taking
complacency in their own doings (be they good or ^ad) that often times they do
violence ^o themselves merely for the aug^enting the follies of their
wicked^ess; that is, in striving to be more ^oolish and wicked.

Sect. 4. How Self-love is prejudicial to God and Men.
Sect. 1. Self-love causes Blasphemy Undervaluing of God; therefore
prejudicial to him. 2. Self-love looks always at his own interests, in treating
with neighbors; therefore prejudicial to them. 3. By Self-love we Seek all
sorts of Vanities therefore prejudicial to our selves.

Sect. 1. Self-love causes Blasphemy and an Undervaluing ^^ God; therefore
prejudicial ^^ him.
SInce it is the Divine Precept, T^^^ we should love Almighty Go^ above all
things, with all o^ hearts; that is to say, by all o^ Understanding, without
any erro^ contrary to Faith; and with all o^ Soul, that is to say with all our
Wi^ without any opposition or contra^^ction to the Will of God; with all o^
Mind, that is to say, with our M^mory, not yielding to any oblivio^^ or
voluntary forgetfulness of him and, finally, with all our Strengt^ that is to
say, with all our endeavors and power, not using a^ slightiness or negligence
in doin^ his Service; seeing (I say) the we ought thus to love God, it fo^lows
of necessity, that if we do no^ but the contrary, being found neg^igent in the
performance of any the ^ore-mentioned particularities, we ^o prejudice God, and
rob him of his ^ues and Rights. For man cannot ^e cornival with God, so as to
give ^im no more than he^ thinks meet, ^ut must give all that is required, and
^o all that is commanded, and in such (...) as it is commanded; nor may ^e
yield to any other love, which i^ ^ot in order to the supreme love of ^od.

And with most just reason it is, that ^od does thus claim all to himself, ^ll
Love, all Service, all Honor, and acounts himself in jur'd, when a^y Love,
Honor, or Service, but that he allows, is performed to any things else: for he
made all, he (...) ^^d all Creatures, even the whole ^niverse. He gave us all
the Being ^^at we have, all our Powers, Fa^ulties, Parts. We have nothing ^ut
of his Gift, and could do no^ ^^ing but for his help: Therefore it is most due
to him, that we should love him (as abovesaid) with al^ our Hearts, with all
our Souls, with all our Mind and Strength* This is Gods due, by that great and
universal Title of Creation; to which that more Special Title of Redemption
adds much right. B^^ alas! how little sensible are we ^^ either! how often do
we trang^gress, and leap over the limits of o^ bound duty, and how much negle^^
our obl^gation, through the veheme^cy of Self-love, and the affection w^ bear
to our selves, the world, an^ the things contained in it, the riche^ the
honors, the pleasures, and v^nities of the world; not to speak o^ diverse, more
unlawful, objects th^^ to be found, and too frequently stumbled upon; which
cause much dis^^nour to God, and great prejudice ^^ our Souls, through the
innumerab^^ disorders and distempers, which happen in Chistianity by occasion
o^ them, blinding the understanding^ and shutting up the eyes, as it were, of
all Mankind, through the pre^alency of their mischievous ef^ects.

One of the chiefest, and greatest whereof is pride and ambition; of which,
intending to speak more at ^arge in an other Treatise, for the ^resent I will
only say (and desire it may be observed) that through this ^xcessive pride and
ambition God is ^ighly dishonored, and the rights of his absolute and sole
Sovereignty ^resumptuously trampled upon and ^espised, no less than by open
Blasphe^y; while through the pride of their ^earts men refuse to acknowledge him
^he only God, the Creator of all things, and that his providence ru^eth the
world; and while out of the ^ame affection of pride, disdaining to ^e under his
power, or command, ^hey forbear not to speak evil of his Deity, and either to
deny or dispute ^is Supreme Authority, Divine Omnipotency, etc. Verities ever
acknowledged from the beginning of the world, continued in all the ancient Law,
and renewed in the Gospel, at the very birth of Christ, and by the Public
Confession of all Chrians, preserved to his present. So that there seems
nothing to be added to the pride of too many now adays, but with Domitian the
Emperor, having thrust God out of his Throne, to place themselves in it; as, if
you please to consult ancient Histories you will find that Emperor to have
done; who through the exorbitancy of many other precedent Vices, arrived at
last to such a stupendous height of Pride, Self-estimation, and sottish
Ambition, as to require to be called and proclaimed God; not enduring to hear
of any other: and, as Eusebius Caesariensis relates of him (Lib. 3. Hist.
Eccles. cap. 19. and 20.) putting to death all those of the Tribe of David
among the Jews, that himself might be acknowledged the only King and God of
the whole World, as Jesus Christ, the son of David, was by Christans confessed
to be.

A great excess of pride, and Self-love this was, certainly, in a mortal man,
to affect the honor and esteem of being accounted God; yet it was no greater,
than what some others had attempted before him; as for example Nabuchodonosor,
of whom, according as holy Scripture reports, Judith 6. v. 3. his servants were
wont to speak thus. Ostendam ^ibi, quia non est Deus, nisi Nabucodonosor, I
will show you, that there ^s no other God but Nabucodonosor; and of Herod, Acts
12. 22. who accepted of the Title of God, though to his cost, given him by the
public acclamation of the people. And as these, through pride think themselves
to be Gods, and require others to have the like opinion of them: So there are,
that altogether deny God, and either through pride, or some other distemper of
mind, think there is no God at all to be acknowledged; of whom the Prophet
David co^plains, Psalm. 13. v. 1. calling the^ Fools, though none think
themselves wiser men. Dixit insipiens in cor^^ suo, Non est Deus. The Fool ha^
said in his heart there is no God. C^^rupt they are, and become abomin^ble in
their doings. There lies the cause of their Distemper, and show whence it
comes, that they are su^^ fools, and so besotted in their unde^standing. They
are men that drow^ themselves in the multitude of the^ iniquities, that give
themselves ^^ to all manner of sin and vice: an^ of such men it is not to be
wo^dred, that they should be easily perfuaded to think and apt to say, Ther^^
is no God, no Divine Providence, that governs the World, none, th^^ shall judge
the wicked actions o^ men at the latter Day, no Judgment to come, no account
to be given of what we say or do in thi^ world. For all this is natural to
them, and they hear such lies as these with much ease and delight.

How many, besides these, are ^here, that daily injure and disho^our God, by
making a God of their ^ellies, through Glutteny and Drun^enness. How many, that
with those wicked ones in Job (chapter 15. v. 25.) Stretch out their hands against
God, and think to strengthen themselves against the Almighty. Such a one was
that Cassibes, the Son of Cyrus, who according to the relation of Herodo^us,
would never acknowledge any other God but himself (a common Distemper of those
mighty Asian, and some other Monarchs) being so notoriously wicked, and impious
in his proceedings, as that where ever he came, he caused all Temples, or
Places where God was invocated, and worshipped, to be burnt. But as his impiety
went not unpunished, so let me say it once for all, That nothing, which these
Blasphemers do either speak, act, or conspire contumeliously against God, shall
ever escape its due punishment. Though you daily see and hear those; that every
moment, and almost at every word profane his most holy and terrible Name, by
their Oaths and Swearing. Though you hear so many Atheists, taking the liberty
to deny the Deity, Providence, Power, Justice, and Goodness of God: Though you
see so many Politicians and False Chirstians, losing themselves in their
dissolute lives, and perjuring themselves in their Oaths, whether by God, by
his Church, by the Gospel (of which they are in heart the greatest enemies) or
by any other kind of Oath, though they seem to be very fortunate and prosperous
for the present, yet shall they not escape deserved punishment; Divine Justice
will find them out, first or last, in this world or in the next.

We see many sad examples, how severely God Almighty has from time to time
punished such presumptuous and arrogant people, so that we need not seek, or
take examples out of Holy Scripture to prove and verify this evident Truth.
Let us ^ook but into this present age, and we shall see, that for the most
part, Those that blaspheme the name of God, that rob and vilify his Church,
pollute and undervalue his holy Sacraments, make unjust wars against his
Holiness, the true Vicar of Christ upon earth, Those that take arms against
their lawful Sovereings, Kings, Princes, etc. that persecute, and put to death
the true and lawful Ministers of Gods Church, have for the most part died
shamefully, and perished miserably, their bodies hanging dead in the air, as
unworthy to have their Burial amongst good Christans, and their poor souls
carried into the deepest pit of Hell, there to suffer torment for all Eternity:
which things ought to give great terror to those that meditate of the judgments
of God, and the punishment he inflicts upon the Blasphemers of his holy Name.

It is true, God has sometimes deferred to punish some of these sinnets;
expecting their happy repentance, and conversion: but some likewise he has
severely and suddenly punished, inflicting pains presently upon their sin. As
(for example) he did to one Olimpius, Bishop of Carthage, who for Blaspheming
the Holy and Divine Trinity, was suddenly seized upon by a natural fire all
over his Body, which by little and little burnt and consumed him roaring amidst
the excessive pains which he endured.

Anatolius a great Blasphemer of Christ, in the year of our Lord 582 was
exposed alive to wild Beasts, and by them torn in pieces; after which he was
drawn to the Gallows, and there hanged; all the rest of his Fellows being burnt
in a little Ship by artificial fire; and so perished both by water and fire.
Nicephorus (lib. 17. cap. 4.) says that Nestorius was such another, to wit, a
Blasphemer of the holy Mother of God; for which fault, Divine Justice so
ordaining it, his Tongue was eaten with worms, being yet alive; by reason
whereof he suffered extreme horrible pain, and at last died miserably.

The Spanish History, written by Rodericus Sanctius and others, makes mention
of diverse other like examples; particularly of one Alphonsus a great
Blasphemer, who was suddenly punished by Divine Justice, for saying, That he
could govern the world far better than God, if he would undertake it. Toletanus
(lib. 6. de Reb. Hisp.) says, that Datianus was, for the like offense burnt
and consumed by Fire from Heaven; and that Gunderick was suddenly seized and
strangled by the Devil; as likewise were Alrorax, Attilla, and many others,
that for their blasphemies received present and horrible punishment from the
hand of God.

Procopius (lib. 1. de reb. gest.) Belisar.) testifies, That Hunnerie^ a most
cruel King of the Vandals, (who was not only a great Blasphemer, but also a
great Persecutor of Christians) was whilst actually Blaspheming, suddenly taken
with the Plague, and died miserably in the place where he was struck. Beside,
if you will take the pains to read Osorius (lib. 20. chap. 3.) in the Portugal
Histories you will find, that for the like Crimes, the same or like death
happened to the Lord of Ce^lis, who died mad and raging in Blaspemies without
end, after he had plundered several Churches, and burnt the Abbey of Saint
Hubert. Verily I could allege here an infinite number of other like sad
Examples, but these may suffice to make us absolutely believe, that never any
obstinate and perverse Blasphemer had a happy end; and that although some may
seem to escape Vengeance in this world, yet in the next wrath and indignation
to the height will be their portion.

Sect. 2. Self-love looks always at his own Interests, in treating with
Neighbors; therefore prejudicial to them.
Having already shown, how God Almighty is vilified, undervalued, injured, and
blasphemed, by the pernicious Disease of Self-love, and the evil Effects
proceeding from it, if we will now consider things well, we shall find that our
Neighbors are no less injured, wronged, and prejudiced by the same; because it
makes men look at themselves, and to seek only their own Self Ends and
Interests, upon all accounts and occasions; as a learned Divine does well
observe, saying, That Self-love is always in agitation, always acting,
against our Neighbor, or against ones self. Self-love never leaves our
Neighbor long in peace, but ever and anon is finding matter to trouble and vex
him, living almost in perpetual grudg with him, and i^ opposition to him,
either spiritual o^ temporal; what by Process and Sui^^ at Law, what by private
quarrels, contentions, animosities, what through hatred, envy, and ill will,
what by slanders, detraction, and defamation* what by fraud and deceit, what by
rapine and violence, what by murders, poisoning, and other evil practices, he
is incessantly molesting and doing him prejudice; sad experiences whereof
appear every day i^ the world: not to speak of more public mischiefs and
calamities, which happen, and are originally hatched by Self-love, of which in
due place. But for private wrong and injury done to our Neighbor through
Self-love, that one example which is mentioned in the third Book of Kings, Chap
21. v. 7, 8, 9, etc. may well serve instead of many. It is that of Achab and
Jezabel, wickedly plotting and procuring the death of Just Naboth, for no other
reason, but because he would not part with the In^eritance of his Fathers, for
to make Achab a garden of pleasure. What ^orrid mischiefs were caused by the
^elf-love of David, in the matter of Bathsabee and Vrias, first defiling ^he
Wife, and then commanding the ^eath of the Husband; as we read Reg. Chapter 11.

In fine, all other murders, slaughers, and violences of that nature, which
are daily committed, do they ^roceed, have they any other spring ^r root, than
the inordinateness of his passion of Self-love? All con^entions in Courts of
Justice, all ^leadings and debates in Parliament, ^hey have no other original
ground ^ut Self-love: All the Wars that are ^etwixt Kings and Princes (and
which are the great and almost per^etual plague and scourge of Chri^endome.)
whence come they but ^^om Self-love? The same is to be ^id of all Domestic
contentions and discords, their original source is Self-love; so that, in a
word, we may safely conclude of this vice, that it is the common Fountain, even
of all the evils in the world, that are committed against our Neighbor:
Neither need I to spend time any further to particularize or prove, as it were
by retail, this most certain truth, it being so evident in the gross; beside to
mention, or go thorough with all particulars that might be alleged in proof,
would be a work of no end; a man's whole life might be employed therein.

And truly which of those two Philosophers I should wish to be revived (whether
Democritus that laughed at all things, or Heraclitus that wept for all things) I
cannot easily resolve. The World affords matter enough for the exercise of both
humors: But till we can mend things that are amiss, by overmuch vexing at
them, I think it is best to make as light as we can of the evils we cannot help,
or hinder: With as equal therefore, and unmoved affections as I can; I look
upon the various proceedings of men, and observe ^he vanities and follies of
those who ^re wholly addicted to pleasures, and of those who with like
eagerness pursue their profits, and interests of gain; and see how vehemently
and ^niversally the Spirit of Self-love agitates and works in them all: how
^estless they are to put their proper will and sensuality in execution, and ^ow
solicitous till they have obtained their desire; which may be obtained, ^ut can
never satisfy: their wills may be fulfilled, but their minds are ^ever the
more at rest.

Seneca (lib. 1. de Tranquilitate ^itae) takes part with Democritus, and
maintains, that he had more rea^^n to laugh at the state of the ^orld (or
humane affairs) consider^^g the great vanity and folly that is ^ them, than
Heraclitus had to de^ore them with his tears; and the ^^ief reason he gives for
his Opinion, is, that as there is no ground or cause in reason to cry, to be
sad, angry, or any way troubled in our selves at any thing that a Fool or a
Madman says or does, seeing they are people out of their wits (as we say) void
of common sense, reason, and understanding; so there is no reason that
Heraclitus, or any other of his complexion, should cry, weep, mourn, or lament
in any passionate sort, the evils which he sees in the world; seeing they are
but the actings, for the most part, of mad, tha^ is, of perverse and obstinate
people, playing their pranks, and doing contrary to all reason. There is no
great cause to lament one that goes to the Gallows sporting and dancing, as ^^
he were going to a Feast; such ^ man deserves to be less regarded, ^ven for his
vain joy and unseasonable alacrity, in seeming so little t^ consider, or lay to
heart the sad condition of his approaching end. ^^ the same manner when we see
m^ go wilfully, and with delectation to ^ternal miseries, only because they
will satisfy their Self-loves, and ^njoy their Self-wills, and sensual
^leasures to the full, hearing no admonition, and receiving no instruction to
the contrary, why should we pity them.

I say, why should we pity them? ^ot being ignorant, that all good Christians,
who apprehend and re^ect better upon their unhappiness, ^ut of a spirit of more
perfect chari^y, will not fail to pity them, and ^o have a great compassion for
their ^ad and deplorable estate, and for ^he imminent danger they are going ^o
precipitate themselves into for all ^ternity. But I mean, they give no ^ause,
of themselves, to be pitied. I ^o willingly say, Alas for them! ^las! that for
a short momentary ^leasure they will thus choose to suf^er eternal torments; as
Job says of them (chap. 21. v. 13.) Ducunt in bo^is dies suos, and in puncto ad
inferna descendunt. They spend their days in wealth (the worldlings chief and
only God) and in a moment go down to Hell. Verily, at a dear rate they buy
their Pleasure, and the fruition of their Self-Loves. Had Dives, mentioned in
the Gospel (Luc. 16. 19, etc.) well considered the Exchange he was to make
after death, for the Pleasures he enjoyed in this life; I cannot doubt but he
would have bettered his ways, and prevented the hearing of that hard sentence
from the mouth of Abraham his Father (Ibid. v. 25.) Recordari, fili, qui^
recepisti bona in vita tua; nunc autem cruciaris. Remember Son that in thy life
time thou receivedst good things; but now thy life (of pleasure) is ended, and
thou art come into torments. But alas, I say again! when we begin to speak of
the torments which damned Souls endure, to these Self-ended People, and worldly
Self-lovers, we seem to them, as if we told them stories to fright Children;
they are too old and wise to believe us: that which Christ did teach and
preach, they reject for fables and untruth. Alas for them! there is no Faith
for them, nor any other true Christian Virtue. Self-love domineers, Self-love
bears all the sway, Self-love is all in all with them. Unhappy men, at so great
a peril to pursue that which at length will certainly deceive every one of
them, and reward their pains and pursuits with perpetual sorrows.

Ah! would to God they would open their eyes a little, and that his grace might
unblind their understandings, so as to make them see the truest effects of the
Love of God, which are absolutely contrary to the effects of Self-love. For
why, the effects of Divine Love are all of them good, yea they are all the good
that can, or ever will be desired; but contrariwise, the effects of Self-love
are all of them evil, and are all the evils that men can possible think,
imagine, or fear. Since then there be two sorts of Love namely, the Love of God
and the Love of our selves, and that all tr^^ good and happiness is to be
attributed to the Love of God; as on the contrary, all wickedness, and all
evils to Self-love; we are now to ma^^ our choice, we must go either to the
right hand or to the left; we mu^^ practice either what is Divine, o^ else
Self-love: Consider the matt^^ therefore well, and proceed as yo^ see cause by
what has been hitherto said, you cannot but have observ'^ and know, that all
the actions of those that exercise Self-love, tend wholly to their own praise
and commendation, and to exalt themselves; and if at any time they applaud
Virtue, it is only to praise themselves the more; upon a precarious and false
supposition that they are such: For though they applaud it they never practice
it. Their practice is only what the Poet (Ovid) describes, Laudamus veteres,
sed nostris utimur annis. ^n conclusion, where Self-love reigns, ^l Virtue, all
Justice, all acts of ^harity, all good Discipline, are sent ^^to exile, are
banished; and on the ^ontrary, Cruelties, Commotions, ^ars, Lusts, Adulteries,
Murders, ^esolations and Tumults, Furies and ^yranny, Persecutions and
Robbe^es, Pride and Ambition; yea, all ^ices (without exception) which can ^e
named, are in such vogue, that nothing can withstand them, and in ^uch credit
and practice, that it is in ^ain to speak against them.

By Self-love every one is prejudi^ed: By means of Self-love poor Orphans lose
their right, and poor Wi^ows sustain wrong; none conside^ing their cause, none
regarding, or giving ear to their just complaint. Through Self-love, the poor
perish, or live miserably; few or none taking pity, or having any compassion
of their hard condition. In fine, a^ sorts of men suffer more or less, ^^ some
respects or other, through the prevalency of this passion. From hence, from
this cursed root, Treasons are contrived and spring, Felonies are committed,
Perfidiousne^^ and Deceits practiced, Churches a^ robbed, Matrons and Virgins
defiled, Religion and all Fear of God laid aside and forgotten; insomuch that
hereby the Proverb comes to be verified, Mala etiam non quaerentibus obti^gunt;
bona vix accedunt etiam qu^rentibus. Evils though not sought after, will be
found and take place; but God though never so much sought after, will scarce be
found. This was the answer of that famous Diogenes the Philosopher, when one
asked him what his Opinion was touching Men's Estate and Condition in this
World. And truly in my judgment the answer was to purpose; for so much as
(generally speaking) Vice is much more rife in the World than ^ertue, and
consequently men are ^ore apt, and are better furnished to ^rocure Evil than to
procure Good, ^oth to themselves and their neigh^ours.

Sect. 3. By Self-love we seek all sorts of vanities, therefore it is
prejudical to our selves.
Having so largely declared in the ^wo precedent Paragraphs, how Self-^ove is
most prejudical to God and our Neighbor, tending to Gods dishonor and our
Neighbors harm; it hence of necessity follows, that the same Self-love is also
most prejudicial to our selves; for if God be offended by our Self-love, as we
have plainly demonstrated that he is, the very same transgression committed
against him by Self-love, does wound our own poor Souls to a spiritual death;
and if withal our Neighbor be prejudiced or harmed by it, as it is certain he
is, it does also include, that we our selves are prejudiced and receive hurt
thereby, no less than ou^ Neighbor; seeing we cannot unjustly harm our
Neighbor but we offend God, and by offending God we hurt our selves: so that
there need^ not much to be spoken to prove this verity; to wit, that Self-love
is prejudicial to our selves as well as to others; nevertheless, to keep a
dece^um in our proceedings, since I have not been sparing, or restrained my
self in showing the evils and mischievous effects of Self-love, in relation to
God and our Neighbor; it seems but requisite that something should more
particularly be proposed to show the like effects which it has upon our selves,
and how much we our selves are prejudiced by indulging to the passion of
Self-love.

First, you are not ignorant, that Self-love, according to the Ancient Fathers,
does blind the eyes of Mankind, dulling the Spirits, and weakening their
Understanding; inso^uch, that being to make choice of ^y thing, for the most
part they ^use for the worse; and more espe^^ally, when the matter concerns
^^eir spiritual estate or good. As for ^xample, there is nothing in this ^orld,
that a man loves better than ^is Life, his Soul, his Ease, his pro^er Will,
his Pleasures, his Sensuali^^es, his Vanities, and the like: and ^et it is
certain (and well donsidering ^e would easily see it) that all these, ^ven the
best of them (Life and Soul) ^ inordinately loved, are extremely ^ontrary and
prejudicial to his true ^ood: For in this sense, according to ^he Evangelist
(Joan. 12. 25.) Q^i ^mat animam suam, perdet eam, etc. He that loves his life
shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this World: that is, loves it not,
nor makes any reckoning of it in compa^ison of his love and duty to God, shall
keep it to life everlasting. The ^ame is to be said of the soul, according to
Saint Matthew. (chapter 10. 39.) As for the rest (ease, proper will, pleasures, etc.)
they are mere Vanities, not worth the wishing for, a^ witnesses the wise
Solomon, in those words, Eccles. 1. v. 14. Vidi cuncta, quae fiunt sub sole;
and ecce Vnivers^ Vanitas. I have seen (says he) and considered all things
that are done under the Sun; and behold, they are all vanity and affliction of
Spirit; which is to say, they are things wherein no full satisfactinn of raind,
no perfect content is to be found; and that therefore men do vainly, and to
their own prejudice, to set their minds, their love and affections so much upon
them.

Yet will not men be persuaded; their minds are still set upon the things under
the Sun, and not on those above it: they still mind the world and worldly
things, worldly riches, worldly honors, worldly pleasures, worldly power, etc.
and with such an eagerness of appetite do they hunt after these things, as if
^^ey were the chiefest good, and ^^at all happiness consisted in them;
^eglecting the care of their Souls for ^e love of them; quite contrary to ^e
advice and exhortation of the ^lessed Evangelist Saint John, who ^howing the
harm that comes to men, ^y setting their minds and affections ^ much upon
worldly things, and ^esirous to withdraw them from it, and to fix their minds
and hearts ^here they ought to be fixed, that ^, upon God and the life eternal;
he ^ys thus to them, 1 Joan. 2. v. 15. ^ratres, nolite diligere mundum, neue
ea, quae in mundum sunt. My ^ear Brethren, do not love the world ^or the things
that are in it; as be^^g a thing most prejudicial to your ^piritual interest:
by reason, that if ^ man loves the world and the things ^hereof, he cannot love
God as he ^ught; the love of the Father is not ^^ such a man: which counsel of
the ^postle is also seconded and confirmed by the Catholic Church, by whose
Order it is, that being to be enrolled in the rank of Christians, before our
admittance to the Sacrament of Baptism, it is demande^ and asked of us whether
we do renounce and forsake the World and the Devil? Abrenuncias Satanae ^
omnibus pompis ejus, and omnibus op^ribus ejus? (See the Roman Ritual^ Do you
renounce the Devil, and a^ his pomps, vanities, and wicke^ Works? To which we
all assent an^ answer, Abrenuncio, I do renounc^ and forsake them most freely
an^ willingly.

But alas! notwithstanding our promises and engagements to love God only, and
all other things merely for his sake, in order to him, and so far as he allows
us to love them* such is our depraved nature, such our false hearts, that we
mind nothing less than those our sacred vows* and suffer our selves to be
violently carried away to all the excesses of worldly pomp, pride and vanity;
^ading our selves with Gold and Sil^er, and setting our selves out with ^^l the
bravery of sumptuous Gar^ents, to the confusion of our Souls, ^onsumption of
our Estates, and ^orning of those who are our infe^ours, or fall any thing
short of us ^ vanity or vice. Add hereunto the ^any vain divertisements which
Self-^ove has invented, and does invent ^aily for our pass-time, and the
sta^ing us off from more serious thoughts. ^ith these sports and divertisements
^e spend unprofitably (and therefor more or less sinfully) all our ^ime, which
is one of the most pre^ious things we have in nature, and ^^ the spending
whereof (well or ill) ^e are most concerned. Thus we ^pend all the day, thus we
spend most part of the night; these diver^isements take up all our time, so
that we have little or none to spare ^or God, or our Soul. And what may ^he
subject of these divertisements be? for the most part (setting aside those
which are exercised in voluptuousness and Belly-chear, feasting and
Banqueting) it is little else but vain discourse, vain conversation, vain
entertaining of one another, if we proceed not to worse, and that our
discourses wrong not those that are absent by detraction, slander and
mis-report, and that our conversation runs not out into some dishonesty or
other, some impudicity or unchastness of action, some immodesty, filthiness,
and unseemliness of speech: as considering the great frailty of humane nature,
and the prevalency of ill custom, it can hardly be thought but we do. In thus
doing, we turn night into days and days into nights; not to be wondered at, nor
much spoken against, it is the mode amongst so many of the great ones; who
after the night spent in revelling, are obliged for their health to keep their
Bed till toward noon, and well it is if they can rise to take their dinner.

How much time is consumed in vain unprofitable playing at Cards and Dice? What
Swearing is occasioned thereby, by all manner of fearful Oaths that can be
imagined? What horrid Cursing, Blaspheming, and Damning themselves at every
Chance? What giving their Souls and Body to the Devil, so as it would make a
man tremble but to think of their horrid and execrable expressions? What should
I speak of the divertisements of Comedies, and Plays and Balls? How much
precious time is spent herein is known (but perhaps not so well considered) by
those that frequent them? Account must be given for it together with the rest.
Thus do men consume their time, and live indeed more like Brute Beasts than
good Christians; since they mind nothing but sensual things, neglecting prayer
and devotion wholly. Thus sadly do they forget their Vow and Promise made in
Baptism, that they would renounce the world, the flesh and the devil, with all
his wicked works and vain pomps. Add unto all the vanities aforesaid, the
continual use and fruition of bodily pleasures in meat and drink, etc. to which
others wholly give themselves up, pleading for their practice (though to the
great aggravation of their guilt) those words of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5. v. 29.
Nemo unquam carnem suam odio habuit, etc. No man ever hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes the same. For this reason (say they) we will taste,
so much as it lies in our power, all the pleasures of the five senses; nothing
that is pleasant shall escape us. Quae desideraverunt oculi nostri, non
negabimus eis. All things that our Eyes desire they shall have, if we can
procure it for them, Eccles. 2. v. 10. We will enjoy the good things that are
present, we will fill our selves with Wine, and crown our Heads with Rose Buds.
Sap. 2. v. 6, 7, 8. Thus they say and do.

But oh! how sad and fearful a thing is it for men that profess themselves
Christians, to lead such lives, so absolute contrary to what they have promised
to God, and against the special command of the Apostle; who in compassion to
such men, prescribes them a remedy for their Disease, and shows them how to
employ their time. Redimentes tempus, quoniam dies malisunt, Ephesians. 5. 15, etc.
Walk warily, dear Brethren (says he) redeeming the time because the days are
evil. Wherefore be not unwise, but understanding what the will of God is, and
perform the same. Walk honestly as in the day, not in banqueting and
drunkenness, not in beds and impudicities, not in contentions and emulations:
Nor make any provision for the flesh in concupiscences, Romans 3. v. 13, 14.

Ah poor Self-lovers, that this passage and expression of the Apostle could be
to you the subject and means of conversion, as it was hereto fore unto the
great Saint Augustine, that most glorious Doctor and Pillar of the Church; who
at his first happy and miraculous conversion, was by a voice from Heaven
directed not only to the Catholic Faith, but to a Life of perpetual
Continency, as he himself does acknowledge, Lib. 8. Confess. Cap. 18. The voice
which came from Heaven was this, Toll, Lege, Toll, Lege (Take up and read,
Take up and read) meaning the Book of the Gospel, which lay there by him.
Having done as he was commanded, upon opening of the Book, the first place his
Eye fixed upon, was that Text of Saint Paul abovementioned, to wit, Romans 13.
13. Sicut in die honest ambulemus, non in comessationibus and ebrietatibus,
etc. The consideration of which words, through the Grace of God, so wrought
with him, that he was forthwith converted both to the Catholic Faith and to a
most holy, continent, and chaste life. Oh, that we could follow his good
example, and retire our selves out of the Life of this World, to a Life Holy
and Spiritual! that we could give our selves up wholly to Gods service,
renouncing all vanities and vain divertisements, fopperies, and all the
sensualities of the world and of the flesh; and avoiding all the deceitful
works of the Devil, as things that are most prejudicial to our Bodies and
Souls. Oh that we could resolve from this present time to say with the Prophet
Osee, Ducam animam meam in solitudinem (Oseae 2. v. 13.) I will lead (or
withdraw) my Soul into solitude. I will make a divorce, a perpetual separation
from all sorts of Vanities, Concupiscences, Pleasures and Sensualities. I will
henceforth with St. Paul, 2 Cor. 4. v. 10. say, Semper mortificationem Jesu in
corpore nostro circumferam. I will always bear about in my Body the
Mortification of Jesus Christ, that by means thereof, through his Divine help
and aid, I I may avoid and qe free from Self-love.

SECTION V. How to conquer and overcome Self-love.
Sect. 1. Man cannot attain that Grace without the help of God. 2. The first
means to overcome Self-love, is by the knowledge of our selves, of our own
Nothing, Unprofitableness, Vileness, Miseries, and Afflictions. 3. The second
means to overcome Self-love, is by the knowledge of the Excellencies and
Perfections of God. 4. The third means to overcome Self-love, is by the
knowledge of the Benefits we have received, and are to receive.

Sect. 1. Man cannot attain that Grace without the help of God.
The duty of our present state is, and the chief employment of our whole life
ought to be, constantly and fervently to cooperate with Divine Grace, and to
grow in Virtues; endeavoring always and in every thing to get the victory over
our selves: that is, over inordinate Self-love, and Self-interests, that would
debauch us from our duty, and carry us into wrong ways: The reason hereof is,
because God being a Nature or Essence, superlatively excellent, and infinitely
above our and all other created natures, requires as a tribute most worthy of
him, and of justice belonging to him, that we totally abstract our love from
all objects whatsoever, and place it in him; not loving any thing but God, and
what he commands and allows us to love for his sake. This I confess is
impossible for us to do by any mere natural ability or strength, according as
the most Reverend Father Nicolaus a Sancta Cruce (a person who has been twice
Provincial in the Order of Saint Francis, and is famous as well for his
Learning and Piety, as his connual labor and pains-taking in the Mission of
England) confirms in his Cynosura (Chap. the first page 5th. upon the Miserere
Psalm) in these words: When man looks into himself, he finds a check, seeing he
cannot so much as dispose himself for his happiness without a supernatural aid.
For though it be true, that humane nature by its own strength, knows that God
is worthy of all love, yet our knowledge in Morality is much more apt for
comprehension (that is for understanding) than for practice. It is not enough
to have wings to fly, if they be so hampered as they cannot be displayed. So
this natural faculty in man of loving God above all things, by means of
Original Sin; and a million of other obstacles, is so weakened, that we find
the inclination of doing it far less vigorous and effectual than the Dictamens
of our Reason to have it done. And no wonder, since St. Thomas affirms, That
our Will by Original Sin, is much more damnified and impaired, than our
Understanding. Whence Self-love grows powerful in use, so that if it has not a
counter-prize of supernatural succors, we yield and suffer our selves to be
violently hurried on to the pursuit of fading and sensual objects; for which
cause the miseries of our humane nature are very much to be pitied and
deplored, being so wounded and made impotent unto good, as that of her self
alone she is not able to pay the least part of what she owes to the most lawful
object of all hearts; whose just homages are not only sighs, groans, or throws
of spirit, good wishes, good desires, etc. but effective, that is, actual and
real service done, actual performance of what he commands, exact observance of
all his holy Precepts, Laws, etc. together with a careful, wary, diligent
aversion from whatsoever we know to be offensive to him, and apt to put a
separation between God and our Souls. Such are the excess of sensual pleasures,
and the immoderate affectation of worldly greatness, honors, riches and the
like. Our love and duty to God likewise requires, that we resist temptations,
and in many encounters to suffer afflictions, miseries, and all manner of
calamities incident to man's life; yea, sometimes to lose and lay down our lives
rather then to fall into any transgression or sin, opposite to Divine Love.

Now all these are difficulties, hard things to be done, and do far exceed
humane strength, which deserves indeed to be called rather weakness than
strength; so that it behooves us to have recourse to Divine Aid, and to implore
the Majesty of God for the gift of his special Grace, which may enable us to
perform what is required of us; knowing this, that should we be freed from all
sins and imperfections, yet could we not attain to such a degree of divine love
and perfect holiness, as to love him as much as he deserves to be loved; how
much more is this impossible for us to do in this our present condition; in
which, beside our natural and original weakness, we are through evil custom,
and long practice of actual sin, become most averse and disinclined to it;
being on the contrary wholly possessed, filled, and taken up with Self-love,
and the fruits thereof; to wit, pursuing our private interests, concerns,
proprieties, ambitious and worldly designs. However, some means I shall not
omit to produce in this place for the helping us, with more ease to vanquish
this Vice of Self-love, and to get a perfect victory over the same, which we
are not to despair of, being prompted with divine help and assistance; but to
say confidently with S. Paul (Phil. 4. 13.) Omnia possum in eo, etc. I shall be
able to do all things (requisite to my Salvation) through Christ who
strengthens me.

These motives (or means) must be fundamentally grounded in a true and right
knowledge of God and our selves: and first of all in the perfect knowledge of
our own selves, of our nothing, of our own unprofitableness, vileness,
afflictions, miseries: In the second place it must be grounded in true
knowledge of the Universal Sufficiency, Being, Power, Wisdom, and other the
infinite perfections, beauties and goodness of God; who by reason of them is to
be the only object of all our loves: And in the third and last place, it must
be founded in the knowledge and due consideration of the benefits we have
received in this world, and do daily still receive from God; as also of the
reward of eternal joy and felicity prepared for the faithful in the next.

Sect. 2. The first means to overcome Self-love, is by the knowledge of our
selves, of our own nothing, unprofitableness, vileness, miseries, and
affliction.
The Royal Prophet David, one of the greatest Monarchs of the World in his
time, had so deep and serious a reflection of this matter with himself, to wit,
of his spiritual nihileity or being nothing, in comparison of God; of his
unprofitableness, vileness, miseries; that he could not but sadly lament his
condition, and freely acknowledge that he was but a worm, and not a man (vermis
and non homo, Psalm 21. 7.) the reproach (or scorn) of men, and the outcast of
the people: And again, Psalm 72. v. 22. Ad nihilum redactus sum, etc. I am
brought to nothing (says he) and knew it not. If this great King had such
humble and mean conceits of himself, when he thought upon the Greatness and
Majesty of God, how much more should we be moved to make the same, and (if it
were possible) how much more lowly reflections of mind, when we have the like
occasion; how should we humble and abase our selves in the presence of God,
when we consider our natural vileness, baseness, sad condition, and continual
miseries! The better to induce us to this, let us think upon the life of all
our Predecessors and Progenitors; what were they all but dust? what was the
first man (Adam) made of, but of the clay of the Earth? that was our first and
common extraction: Look upon your particular Generations and Conceptions;
Behold, you were conceived in iniquity, says David, Psalm 50. v. 7. you were
born in Original Sin, the links whereof (concupiscence and weakness) do still
remain in you, and should give you cause to lament. Job having such a reflection
in his mind, did no less; for while he lay upon the Dunghill, perplexed
inwardly, and afflicted outwardly, he addressed himself to God, and made his
prayer, to be cleansed from all the filthiness of his Conception; saying (Job
14. v. 4.) Quis potest facere mundum de immundo conceptum semine, nonne tu, qui
solus es? Who can make clean him that is conceived of unclean seed? who but
thou alone, O Lord! Homer (lib. 17.) has a saying, That amongst all the living
Creatures which are upon the face of the Earth, there are none so unhappy as
man; the truth whereof may be seen daily by experience in the birth of all
Children. When man is first born, and comes forth into the world, there is
nothing can be imagined a more rueful and despicable object than he; nothing
more imperfect, nothing more weak, nothing more indigent of all things; naked,
uncomely, not to say deformed, and attended with filth and nastiness, than man
is. Alas, he is one that Nature it self would not allow to have a cleanly and
neat coming into the world; but on the contrary, sent him in all covered with
blood, and more resembling a lump of impure flesh, than a Creature endued with
a reasonable Soul: Insomuch that none will readily touch him, or take him up
from the ground on which he falls (in similiter factam decidi terram, etc. Sap.
7. 3.) none will cherish him, none embrace him, but those that undertake the
office for hire; or the Mother, who by force of natural inclination cannot but
love her own Child. Shall we speak of his nourishment in the Womb, or what
happens to him presently after? whiles unborn, it is known that he has no other
nutriment than the impure Flowers and Menstrual of the Mother, being close
covered with a garment of the same, which so soon as the poor Infant is
unvested of, is burnt or buried, and not suffered to be seen: Wherefore it is
no wonder, that as soon as man is born, he naturally begins to cry, thereby
presaging and proclaiming, so much as he can, his future miseries and sad
condition. Ah that man would but consider this well! how little reason would he
then see to be so high-minded, so proud, and to love himself so much! he would
see more cause to have an aversion, or loathing of himself, than otherwise.

As to your condition after birth, you were no sooner come to the use of
reason, but you understood that you were to labor hard for your living, it
being the Sentence or Judgment of God pronounced upon (...) first transgression
which our (...) (Adam and Eve) committed (...). In the sweat of thy (...) shall
eat bread (says God to (...) Genes. 3. v. 19.) till thou (...) the ground from
whence thou (...) taken; for dust thou art, and (...) dust thou shall return.
Add unto this, that so long as he lives, he is subject unto, and very
frequently visited with calamities, afflictions, miseries, and the like: So
that recalling to mind what is abovesaid, and well considering the troubles
both of body and mind which he endures, with the uncertainty and shortness of
his life, I am confident it will, more or less, humble his thoughts; and in
consequence, through the grace of God, abate the vehemence of Self-love, and
better dispose him to the loving of God alone, and above all other things. In
brief, if you would take a true Model of your self, think upon the dead: Let
your mind seriously reflect upon some Friend, Neighbor, or other Acquaintance
deceased; think what he is now become; nothing but dust, nothing but earth,
ashes, rottenness, and corruption; so must you be, how rich soever, how
powerful soever, how elevated and high soever you be, either in your own
conceits, or in the honors and dignities of this present world. The time is
coming, when all these things will signify nothing to you, though to your self
you seem to be in good health, strong, lusty, and in the flower of your Age,
and think to live a long time; alas! these are deceitful thoughts, vain
immaginations; a sudden Fever, or some other unexpected sickness, disease or
mischance, easily changes the face of your affairs, and puts an end to your
ungrounded hopes; though you look well, and find your self every way well
disposed for the present, yet take my Counsel, do not rely upon a staff so apt
to break; fix your mind and meditations rather upon death; have a Skeleton
always before your eyes, which will teach you more truly what you are, and what
you must come to, than all the painted images of the worlds good: There you
will see the Origin of your Nobility, and the end of your Glory. The dead was
what you are at present, and your lot will be what they are now.

Verily, if you would but look seriously upon your self, you would find but
little matter or reason to cherish and love your self so much. What is Man
according to his Body? Job will tell you (Chap. 7. v. 5.) Induta est caro mea
putredine, and sordibus pulveris. My flesh (says he) is clothed with
rottenness and filth of dust; my skin is dried and shrunk up. What is Man
according to his Soul? Alas! if he be destitute of Grace and true Charity, he
is Gods enemy, he is the heir of Hell, and of eternal damnation; he is a friend
to all sorts of vanities, a worker of Iniquity, Gods Dishonor, apt and ready
to all Evil, but slow to all that is good. Infine, he is a poor creature beset
on all sides with evil; blind in Counsel, extravagant in his passions and
proceedings, vainglorious and boasting in his words, and in his deeds
deficient, and falling short of the good he pretends to; in his appetites
dishonest, and in all things little, save only in his own applause and esteem,
wherein he is beyond measure great; for all which, upon due consideration he
ought rather to have a great aversion and dislike of himself, than to be puffed
up and swelled with Self-love, so much to Gods dishonor and his own prejudice.

Sect. 3. The second means to overcome Self-love, is by the knowledge of the
Excellencies and Perfections of God.
It cannot be denied, but there are several causes which do oblige us greatly
to overcome Self-love, as also induce us toward a perfect and true love of
Almighty God, who is the Creator of all, both Heaven and Earth, and all things
therein contained (Genes. 1. v. 1.) who is our Maker, having made us of
nothing, to his own Image and Likeness, according as we read, Ecclus: 17. v. 1.
who is our redeemer, having given himself a redemption for all, as the Apostle
witnesses; 1 Timothy 2. v. 6. who is our Heavenly Father; so witnesses Christ
himself, Matthew. 6. 32. Your Father that is in Heaven knows that ye have need
of these things: And Joan. 20. 17. I ascend to your Father and to my Father, to
your God and to my God. These are all of them just reasons and titles of right
which God has to our love; these are all prerogatives and properties of such
high perfection, that in consideration of them we ought to suppress all motions
of Self-love and Self-esteem, and to entertain no thoughts of our proper
excellency, dignity, merit, etc. But besides these, there are diverse other,
very well deserving to be taken notice of by us, of which we must therefore
speak. I shall reduce them under two general heads: To wit, Those which
concerns the intrinsecal perfections and unparalled excellencies of Gods Nature
in himself, and those which concern his outward works toward us: that is to
say, the many and great benefits which we daily receive in this world from his
infinite goodness and mercy, and which we expect to receive in the world to
come.

As concerning the first sort, we are to know, that whatsoever is amiable of it
self (or beloved) it deserves to be so loved according to reason, or for some
reason or motive of love that is seen in it. As for example, when we love any
reasonable (or humane) creature, if the love be (as the object is) reasonable,
and not merely passionate; we love it upon the account of some particular
quality or perfection that we see in it; and according to the measure or degree
of that lovely quality in the object, which we apprehend and are affected with
all; is our love more or less great toward the subject wherein it is. After
this manner is all reasonable and virtuous love begotten ^ it arises always
from the consideration of something in the party loved, that justly deserves
love; and where there is no such thing seen or looked at in our loving; there is
no reasonable or honest love. Now upon this account, what and how great reason
have we to love God above all Creatures, seeing that in him, not only one (or
some few) but all the reasons of Love, all the Perfections, all the good
Qualities or Properties, that are fit to deserve and gain Love, are found! All
Goodness, all Virtue, all Wisdom, all Power, all Beauty, all Majesty, all
Glory. They are in him, and superabundantly flow, issue, and proceed from him,
as from an eternal fountain of Good. All the little rays and resemblances of
God, which are seen in Creatures, are darted from the Sun; he imparts them all.
He makes Men wise, virtuous, good; he furnishes them with all due feature of
body, and gifts of mind; according as the Apostle S. James assures us, saying
(Jac. 1. v. 17.) Omne datum optimum, and omne donum perfectum de sur sum est.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights. If therefore we love any person for his wisdom, God is
infinitely more wise; or for his nobility, power, wealth, God is infinitely
more noble, mighty, rich. In fine, whatsoever quality or perfection can be
observed in Creatures, as a Motive or reason of love, the same with infinite
advantages is to be found in God: How much more therefore are we to love God
than Creatures! God, I say, who surpasses all Creatures, not only in the
perfections already mentioned, but in all others whatsoever, without any
exception.

As for his wisdom, S. Paul tells us, that the depth of it is unsearchable,
and past finding out, Romans 11 33. O altitudo divitiarum Sapientiae and
Scientiae Dei, etc. O the height! O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! how in comprehensible are his judgments, and his ways
investigable! There is none like unto him. Quis poterit scrutari sapientiam
ejus, says Elihu in Job (Chap. 36. v. 23.) Who can, or will ever be able to
search, and know his wisdom? As for his Nobility, and the Titles of his due
honor, he surpasses all. Nabuchodonosor, though his Enemy at that time, and a
wicked King, yet acknowledged this to the Prophet Daniel, saying, (Dan. 2. v.
47.) Vere Deus vester Deus Deorum est, etc. In very deed your God is the God of
all Gods, and the Supreme Lord of all Kings. He is, according to S. John (Apoc.
19. v. 16.) Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium; King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords. As for his Power, Authority and Might, he shall reign for ever and ever,
Luc. 1. v. 33. Et Regni ejus non erit finis; Of his Kingdom there shall be no
end. Yea, his power is such, that nothing can be done without him; by reason
whereof it is said, Romans 11. 36. that of him, and through him, and to him, are
all things; and (Colos. 1. v. 17.) that by him all things consist.

As for his Beauty, his comely and excellent features, fair complexion (take it
which way you will, whether of body or mind) they are unparalleled: So the
Espouse professes, Cant. 1. v. 16. Ecce tu pulcher es, dilecte mi; Ecce tu
pulcher es, and decorus. Behold you are fair my beloved, behold you are fair
and comely: And Chap. 5. 10. Dilectus meus candidus and rubicundus, etc. My
beloved is white and ruddy, the choicest amongst ten thousand: and according to
the Royal Prophet, Psalm 44. v. 3. Speciosus forma prae filiis hominum; among
the Sons of men none so goodly, none so beautiful as he; being most perfectly
accomplished, and excelling in all internal and external endowments. As for his
great Goodness it likewise excels, infinitely beyond all comparison, the
goodness of all men, and of all creatures; for, according to the testimony of
the Evangelist (Luc. 18. v. 19.) Nemo bonus, nisi solus Deus. None is good, but
God alone. Taste ye therefore the sweetness of his exceeding goodness, and say
with the Prophet David, Psalm 85. v. 5. Quoniam tu, Domine, suavis and mitis,
etc. Thou, O God, art good, sweet and gentle, and of much mercy to all those
that call upon thee. God of his own nature is good, and benign, ready to bestow
benefits, meek to remit offenses, and merciful to mitigate the punishments of
those that love him.

No doubt therefore can be made, but that as God is our Father, most good, most
noble, most wise, most pleasant and agreeable, most beautiful and fair, most
powerful, mighty, able and ready to help; so he is more worthy of our love,
than any thing can be imagined in Mankind, or in the whole race and order of
Creatures. Nunquid Deo potest comparari homo (Job 22. v. 2.) is there any thing
in man that shall be compared to God? no sure. Divine Excellencies, and Divine
Perfections are such, that man cannot reach the least shadow of them: His
goodness and mercy is such, that he readily forgives all injuries, all offenses
committed against him by sinners, upon their true repentance, how greatly
soever, and how often soever he be offended. Si impius egerit poenitentiam,
etc. says the Prophet Ezechiel in Gods name. If the impious will but do
penance for his sins which be has wrought, and observe my Commandments to do
them; living he shall live, and shall not die. In conclusion, he is, as the
Espouse in the Canticles speaks him, Cant. 5. v. 16. Totus desiderabilis,
wholly, and in all respects to be desired, and to be loved: There is nothing in
him, but what commands love in all that rightly look upon him. David said of
Jonathan, that he was amabilis super amorem mulierum, lovely beyond all the
amiableness of Women: How much more true is this of God, the least of whose
Beauties duly considered, is able to ravish all hearts with the purer flames of
Divine Charity! Who would therefore, having a perfect knowledge of these Divine
Excellencies, but subdue his heart to the love of them? Who would not use all
means, and all endeavors in his power, to conquer his own passion of
Self-love; and withdrawing his sensual affections from all worldly Creatures,
to fix a pure, holy, and perfect love on God alone, and on his Neighbor for
Gods sake!

Sect. 4. The third means (and motive to overcome Self-love) is by knowledge of
the benefits we have received, and are to receive from God.
As to the third motive, which obliges and induces us to love God above our
selves, and all other Creatures, it is grounded not only upon the benefits he
confers upon us every moment, which are infinite, and continual, according to
the Sacred Text, Acts 17. v. 28. In ipso vivimus, movemur, and sumus (in him we
live, move, and have our being;) but also upon those that are still expected
from him. Either of these benefits are a sufficient motive to oblige us to love
God above all, and our selves only for his sake. If we consider those of the
first sort, what greater reason of love can be imagined, than to reflect that
of our selves alone, without his consent and permission, (yea without his
special favor and assistance in the best things, and those of greatest
concernment to us) we can do nothing; without his leave and concurring help, we
are not able to lift up our foot from the ground, or move a hand: By his
Creation we had our Being first given us, and by his Conservation and continual
Protection it is preserved to us, with all our Powers and Faculties: In him we
live, and without him we cannot live; in him we move, act, and do such things
as are agreeable or profitable to us; but without him we neither move, nor stir
any more than a dead Corpse; so that it is of his mercy and free goodness, that
we do not every moment sink into our first and Primitive nothing, as we should
infallibly do, if he were not pleased by the hand of his Providence, and good
will, continually to hold us up. This thing alone being well considered (not to
speak or mention as yet our Redemption or Salvation) will make it more than
sufficiently to appear, that God is more worthy to be loved, than we, or the
whole race of mankind, are able to love. For (to say the truth) neither the
Angels nor the Archangels, neither Cherubins nor Seraphins, nor all the Holy
Spirits of the Celestial Court of Paradise, are able to do this: their most
united and unanimous affections in this kind; their greatest and purest slames
of love, could not reach or come up to the merit or worthiness that is in God
to be beloved. Wherefore in this he condescends to our infirmity, and requires
us to love him above all other Objects; not so much as he deserves to be loved,
but as we are able to love, laying no other obligation upon us.

It behooves us therefore in all reason, seeing God is so easily satisfied, and
requires of us no service but what is most reasonable, that we give him our
whole love, and our whole hearts, and serve, worship, and adore him with all
our might, and with all the power and virtue, and strength of good will, that
possibly we can use. This we may do if we will, and it is all that he requires
of us to do. Fili, praebi mihi cor tuum, says the spirit of God in the
Proverbs (Chap. 23. v. 26.) My Son give me thy heart. Shall we not give it him
when he asks it so kindly of us? Ah! if we be Sons, if we be Loving, Dutiful,
and Obedient Children, and not stubborn Rebels, we will give it him, we will
bestow it wholly upon him; forsaking not only our selves, but all other
creatures, to adhere closely unto him: loving him with all our Hearts, with all
our Understanding, with all our Will; and in a word, with all our Soul, and our
Spirit: not suffering any thing to rest or have possession in our hearts that
is contrary to his love, nor minding ought, but what may further us in his
service; never forgetting the merits of his great goodness toward us: never
tainting nor growing slothful in doing of his Commandments. We will love him
above all things, as our Creator and Maker, as our Savior and Redeemer, as our
Everlasting Joy and Happiness. All which when Saint Anselm reflected upon, he
could not refrain from saying, O my Soul, when I consider and ponder well, how
much you are indebted to the Eternal God, I blush at my former negligence, in
not performing my duty and great Obligation. Tell me O Lord which way I am to
turn my self, and what I can do that will be acceptable to your Divine Majesty.
You have made and created me by your love, therefore I owe you all, and all
that I am. You have redeemed me in Love by your Sacred Death and Passion, out
of the perpetual slavery of Satan; therefore I owe you all, and all that I am:
You have promised me such eternal comforts and reward after my decease;
therefore I owe you all, and all that I am: In one word, you did give your self
wholly to me, and for me; therefore I owe you all, and all that I am.

O Lord, what satisfaction can Man give, what recompense can he make for so
many benefits already received, and still to be received from your Hands and of
your Bounty? Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus, quae retribuit mihi: said the
Prophet David on the like occasion, Psalm. 115. 3. What shall I render to our
Lord, for all the (good) things that he has rendered to me! As if he had said,
I am full of confusion, I am ashamed and troubled in mind what to do,
considering that he has not only given and bestowed many great benefits upon
me and mankind, but has also rendered good for evil, mercy for ingratitude,
forgiveness for our sins and transgressions: And we (most unthankful) have
rendered to him evil for good, for which cause, reflecting upon what the truly
penitent Sinner, King David, said in this case, I resolve with all my heart and
Soul to say the same with him, Calicem Salutaris accipiam, and nomen Domini
invocabo, said he (ubi supra v. 4.) I will take the Chalice of Salvation (say
I) and will invocate the name of our Lord: that is to say, Seeing that I am not
able to render any thing worthy of Gods Favors to me; I will do what I can, I
will gratefully acknowledge and accept his great benefits, especially the
sacred Cup of Christ, which he was pleased to bless for the Salvation of
Mankind, and to drink of himself: I will praise him and call upon his Holy Name.

SECTION VI. How to cure the pernicious Disease of Self-love.
Sect. 1. By withdrawing our love from all Corporal Objects. 2. By humbling
and undervaluing our selves. 3. By overcoming our selves and sensual appetites.

Sect. 1. By withdrawing our love from all Corporal Objects.
To cure and totally to extirpate the pernicious disease of Self-love, I must
confess is no easy task; it requires hard labor to overcome that inordinate
Passion, being a Vice so inveterate, that nothing is more rooted in our hearts
and so connatural, that nothing is more pleasing to corrupt and unmortified
nature; so that to compass this end, we must strive to our utmost, and level
all our actions, intentions, and wills, so purely at Gods Honor and Pleasure,
as that we make him the only end we aim at, and the sole object of our love;
for which purpose we cannot do better than to follow the example and counsel of
the Seraphical Father Saint Francis, saying daily in imitation of him, Deus
meus and omnia, Deus meus and omnia. O my sweet Jesus, O my sweet Lord, Thou
art my God and all. In the first place therefore great care is to be taken, and
exact diligence used for to withdraw our affections from all eternal objects
whatsoever, and to place and fix the same totally upon God; for otherwise we
run great hazard to fall short of our aim; and that of the Evangelist will be
found true in our selves, Qui amat patrem aut matrem plus quam me, non est ne
dignus, Matthew. 10. v. 37. He that loves Father and Mother more than God, is
not worthy of God; that is, deserves not to be accounted, nor shall ever be
accounted Gods true lover. What love is more lawful or more recommended by God
unto us, than the love of Children to their Parents? Wherefore seeing that even
this kind of love, to wit, the love of Children to Parents (and vice versa the
love of Parents to Children, etc.) can be no just excuse why we should not love
God as we ought; seeing that even this love, when it is opposite to the love of
God, is forbidden us, and we are commanded to cast it off; there can be no
reason to doubt, but that all other loves of less nearness and concernment, of
less piety and virtue, of less obligation, in like occasion, are likewise
forbidden us, and that we are commanded to withdraw our hearts from them, and
to give our selves wholly to the love of God above all things; not to love any
creature so much as we love God, nor to be hindered by it from doing service.

The Evangelist Saint Luke, seems to be yet more strict (that we say not
rigorous) in the matter, not only exacting to the full the accomplishment of
what the Evangelist Saint Matthew mentions, to wit, that we should not love our
Parents more than God, or above and before God; but requiring also that we
should even hate our Parents (if need requires it) for Gods sake, and renounce
all affection, love and Duty to them, rather than to offend God, or to forsake
the least part of the love and Duty we owe to him; for so we read, Luc. 14. v.
26. Si quis venit ad me, and non odit patrem and matrem, etc. adhuc autem and
animam suam, non potest meus esse discipulus. If any man comes to me, and
hates not his Father, Mother, etc. yea and his own life besides, he cannot be
my disciple. It may seem an hard sentence, but the meaning is easy, This we
are to do rather than hate God, we must hate our Parents, rather than do any
thing which he will judge and esteem an hating of him; we must renounce and
cast off all love and duty to our Parents, rather than to renounce, or cast off
our love and duty to God. This expression therefore of the Evangelist obliges
us to leap over all stumbling blocks that are laid in our way, to hinder us in
our going about Gods service: We must renounce and reject whatsoever is most
dear unto us; yea our own selves, and all the desires, affections, and
inclinations of our Hearts; how specious, how morally good, pious and honest
soever they seem to be, if they stand in our way, and stop us from the supreme
love of God. Fie upon all friendships (must we say) fie upon all affections,
that are attended with such mischiefs, and do lead us into such dangers; and
fie upon all distracting and disquieting designs of the world, which bend our
imaginations wholly to the things unprofitable and impertinent, thereby
disturbing and separating us from the love of God.

When we have done this, and that the love of God begins to be well rooted in
our hearts, we are in the next place to do our endeavor, that the same may
increase, and grow in us daily more and more, which is best done by the
continual practice and exercise of virtue, and all manner of good works
incident to our state and calling; together with fervent prayers, and observing
such Rules of good life, as by the Providence of God, and the labors of pious
men, the Christian World, as to that part, is plentifully supplied with. Let us
have made never so great advancement in the love of God, yet we are still to go
on, and not to make a stand in our Progress; much less to think or persuade our
selves, that we have already attained such a perfect measure of loving God with
all our hearts, and all our souls, as that we need not to add any more to it by
Piety and Holy Living: For such a degree of Divine Love is not to be pretended
unto in this life, until we come into the Heavenly Court of Paradise. So long
therefore as we live in this state of Mortality, we are to go constantly
forward in the exercises of Piety and Virtue: For in this case it is rightly
said, Non progredi est regredi, Not to go forward in the study and endeavor of
Christian Perfection, is to go backward; and not to advance in the love of God,
is to fall back, and come short, more or less, in point of duty and love to
him: and so they would find by experience, in a short time, whosoever should
indulge to such a pernicious fancy, to wit, as to think they had done enough,
and that they loved God so well, as that they needed not take any care of
loving him better, or with a more intense, diligent, exact, and affectionate
love: Whereas the only measure of loving God, is, as S. Bernard often and
excellently teaches, to love him without measure, and never to think that we
love him enough.

In consequence to what has been said, it follows, that all our endeavor must
be employed toward this end, viz. of growing still more and more in the love
of God, and less and less in the love of this world, of our selves, and of all
things that hinder, or withdraw us from God; whereto, as Father Cressy rightly
teaches, We must be guided by a divine light, and assisted by divine grace.
The first, for the removing such impediments as either corrupt nature, or the
Ghostly Enemy lays in our way to deceive us, and make us give over the pursuit
of virtues: The second, to help us forward in our journey, and to bring us more
near unto God, till at length we be joined to him by an immediate Union; to
which we ought to aspire, as the end of our Creation, and the ultimate
perfection of our nature. We must renounce (as we have said before) and fly
from our selves, that we may draw nigh unto God; we must destroy Self-love in
our souls, that so the Divine Love may be raised up, and increased in us; we
must give our selves to the exercise and practice of all virtues, as well those
which regard our selves and our Neighbor, as those which concern God; always
remembering, that those which concern our selves and our Neighbor (usually
called Moral Virtues) are then only to be esteemed worthy of that name, (or to
be styled Virtues) when they are exercised for the love of God, and do
effectually help to the mortification of our natural or corrupt passions,
affections, lusts. Those which properly and immediately concern God, are called
Theological Virtues; and being these three, to wit, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
are conveniently put in practice (all of them) in the one exercise or duty of
Prayer, which includes all duties directly pertaining to God; as namely, of
loving him with all our hearts and souls, of trusting or putting confidence in
him, of believing his holy Word, adoring his Divine Majesty, obeying his
Commandments, submitting and resigning our selves to his Divine Will and
Pleasure.

Follow therefore herein the good counsel of Father Grenadus, who bids us, not
to suffer our minds to be entangled with overmuch love of corporal objects (or
visible and worldly things) whether they be Honors, Lands, Riches, or other
goods of this world, Children, Kinsfolks, Parents, Friends, etc. Forasmuch as
this kind of love is a great occasion of all sorts of sins, of cares,
vexations, vain fantasies, passions, temptations, and all kind of evil
disturbance, unquiet, and disorder, that is to be found in the world. This
Love, according to S. Augustine, is the poyse of the Soul, and which way soever
this Love draws, that way the Soul inclines: So that if this Love de set for
Heaven, then the Soul is drawn toward Heaven: but if this Love be set upon
Earth, then is the Soul also bent toward Earthly things. This being so, it
concerns us to walk warily, never suffering our heart to fix upon, or to cleave
unto the love of visible things, but rather to esteem them as things of small
account, as frail and uncertain, and such as pass away in a moment. Remove
therefore your hearts from them, and fix them wholly upon that which is their
chiefest and most proper object, viz. true felicity.

Sect. 2. By humbling and undervaluing our selves.
Deponentes omne pondus, and circumstans nos peccatum, says S. Paul, Hebr. 12.
v. 1. Laying aside all weight and sin that besets us, as it were, and
incompasses us round about, let us run with patience the Race that is set
before us, looking unto the Author and Finisher of our Faith, Jesus, who for
the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is
set down at the right hand of God. The reason of his Exhortation is, by the
example of Christ humbling himself for us unto death, yea the painful and
shameful death of the Cross, to move us to humility and patience for his sake,
who endured so much in our behalf, both living and dying. Christ disdained not
for our sakes, being God, to descend from his high Throne of Majesty in Heaven,
and to be made Man, taking our humane and vile Nature upon him, yea and to be
vilified, contemned, and undervalued by men; and that in such a measure of
inhumanity and malice, as is beyond all expression: and therefore if we will be
his true Disciples, and live after his example, we must not disdain to humble
our selves as he did, nor to be ill treated by men as he was. The Servant must
not expect to be above his Master, nor the Disciple above his Teacher: If
Christ were so humbled for us, we ought to humble our selves for him, and where
his honor and service requires it, not to think much to be undervalued,
abused, despised, and persecuted even to death. If we will be worthy followers
of Christ, we ought (with S. Paul) continually to bear about with us the
mortifications of our Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 10. daily dying, as to this world,
in all our inordinate passions and affectations of humane praise, honor,
favor; and contrariwise choosing, and desiring rather to be undervalued by all;
to the intent, that for the present the power of Self-love may be broken, and
abated in us; and that afterward, for this undervaluing and dispising our
selves, we may be honored and exalted by our Lord Jesus Christ, according to
his promise (Luc. 18. 14.) Qui se humiliat, exaltibitur. Who so humbles
himself, shall be exalted. He that undervalues himself, easily undervalues all
other things; and if you will possess all, the only way is to forsake all.

But alas! How far short are we of Perfection in this kind? How few are there
amongst us that forsake either the world or themselves as they ought? Few there
are that go by this narrow way. Many are called, many are exhorted and incited
to it, but few elected or chosen to walk, and finish their lives in it: Few
there are that love to be vilified, or desire to be humbled for Christ; and yet
it is that we must submit unto: we must come to that perfection, or miss and
fall short of our reward, eternal happiness. If we would desire this Perfection
from our heart, we should obtain it; seeing our Savior has promised us, that
whatsoever we shall ask in his name (that shall be for his honor and our good)
it shall be granted, Joan. 14. v. 13, 14. And therefore if God do not send us
afflictions and adversities requisite to this purpose, viz. to humble us, and
mortify our corrupt passions; it is by reason he sees us unfit for them: We
are not strong enough, nor so well mortified in mind and spirit, as to bear
them. God on his part is always ready to do us good, and to treat us so as may
be best for us, both as to this life, and that to come; and consequently to
send tribulations, crosses and afflictions to those that are truly mortified,
and so resigned to his Divine Will, as that he sees they will receive good, and
not harm by them, that they will be humbled by them, and patient under them;
and consequently increase their own merits upon that account, if not unto
temporal, yet at least (which is far better) unto eternal reward.

Observe from hence, that all the things which men desire, or can wish for, if
they tend not to the true abnegation, to the true submission and humiliation of
our selves for the love of God, they are tainted with corrupt nature, Interest
and Self-love; and though men sometimes are apt to think that they have clearly
avoided and freed themselves from this paspassion, yet it is only in
appearance, and they have driven it from them as it were on the one side, but
it returns slily and secretly upon them some other way, and sticks fast on
their Souls; which appears by this, that men seldom or never wish for or
desire any great adversity, any sharp afflictions, tribulations or crosses, nor
desire much that any thing should go contrary to their mind (and yet only these
and such like things can show how they are humbled, how mortified, and free of
Self-love) The reason hereof is no other but that virtue is imperfect in us: We
are yet faint-hearted, and ready to fail in small matters. Men are not as yet
come to a true undervaluing of themselves; they love themselves, esteem
themselves, and still seek themselves too much almost in every thing. Self-love
is a subtle and deceitful vice; it deceives others, it deceives our selves,
using much dissimulation with every one. Happy is the man that is free of it,
that is dead to himself; that is to say, who is dead in all his sensual
passions and appetites, and in all inordinate affections toward visible
objects, and dead in his own Self-love; desiring to be vilified and undervalued
of all, according to the example of Jesus Christ, who in his own person gave us
a mavelous instance of most perfect mortification, when being upon the Cross
he cried out in these words, Matthew. 27. v. 46. Deus meus! Deus meus! ut quid
dereliquisti me? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Why am I thus left
destitute to the will of my enemies, without any aid or comfort from you?

God our Savior and Redeemer, hanging thus on the Cross, was (for certain)
deprived of all spiritual and sensible consolation, yet did he suffer most
willingly, and not in the least lose his courage. Ah, he did it for our
example, it was to let us know that when God deprives us at any time of our
wonted Consolations (whether Spiritual or Temporal) and brings adversity and
affliction upon us, it is, that we should suffer them patiently and willingly
for his loves sake, and that we should with a perfect resignation, submit our
selves to his Divine Will. Perfection does not consist so much in the gifts of
a sensible Love, and sensible Consolations, but in that which may be more real
and essential, though less sensible: to wit, in a well-ordered and
well-grounded affection of resolution of mind for God, and for the performonce
of his Holy Will and Commandments in all things. The servant of Christ should
not seek nor place Perfection in any sensible things whatsoever (whether
Corporal or Spiritual) not in any sensible Devotion in time of Prayer, nor in
the frequency of Internal Consolations, but in perfect Conformity to the Will
and Commandments of God; in perfect mortification of all sinful lusts and
appetites, and in perfect abnegation of our selves, as to every thing that is
offensive to him, and contrary to our duty. Perfection consists in being
thoroughly clear of all affection to sin, and constantly inclined and well
disposed to whatsoever is good.

Happy is he who is so humble, as to acknowledge himself a great sinner, and
with the Publican to confess, that he is not worthy to lift up his eyes to
Heaven, for the great multitude of his sins! Happy is he who is so well
disposed and mortified, as to be ready to endure all pains, yea even those of
Hell it self (if it could be) for the love of God, though being himself in the
state of Grace. Happy is he, who is as well prepared, and as well pleased in
being deprived of all sensible graces, devotions, love, as to have or receive
such gifts from God. Happy is he who is so well inflamed with the Essential
love of God, as to desire at all times of his life to be freed from corporal
love to any Creature. Happy is he who desires to imitate, or be like unto
Jesus Christ upon the Cross, abandoned of all good, spiritual and corporal,
rejected and vilified by men, forsaken by God, and left destitute to all want,
pain, and misery! But alas! How few are there of this perfect disposition?
where is the man that is thus mortified in his passions, humbled in his mind,
resigned in his will? Where is the man to be found, who being deprived of his
wonted Consolations, becomes not thereupon, more or less, sad, idle, remiss,
and negligent in Gods service? Wherefore if we desire to be victorious, and to
gain a full Conquest over all our Ghostly Enemies, and all Ghostly impediments,
defects, infirmities whatsoever, let us be willing to receive all sorts of
Humiliations from Gods hand, and from the hands of men. Let us even rejoice,
and be glad, whenever we find our selves vilified, and undervalued by men,
and whenever we are destituted of Consolations. Let us rejoice to submit our
selves, not only to our chief Prelates and Superiors, but also to our Equals
and Inferiors, following therein the example of Christ our Lord, who submitted
himself to such, and so low, as to become obedient unto death, even the death
of the Cross, Philip. 2. v. 8.

Sect. 3. By overcoming our selves, and sensual Appetites.
You have heard of old, that the life of man is a continual warfare upon Earth,
as the holy Job testifies in his Book (Chap. 7. v. 1.) saying, Militia est vita
hominis super terram, etc. We cannot live in any place, or in any condition or
state whatsoever, without continual opposition and repugnancy: we must be
always fighting, and consequently always in trouble and danger, never secure of
our selves, never at perfect rest, never in perfect peace; and a great reason
hereof is, that wheresoever we go, we carry in our selves, and in our own
bosom, our Enemy, who never ceases to oppugn and hinder us, especially in our
spiritual proceedings. This S. Paul clearly insinuates, 2 Cor. 4. v. 16. where
he speaks of a twofold man dwelling in every one of us; to wit, our selves, and
this our Enemy, saying, Licet is, qui for is est noster homo corrumpitur,
tamen, qui intus est, renovatur de die in diem. Although that our man which is
without us does corrupt and perish by little and little, yet that which is
within us is renewed day by day. By which expression, the man without us,
signifies our Body, together with its nature Affections, Concupiscences and
Lusts which die (or ought to die) and decay in us every day; and the man within
us, our Soul or interior Spirit, with its faculties and graces, which should
proportionably live, be renewed, and every day gather more and more strength in
us. These two (Men, or parts of Man) are so fast chained and joined together,
that the one cannot be without the other; and yet are so opposite and contrary
the one to the other, that the life of the one is the death of the other.

Between these two Men all the Contradictions, Contentions and Opposition,
incident to our life, are tried; for which cause the Apostle attributes to them
several names by which they may be distinguished the one from the other; for
that end calling one of them the Spirit, the other Flesh; the one Body, the
other Soul; one of them the Law of the Mind, Spirit, Soul, etc. the other the
Law of Bodily Members; One he calls the Old Man, the other he calls the New:
and finally (as here) one the Exterior or outward Man, the other the Interior
or inward; all which several names do serve very properly to represent to us
the several and peculiar natures, properties and inclinations of these two men;
and that we ought to obey and follow the inclinations of the one, but to reject
the motions, and resist the inclinations of the other; following herein the
Counsel of the same Blessed Apostle, which he gives, Galat 5. v. 16. Dico aut
em vobis, Spiritu ambulate, and desideria carnis non perficietis. I say unto
you (to all you that desire to be happy) walk in the Spirit, and the lusts of
the Flesh you shall not fulfill. Where we see, that obedience to the Spirit, and
its motions, is commanded, but the motions (that is, the lusts) of the Flesh,
we must not fulfill: And again, Romans 8. 13. If you walk according to the Flesh,
you shall die; but if by the Spirit, you mortify the deeds of the Flesh, you
shall live. It is required of us that we mortify and overcome the Flesh by the
Spirit, and for as much as the Flesh rebelleth so much and so often against the
Spirit, the Spirit must be encouraged by all the good means we can use against
the Flesh, and the sensual motions thereof. So that the only way for a
Christian to obtain tranquillity and perfect peace, is to be continually
fighting with this Enemy: We must seek our Peace in Wars, our Life in Death,
that is, in dying to sin, that we may live to God; and finally, our greatest
liberty in servitude; for if we be the servants of God, and of Righteousness,
we shall be free from the slavery of sin and wickedness, which is the best
liberty of all.

The great courage, liberty and power of a virtuous Man, shows it self best
in overcoming himself and his passions. To subdue and make subject the sensual
appetites of the Flesh to the Spirit, is the work of a great and heroic mind;
as on the contrary to follow and obey them overmuch, speaks a great tepidity,
and weakness of heart. In this kind of Combat it is no disgrace to fly and run
away, but rather it is the best art of fighting; for by flying and running away,
we are sure to gain the victory; neither does any thing more discourage, vex,
trouble and mortify our adversary, than to know that we dare not encounter, we
dare not come up to him. By flying from the World, we avoid the snares of the
World; by flying from the Flesh, we escape the temptations of the Flesh; and by
flying and running from our selves; we make void and of no effect all private
affections, all private and proper interests that may be hurtful unto us, and
all the private designs of Self-love. So that by flying we conquer the World,
the Flesh, the Devil; our wicked selves also and all. We lead captive all evil
inclinations whatsoever, and so pacify and quiet our exterior or outward Man,
as that we make the interior or inward Man to reign and rule in us in much
peace; gaining thereby a more glorious and illustrious triumph, than if we had
vanquished whole armies, and subdued the mightiest Kingdoms of the whole World.
Josue by flying and running away from the City of Hay (Jos. 8. 15.) obtained a
great victory over his enemies, and subdued that City, which but a little
before had put the whole Army of Israel to flight. So if you will conquer and
subdue to Reason all your unreasonable and disorderly appetites, the only way
is to fly from them, not to attend to them nor hearken to any thing they
suggest. The same is to be said of your fighting and contending with the world
and your selves; to get the victory over them you must fly, you must renounce
the world and deny your selves; the world, and all its glory, magnificenc^ or
vain pomp, riches, honors, pleasures, etc. Your selves, and all your private
concupiscences, lusts, designs. Can you desire a greater conquest than to
subdue the world, and to trample all the deceitful glories and vanities thereof
under your feet? Can you think any victory more advantageous than that, which
of Captives makes you Kings (for freedom and true liberty) and of Slaves to
Self-love and sin, the Sons of God and Heirs with Christ of Eternal Glory? A
greater Conquest you cannot reasonably desire, than to subdue all your enemies;
nor Dominion, than to be master of your self; and this is done by the way I
have showed you.

Happy therefore (I say) are those that conquer and overcome their passions;
yea much more happy are they than those that conquer Kingdoms and Countries,
but cannot conquer themselves: Happy are those that can rule and govern their
sensual love, concupiscences and appetites, so as not to transgress in them or
by them. Such a one is Lord of a great Empire, Lord of this World and Heir of
Heaven. To be truly humble is a great Trophy, and the right way to Jesus
Christ, is to subdue your own proper will, to suffer injuries and other evils,
not seeking overmuch after any temporal interests, or things concerning the
Body. Be content to suffer with Christ and for Christ, and be sure that if you
thus suffer, you shall also reign with Christ: For a little adversity you will
enjoy a perpetua^ felicity: therefore do not think i^ a troublesome thing nor
grieve, tha^ it is required of you to fight with and to overcome your self; for
how bitter soever it may seem in the beginning, the end of it will be sweet;
and God will fight for you, and help you to get the victory: only remembering
this, not to attribute the glory of ^he conquest to your own strength, ^ut only
to the Divine Majesty, whose Grace gains you the Victory; and ^et you must do
your endeavor too; ^or that Gods Grace helps none that ^ill not help
themselves as well as ^hey can: and you may observe, that ^f those, who only
cry Lord, Lord, and do nothing else; it is said, They shall not enter the
Kingdom of Heaven. None shall be crowned but those that fight well, and with
cou^age persevere to the end. If two Men come to fight, being both of ^qual
strength courage and skill, and ^oth alike armed, naturally speaking, ^t is
certain that he that gets help (or ^ second to join with him) will get ^he
victory: In the same manner it ^s between the Body and the Soul continually
fighting (supposing both equal and alike in strength) if we favor and help the
Body by idleness, over much eating and drinking, and will not deny it ought of
its sensual desires, be sure it will get the victory over the Soul, and subdue
her to its lure and appetite: and so on the contrary, if we favor and help the
Soul by fervent Prayers to God, if we support and uphold her by the practice of
Virtues, and arm her Cap-a-pe (from Head to Foot) with the whole Armor of
Righteousness; Faith, Hope, Charity, Patience, Zeal, and other good Graces of
the Spirit; it is not to be doubted but she will have a glorious victory over
the Body; vanquish all the Vanities of the World, and find a saving cure for
all her languishings and distempers occasioned by Self-love.

SECTION VII. How to love God and our Neighbor.
Sect. 1. How we are to love God. 2. How we are to love our Neighbor. 3. How
we are to love our Enemies. 4. In what manner of love we are to love our
Neighbor and our Enemies. 5. How we may know our selves free from Self-love,
in loving God and our Neighbor.

Sect. 1. How we are to love God.
I must confess that all we have hitherto said or written, serves in part to
declare how we are to love God; namely, above all things, with all our hearts,
with all our mind, with all our soul, and with all our strength. This has been
often inculcated by us: But such is the thing, that whether we consider the
difficulty and hardness, or the utility and benefit of it, it can never be
insisted upon too much. We cannot be too often called upon, or too often put in
mind of this duty; and therefore I will in short speak a word or two more to
that effect, that if you desire to attain the Perfection of that Grace, to wit,
of Divine Love, I may by the mercy of God, be a little helpful to you in order
thereto: Verily it stands with great reason, that we should love God in the
manner abovesaid; both Justice and Natural Reason dictating and commanding
with all urgency, that we should wholly give and dedicate our selves by love
unto God; and by lovin^ him, from whom we wholly possess and enjoy our selves,
to re-pay in some sort our Duty and Obligation. Now, for the better performance
of this, my advice is, that you follow the counsel of the seraphical and subtle
Doctor Scotus, who says, That we are to love God sweetly, prudently, and
valiantly or with good courage. Sweetly; that you be not by any bitterness, or
amarulency, that sometimes happens therein, averted from loving him. Prudently;
that you be not by the guil of your Ghostly enemy ensnared, nor caught in any
ambuscado of his. Valiantly, and with good courage; that when you come to
suffer injuries, oppressions, affronts, for loving him. you be not in any
manner of ways drawn or driven, enticed or forced from his Divine Love, either
by the pomp and glory of the world, together with the voluptuous Allurements of
the Flesh, or by the sterner violence of Persecution and Troubles threatened for
loving him: and being resolved for your part, thus to proceed toward the Love
of God, there are Three Things more chiefly required of you.

The first is, You must extirpate out of your heart all Sensual Love, all Love
that proceeds from Concupiscences, all inordinate love of the World, and purge
your selves of all sorts of Self-love, Inordinate Appetites and Passions, and
of all the sins that proceed from them. It is the admonition of Saint Paul
(Ephe. 4. 22.) Deponere vos, secundum pristinam conversationem, etc. That you
put off, concerning the former conversation, the Old Man; which is totally
corrupt through deceitful (and erroneous) lusts, and be ye renewed in the
spirit of your mind; putting on the New Man, which according to God, is created
in Justice and True Holiness: And again, Romans 13. v. 12. Cast off (says he)
the works of darkness (which are Self-love and Sin) and putting on the armor of
light (which is the practice of Divine Love) let us walk honestly, as in the
day, not in Banqueting and Drunkenness, not in Chamberings and Impudicities,
not in Strife and Emulation; in a word, nor in making any provision for the
Flesh in Concupiscences, or to satisfy the lusts thereof: consonant unto which
is that of Solomon (Sap. 1. v. 4.) In malevolam animam non introibit sapientia,
etc. Divine Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a Body
that is subject to sin. Wherefore it is very true, and in this case necessary
to be observed, what Father Granada says, Such as desire to love Almighty God,
should endeavor to sequester themselves, and depart from the practice of all
sins.

As to the second thing required, you must know, that before you can obtain the
grace of loving God above all Creatures, it is necessary, that you be very
serious in your thoughts and apprehensions of God, and that you delight your
self to consider and meditate in your mind both the truth of his Existence, and
also how important a thing it is for you and all men, rightly to believe and
conceive of him, and worthily to serve him. To which end it shall not be amiss
to call to mind, and reflect upon the Motives which I have already in part
alleged in the Fifth Section Sect. 3. for the exciting and stirring up men's
hearts to Divine Love; that is to say, some of those Attributes, Perfections,
and Proper Excellencies, which are to be contemplated in the Divine Nature, and
do worthily move us to a due esteem and love of him: and particularly, that we
do often, and devoutly think upon the Perfections and Excellencies of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is God Incarnate, or God made Man for us, and to procure our
salvation; in whom the Fullness of the Divinity does inhabit corporally, and in
whom are hidden all the hidden Treasures of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God;
Colos. 2. 3. and in whom all the good Properties, Perfections, and
Excellencies, whether pertaining to the Divine Nature, or Humane (to God or
Man) that can merit Love, Reverence, Honor, and Esteem from us, are found to
admiration and excess; he is Splendour Gloriae, and figura Dei Patris; The
Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image or Figure of Gods
Substance: as to this purpose the Apostle speaks, Heb. 1. v. 3. Cum in forma
Dei esset, etc. says the same Apostle again (Phil. 2. v. 6.) making or
confessing him to be the Form, that is, the most true, internal, and perfect
resemblance of his Fathers Nature. The Vapor (or Breath) of the Power of God,
and a bright streaming (or Emanation of Glory) from the Almighty: He is the
Brightness of Eternal Light, the Unspotted Mirror (or Glass) of Divine Majesty,
and Image of his Goodness; (Sap. 7. 25, 26.) In fine he is, God of God, True
God of true God; and consequently, perfect and absolute in all the Properties
of Divine Majesty and Glory, and the Fountain of Perfection and of all Good in
his Creatures: which thing well considered, I cannot doubt, but they will make
us see, how just and reasonable it is, that he alone should be loved and
honored by us above all Creatures, as containing in himself all the Causes,
Motives, and Reasons of Love and Honor.

As to the third thing requisite for the obtaining of Divine Love, it is to
recall often to mind the Graces and Benefits, the Gifts and Favors, which we
have received, and do daily receive at Gods hand, as well those received before
Baptism, as since: the benefit of our Creation, whereby we have our Being; the
benefit of his Providence, whereby we are preserved in our being; defended from
all Evil, and supplied with all necessary Good. The benefit of our Redemption,
and the great kindness which God therein has showed toward his Creatures; to
wit, in sending his only Son our Lord Jesus Christ to take humane Flesh upon
him, in the Womb of the most pure and immaculate Virgin, his Mother; and in the
same Flesh to die and redeem us from the slavery of our Ghostly Enemy, and from
everlasting Damnation: By which means being already in right of Creation and
Providence, our loving Father, through the Mystery of Incarnation, he became
our Brother, our Savior; and in a more special manner, our Lord, our King, our
God, our Governor, and our last end: Yea by reason of this Union and Communion
of Nature with us, he becomes through Grace the Heavenly Spouse of every one of
our Souls; being married to him in Faith and Charity: And therefore as our
Spouse, so loving, so good, so rich, so great, so beautiful, so provident, so
tenderhearted; he deserves to be requited and repayed by us with the same,
that is, with a most intense, most cordial, most affectionate, sincere (and if
it could be) an infinite love; and as he is our last end, he is to be supreamly
looked at, aimed at, regarded and intended by us in every thing of moment that
we do or take in hind. Considering therefore that we have such motives and
reasons to love God above all, and especially our Blessed Savior (God
Incarnate) let us use no delay, let us show no backwardness to return him love
for love, and to to render him our most humble and daily thanks for all his
benefits and mercies; remembering that of Solomon (Sap. 16. v. 28.) Quoniam
oportet praevenire Solemn ad Benedictionem tuam, etc. That we ought to prevent
the Sun to give thanks to God, and the Morning-light to adore and make prayers
to him; and that if we do it not, but remain unthankful for his Benefits, it
shall befall us, as is said in the same place (v. 29.) Ingrati spes tanquam
hybernalis glacies tabescet, etc. The hope of the Ungrateful shall melt away as
a Winter-Ice, and shall perish, as unprofitable Water.

Sect. 2. How we are to love our Neighbors.
None can be so ignorant as not to know that it is part of our Duty to God to
love our Neighbor, since that God himself does so positively and precisely
require it of us by the Evangelist (Matthew. 22. v. 39.) Diliges proximum tuum
sicut teipsum. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. The same Commandment
is repeated in diverse other places; as namely, Luc. 10. v. 27. Romans 13. v. 9.
Galat. 5. v. 14. Jam. 2. v. 8. Yea, it was a Law in force unto the Jews as well
as Christians, according as we read, Levitle 19. 18. The just and honest love
of our Neighbor is so united, annex't, and as it were chained with the Love of
God, that for the same loves sake whereby we love God, we are commanded to love
our Neighbor: yea Saint John the Evangelist argues, that through want of
loving our Neighbor we cannot love God; and calls him Liar that pretends the
contrary, to wit, that we may love God truly and acceptably, without loving our
Neighbor. Siquis dixerit, etc If a man (says he) shall say I love God, and
hates his Brother, he is a liar; giving this reason, For he that loves not
his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? 1
Joan. 4. 20. and making his reason good with this final assertion, viz. And
this Commandment have we from God, that he who loves God, loves his Brother
also. These two loves proceed and come forth from the same Root, and have the
same Original Cause; to wit, Divine Grace and the Spirit of God, who is Love,
according to the same Apostle (1 Joan. 4. 8.) Quoniam Deus Charitas est. These
two Loves are so inseparable, that as soon as one comes to decay, the other
at the same time perishes. On these two Loves depend the whole Law of God; and
he that has them, and does exercise them as he ought, fulfils the Law;
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 13. 8, 10. He that loves, has
fulfilled the Law, and Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and all that God has
commanded us by the Prophets, by the Apostles, by the Evangelists, by his
Disciples, or any other lawful Teachers; yea by Moses or by Christ himself,
tends altogether to this end, namely to love God and our Neighbor. Christ our
Savior himself loved his Neighbor, that is all Mankind (for by taking our
Nature upon him, and by conversing with us in Humane Flesh, he made us all his
Neighbors and Brethren;) Christ (I say) himself loved Mankind so tenderly,
that all his Desires, Entreaties, Counsels and Commands, tended to (almost) no
other thing, save only to excite, move and stir us up to a mutual loving of one
another, and to mutual affections, mutual goodwill, and kindheartedness one
from another; charging it upon his Disciples even at the last, and when he was
ready to leave the World, in these express words, Joan. 15. v. 12. This is my
Commandment that ye love one another, and telling them (Joan. 13. v. 35.) that
hereby all men should know them to be his true Disciples, if they had love one
to another: and when he gives the world precaution not to offend or do injury
to any of his, for that all offenses committed against them, are taken by him
to be done against himself; as we read Zach. 2 v. 8. Qui tetigerit vos, tangit
pupillam oculi mei (He that shall touch you, to do you harm, touches the Apple
of mine Eye:) I say, to what end tends this precaution, but to signify how
much we should love one another, after the Example of Christ, who declares
himself as much sensible, and seems to be as much offended at transgressions
done against another, as at those committed against himself.

I do not advance this truth without ground and reason, seeing Christ himself
in the Gospel makes it manifestly appear to be so; to wit, in the Parable of
the King, calling his Servants to account, Matthew. 18. v. 23, 24, 25, 26, etc.
The good King, when his poor indebted Servant asked him mercy, being fall^n
into arrears with him, much more than he was able to pay, presently and most
willingly pardoned him, and forgave him the whole Debt; that is, all the
transgressions and offenses which the Servant had committed against himself;
yet because the same ungrateful Servant would not forgive a small Debt, nor
have patience with his Neighbor or Fellow Servants, he presently called him to
him, and rebuked him, adjudging him to severe punishment, as that he should be
cast unto a Dungeon, and there tormented, not to come out till he should have
paid the utmost farthing which ^e ought; his Lord thus speaking to ^im, Thou
ungracious and w^^ked Servant, I forgave thee all thy Debt, because thou be
soughtest me; ought ^ot thou therefore to have mercy upon ^hy
Fellow Servants, even as I had ^ercy upon thee: immediately whereupon (says the
holy Text) he was delivered to the Tormentors. By the conclusion of which
Parable it is easy to see how absolute the will and pleasure of God is, that
we should love our Neighbor even as we love our selves, and to do to them such
things as we desire should be done to our selves.

But here a question man (perhaps) be asked of some, viz. Whether loving our
Neighbor as our selves be such a condition or qualification of our love, as
that it is of it self sufficient for the fulfilling of the Precept of loving
them? I answer no; it is not always sufficient: in some cases it is, and in
some it is not. When the love of our Neighbor tends to the honor and glory of
God, then it is sufficient; and then by loving our Neighbors as our selves, we
do fulfill Gods Commandment, or the Precept of loving our Neighbor: but when
it is on the contrary; that is, when the love of our Neighbor tends to the
dishonor of God, or be such as he is offended by it, then instead of being a
fulfilling of Gods Commandment, or a just performance of our Duty and
Obligation, it is matter of high displeasure against God, and we incur the
guilt of great and grievous offense, in so loving our Neighbor. And therefore,
as Lusitanus, the honor of the Friars Minors, does well observe and admonish
us, Sermon. 1. in Com. Apost. Though the Commandment of God does exact of us to
love our Neighbors as our selves, yet we ought to consider how this is to be
done; by reason that many men love themselves amiss, not according to God, but
according to the lusts of concupiscence; giving themselves up to all sorts of
inordinate love, so as to drown and cast themselves thereby into eternal
perdition. For such men to love thoir Neighbor as they love themselves, were
to make sport for the Devil, and to aggravate their own damnation. As for
example, a fawning and foolish Lover, will not stick to say to some vain woman,
that he loves her as much as he loves his own self; and with all his heart: and
though for the most part such people mean nothing less than they say, yet they
utter unawares a sad truth. For they love themselves not well, they love not
themselves so as they ought, but with a love, that in fine will carry them
headlong to Hell, and plunge them into the deepest pit of Destruction. Well
therefore may they profess to their companions in lewdness, that they love them
as they love themselves, and their own hearts; and if their Copesmates consent
with them, and love them as well, they will both have the Sentence of Eternal
Wrath pronounced against them, Go ye wicked into everlasting fire, Matthew. 25.
41. O unhappy love of our Neighbor, that by loving sensually the Body, hates
his soul! Such do not know how to love; seeing that in loving themselves after
this manner they destroy both their own, and their Neighbors souls. For true
is that saying of the Prophet, Qui diligit iniqui^atem, odit animam suam. He
that loves iniquity, hates his own soul.

Now to know the True Lovers from false, and also how to love our Neighbor
rightly, the great Doctor Saint Gregory will teach us, Ille veraciter amat
proximum, qui eum diligit in Deo. (Greg. Homil. 27. in Evang. Joan. cap. 15.
True Lovers of their Neighbor are those that love him in God, and for Gods
sake: which plainly shows, how many there are that mistake themselves herein,
and love their Neighbor to little purpose, as to God and his Divine
acceptance; because they love him not in God: God is not the principal Motive
and Reason of their love. They love him only with a natural love. Thus Parents
love their Children, and Children their Parents, Kindred love their Kindred or
Relations, Friends love their Friends, and others love their Acquaintance,
Familiars, Companions, etc. which Love, although generally speaking, it be not
discommendable, but lawful and honest in the eye of the world, yet it is not
that true love whereof we now speak; being not grounded upon God, nor exercised
principally for his sake, but upon natural grounds, to wit, upon the particular
properties, qualities, and perfections (Natural or Moral) that are found in
things; and exercised merely upon our own account, for the good, the pleasure,
the benefit, content and profit, that we receive by the persons we love: by all
which kind of love, though we do not transgress any Divine Precept, nor sin,
properly speaking, yet neither do we deserve any reward for it at Gods hand;
because (as the same holy Doctor says) such Lovers, amorem suum non
spiritualiter, sed naturaliter impendunt, exercise love, not after a spiritual,
but a natural, and (as it were) carnal manner. Such love may be commendable and
honest; but meritorious it is not. We must therefore learn to be True Lovers,
by exactly observing and following the Commandment of Christ; who when he first
gave this Precept to the Apostles, propounded himself as an example thereof to
them: Hoc est praeceptum meum, ut diligatis invicem, sicut dilexi vos, Joan.
15. v. 12. This is my Commandment, that you love one another as I have loved
you. Our Savior loves us in God, and for our Eternal Good; so in the same
manner are we to love our Neighbor.

This great Doctor moreover observes, and mentions it as a matter, whereat some
wondered, others disputed and enquired solicitously, how it could stand, that
God should require us so strictly to love our Neighbors, since elsewhere, and
at other times he requires us not only to have them in aversion, but also to
hate them; and not only our common Neighbors, and such as may be accounted as
well Strangers as Neighbors, but even those of the nearest and dearest
relation to us; that is to say, even our Parents, Brothers, Sisters, Wives and
Children: As for example, by Saint Paul he commands in very earnest and
expressive terms, that Men love their Wives; saying Ephesians. 5. 26. Viri diligite
uxores vestras, etc. Husbands love your Wives, as Christ loved his Church, and
gave himself for it; and yet, by the Evangelist he says, Qui Vxorem non odit,
non potest meus esse Discipulus; Luc. 14. v. 26. Unless Men hate their Wives,
they cannot be his Disciples. Is Christ contrary to himself? Does he command
that by one Apostle, which he forbids by another? Nothing less. For we ought to
reflect and consider, that the substance and effect of both Precepts, is by
discretion and a right understanding easily kept and observed; and that in
different respects, and for diverse reasons, we may both love them, and hate
them. We may love them for Gods sake, as being our Parents, Friends, Wives, and
Neighbors, whom God commands us to love. We may hate them, when they prove
obstacles and hindrances to our chiefest good, when they become stumbling
blocks unto us in the way of our Eternal Salvation: when the loving of them
will not stand with our Love and Duty to God, we may hate them. For so it is
written in the Exposition of this great Doctor abovementioned. There is no
Creature (says he) so dear unto us, which we must not hate and forsake, if it
hinder us from Christ, or from his Church, or from Salvation. And the reason
is, because no earthly Thing, no Duty to Parents, no Love to Wife or Children,
Country, or to a man's own body and life, can be any just excuse or plea for
him against God, or for the doing of any thing that may offend or displease God
in the least.

Sect. 3. How we are to love our enemies.
Having thus declared, That we are to love God and our Neighbor, we are to
make some enquiry about loving our Enemies, a thing very much against the
natural bent of our minds. We do not at all times find it easy for us to love
our Neighbors, who either love us, or at least do not hate us, or wish our
harm: Much more difficult then it will be for us to love our enemies; of whom
we have apprehension that they do both; that is, both hate us, and wish and
practice harm to us. But how difficult soever it is, and what reluctance soever
we find in Nature against it, we must conclude for the Affirmative, That we are
to love even our enemies, and to exercise all the good Offices of love to them
that we can, saving the due Order of Charity; according unto, and admitting for
good, the reason of Marchantius, We must love our Enemies (says he) by virtue
of this Precept, which bids us to love our Neighbors, Quia nomine proximi non
solum intelligitur Amicus, sed quilibet homo vivens: Under the Name of our
Neighbor is understood, not only our Neighbor that dwells by us, but every
Man living; and by consequence our Enemies are to be reckoned (in that sense)
for our Neighbors; and accordingly loved. This Divine Precept is not only
expressed, or given, in the Law of Grace, but was in force under the Mosaical
and Prophetical Laws. In the Mosaical Law it is said (Exodus, chap. 23. to 4.)
Si occurreris bovi inimici tui, aut asino erranti; etc. If thou meet thine
enemies Ox or Ass going astray, bring it back to him. Under a particular cause
or occasion, he expresses a general Duty; namely, that where we have
opportunity to do our enemy a good office, we fail not to do it, out of our
love, and good will to him. In the Prophetical Law it is said, Prove. 25. v. 21.
Si esurierit inimicus tuus, ciba illum, etc. If thine enemy hunger, give him
meat; if he thirst give him water to drink; for, in so doing, thou shall heap
coals of fire on his head, and our Lord will reward thee. Not that we should
intend evil to our enemy in doing him good; but to show, that our doing him
good shall be a better revenge, than if we had heaped coals of fire on his
head. For we both please God, and may expect our reward for what we do; and he,
if he repents not, and ceases to be our enemy upon so just occasion given him,
must expect the effects of Gods displeasure, first or last, to fall upon him.
So likewise, in another place, it is said, Cum ceciderit inimicus tuus, ne
gaudeas, etc. If thine enemy fall, be not glad thereat; and in his ruin let
not thy heart rejoice; least perhaps our Lord see it, and it displease him. But
in the Evangelical or New Law, our Lord Jesus Christ does more ratify and
confirm it, Matthew. 5. v. 44. in these words; Ego autem dico vobis, etc. But I
say unto you; love your enemies, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that persecute you, and that slander, or falsely accuse you; that you may
be the children of your Father which is in Heaven: who makes his Sun to rise
upon the good and the bad, and causes it to rain upon the just and unjust.

What can be more express and clear? For it might (possibly) be objected by
some, concerning the Old Law, that there was nothing expressly declared or
written, that we should love our Enemies, but only that we should help him in
his necessity, that we should not revenge our selves, nor rejoice in his ruin
or adversity: But in the New Test^ment it is positively and expressly said, Love
your Enemies, as is abovementioned out of S. Matthew; which the Evangelist S.
Luke also confirms (Chap. 6. v. 27.) in the like words; Love (says he) your
enemies, do good to them that hate you, bless them that curse you, and pray for
them that calumniate you. Nay more than this: The Gospel, or New Law, requires
so great equanimity, patience, and good affection of mind toward those that
hate us, and treat us injuriously, and that we be so far from revenging our
selves, that it requires us, when we are stricken on the one Cheek, to offer
also the other. For so this Evangelist (S. Luke) writes, Chap. 6. v. 29. Et
qui te percutit in maxillam, praehe and alteram; When one strikes you on one
Cheek, give him the other also to strike. In fine, for the accomplishment or
full performance of this Precept, we must know, that as in relation to our
Neighbor, we are to love him, cord, ore, and opere (in heart, in word, and in
deed;) so must we also do toward our enemy: We must in heart wish him as much
happiness as to our selves: we must in our actions do them as much good, as we
would have done to our selves in like case; we must not defame, slander,
injure, or do them any harm in our words; but in all our expressions and speech
of them, tender their good and their just concerns as our own. So that although
our enemies hate us, yet we in charity are to love them; and though they curse
us, we are to bless them; though they persecute and trouble us, we must forgive
them, and pray for them; if they be wicked, that hinders not us to be good; if
they be our enemies, yet the holy Commandment obliges us to be their friends.

These things (I doubt not) will seem to many extreme hard to be performed,
such is humane w^^^ness; yet perform them we (...) and that for Gods sake: for
so is Gods Commandment. We must be not only content, but willing, with the
Prophet David to say (Psalm. 16. v. 14.) Propter verba labiorum tuorum ego custo
divi vias duras: For the words of thy lips I have kept hard ways; that is to
say, by reason of thy Commandment I have overcome my self, and kept the narrow
way of virtue, how hard and difficult soever I found it to Flesh and Blood:
Because thou have commanded it, I have loved, and will still persist to love
even mine Enemies, and to pursue them with kindnesses, as much as they
persecute me with words, and deeds of hatred: all this I will do to fulfill your
Divine Pleasure, and to gain the more interest in your love. Nor will any good
Christian think it much, or a hard thing, to love his Enemies, that well
considers the matter, and sets before his eyes the example of Christ upon the
Cross. None had greater Enemies than he; no Innocent person was ever persecuted
so maliciously, so causlesly; none ever suffered more contrary to all justice,
right, gratitude, at the hands of his Enemies; and yet even upon the Cross,
while he lay under the greatest pain, misery and shame, that their hatred and
ill will could possibly bring upon him, and was breathing out his Soul, with
the extremity of it; yet even then he loved them, and did the best offices he
could for them to his Father; namely, praying for them, and excusing, in some
part, the wickedness of their sin, in these words; (Luke 23. v. 34.) Pater,
dimitte illis; non enim sciunt quid faciunt; Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do. Thus did the Savior of the World requite the hatred of
his Enemies; thus did he repay all their revilings, cursings, injuries, all
their cruel, barbarous, and despiteful usage; to wit, by the greatest charity
and good will showed on their behalf, his love contending, and gloriously
triumphing over their hatred. I do not doubt, but having such an object of
Charity before our eyes, and excited by such an example, we will desire above
all things to imitate, and be like unto him: his most perfect goodness duly
considered, will work in us the like affection; so as it shall not be grievous
unto us to follow his steps, per vias duas, in any kind of virtue, though never
so hard to flesh and blood, and particularly not in this, of loving, for the
future, those that we have at present in aversion.

Our Saviors most perfect and unparalleled example alone might serve for
this: But we have several others, besides this, in the holy Scriptures, not
unworthy to be taken notice of, in order to the good effect of loving, and
carrying our selves well to those who deserve not very well of us; as namely,
that of the holy Patriarch Joseph, who being well beloved of his Father, was
for that reason so hated of the rest of his Brethren, that (as the holy Text
speaks of them) Non poterant ei quicquam pacifice loqui, They were not able
to speak a good or peaceable word to him, (Genesis 37. 4.) but were perpetually
quarrelling and contending with him; till at length their aversion grew to such
a height, that they conspired his death (v. 19, 20.) casting him first (in
order to that end) into a Cistern (or certain dry Pit) in the Wilderness, and
afterward sold him to the Ishmaelites (to be their Bond-slave) Viginti
argenteis (for Twenty pieces of Silver) (v. 28.) yet Joseph took all these
doings well, meditated not revenge, though it was in his power to have done it;
but when his Brethren were fallen into distress, by reason of the Famine, he
provided for them and their Families all manner of Food; and when his Brethren
did not know Joseph their Brother, he made himself known to them in this kind
manner, excusing their iniquity toward him: Accedite ad me, nolite pavere; Ego
sum Joseph Frater vester, etc. (Genesis 45. v. 3, 4, 5.) Come near unto me, I pray
you; be not troubled, I am Joseph your Brother, whom ye sold into Egypt: Is my
Father yet alive? -- and let it not seem grievous to you, that you sold me; for
God sent me hither before you to preserve you alive. Non vestro consilio, sed
Dei voluntate, etc. It was not so much by your design, as by the will of God,
that I was sent hither. Therefore, Load your Beasts, and go up to my Father
into the Land of Canaan; and bring him, and all your Kindred, from thence; and
I will give you of all the good things in Egypt: and you shall eat the marrow
of the Land. Thus did the good Joseph requite the unkind wickedness and
ill will of his Brethren with love.

But what shall we say of the Royal Prophet, King David? how much was he hated
by Saul, and how often persecuted by him to so great extremity, that he was in
imminent danger of his life thereby, yet he never hated Saul upon that account,
but did him all the good Offices he could; saving him several times when he was
in his power, and that David might at once have ridded himself of a cruel
Enemy, and gained both Crown, Scepter, and Kingdom; to which he had right
sufficient, being by Gods special appointment anointed King over Israel to
succeed after Saul. The good King found his Enemy fast asleep, his Spear fixed
in the ground at his head; and Abner, with all the rest of his people, sleeping
about him; yet would he not hurt him: And when Abisai, one of the Captains of
King David, offered himself to dispatch Saul at one blow, alleging some show
of reason for it; Because God had now delivered his Enemy into his hands, and
he ought not to neglect the opportunity which Providence gave him of securing
himself: David would by no means listen to the motion, but forbad him doing any
such thing, in these express words: 1 Reg. 26. 9, 10, 11. Kill him not. For who
can extend his hand against the anointed of our Lord, and be innocent! Vivit
Dominus, quia nisi Dominus percusserit eum, etc. As our Lord lives, unless God
shall strike him, he shall not be stricken by me; or that his day come to die,
or that descending into a Battle he perish (so God be merciful to me) I will
not lift up my hand against our Lords Anointed.

The New Testament wants not innumerable other Examples of this kind; namely
the Examples of all the holy Martyrs, both of ancient and late Times; who
following the Example of Christ our Savior, have ever prayed for their Enemies
and Persecutors, with such fervent Devotion and ardent Charity, that very often
their Enemies and Persecutors have been converted by that means, and become
great Saints and Martyrs themselves. Look but into the Acts of the Apostles,
there you presently meet with the Blessed Martyr Saint Stephen, in the midst of
his Sufferings praying for his Enemies in these words (Acts 7. v. 60.) Domine,
ne statuas illis hoc peccatum. Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. The
effect of which Prayer was (besides other not mentioned) the present Conversion
of Saint Paul, one of his greatest Persecutors. For behold, while he was in his
greatest fury against Christians, and posting in all haste to Damascus, with
Commission and Design to make havoc of the poor Church there (as we read, Acts
9. 4, 17.) Christ appeared to him, saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
As if he had said, I should have lost thee, standing so much against me and my
name: But my Servant and Martyr, Stephen, praying for thee, for his sake, you
are a chosen Vessel unto me; and shall bear my name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, and Children of Israel. In the same manner, and for like reason, it is
reported by Saint Chrysostom of Saint James the Apostle, that he who lead him
to the Execution of his Martyrdom, was so much moved with the great zeal and
constancy of this holy Apostle, that he asked him forgiveness for what he was
to have done; which the blessed Apostle most willingly gave him, embracing him,
and saying to him, Pax tibi sit, Frater; Peace be with thee, my Broter. At
which Salutation the poor man was so animated and encouraged, that he forthwith
publicly professed himself to be a Christian; and was upon that Confession
made a Martyr: having his head likewise cut off.

Let these few Examples suffice to give you strength and courage to do the
same, whenever occasion shall require it of you. At all times let us be
prompt, and willing to forgive our enemies, seeing God is so ready at all times
to forgive us, having penitent recourse unto him. Be not of the number of
those, who, when duty requires of them to follow the example of Christ, and to
forgive, and love their enemies, make their excuse, and say Christ was God, and
most Divinely perfect, and consummate in all goodness; but they are weak men,
and cannot reach so high perfection, as to forgive, and love enemies,
persecutors, etc. But in vain it is for them to use such speech, it will not
serve their turn, it will be no just apology for them at the latter day. And
verily it is to be admired, how such persons can say their Pater Noster, or how
they can address themselves to God to be forgiven, in the terms they do: For
they say, Dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos dimitt^mus debitoribus
nostris. Forgive us our debts as we forgive our Debtors. As we forgive others,
so let us be forgiven. What i^ this but to pronounce Sentence against our
selves, if we do not forgive others. Delay not therefore to make good your
promise, and to discharge your obligation. Forgive your enemies, as you would
be forgiven of God; Love your enemies as you desire that God should love you.
For otherwise I do let you all know, that who so hates his Neighbor, or Enemy
(it matters not which, all is one in this case) renders himself incapable of
begging forgiveness from God; he is so far from obtaining his request, that he
cannot without most grievous sin, and entangling his Soul with further guilt,
make such a request: unless we do first lay aside all hatred, by loving,
pardoning, and forgiving our enemies in heart, it is in vain for us to expect
any mercy from God. It is against all reason that God should love him, who is
not in true Charity with all. Those that wish harm to others, and will not
forgive injuries received, it is evident they do not love, they are not ^n true
Charity, and consequently, not in God; according to the Doctrine of the holy
Apostle (1 Joan. 4. v. 8.) He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love.

Sect. 4. In what manner of Love we are to love our Neighbors and our Enemies.
According to what we have said in the two precedent Paragaphs, we must not
only love our Neighbors and our Enemies, but we must also forgive them; yea,
though they should be obstinate, and not repent for what they have offended us;
but should rather continue, and increase their enmity toward us, than seem to
desire reconciliation. For we are not to reflect upon their obstinacy, or
disaffections, but to perform what is required on our part; by reason it is
otherwise with men, than with God. Men may not be then o^n revengers; and
therefore whatsoeve^ Men do to us, we must do to the^ no more than what God
allows u^ to do. Revenge belongs to God ^lone, and his Divine Justice do
oblige him, first or last, sooner or later, to punish all offenders, which
repent not; and does never forgive save only where men repent. Now as
concerning Man, God has give^ him an express Charge, to leave al^ revenge to
him alone; he therefore is obliged to pardon his enemies whether they repent or
not. S^ that knowing our Obligation, it i^ most requisite that we also know
what manner of love we ought t^ have, and to bear toward them or how, and in
what manner to exercise that love. To which purpose the renowned Saint
Vincentius, according to the relation of the R. F. Granada (in his Fourth
Treatise, chap. 3. Sect. 3.) has an ample and large Discourse to this effect.

He that will perfectly love his Neighbors and Enemies, ought to have seven
special affections toward them. In the first place he ought to have an inward
hearty compassion of their miseries, and to be grieved, as if they were his
own. In the second, ^e ought to have charitable gladness ^f mind, wherewith to
rejoice at the ^rosperities and felicities of others, as much as he would do,
in case they were his own.

These two first affections are commendable, and do agree to the full with
that, which Marchantius de^ivers, saying, That we ought to have a joyful
affection, and con^ratulation in the prosperities of our Neighbors, as also a
pious com^assion in their adversities; as much ^s if they were our great
concerns. Therefore let our Charity rejoice at other men's good, when it tends
to their salvation: for otherwise it is ^ot indeed to be accounted their good,
^f it tends to their destruction, and ruin of their Soul. Let us also
participate, and have our share in their sadness and afflictions; and so fulfill
the Apostles Precept, bidding us (Romans 12. v. 15.) Rejoice with them that
rejoice and weep with them that weep: and in so-doing we shall show our selves
to be lively members of Christ's Mystical Body. For as Saint Paul says of the
Natural Body of Man, that if one member suffer any thing, to wit of pain and
infirmity, all the members suffer with it in some measure; as likewise if one
member rejoice, or be honored, all the rest of the members rejoice with it in
their kinds: So is it true of the Body Mystical of Christ, which is his Church,
all the members thereof ought in a special manner to sympathize with each
other, and for each other, and to be like-minded one toward another, rejoicing
for the Consolations which each one receives from God, and mourning, or being
sad for the afflictions, which he suffers. There must be no Schism, or
Discension, in Christ's body, but the members must have the same care one for
another, as being one Body in Christ, and members of each other in particular;
as the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 12. 26, 27.

As to the Third Affection proposed by Saint Vincentius, men ought to have a
quiet and settled patience, willingly contenting themselves to suffer all
vexations, troubles, and injuries, that shall be done to them; being always
ready to forgive them: of which kind of affections, or love; I have in part
already spoken somewhat in the foregoing Paragraphs; as namely, that we should
love our enemies, do good to them that hate us, pray for them that persecute
and calumniate us; forget, and with all our heart forgive injuries, and the
like. I have only this one thing to add further in this place, that concerning
the point of loving our enemies, and doing good to them, thatthis affection may
be found true, real, and meritorious of Divine reward, it must be operative and
effectual; it must not rest, or contain it self only in well-wishing, but must
extend to well-doing also. Remember you not what has been often said? to wit,
that we must love others (our Neighbors, our Enemies) as we love our selves.
Now in loving our selves we do not think it enough, merely to wish good, or
pray for good to ones self, but we are diligent, and careful to use our best
endeavors to help our selves what we can; and to desire, that all others, that
can, would also help us. In the same manner the duty of true Charity obliges
us, not only to wish good, but to do good, to our Neighbors, to our Enemies,
and to all others that want the good we can do them. For if we only wish, and
do nothing, we trifle; our wishes serving for nothing, but to bring us under
the censure and reproof of Saint James the Apostle, which he uses against such
like people in these words (Jac. 2. v. 15.) Si autem frater, aut soror nudi
sint, etc. If a brother, or sister, be naked, and lack daily food, and one of
you say to them, Go in peace, be warmed, be filled with meat; but you give them
not the things, that are necessary for the Body, what shall it profit? It will
not satisfy the Belly, to say Eat, where nothing is given to eat; nor keep off
the Cold, to say Be warm, be clothed, to one that has no Clothes to put on.
In like manner neither can we merit any thing with God, only by wishing good to
another, and not doing him the good that is in our power to do. Therefore we
are not only to wish good, but to do good, so far as we are able, to our
Neighbous, Enemies, and all men living; and not only to pray for them, but also
to assist and help them in their necessities, as God shall enable us.

The third Affection or Love mentioned by Saint Vincentius, requires that we
use gentle and benign behavior and affability toward all men as reason
requires; demeaning our selves in conversation amongst men as becomes
Christians, with courtesy, respect, mildness, not giving any sign of anger or
offense of mind, nor of contempt and disrespect to any, but wishing well in our
hearts to all; to afford all convenient testimony and demonstration thereof,
both in our words and deeds; for so the Blessed Apostle requires (1 Joan. 3.
18.) Fratres, non diligamus verbo, neque lingua, sed opere and veritate.
Brethren, let us love not so much in word and tongue as in work and in truth.
He does not forbid us to make profession of our love and good will to others by
words and by our tongue, but to take heed that our love lies not wholly in our
Tongue, that it be not only a feigned love of outward profession, and not in
deed and truth. This affection is likewise congruously exercised in judging of
other men's actions in the better sense, in concealing and keeping secret their
faults and imperfections, supporting their infirmities, etc. considering that
we our selves are infirm and weak; frailties and imperfections are to be found
in our selves as well as others; and mutual Charity in this kind is requisite
on both sides. Verily it is no easy matter to converse with men (I mean those
of worldly and common conversation) without transgressing or giving offense:
For which reason it behooves us prudently to comply with every one, for the
Love of God, and (as much as is possible) to have a quiet and settled patience
in their infirmities, being always more ready to pardon, pass by, and over-see,
what happens to be amiss (so far as just reason and charity permits) then to
check or reprove it unseasonably and with offense. What the Apostle says
(Galat. 6. v. 2.) is good counsel for us all. Alter alterius onera portate.
Bear ye one another burdens, and so you shall fulfill the Law of Christ. And
truly with great reason it is required of us, that seeing we all desire to have
our own defects and frailties covered, our own infirmities supported, our
ignorances excused, and our offenses forgiven; we should do the same unto
others, supporting one another and pardoning one another; but above all things
having the true Charity of God one toward another; which, where it rules, is
the bond of Perfection; Colos. 3. v. 14.

The fifth sort of Love or Affection which the good Author Saint Vincentius
suggests to us, is to have an humble and reverent regard toward all men,
according to their dignity and quality, esteeming them all (as they are) for
our betters; yielding them place, and submitting our selves with all our hearts
to them, as justice and charity requires; giving them willingly all the honor,
respect and reverence, which their qualities, dignities, states and conditions
do merit: If they be our equals and no more, it suffices that with candor and
all sincerity of good will, we treat them, and carry our selves to them as we
in like case would be treated and conversed with by others. Thus doing, we
shall in good manner correspond, not only with that general and most equal
precept of the Gospel (Luc. 6. v. 31.) Prout vult is ^^t faciant vobis homines,
etc. (As ye would that men should do unto you, do ye also to them) but also to
that more special Counsel of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. v. 13. Subjecti estote omni
Humanae Creaturae propter Deum. Be subject therefore to every Humane Creature
for Gods sake, whether it be to the King as most Excellent, or to Rulers as
sent by him: as likewise to what Saint Paul says, Romans 13. v. 1.) in
confirmation of this Truth, Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit,
etc. Let every Soul (says he) be subject to the higher powers, for there is no
power but of God; the powers that be (now in the world) are ordained of God.
Obey therefore at a word, and be ready to every good work that shall be
commanded you. Be not litigious, but modest; showing all mildness and
equanimity toward all men, (Titus 3. 2.) Where yet I would have it remembered,
that as in the exercise of Chastity or Divine Love, so in the exercise of
Obedience, there is an order to be observed which the Spirit of God and
Christian Prudence will not fail to dictate to every one that truly loves God
and desires nothing but to perform his duty: An order there is (I say) to be
observed in the exercise of Obedience: Where Powers or Commandments clash, we
must obey God rather than Man, and be more careful to fulfill the Divine Laws,
whether of God or the Catholic Church (which is a Spiritual Power) than the
Laws of any Temporal or Earthly Power, commanding contrary thereunto; that is,
contrary to our duty to God, and to the true Confession of Catho^ique Faith; in
which case such Laws and Comandments are not to be obeyed.

As to the Holy Saint Vincentius his sixth sort of Love and Affection, it
obliges us to be at perfect agreement with all Men, and to live in Concord and
Amity with all, so much as it is in our power to do, and so far forth as our
Concord and Amity with others may not displease God or tend to his dishonor;
for if it does, such Amities are to be broken off. There is no Concord betwixt
Christ and Belial. (2. Cor. 6. 15.) We must say the self same thing with other
Christians so long as they confess the Catholic Faith; but if they will
depart from it either in whole or in part, we are not then to say as they say,
but to say Anathema to them and to all their wicked errors. We are to agree
with men in good not in evil, in the Truth and in the sound Doctrine of
Christian Catholic Faith, not in Devilish error. The Prophet David took
very much pleasure in such kind of love, and in such agreement as this; witness
that of the Psalm. 132. v. 1. where he says, O, quam bonum, and quam jucundam,
habitare fratres in unum. Behold how good and how pleasant a thing it is, for
Brethren to dwell together in Unity! And truly, that Concord and Unity are both
good, pleasant and profitable things, needs no other proof, than to consider
and take notice of the fruit it has produced in every well governed Community;
more especially those in the Church of God: which the Apostle might seem to
foresee, when he said with such a passion of Holy Charity (Philip. 2. v. 2.)
Siqua ergo consolatio in Christo, etc. implete gaudium meum, etc. If there be
any Consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the
Spirit, if any howels of Compassion, fulfill ye my joy that ye be all of one
mind; having all the same charity, being all of one accord, thinking the same
thing; doing nothing by Contention, neither by Vainglory, but in humility,
each one accounting other better than themselves. The like pathetique
exhortation to the same end, he makes, Romans 15. 5. Deus autem patientiae and
solatii, etc. The God of Patience and Comfort grant you to be of one mind (of
one love and affection) one toward another) according to Jesus Christ, that of
one mind and with one mouth ye may glorify God and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

The seventh and last sort of Love, is, that which we are chiefly to look at,
and regard in the Example of our Savior Christ, to wit, that we have a ready
mind and will, to sacrifice our selves for the good of others; that is to say,
This Love requires that we be prepared to bestow our lives for the Salvation of
all Men, eve^ our Enemies, occasion requiring i^ This is a high degree of Love,
an^ so commended by our Savior him self, that he says of it (Joan. 15* 13.)
Majorem Charitatem nemo habet ut animam suam ponat quis pr^amicis suis. Greater
Charity none can have, than to expose (or lay down) his Life for his Friends.
And this Perfection of Love if we have not, yet at least we must have so much
Charity for all Mankind, as to wish and make Prayers to Almighty God, that all
Mankind may be converted and become one in Christ; and if we cannot suffer
death for the good of others (I mean so great good and so greatly tending to
Gods Honor, as is the Conversion and Salvation of Sinners) yet at least let us
not be unwilling to suffer injuries at their hands, and afflictions for their
sakes, and to edify them what we can by the example of a true Christian Life,
both active and passive, in doing well and suffering ill, when occasion
^equires. This is but the common Duty of all True Christians; and ^urely he
must be thought to have but ^ weak and faint Love of Christ, that cannot or
will not do thus much for his Saviors sake; who has done and suffered so much
for him, and has ^eft us his own Example expressly to that end; namely, to show
how much we are to condescend to others, and deny our selves to procure their
good in order to God. Exemplum dedi vobis, says he, I have given you an
Example, that as I have done to you so you should do also to others. Sustain
therefore patiently, for unto this you are called; because Christ has suffered
for us (the just for the unjust) leaving us an example that we should follow
his steps, 1 Pet 2. v. 21. Let us therefore follow our Savior and Redeemer,
since they that follow him walk not in darkness, but enjoy the light of life.

Sect. 5. How we may know our selves free from Self-love, in loving God and our
Neighbors.
Seeing that the Love of God must be predominant over all other Loves, and
reign over all our Passions, Affections, Lusts, Desires, etc. as we have
already declared; it cannot but seem reasonable, and a thing to be wished for
by all such persons as do seriously concern themselves in things of the Spirit,
that we should, at least in brief, point at and show them the means how by Gods
Grace they may come to a pious and probable assurance, that they do truly love
God above all things, and by consequence that their hearts are free from the
pestilent and dangerous Vice of Self-love: To satisfy whose desires, I think
it necessary to add a word or two further upon that Subject.

First, In the general I say, that to proceed securely in this matter, it
behooves us exactly, and without all partiality, to consider what the course of
our lives has been and is, whither bend our affections, inclinations, desires,
what is the intent and design of all our actions; for if these either wholly or
at least principally tend unto and be directed to Gods Honor, to the health of
our Souls, and to the gaining of a good Eternity, all is well; we walk safely,
and may promise our selves good from God. As on the contrary, If we find our
lives to be dissolute and careless, and our mind more set upon Vanity and the
things of the World than upon God, we must fear the worst, yea know for
certain, that as to our Spiritual Estate, things go not well with us. The
predominant affections that are in us, will easily show what we are, and to
whom we belong. Amongst Men of the World we see, that for the most part, in
every one of them, some passion or other (one or more) predominates over all
the rest, and makes such persons to be accordingly esteemed, some avaritious,
some ambitious, some voluptuous and given wholly to pleasures, others
extravagant and humorous, and as much overborn with fancy; finally, others too
much re-senting and apt to revenge; all which are so denominated and judged
from their principal Love, and the Affection which they do principally bear,
and show either toward Riches or Honors, Worldly Greatness, Pleasures, and
the like; the whole conduct of men's lives being as it were tinctured or rather
tainted with that principal Affection which reigns in them.

This shows us our selves, for in the same manner it is with us: No man has
reason to think himself free from Self-love, or that he loves God above all
things (which is necessary to Salvation) if examining his life, his actions,
his employments, desires, and pretensions, he do not find the principal bent,
frame, and design of them to be toward God; and that his Honor and our
eternal good are the things chiefly looked at by us. The love which we bare to
God, must be a Love not of bear Words, not vain transitory Thoughts which
perish and come to nothing; but it must be a Love of Effects, a Love that
produces good Actions and good Works, It must not be an idle Love, nor a
talking, nor a vaunting, but a working Love, a diligent and industrious Love; a
Love that loves to be doing, to be always busy and employed in the works of
love: And therefore we must take heed that we do not deceive our selves in
taking the acts of our Understanding for the acts of Love or Divine Affection.
There is not a mortal man living (that has the use of reason) whose
understanding does not tell him that he ought to love God more than himself;
yea, there is not a true man who has not some inclination of Will, though
weak, faint, and uneffectual, to love God more than himself; and yet for all
that want the true Grace of God, for as much as we must know, that the Love of
God does not consist in that act of the Understanding, nor in those
inclinations of Will, but it consists altogether in putting the said acts or
judgments of the Understanding and inclinations of Will in practice; and by
consequence, if we want those things which are the proper effects and fruits of
Divine Love and Friendship; how can we think our selves to be Gods true Lovers
or Friends? and if the true Love of God dwells not in us, it is certain that
Self-love and Self-interest does. By this therefore we may judge whether we
have the true love of God or not, or whether we be not still under the domi^ion
of Self-love. For the acts and proper effects of Divine Love (as all Divines
teach) are to be united in our affections to God, and in all things to look at
him as our chief and only good: If it be thus with us, we love God, if
otherwise, we love our selves.

This is one Rule, (and I think, the principal) whereby to know, what our
condition is in order to God, and whether we be free from Self-love: Yet I
think it not amiss to mention some others, that I observe to be re-commended by
pious and learned Men. According to F. Cressy, the property of true Divine Love
is to unite all our affections to God, and to make them all one in him, as in
our Chief and Sovereign Good: and that out of this love we are to take joy in
his Divine Perfections and Excellencies, and that he is, upon the account of
them, so adored and glorified in heaven by the Angels, and by all Saints.
Besides this we are (according to the same good Author to desire, and (occasion
being given) to endeavor so much as in us lies, that all Creatures, acording
to their several capacities, may serve, love, and adore him; That the Infidels,
Heretics, and all Sinners, may be converted to him, and truly repent of their
disobedience and rebellion against him; that so, by love, he may reign in all
hearts, and all hearts be sad for the offenses (of their own or others)
committed against him.

In pure love to him we are to determine faithfully to serve him, and to take
joy in all things that please him. Moreover with indifferency we are to accept
all things from his hands, and to take them in good part; as well things
displeasing and offensive to Nature, as pleasing. It is required of us all to
be heartily sorry for all things, that are done, or happen, contrary to his
Divine Will and Pleasure; to love all things that are grateful to him, and
pertaining to his Honor, his Service, and his Glory; and that merely for his
sake we should love all men, yea even our Enemies and Persecutors; doing our
endeavor also (where we judge it convenient) to express some effects of love
to them, more than to others, as being special Instruments, to procure us
greater good from God, than those Friends, who do all they can to please us,
and to foment and flatter us in vain things.

It is expected from us, that we do all the honor we can to Almighty God, and
all the service, and good offices in our power, to our Neighbor, for his Sake;
in nothing seeking our own commodities, further then his Goodness allows; but
in all things his good pleasure. We must imitate and follow his holy Examples,
in all kind of Virtues and Perfections, to our utmost possibility: and
particularly it should be our Design to love others, with the like Freeness of
love, wherewith he loved us, without looking to our own profit, or interest in
loving. He loved us merely for our good, not for his own; so should we love our
Neighbor; pretending nothing, but to do him good by our love, and not our
selves. We must resolve, never to accept any contentment but in him, nor other
happiness, but in himself alone. We must not set bounds to the measure of our
love; but still endeavor to love him more, and better.

We are to be resigned, and willing to suffer for him in this State of
Mortality; being contented for the present only with the hope of Fruition
afterward, that is, in Heaven. We are to hate our selves, our corrupt and
vicious Nature, our bad Inclinations, our Unsensibleness of his great Mercy and
Goodness toward us, etc. with a most perfect hatred, never being weary of
persecuting and mortifying our selves. We are bound to love him equally in his
Commandments, as his Rewards, and to rejoice, or take contentment in any act
of Temporal Severity, exercised by him upon us. We are never to cease praying,
that God would show us the defectousness of our love, and that he would daily
give us his grace, more and more to increase, both in the degrees of Fervor
and Purity.

These are the Marks, the Signs, the Fruits, and real Effects of the True Love
of God; and by them we may perceive, when and whether or no we be free from the
pest of Self-love, Self-esteem, Self-seeking, and Self-pleasing. This little,
which has been said, will serve to show our state, if we consider it well. But
alas! where shall we find a Soul, that can show all these (or the most part of
these) Rules exactly observed, and practiced by her! However, our duty is to
aspire to all Perfection, and to the Practice of all these good Rules and Helps
thereto, as much as may be; yet as to the measure of our Perfection, submitting
our selves, and being resigned therein to the Will of God; of whose grace it
is, that we attain to any measure, or degree of perfection: For so is his holy
pleasure.

The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE Languishing Diseases OF CHRISTIANS Proceeding from
SELF-PRIDE, DRUNKENNESS, And CARNAL CONCUPISCENCE, CURED.

4 ESDR. 8. 31. We, and our Fathers, languish with such Diseases: but thou for
Sinners shall be called Merciful.

LONDON, Printed 1677.

The First Treatise OF THE SECOND PART OF THE LANGUISHING DISEASES OF
CHRISTIANS Proceeding from Self-Pride.
SECTION 1. Pride a General Disease amongst Christians.
SECT. 1. Heaven and Earth was infected with it. 2. Self-Pride of the Nobility
and Gentry. 3. Self-Pride of great Ladies. 4. Self-Pride of other Women.

Sect. 1. How Heaven and Earth was infected by Pride.
THE Pestilent Fevor of Self-Love (as Saint Ambrose very well observes) is
usually attended with Two Symptoms (or ill Signs) as bad as it self: which are
Pride and Ambition. Febris enim nostra ambitio est, etc. says that Father. The
Feavor, that troubles and agitates our Souls, not suffering them to rest in any
thing tha's good, is Ambition; which, according as Saint Augustine, Saint
Bonaventure, Isidore, Hugo, and many others have described it, is the
inordinate love and app^tite of our own commendation, and a desire to excel (or
to be thought to excel) others in our actions: which if they be public, and
concerning the Commonwealth, is then most properly termed Ambition; but if the
actions be private, and concern only our Domestic Conversation and Behavior,
it is called Pride: being but one and the same feavorish Distemper of Self-love
more or less extending and showing it self. A Feavor, or Spiritual Distemper,
this is, so malignant, that it causes many other Diseases, and Dangerous
Symptoms of Soul, to Mankind: as for example, many Vaingloryings, many and much
Vainboasting, and Vaunting of ons Self; much Flattering of others, much
Wantonness, much Hypocricy and Dissembling, innumerable Impertinencies and
Curiosities of like nature, frequent Ingratiudes, frequent Disobediencies to
those in lawful Authority, frequent Seditions and Commotions public, frequent
Contentions and Contests more private, frequent Disrespects to Superiors, and
Despisings of Equals, and those beneath us; together with many other such like
Distempers and Disorders, under which, and by means whereof, not only private
persons, but Kingdoms and Commonwealths languish daily, and endure all the
mischiefs of Devastation and Misery; not to be ended, but with utter ruin,
unless care be taken to apply fit remedy in due time and season: not to menton
the harm that is done to the Soul, by means of them.

The first that ever was troubled with these Distempers (to wit of Pride and
Ambition) was Lucifer, that reprobate Angel, together with all his wicked Crew:
who through the excess of Pride, and the inordinate Love and conceit of his own
excellency, extolled himself to such a height, as to pretend to be equal to
God; according to the relation which is given of him by the Prophet Isaias
(Chap. 14. v. 14.) where the wicked Angel says thus in his heart, In Coelum
conscendam, super astra Dei exaltabo solium meum, etc. I will climb up into
Heaven; above the Stars of God I will exalt my throne: I will sit upon the
Mount of the Testament, in the sides of the North. I will ascend above the
height of the Clouds, I will be like the Most High. His Pride was such, that he
affected to be Gods rival in every thing, and wheresoever Gods Throne was
(whether in Heaven or in Earth) there would he set his throne. But this
presumption of his cast him down into Hell, and of a bright Angel transformed
him into a black Devil: for so we read (Jud. Ep. v. 6.) Angelos vero, etc. He
keeps now in everlasting chains under darkness, etc. See also Apoc. 12. 7, 8,
9.

Now this wicked Angel, having found by woeful experience the fruits of his
Ambition, and to what a bad Estate that Disease of his had irrecoverably
brought him, out of the height of his Envy and Malice, resolves forthwith to
revenge himself upon Mankind; to which end, seeing he could no longer bear the
shape of an Angel, he takes that of a Serpent, and therein sets upon our first
Parents in Paradise, overthrowing and deceiving them by his fair but false
words, specious, but pernicious illusions; persuading them that if they would
but eat of the forbidden Fruit, they should be (strait ways) like unto God; for
so we read, Genesis 3. 5. Deus enim scit, etc. God (says that wicked deceiver and
lier) does know that in the day you eat of that Fruit, your Eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil: which words of his so
pleased our Mother Eve, that she presently fell into a longing after that
promotion and privilege he spoke of, desiring the likeness and equality of
God; whereupon she unhappily yields to his remptation, out of a perverse
desire of knowing more things than did belong to her; and being deceived her
self, she persuades her Husband also (Adam) to do the same; who as unadvisedly
consents to her, swallowing the venom that poisoned himself and all Mankind:
for instead of knowing all things, according to the lying promise or
insinuation of Satan, they knew nothing more than they did, but only that they
were naked; the opening of their Eyes made them see nothing but their own
shame, and instead of being equal to God, they were made in a sad measure much
less than themselves; being of Saints become Sinners, and for their Sin
expelled and cast out of the Terrestrial Paradise. O pernicious Disease! O
Universal all-reaching Malady! seeing that neither the Celestial nor
Terrestrial Paradise, neither Heaven above nor Earth beneath, could be exempt
from thy contagion! and not only Men, (frail, weak, and mortal Men) but even
the Angels (mighty and immortal Angels) tainted, corrupted, and made no Angels
by thee.

Sect. 2. Self-pride of the Nobility and Gentry.
Ever since the fall of the Angels in Heaven, and of our first Parents in
Paradise, this Disease the Pestilent Fever of Self-pride, has lain sore upon
the Sons of Men, insomuch that unto this day it seems rather to have been in
continual growth and increasing then otherwise; (for to look a little into the
several sorts of Men) both the greater Nobility and Gentry, seem so troubled
with it, and so generally distempered by it, that few of them are to be
accounted free; few or none amongst this sort of men but are in some kind or
other more or less obnoxious to this infirmity. Are not our Eyes witness of
this? Do we not see daily every one of us, how this state and order of men
labor with all force and might to exalt themselves above others? contending
and contesting for Superiorities, for Places, for Excellency, for Honor? Do we
not see how all strive who shall be greatest, who shall get the greatest
Estates, Possessions? who shall be in greatest Favor? who enjoy the greatest
Titles, Dignities, Offices? Are not the many Wars and Public Differences
between Nation and Nation? Are not the many Seditions, Commotions, and Civil
Discords, that happen between People of the same Nation? Are not the many
Private and Personal Dissentions, Quarrels, Duels, happening between Persons of
Honor and High Quality, a sufficient demonstration of this? It Is true to them
that duly consider, Pride is but as it were a blast of Wind, a mere vanity, the
swelling of a bubble; yet nevertheless we see it disturbs not only Christians,
but even all mankind, few excepted; yea the very State and Peace of Christendom
it self is disturbed by it. If we look back to more ancient times, did not
Alexander the Great, merely through his Pride and excessive Ambition, shake and
trouble the whole World, endeavoring to reduce the same to the obedience of
one only Monarchy, and to keep it in subjection under his own sole Government:
Was it not out of the same unquiet humor of Pride and restless Ambition that
Julius Caesar so much disquieted all the Roman Empire? Was not his Pride great
that would not permit him to make his public entry into a Town or City,
without having at his Coach a set of no fewer than forty Elephants to draw the
same?

But what shall we say of Nero? of whom, when he made his entry into Rome, it
is reported that he never had less than a Thousand Coaches of his own to attend
upon him as a Train, and all his Horses shod with Silver Shoes? Another called
Sesostres, a King of Egypt, had always in his Royal Chariot, instead of Horses
or Elephants, four Kings to draw the same, clothed in their Royal Garments,
having their Crowns upon their Heads and their Scepters in their Hands? Was not
the Pride of Herod Agrippa, King of the Jews, very great, who having made a
public and solemn Oration to the People upon his Birthday, could endure, yea
rejoice to hear the flattering multitude, by way of Acclamation and Applause,
cry out, Dei Voces, and non hominis (The Voice of God and not of Man?) He took
such pride in this vain Honor which the People showed toward him, and was so
ambitious of it, that God suddenly struck him by an Angel from Heaven, which
humbled him somewhat; For perceiving himself to consume away (being eaten of
Worms, as the Text says, Acts 12. 23.) he could himself cry out to the People
and say, Behold here how with intolerable grief and pain he now dies, whom you
but even now called God! Dioclesian the Emperor, was so puffed up and swollen
with this Disease, that he stilled himself Brother of the Sun and Moon, which
Title the Grand Signior, Emperor of the Turks, assumeth to himself to this
present; pretending to the great prejudice and dishonor of our Lord Jesus, to
be the King of Kings and Lord of Lords.

But leaving profane History, let us reflect upon what the Holy Scriptures
report in relation to this matter. In the second Book of Chronicles, you may
read, Chap. 9. v. 25. of King Solomon, how that he exceeded all the Princes and
Monarchs of the Earth, in Royal Magnificence and Powers: The particular
instances of his Greatness, would be innumerable and too many to rehearse;
therefore omitting them, I will only take notice of this, That whenever he
thought good to appear in his Royal State and Dignity, he had for that purpose
always ready to attend him, Forty thousand Horses in the Stables, and Cbariots
and Horsemen Twelve thousand. But alas! to what end comes all this Worldly
Pomp, Splendour, and Magnificence? if they escape the judgment which this Great
and Wise King does (himself) threaten to the Proud and High-minded (Prove. 16.
18.) Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty mind before a fall, yet they
shall never avoid what the Prophet (Isa. 14. 11.) shows to be the end of all
Worldly Glory. Subter te sternetur tinea, and operimentum tuum erant vermes.
The Moth is spread under thee, and Worms are become thy covering: That is, if
they fall not by some special and sudden judgment of God, that puts an end to
their Pride before they be aware of it, yet most certain and unavoidably they
must at length yield to that which is the end of all Flesh, to wit, Corruption.
The Pomp and Splendour of this World will not always endure. Moses, (Numb. 15.
v. 30.) seems to fore-warn this to the People of Israel, telling them
peremptorily, that the Soul which offends through Pride, shall in no sort escape
unpunished. He that sins through ignorance, error, or weakness, the Priest
shall make an Atonement for him: Anima vero, quae per Superbiam aliquid
commiserit, etc. He that sins out of Pride, or with an high hand, he must bear
his iniquity, whoever he be, native or stranger, he must be cut off from his
People.

Behold therefore here, and consider the unhappy end of Pride; it is, for the
most part, but the forerunner of Destruction, which the Scripture further
confirms by the example of that Proud Man Haman, who was hanged upon the same
Gibbet which he in the pride and inselency of his haughty mind, had prepared
for the humble Mordocheus, Esther, 7. 10. The like end happened to the proud
Holofernes, who having conquered so many Provinces and subdued so much People,
only to satisfy his own and his Masters Pride, was at last with the help of
his own Sword, beheaded by a Woman, Jud. 13. 8. I might observe as much of the
great Philisthin Golias, who though himself invincible, and out of that Pride
defied the whole Host of the Living God; a Shepherds Sling and a Stone out of
the Brook, taught him to be more humble, in laying him Dead on the Ground.
Finally, Nabuchadonosor, that great King, who in the pride of his heart, said
thus to himself, Nonne est haec Babylon magna, quam aedificavi, etc. Is not
this great Babylon that I have bulit for the House of the Kingdom, by the might
of my Power, and for the honor of my Majesty? (Dan. 4. v. 30, etc.) the word
was scarce out of his mouth, but according to the Decree of God he was suddenly
driven from his Kingdom, and the company of Men, becoming a mere Beast,
wandering in the Wilderness, and ea^ing Grass as Oxen, for the space of seven
years, till repentance and the mercy of God brought him both to himself and his
Kingdom again.

Sect. 3. Self-pride of great Ladies.
Great Women are no less subject to this Vice than great Men; great Ladies
think themselves priviledg'd herein by the presidents which their great Lords
give them. It Is true, Saint Augustine honored Womankind so much (perhaps for
his Mothers sake; Saint Monica, and in admiration of her Piety) as to call them
the Devout Sex: neither do I doubt but there are amongst them many (I might say
innumerable) most pious, most pure, and most perfect Souls: but alas! it is too
evident that many of them are not so; the multitude falls short of that
Elogium, being apparently no less than Men addicted to all manner of Vice, that
their Sex permits them to be capable of. To pass by other of their infirmities,
I shall at present instance only in this which we have in hand, the Sin of
Pride and inordinate Love, esteem, valuing and admiring of themselves. Can any
thing be more rife than this Vice, amongst the great ones of that Sex? Do we
not see the Ladies of this time, how they make use of all the Arts, Skill, and
cunning Practices possible to adorn and set out themselves to the height of
Pride? Do we not see what new and costly fashions are daily devised, to foment
and help forward their vain inordinate affections in this kind? Do we not see
what emulations there are, what pleasure they take, and how much they strive
the one to exceed the other in vanities and gallanteries, as they are
accounted; sparing neither pains nor labors, cost nor time, to satisfy their
Pride, and to fulfill the ambitious appetites and desires of their mind. To
please their proud fancy to the full, what charges are regarded, what means not
used? and yet in other respects, what thing is there whereof they are more
presently sensible than matter of charges and cost? as is quickly seen
whenever Piety toward God or Charity toward their poor Neighbor requires
charges of them. Every little cost in such cases makes them shrink, and either
with Nabal to make a churlish refusal, or which is worse, to frame a feigned
and false excuse, saying they cannot or they have not. Truly, it is a most sad
thing to consider how much it redounds to the shame and confusion of
Christianity, and to the prejudice of true Piety, the general spreading of this
evil over all parts of Christendom, and more especially in Princes Courts and
great Cities; most Ladies seeming to thing they were born for nothing else but
to take their ease, appear in bravery, and be courted. Oh how high do the
desires of exorbitant nature mount, especially when great fortune supports
them! No sooner are they out of their Bed, but instead of offering the first
fruits of ^he day to God in humble Prayers and thankful Address to him for his
Mercies and Benefits as well past as to come, their mind and their thoughts are
wholly taken up how they shall spend the day; enquiring not where they may hear
Mass or a good Sermon, but what Play is to be Acted, what Gallants are
expected, what Company is to come, and what Sports are to be seen: and
according to the answer that is given them, they cause themselves to be attired
and clothed, like an Idol upon some great day, by two or three Servants who
attend upon them, and spend the greatest part of their time in being
serviceable to Vanity and Pride; the Waiting Women finding it labor enough
(and no time to spare) to dress themselves first, and then to wait upon their
Ladies, and do them the like service, wsth the greatest exactness and diligence
that may be, and all to preserve and give luster to a fading Jewel (which they
pretend to have and are infatuated for) namely Beauty. Oh this Beauty, this
brittle, this frail, this painted thing Beauty! how does thou bewitch the Eyes
and pervert the Minds of those that regard thee! how many and great are the
mischiefs that proceed from thee! so great and many, that the consideration
hereof moved Sir Thomas Moore, a grave Person, and most worthy Lord Chancellor
of England in his time, observing the Ladies to spend so much time in dressing
themselves, that they might appear Fine and Beautiful in the Eyes of Men, to
tell them in plain English, That God should do them wrong, if he did not give
them Hell for their reward; seeing they took a great deal more pains to serve
the Devil, the World, and their vain Minds, than they did to please God, or to
preserve the Beauty of their Souls, pure from the spots and uncleanness of Sin.

O what folly is this, Oh what frenzy! thus to implore our time (which is so
precious) in trimming, dressing, and adorning this Body of ours, which is no
better than a mass of Corruption, which must ere long be meat for Worms, and
turned again to dust. But O much more the deplorable unhappiness of these times
wherein such exhortations as these are vain and to no purpose, unable to stop
the carrier of Pride; which the Reverend F. Causin, not unfitly describes thus:
When (says he) the Patching, Painting, Plating, Curling of the Hair, is over
(or finished) then follows the feat of Ribbon (which must be put in order) then
the taking of their Bracelets, their Rings, Jewels, Rubies, Chains of Gold,
with variety of Persnmes. If duty oblige them to go to Church, they go indeed,
but whether with greater devotion to serve God or to show themselves, I leave
to their Conscience and the Judgment of the great day. Thi^ is manifest, that
if they observe the one part of the Apostles Counsels, 1 Timothy 2. v. 9. Let the
Women pray in a comely Attire, with demureness and sobriety, they oversee the
other, to wit, not adorning themselves with plaited Hair, or Gold, or precious
Stones, or gorgeous Apparel, but (as it becomes Women professing Piety) with
good Works. These words of the Apostle signify little with them; they can
easily dispense with such Divine Counsels and Prohibitions, whether contained
in Sacred Scripture or in the Canons of the Church; pretending to have lawful
cause or excuse for what they do, because they are of the rank of the Nobility
and Gentry. And upon that account they fear not to exceed in all sorts of Pride
and Vanity, spending both days and nights in Visiting or being Visited, in
Coaching, Gadding, Sporting, Playing, or Play-house-Haunting, Masquing,
Dancing, etc. in fine, they are prompt, and ready to obey all the suggestions
of Pride and Pleasure, and as cold to Devotion.

Sect. 4. Of the Self-pride of other Women.
It might be thought Pride were a Disease proper or incident only to Great
Persons, Men and Women, and that for those of inferior and mean condition, as
their fortune is low, so their minds should not be high. But experience tells
us it is otherwise, and therefore having hitherto represented in part the
Vanity, Pride, and Ambition, that is in Women of high Quality and plentiful
Fortune, I shall conclude with a word of Admonition to those of meaner Rank,
only to show them, that if Pride be an odious Vice, and unseemly even in the
greatest Persons (for Honor, Wealth, and Dignity) that live upon the Earth, it
must be much more detestable and intolerable in them. To be Rich and Proud, to
be in High Place and Proud, to be in Great Office, in Great Power, Dignity, and
Honor, and Proud, is a Humane infirmity, more to be pitied than blamed by
Wise Men; but to be poor and Proud is monstrous, a discongruity purely and
manifestly satanical. What shall we say of such People, whom Fortune has not
favored in any degree or measure, with the purveyances, and endowments, that
Pride and Ambition usually stands upon, and yet they are proud? Truly we may
say they are the worst sort of Proud People, their Pride is more criminous and
less excusable than that of others; and if we say this with truth, we need not,
we can say no more to their condemnation.

And yet how common a thing is it to see this Hellish Prodigy in the World? how
easy and frequent to observe the effects of highest Pride in the lowest
Condition; what contemning of others, what scornings and disdainings, what
vilifyings and revilings do we not hear daily from some? What emulations and
envyings, do we not see in others, even of low and mean rank toward those of
the highest? Ah, I speak now of a Disease which our France, our Paris, our
little Theater of this great World labors under. How common a thing is it here
to see People of but ordinary Condition, and disabled by Fortune from being
(themselves) accounted Courtiers, Gallants, or Great Men, finding a hundred
devices ye and pretending a hundred little occasions to be in their company,
and to be seen, though but for some short space of time among them. Yea, such
is their Pride and Ambition, that for a time they can be content to be made
almost Slaves, and be used as Captives, to the intent that afterward they may
appear with some little favor and countenance amongst the great ones; a thing
which experience teaches them daily, who are acquainted with the Private
Conversation of this sort of People. Pride makes these People industrious,
Pride makes them vigilant; Pride makes them nimble, active, painful, and
laborious; it makes them work day and night without intermission, and that in
so strict manner, with such penury and sparing, that they will scarce allow
themselves necessaries for their subsistence, till they have gotten Money
enough for the purchasing of a New Gown, or some other new-fashion'd Cloth, or
New Petticoate, some new Handkerchief, Lace, or other like superfluous Vanity,
that may give them countenance amongst great ones, and confidence enough to
appear and be seen in Company above their proper Rank; of all which (to my
great grief) my own Eyes have been often witnesses; when it ha^ pitied me to
observe what voluntary hardships, and even misery, poo^ People put themselves
unto, for ^^ other reason but only to be Fine an^ Brave (beyond their
Condition) o^ Sundays, and great Holy Days, and all other times of public and
more free Converse among Neighbors; when you will be sure to find them abroad,
perfuming the Air with their Scents, or Coaching it, or Dancing, or perhaps
Playing and Adventuring what Money they have to the fortune of Cards and Dice,
till they have spent all, and are forced by necessity to return again to their
industry and labor, to recuit their ambitious minds, if (as sometime it
happens) they yield not to do worse, to satisfy their minds inflamed with
Ambition and Pride.

Little do these People consider what the Holy Prophet Isaias (in Gods Name)
foretells and threatens to all such proud Females (Chap. 3. v. 17, etc.) saying
Decalvabit Dominus verticem filiarum Sion, etc. Our Lord (says he) will make
bald the Crown of the Head, of the Proud Daughters of Sion, and will discover
their Baldness (or want of Hair) unto all. In that day the Lord shall take away
the bravery of their Ornaments, their changes of Apparel, their Gold Chains,
their Bracelets, their Mantles, their Crisping Pins, their fine Linen, their
Hoods and Vails, and Looking-glasses, the odor of their Perfumes, and the
sweet smells of Ointments; he will bereave them of all for their Pride, and
bring Deformity upon them instead of Beauty. Take heed therefore and be
admonished ye Proud and Unwise of this Nation. What was denounced against the
Daughters of Israel, will be executed upon you the Daughters of England, unless
you repent and apply that Sovereign Remedy for this and all other Diseases of
the Soul in due time and season.

SECTION II. Pride of Men in general.
SECT. 1. Pride of the Spiritual Directors 2. Pride of Learned Men. 2. Pride of
the better sort. 4. Pride of Laboring Men, Shopkeepers, Servants. 5. The
Remedy for all the aforesaid Evils.

Sect. 1. The Self-pride of Spiritual Directors.
THat Vice that we are now enveying against, is a spreading Gangreen which
through tract of time, and the inadvertency of Men, has overr-un and unhappily
rooted it self (more or less) in all the Members of Christ's Mystical Body, that
is, in all sorts of Christians, in all Degrees, in all Orders, in all States
and Conditions of Men; there is none entirely free from the infection of this
Pest; insomuch, that the Holy Father Saint Cyprian, reflecting hereupon, and
bemoaning the sad Condition of Christianity, by means thereof, in conclusion
adds, that even the Priesthood was not free from it. Etiam in Sinu Sacerdotum
ambitio dormit. Ambition (says he) sleeps even in the Bosom of Priests. This
he spoke to show the growth of the Malady, and no wonder; for Satan (we know)
when time was, had the boldness to tempt Christ himself with this suggestion,
to that end taking him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and there showing
him all the Kingdoms of the World and the Glory of them; saying to him (Mat. 4.
v. 9.) Omnia haec tibi dabo, etc. All these things will I give thee (I will
make thee King of the whole World, thou shall be the only Monarch upon Earth,
no Greatness shall be comparable to yours) if you will fall down and worship
me. Thus he tempts our Savior with a motion of Pride, and desire to be great;
and though he were shamefully rebuked for his bold attempt, and departed with
confusion enough from Christ, yet his Disciples could not so well perceive or
resist his wiles. To be overthrown by the Master did but whet his Appetite to
be revenged on the Servants; and therefore he wrought the matter so, that it
was not long before there fell a contention amongst the Disciples which of them
should be greatest, Luc. 22. v. 24. That is, a Spirit of Pride and Ambition got
in amongst them; and it is no less to be feared that the Mother of Zebedaeus
Ghildren and her Sons were taken with the same Spirit, when she made that
extravagant request to our Savior, which is mentioned, Matthew. 20. v. 21.
namely, that her two Sons might sit the one on his Right Hand, the other on his
Left Hand in his Kingdom. These instances show, the Disciples were not
altogether free of Emulations, and Affections of Majority and Place one over
another, and one before another; and though it be as little to be doubted, but
Christ our Savior did presently and effectually, by his exhortation to
Humility, repress those evil motions, and purge his Disciples Hearts of the
Venom they had swallowed, yet in many of their successors it is too apparent,
these Diseases do still remain, not without causing much of the like Distemper
in other Christians, who cannot be well edified by such ill examples: Where yet
I would have it noted, that when our Savior upon this occasion, says to his
Disciples, Luc. 22. v. 26. Vos autem non sic (it shall not be so with you;) his
meaning is not absolutely to forbid, or condemn Superiority, or Majority, in it
self, but only the inordinate and undue affectation and seeking thereof, in
those who have it not, and the exercising of it with Pride, haughtiness of
Mind, and contempt of Inferiors, in those that have it.

Sect. 2. The Self-pride of Learned Men.
By Learned Men, I understand generally, Divines, Canonists, and such as Study
the Laws, Ecclesiastical or Temporal; as well those which aim at the Cure of
Souls, as the Government and Well ordering of the Body; Physicians, and in a
word, all that makes profession of Learning, or have taken the degrees of
Learning in the Schools; concerning all which sorts of Men, there is one
judgment to be given; They are sick of this Distemper.

Go (if you please) through all the Towns and Cities, through all the Schools
and Academies of Christendom; go through all Colleges and Courts of Law, look
into all the degrees of Learning you there meet with, you will quickly observe
and find, that Pride and Ambtion (Inordinate esteem of our selves, and desire
to be esteemed by others) are the predominant and prevailing Humors, in all
those places, and with all such persons: You will find, that, geneally
speaking, every one studies more for Benefit, more for Honor and Glory than
any thing else. For who minds Virtue or Conscience? who makes them the
principal or chief end of their Study? Who regards them further than they are
serviceable to their Profit and to their Glory. This Saint Bernard did very
well observe in his time. Many Study (says he) merely that they may know the
thing they study for; and the Holy Saint rightly calls the same a shameful
Curiosity. Many others study that they may be known to be famous and Great Men
for Learning, which he calls a shameful Vanity. Many others beside do Study
that they may sell their Science and Knowledge to others, partly for Pride and
Ostentation, partly for Profit, Interest, Money, etc. Few or none being to be
found that will Study purely for Charity sake, that is, to be able to teach and
instruct others gratis, having no other motive but the Love of God and their
Neighbor.

Sect. 3. Self-pride of the Better sort.
By those of the Better sort I understand here, all such as are of Civil
Education and Life, whose Condition, although it does not dignifie them with
with any Title of Honor, properly speaking, yet their Virtues, or their
Fortune, make them approach next to it. This sort of People if they be Rich, or
that Fortune any thing favors them, how apt are they to be puffed up with this
Flatus, that is, with the windiness of a proud and vain Spirit! how apt are
they to look with envy at their Equals, and with an aspect of disdain and scorn
toward their inferiors! How little are they pleased, that their Neighbor
should be compared to them, or much praised in their hearing? thinking much to
be beholding to any (for that obliges them to a kindness or good respect at
least) but will rely only upon themselves, that is to say, upon their own
Riches, and upon the strength of their own Arm; despising in their Heart even
the Charity of their Neighbors help. But what says the Prophet to these
People? Abacuc. 2. v. 9. Vae, qui congregat avaritiam malam domui suae, etc. Woe
to the Man that gathers an e-evil gathering to his House, that his Nest may
be on high (out of the reach of ill Fortune) and that thinks he is delivered
out of the power of Evil, that nothing can now hurt him. How much does it
concern such People to reflect well upon what the Apostle so expressly commands
Timothy (1 Timothy 6. 17.) in these words. Divitibus hujus faeculi praecipe, etc.
Charge them (says he) that are rich in this World, that they be not high
minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the Living God, that they do
good, that they be rich in good works, and thereby lay up for themselves a good
Foundation against the time to come. What an instruction is here for the Rich
in this World, how are they taught to moderate their Spirit, and to enlarge
their hand: to be humble minded and free hearted; not more desirous to get and
gather together than willing to distribute, ready to communicate! How does it
reprove the ill-grounded perilous confidence of those who trust in their
Riches, and think themselves safe in the abundance of their Wealth, without the
fear of God, or seeking his Blessing upon it. The same is to be said of those
who are never satisfied or content with what they have, but with an infatiable
appetite of Covetousness are still raking together, still aiming and
endeavoring to get more; making oft-times not only themselves and their own
Lives miserable, but also their Families, Children, and nearest Relations, that
depend upon them.

Sect. 4. Self-pride of Laboring Men, Shopkeepers and Servants.
Finally, as to these meaner sort of People, to wit, Laborers, Artificers,
Mechanics, Servants, can we say they are free of Pride, that they have no
ambitious thoughts lodging in their Breasts, when we see the daily Effects of
them; when we see the Envyings and Emulations which they have one with another;
how they strive to have place and be in the rank of their Betters? Is any thing
more common, than for a Tradesman or Servant, or such like mean Person, having
gotten never so little Money together, presently to lay all upon their Backs,
and lavish out, to make a show of something more or better than those whom they
emulate; desiring nothing mote than to appear better than indeed they are, and
to seem exteriourly brave, though inwardly they fast and pinch for it: All
Townsmen would be Citizens, all Citizens would be Merchants, and all
Merchants, Fortune favoring, and Trade succeeding to their minds, thrust
themselves forthwith into the Rank of Gentry, amongst whom they sind nothing
sooner to imitate than their Vanity and Vice; vying with them in sumptuous
Clothes and Apparel, prodigal Expense, vain and loose Beaviour, etc. till at
length the inward Disease of their Mind (to wit, Pride, Ambition, Envy,)
arrives to such an extremity, that if it do their Body and Worldly Concerns no
prejudice, yet infallibly it finks their poor Souls at last to the bottom of
Hell, with a perpetual confusion; I mean if God in mercy do not prevent them
with his Grace, and bring them to true Repentance; giving them a true sight,
and a due sense of their Spiri^ual Distemper, and causing them to apply all
necessary Antidotes, appointed for the cure of such Languishing and
Soul-destroying Maladies.

Sect. 5. Remedies against the Evils of Self-pride.
No better Counsel can be given to make us abhor and detest the Vice of
Self-pride, than to consider well what the Spirit of God pronounces of it in
several places of sacred Scripture. The Wisest of Men, King Solomon, in the
Book of of Ecclesiasticus tells us (Chap. 10. v. 14.) that to be proud, is to
be no better than an Apostate from God. Initium superbiae hominis, Apostatare a
Deo, etc. The first thing that happens to a proud Man, is to fall from God, and
in heart to depart from him that made him: And again (v. 15.) Initium omnis
peccati superbia. There is no sin committed by Man, but Pride of Heart is or
may be an occasion of it; and as it is a source of all sin, so it is a fountain
of all mischief. For inter superbos semper jurgia sunt, says the same King,
Solomon (Prove. 13. 10.) There never wants Contention, Strife, and Debate
amongst the Proud, and those for the most part are but the Harbengers to
greater Evils. Qui tenuerit ^llam, implehitur mal^dictis (Ecclus. 10. 15.) As
as they are apt to despise others, so they are sure to be hated ^y all, and in
the end to perish, either by the power and practice of ^uch enemies as their
Pride procures ^^em, or by the just judgment of ^od, who is their professed
Adver^ry; witness that of Saint Peter ^ Pet. 5. 5.) God resists the Proud,
^ut gives Grace and Favor to the ^umble Minded; and therefore they ^^ght to
fear the effects of his enmi^^, of which they may read, Prove. 15. 25. Domum
superborum demolietur Dominus, etc. God will destroy the House of the Proud,
but the Tabernacles of the Humble he will establish; for so it is also said,
Prove. 29. v. 23. The Pride of a Man's Heart shall bring him low, but Honor
upholds the Humble in Spirit. These and many other like expressious are to be
observed throughout the Holy Scriptures, declaring and witnessing unto us as
well the pestilent nature of Pride, as the perilous condition of Proud
Persons, to the end we should the more detest and abhor the same, as the root
of all sin, and an occasion of all mischief; malum culpae and malum poenae
(both of them) being derived or proceeding from it; by it w^ depart from God,
as the Text expressly speaks, and by reason of ^ God departs from us; and
because through Pride we despise our Neighbors, our Brethren, he despise^^ us;
for such (with submission) I conceive the meaning of the Psalmist t^ be, Psalm.
137. 6. Humilia respicit, and alta a long cognoscit. To things of low
condition, that is, to lowly minded Souls, God has a favorable respect and
regard; but unto high things (high minded, disdainful Persons) he carries
himself highly, and looks at them at a great disstance, as if he cared not much
for them.

The only means to withdraw you from this Vice, is to to do as you are advised,
Ecclus. 7. v. 36. Recordari novissima, to remember your latter end; for if you
lay this well to heart, you will never sin this sin of Pride. For, Quid super
bit terra and cinis, Ecclus. 10. v. 9. Should Earth and Ashes be proud? Consult
your last end, and that will tell you you are no better than Earth and Ashes,
Dust you are and to Dust you must return. Consider therefore (I say) seriously
as well what you have been, as what you are and shall be, and you will confess
as to the first, that your original is from the Ground, from a Lump of Clay or
Dirt, of which the Almighty Creator framed and made our first Parents; that you
are for the present a mass of suitable sordid Flesh, living indeed, but every
hour and every moment subject to death, and to all the accidents, diseases, and
corruptions, by which death usually is ushered in; and for the future you shall
be (as to your Body) nothing else but Putrefaction and Filth. In the Grave you
shall be nothing else but a stinking Carcass, and meat for Worms; for so in the
Prophet it is said, when a Man dies he shall inherit Serpents (or creeping
things) Beasts and Worms. Tell me now have you any reason to be Proud and so
high minded? Have you any reason to carry your selves so high, that are of an
extraction so low; God could have Created your Bodies of nothing, as he did
your Souls, but in his Wisdom he would not; but made them of the Earth, that
is, not only of a substance Corporal, Gross, Visible, Palpable (to be seen with
our Eyes and touched with our Hands) but of the vilest sort of Earth, of the
Clay, the Dirt and Slime of the Earth. Do you ask me why? To teach us Humility,
and to repress the Swellings of Pride in us; that Man seeing daily with his
Corporal Eyes, the Dirt upon which he treads, might continually be put in mind,
and remember his first Creation, his first Original and Beginning, and how that
he was made and formed of the same; and this for two reasons, The first (as I
said before) that hereby he might give to man a just occasion of humbling
himself with the most profound submission and abnegation that man's heart can
possibly bend it self unto, even so far as to confess and acknowledge that of
himself he deserves nothing but to be concullated, trodden and trampled upon,
under the feet of all men, as the Dirt of the Earth, as Mire and Clay; and that
for this reason, he has nothing of himself to be proud and high-minded for;
since his original foundation and extraction is but Dirt, and the Slime of the
earth. The second reason why God made Man of the Dirt of the Earth, is, That by
reflecting upon that his first Creation, he might be moved so much the more to
love his Gracious Maker, and more faithfully to serve his Mighty Creator, who
of his infinite Goodness and Mercy, from such a vile and mean beginning (as
Earth and Dirt) was pleased to raise him to that height of Excellency, as to
consummate his Creation, and finally, to make him according to his own image
and likeness.

So that, whenever you feel the motions of Pride and High-mindedness,
infecting your Hearts or troubling your Spirits, imagine you hear King Solomon
reprehending you, and reprepressing your Vanity, in these words; Of what are
you Proud, Dust and Ashes! why are you puffed up, Vessels of Clay! Humble your
selves, and be warned by forgetful Adam; who not minding that he was made Dirt,
fell into the presumption of affecting to be like unto God his Creator; by
occasion whereof transgressing his Creators Commandment, he was for his sin
expelleds and for ever driven out of the Terrestrial Paradise. Therefore be
warned by his fall. Humble your selves, that you may be exalted, humble your
selves upon Earth, that you may be exalted for ever in Heaven.

SECTION. III. Contempt of others a general Disease of Christianity.
SECT. 1. Many troubled with this Disease. 2. Contempt between Man and Wife. 3.
Contempts between Children and Parents. 4. Contempts between Servants and
Masters. 5. Contempts between Poor and Rich. 6. Contempts of Persons for their
Infirmities only, and of many for the ^aults of some few justly blameable. 7.
Contempts between Nations and Nations.

Sect. 1. Many trouhled with this Disease.
IN the whole multitude and variety of those Maladies and Diseases of Mind,
under which, and by reason whereof the Life and Vigor of Christianity does so
much languish at this day, there is scarce any more frequent and Epidemical
than that of over-valuing our selves, and contemning others. Hard it is,
especially for Persons that seem conscious to themselves of any merit, to have
(I say, not mean, but) modest thoughts of themselves, and not to be tickled
ever and anon with extravagant imaginations of their proper Excellency; and
where the humor is indulged and yielded unto, the other, to wit, the contemning
and under-valving of our Neighbor, follows naturally. He that tempts us to
think too well of our selves, will easily find a way to make us think too
meanly of others, and to prefer our selves before them. This therefore is a
general Malady amongst all sorts of Men; Jews and Pagans, Turks, Infidels, and
Christians; all are obnoxious to it, and for the most part perish by it, for
not applying the Unguent of Humility, and Sobriety of Spirit, in due time.

But you are to know there are two sorts of Contempt, the one tending to Good,
the other tending to Evil. By the first we condemn the World and all the Evil
that belongs to it, or is found therein; by this we contemn Sin, and disdain to
submit or yield to the occasions and temptations unto Sin, that are laid in our
way, or that lead Men into Sin. With this kind of Contempt (as Saint Hierome
well observes) the Faithful Servant of God may lawfully, and with much right
despise whatsoever is hurtful to his Soul, by whomsoever suggested, and those
will not fail to do so, who have their Novissima, their last things, to wit,
Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell, in due manner before their Eyes. By the
second we contemn our Neighbor, that is, other Persons, whom by the
Commandment of God we are bound to Honor, and by the Spirit of Charity and
Humily (if it were in us) we would Honor and Love according to their several
and respective States, Conditions, Dignities, Merit, etc. By this we are apt to
have in scorn, and to flight whatsoeveris doneby others (or not done by our
selves) as mean and illaudable, although (perhaps) never so well done, and very
profitable for Soul or Body. This is a wicked sort of Contempt, and absolutely
forbidden. This proceeds from Evil, and tends to Evil, and is wholly Evil.
This is that Epidemical Vice under which the World has ever labored, and does
labor at this day; all sorts of Persons, from the highest to the lowest, from
the poorest to the richest, more or less being seized therewith. This all
Nations finds to be true; but (to our shame it must be spoken) none has more
felt, no Nation has greater reason to confess and acknowledge this Truth, than
this of England, where none can be ignorant with what exorbitancy this Vice did
both reign and rage for many years together of late times; the very lowest and
meanest sort of People, Cobblers, Brewers, and other Mechanics, taking the
liberty to despise even the Highest Powers, and most Sacred Dignities of the
Nation; having the King and all his Nobility in Scorn, the Laws in Contempt,
and utterly rejecting whatsoever Commands His most Sacred Majesty thought fit
to give for the good and security of His Kingdom; and not only so, but seizing
at length upon His Sacred Person, and by Injustice and Violence, not to be
parallelled in any History or Example, save that of the Savior of the World:
Pronouncing and Executing the Sentence of Death upon him as a Criminal, who was
most Innocent in the view of the World; and using the same hard measure to many
of his Chiefest and most Loyal Subjects.

Sect. 2. Contempts between Man and Wife.
The Extent and Dominion of this raging Vice, being so large as it is, and
holding in subjection, in a manner, all Mankind, tainted therewith; no Place,
no Condition or Quality of Persons free; it will not I hope, seem inexpedient
to take a short view of those several sorts of People, wherein it principally
resides and has its most quotidian and constant effects. These are first, the
State of Marriage, or the Contempts which happen between Men and their Wives.
The second is of the Contempts that happen between Children and their Parents.
The third of that which happens between Servants and Masters. The fourth of
those between the Poor and the Rich; and lastly, those which fall out between
the Wicked and the Just. These (or most of these) several Contempts the Holy
Scripture mention; and first, that which happens in the Married Estate. In the
Book of Esther you will find, how the Queen Vasthi, having by the seven Chief
Eunuchs and Officers of the Kingdom received a special Command from the King
Assuerus her Husband, to appear before him, Crowned and in her Royal Attire,
she would not obey his Command (though she were both his Subject and Wife) but
refused to come; contemning at once both his Royal Command and Loving Request.
But what came of her Contempt? Verily, that which Justice required. The King,
being highly incensed at her undutifulness, and to give an exemplary Caution or
Warning to all other Women not to despise their Husbands, nor to have their
Persons and Commands in Contempt, put her away from being any longer his Queen
or Wife, and chose another in her stead, namely Queen Esther, of the Race of
the Jews. See Esther, Chap. 1. v. 21, 22, and 2. 17.

Sect. 3. Contempts between Children and Parents.
The Holy Scripture also takes notice of the great Contempts which Children
sometimes, much contrary to their Duty, show toward their Parents; giving also
a great and strict charge to have all such Contempts speedily and severely
punished, for the example and terror of others. There is a remarkable passage
to this purpose in the Book of Deuteronomy, Chap. 21. v. 18. where we read
thus, Si genuerit homo filium contumacem and protervum, etc. If a Man beget a
Son that is Stubborn and Rebellious, not obeying the Voice of his Father, nor
the Voice of his Mother, and being chastized by them, will not regard it; his
Father and Mother shall lay hold on him, and bring him out to the Ancients of
the City, and to the place of Judgment, and shall say, this our Son is Stubborn
and Rebellious, and dispiseth to hear our Counsels; and all the Men of that
City shall Stone him with Stones, that he die: So shall you put away evil from
you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. This was the Law against a Son that
despised and contemned his Parents; he was to be Stoned to Death by all the
People, every Man's Hand was to be against him, and chiefly those of his wronged
and grieved Parents. Alas! what would it be if this Law were now to be revived
or put in execution? I tremble to think how many Parents it would leave
Childless amongst Christians: How many Children are there nowadays to be seen
that have their Parents in scorn? How many are there that will be ashamed to
acknowledge their Father and Mother; yea, how many are there that not only
despise and contemn their Parents, and are so far from honoring and loving
them, as they ought, that they fear not to curse them with Heart and Tongue,
and to wish evil to them; to wish they were dead, as being weary of them, and
greedily looking to have what they leave.

Sect. 4. Contempt between Servants and Masters.
But what shall we say of Servants that contemn their Masters and Mistrisses,
upon pretense that they are miserable and hard to them or too harsh and severe?
shall they upon this account be allowed to contemn their Persons, or to neglect
their affairs, or to refuse to do what they are Commanded? Shall we give
Servants leave to have their Masters in scorn and derision for these Reasons,
or to murmur, complain, and speak evil of them when they are reproved or
corrected for their faults? By no means. But on the contrary, We must cause
them to know what their Duty, what Christianity requires of them; the sum
whereof is thus set down by Saint Paul, Ephesians. 6. 5. 6. 7. Servi, obedite
dominis carnalibus cum timore, etc. Servants (says he) be obedient to them
that are your Masters according to the Flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of heart as unto Christ, -- with good will, doing service as unto
our Lord and not to Men, etc. and by Saint Peter (1 Pet. 2. 18.) who requires
Servants to be subject to their Masters with all fear, and that not only to the
good and gentle (sed etiam dyscolis) but even to the froward and ungentle. So
that there is no excuse, no plea for the Servants contemning his Master or
making light of his Person, Authority, Words; and they that will do otherwise,
woe unto them, I say woe unto them; for so that Wise Master, King Solomon has
pronounced long since. Vi^o, qui corripientem dura cervice contemnit,
repentinus ei superveniet interitus, etc. The Man that despises to hear
reproof (especially having for his offense deserved to hear it) a sudden
destruction shall overtake him; health shall be far from him.

Sect. 5. Contempts between the Poor and Rich.
Others are to be found that have the Poor too much in Contempt, and attribute
all their necessities to negligence and carelessness on the Poors part, but
very unjustly; the poor for a great part of them, being innocent of that
charge, and to their power diligent and careful. But it is crime enough to be
poor. If you be poor, you are sure enough to be slighted and contemned, be your
innocence and your case what it will, for though (as the Wise Man says,
Ecclus. 10. 23.) it be not expedient to despise the Poor Man that has
understanding (it is not a thing that ought to be) yet as to matter of fact he
confesses that so it is; The Poor Man's Wisdom is contemned, and his Words
slighted, Ecclus. 9. 26. let him speak never so wisely, his words have no
place; they say of him, what Fellow is this? Ecclus. 13. 22, 23. which made the
Holy Job also to complain (Job 12. v. 4.) in his time and case, Deridetur justi
simplicitas; The just upright man is laughed to scorn. But take heed ye that
thus despise the poor. For though God suffer the poor and his simple
true-meaning to be despised and contemned for a time, yet it shall not be
always so. There is a time coming, when the wicked (their despisers) shall be
compelled to acknowledge to their great confusion, that those whom they so much
scorned and despised in the time of this World, are worthily in Honor before
God. The words in which they make their fruitless Repentance, and Confess their
error to no purpose, are set down by Solomon, Sap. 5. v. 4, etc. Nos
insensati, etc. These are they whom we had sometime in derision, and for a
parable of reproach. We fools and senseless, esteemed their life madness, and
that their end should be without honor. Behold, how they are now accounted
among the Children of God, and their lot among the Saints!

Sect. 6. Contempt of Persons for their Infirmities only, and of many for the
faults of some few, justly blameable.
There is yet one sort of Contempt, to be observed; which I may call rather
indiscreet, than malicious. For, as it pretends to contemn something that is
evil, so far I think it may be exempt from malice: but as it fixes, or falls
upon persons more than it should, or when upon their actions and vices, does
not well distinguish between matters of enormity and matters of infirmity,
between great transgressions and lighter sins, but hates and despises all
alike, in this respect I think it wants Discretion; and therefore reckon it
amongst those Defects, which are only blamed for want of prudence. For, as to
the first, though I do willingly confess, the wickedness of sinners deserves to
be abhorred of all good Christians, yet I cannot but withal aver, that it may
be blameable in us, to have the persons of the Transgressors too much in
contempt, or too much in hatred; Because according to the rule of Christianity
and Charity, we ought rather to pity, and have compassion for their persons,
imputing things (as much as may be) to humane frailty, and praying for their
conversion: which if we neglect to do, I know not, but in many cases we may
offend God as much, by hating and despising their persons upon the account of
sin, as they do by committing the sin. Add hereunto the just fear that we
ought to have, least we our selves fall into the same errors; which is
possible enough, if we be presumptuous, according to that Caveat of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Qui se existimat stare videat ne cadiat: He that thinks
he stands, let him take heed, least he fall; and Saint Gregory says, What we
are to day, we know: but what we shall be in few days after, we are uncertain.
Likewise, those whom we have in contempt upon pretense of their evil actions,
may repent, and become good: who though they begin late, yet proceeding with
greater fervor and diligence, they may, with Gods help, soon come to oustrip
their Despisers in the way of piety and perfection, and be found at the day of
Judgment better Christians than we our selves.

Things being so, let us contemn none, but have pity and compassion of all, as
occasion requires; for fear, least we fall into sin our selves, and become
worse then they. But that which is worst of all, is, that some cannot be
satisfied to have in contempt particular persons, upon pretense of some faults
they see, or think they see in them, but they lash out, and exercise their
Despising humors against many, merely for some relation they may have to the
said few, or particular persons, without any community, or participation of
guilt with them. For example, if one that is Master of a Family happen to do
some thing that is amiss, and which he ought to have refrained from doing, it is
often seen, that his whole Family, Relations, and Kindred, come thereupon to be
contemned, or ill thought of by some; and more especially those that converse
familiarly with him, will incur suspicion, and be held guilty by the many of
rash Judgers. Hence also it comes to pass, that when some one that is a
Catholic, commits a fault through Humane frailty, and transgresses either
against the Law of God, or of the Kingdom, though Religion and the Faith he
professes be most pure and innocent of that Crime; yea expressly requires,
commands, teaches the contrary, yet for this one Man's sake, all other
Catholics, how innocent soever, are brought under Censure and Obloquy, yea
often do suffer with him as guilty; though it be a proceeding, horrible,
unjust, and detestable both in the sight of God and Man; and wherein those
uncharitable and indiscreet Censurers and Ha^ers of others, are many times
notoriously known to be far worse, and in no sort to be compared for Virtue and
Honesty with those, whom they traduce.

This public practice of this Nation makes good what I say. Who does not hear
all sorts of Sectaries here in England, Protestants, Puritans, and the rest,
talking much, and objecting daily to Catholics the Gun-powder-treason, as
they call it. With this slander their Pulpits, and all Places ring, insomuch
that unto this day all English Catholics are accounted, by Uncatholique
People, little better than Traitors, upon that account; to wit, because
(whoever contrived it) there were some Four or Five Catholic Gentlemen
engaged in it, who have long since suffered for their fault. And though King
James himself (who then reigned) did publicly in Parliament acquit the
generality of Catholics from having any hand in that Conspiracy, yet such is
the infense-hatred and ill will of most English Protestants toward us, we are
still persecuted with ill Language, ill Suspicions, and hard usage upon that
score. They might do much better to reflect plentifully upon their own Wicked
and Barbarous Fact, in Murdering their own King, and so many of His Loyal
Subjects in several parts of the Kingdom; who by and through their violence,
lost their Lives and Estates for no other Crime but their Loyalty. This was not
done by four or five private Persons rashly, unadvisedly, desperately, nor yet
by twenty or an hundred of them (Protestants) but by the generality (or far
Major part) of this Protestant Nation, the Reverend Bishops only excepted, and
many of the Episcopal party, all of them (some very few only excepted) either
immediately or mediately, either actively or passively, either by consent or
sufferance, concurring and being accessory to the Kings Death, and the Death of
so many Thousands of their fellow Subjects, as perished in the late War.
Neither can they produce so much as one Catholic Person in England, that had
his hand in any of those Bloody Actions, but many may be produced who suffered
all that men could suffer in this World, to prevent and hinder them, to the
Praise of God and their Conscience. Protestants therefore may see, that We
(Catholics) have greater reason to have their Persons in Contempt and Hatred
upon the account of Treason, than they ours, if that were justifiable; but we
think it is not, and therefore proceed.

Sect. 7. Contempts between Nations and Nations.
In the same manner are to be apprehended all those that take pleasure, and
make it their sport to speak contemptuously and slightingly of whole Nations,
Countries, Kingdoms, Peoples. An evil Disease this is under the Sun, and the
symptom of a very bad Humor, arguing a great want both of Charity and
Prudence. What can be worse, than to be continually censuring and undervaluing
the Common and Public behavior or Manners of People, the Customs of Places
in which (perhaps) they never were to be Ey-witness of any thing! It may be
that some Countries, Nations, Provinces, Kingdoms, are addicted to some
particular Things which are displeasant unto us, yea, perhaps not so agreeable
to Reason or Virtue. What if they be, are we altogether free of the like? Are
there no evil Conditions, no evil Customs, no ill Manners to be observed
amongst us, that may be as justly displeasing to them? If we censure them for
some particular things, perhaps we our selves are more guilty in others: We
take notice of the Vice of Nations, and People, but we over see their Virtues;
which (for ought is certain to the contrary) they may excel us. For this we
know, that as to Persons, so to Nations, God distributeth his particular Gifts
according to his good pleasure; which Gifts we are not to contemn, but should
endeavor to obtain: our business should not be to spy and to take notice of
other Men's Faults and Imperfections, but to amend our own; studying to be more
perfect and virtuous our selves. It is well known that the Greeks are
(generally speaking) more Eloquent than others, Brasilians more Chaste,
Spaniards more Ingenious, Italians more fixed and constant in their Judgments,
Germans more Sincere, the French more Nimble and Active, Polonians are more
Hospitable to Strangers and Pilgrims, the English more Civil one toward
another, the Scotch more Frugal, and those of the Low Countries more
Industrious and willing to Labor. All which Virtues and particular Endowments
we should rather acknowledge and commend in them as the Gifts of God, than take
upon us impertinently to censure them, or have the whole Nation in Contempt,
because we (forsooth) do not fancy their manners; a thing conttary to all
Reason, Justice, Charity, and the Law of God; which commands us to love and
esteem our Neighbors, as we love and esteem our Selves.

SECTION. IV. Of Gods Indignation toward Contemners.
SECT. 1. Malediction upon Contemners either of God or their Neighbor. 2.
Malediction upon Contemners of Parents and Relations. 3. Malediction upon those
that contemn their Kings and Princes. 4. Malediction upon those that contemn
their Neighbors. 5. Remedy against the contemning of others. 6. A Reflection
upon the whole Matter foregoing.

Sect. 1. Malediction upon Contemners either of God or their Neighbors.
THe wise Solomon, in his Proverbs, by the Spirit of God, speaks thus (Chap. 1.
v. 24.) Quia vocavi, and renuistis, etc. For as much as I have called, and ye
refused to come, I have stretched out my hand, and there was none that would
regard. But you have despised all my counsel, and would none of my reproof.
Therefore shall a sudden Calamity fall upon you, and Destruction, as a tempest,
shall seize you, etc. Against whom is this threatened, but such as despise God,
neglect, and fear not to transgress, his holy Commandments, contemn and slight
his Word, his Counsels, his Exhortations, Admonitions, threatenings; that are
unthankful for Mercies and Favors received, and being gently scourged and
corrected by him, do not amend their Lives. Against these, and the like, Divine
Wisdom, by the Pen and by the Mouth of this Wise King, denounces this Woe, and
not in vain; for that such Vengeance has followed Obstinate and Impudent
Sinners, Holy Scriptures do abundantly declare. Witness (in the first place)
Pharaoh King of Egypt, who for his contemning of God and hardening his heart
against the People of Israel, contrary to the Commandment of God, after
innumerable Plagues sent upon Him and His People, was finally (himself and His
mighty Army) drowned in the Sea; which, while they pursued the People of
Israel, returned upon them and overwhelmed them all without exception; so that
they sunk ^ike Stones into the bottom thereof, Exodus 14. v. 27, 28. Esau,
Jacob's Brother, is another like Example, who for contemning Gods Benefits,
^amely; his Birthright (which was not only a Perogative and Privilege of
Humane Right, but also an assured Token and Pledge of Divine Benediction, to
all that lived well, and were worthy of it) was justly deprived of both, that
is, of his Birthright, and of the Blessing which his Father Isaac out of his
private Affection intended him. How he undervalued his Birthright, we read,
Genesis 25. 32, 33, 34. where, being hungry, he sold it to his Brother Jacob for a
Mess of Pottage. En, morior, Behold I die (says he) and what will this
Birthright avail me? And that he lost Gods Blessing thereby, that is, by so
slighting and making light of that which was a Sacred Thing, appears by the
Apostle (Heb. 12. 16, 17.) who calls him a Profane Person for so doing, and
says that he found no place of Repentance (that is, so as to recover his
Birthright and that Blessing belonging to it) though he sought it with tears.

Sect. 2. Malediction upon the Contemners of Parents and Relations.
As concerning those that have their Parents in Contempt, nothing can be less
doubted but they are (all of them) under Divine Malediction: The Commandment it
self concerning the Duty of Children to their Parents, implying so much; for in
being commanded to honor our Parents, that our days may be long upon earth
(which is a principal Blessing) we are at the same time admonished, that if we
do not honor them as we ought, our days shall be few and short upon Earth;
which is to want and fall short of the Blessing. But Deuteronomy. 27. 16. it is more
expressly denounced in these words, Maledictus qui non honorat, etc. Cursed be
he, that seteth light by his Father or Mother; and Prove. 30. 17. it is said,
The Eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the Young Eagles shall eat it.
Rebellious Absalon was such a despiser, and therefore a like Judgment met him
and took him away. He so far despised his Father, King David, that he
endeavored to deprive him of his Kingdom, and make himself King, pretending to
have more knowledge in the Law and more will to do Justice and Judge according
to Equity in all Causes, than his Father; saying thus, 2 Reg. 15. v. 4. Quis me
constituat judicem, etc. O that some Body would make me Judge over the Land,
that all might come to me me that have any Law-business, and I might to do them
Justice, seeing there is none appointed by the King to do it. Thus he
insinuated himself into the affections of the People, and by little and little
stole away their hearts from his Father; insomuch, that afterward he openly
rebelled; raising an Army against his own Father, and (to make himself
irreconcileably odious) abusing his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all
Israel (Chap. 16. 2.) This was his Sin; but he prospered not long in it: For in
the first Battle that he Fought against his Father, his Army was overthrown,
and himself in great confusion, flying from his Pursuers, was in a Woody Place
caught by the Hair of his Head in the thick Boughs of a Tree, and his Mule
going from under him, was there hanged alive between Heaven and Earth, by the
Bushy Hair of his Head, till Joab the General of the King His Fathers Army,
finding him thrust him with three Arrows to the Heart, and so he perished. Thus
Genes. 39. 19. we read of the Sons of Jacob, how they envied and bore ill will
to their Brother Joseph, because his Father loved him, and because that he
happened upon a time innocently and without intending any harm or offense to
them, in his Fathers hearing, to tell them certain Dreams he had had; whereof
they making an ill construction, conceived so much hatred and ill will against
him, that they resolved to kill him outright; saying to themselves at the sight
of him, Behold the Dreamer comes yonder, let us put him to Death, and then it
will appear what his Dreams profit him. But being prevented of this evil
purpose (Almighty God having otherwise decreed concerning him) they finally
sold him to the Ishmaelites, who carried him down into Egypt. But for this
their wickedness and unkind usage of their Brother, many afflictions came upon
them with sorrows and distresses to their Families; which forced them, after
some years, through extremity, and great want of necessaries, to go
(themselves) down into Egypt, to buy Corn; where necessity constrained them to
humble themselves with all submission before their Brother Joseph (though they
knew it not) and to adore him in the Person of the Governor of that Land;
until he was pleased to make himself known to them, and to forgive them the
injury that they had done him. All which may be read more at large, Genes.
chap. 37. 42, 43, 44, etc. So true it is, that to despise or be unnaturally
unkind to those of our own Blood or near Relation, is a cursed thing, and ever
attended first or last, with due vengeance from God.

Sect. 3. Malediction upon those that Contemn their Kings and Princes.
Kings are the Common Fathers of their Countries, and of the People that live
under their Dominion; and therefore even by the Law of Nature and Common
Humanity, deserve that their Persons should be had in all due Regard and
Honor, and their Commands Obeyed; how much more when the Law of God seconds
the Law of Nature, and imposes a further Obligation upon us! as it does in very
express manner: Fear God and Honor the King, says the Apostle (1 Pet. 2. v.
17.) My Son Fear God and the King; says Solomot, Prove. 24. v. 21. and cum
detractoribus non commiscearis, Meddle not with those that detract from him,
that speak irreverently and undutifully of him; we must have nothing to do with
such. Do I say we must not speak evil of them? that we must refrain our
Tongues, and not vilify them with unseemly and contumelious Words? That Is not
all. We must not so much as think ill of them. In cogitatione tua ne detrahas
regi. We must not detract from him, no not in our thought; and if we do, we do
it at our Peril. God, who is the Great Guardian of Kings, and solicitous for
their Honor, no less than his own, will find a means to bring thy ill thoughts
to light, and thy self to condign punishment. Aves coeli portabunt vocem tuam,
etc. rather than fail, The Birds of Heaven shall betray thy wicked mind, and
that which has wings shall tell what thou say.

And yet notwithstanding that the wisdom of God does take such order, and
provides so well for the Honor of his Vicegerents, Deputies, and Lieutenants
upon Earth (such as all Kings are) yet how great is the number of Detractors!
how frequent and bold are they that dare despise Kings and detract from them,
not in thoughts only, and the secret imaginations of their evil hearts, but in
open words; proclaiming, as it were, their contempt and disaffection at once;
yea even their own Domestiques oft-times are found most injurious and blameable
in this kind. Witness the practice of that petulant Michol, Wife to King David,
but a Daughter of Saul; of whom in the Book of Kings (Chap. 6.) the Scripture
makes mention, that when King David (her Husband) with all the People of
Israel, brought up the Ark of the Lord to Jerusalem, with Shouting and Sound
of Trompet in great Solemnity, and that the King out of Devotion and Joy,
Danced before it, girded with a Linen Ephod; she looking through a Window, and
seeing him, despised him in her heart for so doing; and when he was returning
home to his own House, she had the boldness to meet him, and profess her
contempt and despising of him in these scornful words: Quam gloriosus fuit
hodie Rex Israel, etc. Oh, how Glorious was the King of Israel to day? how well
did he behave himself, being uncovered, and as it were naked, in the eyes, or
before so many Handmaids of his Servants; even as some Ribauld or Vain Fellow
would uncover himself! For which the King rebuked her in such manner as was
most meet, saying unto her; Ante Dominum qui me elegit, etc. It was before the
Lord (and in honor to him) that I thus appeared, who chose me before thy
Father to be King, and to Rule over the Lords People; and for this reason I
will not forbear to Dance before the Lord; and (if this be to be vile) I will
be more vile in my own Eyes, and of the Handmaids, of which you speak, I shall
be had in more Honor. And though the Kings reproof went no farther than this,
yet God was so displeased at what she had done, that he permitted not that any
Children should be born of her to her dying day: She both lived and dyed under
the Malediction of a Barren Womb; esteemed, not without cause, by all the
People of the Jews, a great infelicity.

Another Example of disrespect shown to Kings in the Person of this good King
David, we read in the First Book of Kings (Chap. 5.) where it is said, that the
Servants of King David, being sent by the express Order of their Master, and in
His Name, to salute Nabal, and in a peaceable manner to request some Victuals
of him, the proud Churl answered the Kings Servants with this contemptuous
Language (v. 10.) Quis est David, -- and quis est filius Isay, etc. Who is
David, and who is the Son of Isay? There be many servants nowadayes that
run away from their Masters. Shall I then take my Bread and my Water, and the
Flesh of my Cattle, that I have killed for my Sheerers, and give it unto men,
whom I know not whence they be: and thus scornfully dismissed the servants with
empty hands. But his churlishness had cost him dear, if his Wife Abigail, had
not been wiser than himself. For David, for his proud contempt, had resolved to
destroy him and all his household: but that was prevented by the prudence, and
more kind respect of his Wife Abigail; so that no harm came to him from thence.
Howbeit Divine Justice would not suffer his contemptuous Fact to pass
unpunished. For, after the space often days stricken partly with terror of
mind for having so highly, and unworthily offended the King, and partly by the
hand of God, he died. For which cause David blessed God, who had taken vengence
for him, and judged the cause of his reproach at the hand of Nabal; keeping him
from doing evil, that is, from taking revenge himself, and returning the
wickedness of Nabal upon his own head. (v. 37, 38, 39.)

Sect. 4. Malediction upon those that contemn their Neighbor.
The most just, and equal rule of the Gospel, is Dilivered by Saint Luke (chap.
6: v. 31.) As you would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise:
we must do, as we would be done by. Now seeing that (naturally and ordinarily
speaking) no man desires to be contemned, or despised by his Neighbor, if we
do despise, or contemn our Neighbors, it cannot be, but that we make our
selves Transgressors, and become guilty before God; in further proof whereof
the New Testament will not leave us unfurnished of many Signal Instances, and
Texts; whereby it clearly appears, how much offenders in this kind (that is,
contemners and despisers of their Neighbors) are rejected by God, and remain
liable to severe punishment. In Saint Matthew's Gospel we read (chap. 5. v.
22.) That whosoever shall say to his Brother Raca, shall be in danger of the
Council, and whosoever shall say unto him, Thou Fool (speaking out of contempt
and despite) shall be guilty of Hell Fire. Oh, how many does this Sentence of
Christ send to Eternal Flames, and yet few or none lay it to heart? Why will
you judge so meanly of your Brother? Why will you despise and set at naught
your Brother, says Saint Paul, Romans 14. v. 10. Is this to do as you would be
done by? We must all stand before the Tribunal of Christ, and every one must
give account of himself to God, and particularly how he has behaved himself
toward his Neighbor. Therefore take heed and be admonished in time.

How greatly was that proud Pharisee to be blamed upon this account, of whom
mention is made, Luke 18. 11, 12, etc. who made no scruple to contemn all in
comparison of himself, and to prefer himself before all in point of Sanctity
and Holiness of Life; beginning his Prayer thus, God I thank thee that I am not
as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, etc. By which expressions,
instead of making humble Prayer and Supplication to God, he vaunts in his own
praise, as being Just, seeking his own more than Gods Glory. In saying he was
not as other Men, Extortioners, etc. He says in effect, All besides my self are
Sinners, great and grievous Sinners; wherein the rashness of his Judgment
contends with the height of his Pride; which though it made him point at the
poor Publican, by name, for a notorious Sinner, and to brag of his own Merits,
I Fast twice in the Week, I give Tithes of all that I possess. Yet it could not
hinder the humble and penitent Publican, whom he so much despised, from going
home more justified before God than himself; nor that himself should not be
involved in that just sentence which our Savior pronounces upon this occasion
(v. 14.) Omnis qui se exaltat humiliabitur. Whosoever exalts himself shall be
humbled, or brought low.

Sect. 5. Remedies against the con*
The best Remedy that I can prescribe against this Malignant Disease, is to
have a good Opinion of every one, be his quality and condition outwardly to the
World what it will, laying all rash Judgments and uncharitable Censurings
aside, and considering our Neighbors Actions always in the best sense, and
condemning none but our Selves, the World, and the Evil that belongs to it. Put
case that (perhaps) you see or discover some Person, or some People to be in
Error, or to do Amiss, yea worse than your self, and that you take your self
to be altogether free of subh Transgressions; yet examine things well, and be
sure that you are not addicted to any other kind of Faults, Infirmities, Sins,
which may render you worse than those you have in contempt. For if it be thus
with you, your contemning others upon the account of Sin, will be found no
small Sin in your self. And if nothing occur to you of that nature, that is, if
your Conscience well examined, shows you nothing that ^s much amiss in your
self, thank God for his Grace; and in relation to your Neighbor, call to mind
and practice that which Saint Paul (Gal. 6. v. 1.) requires in these words:
Fratres, si praeoccupatus fuerit homo in aliquo delicto, etc. Brethren, if a
Man be overtaken in a fault, you that are Spiritual, instruct such a one in the
Spirit of Lenity, considering thine own self, least you also be tempted. Bear
ye one another burdens. In Charity and Meekness we may admonish those that
offend, when we see it convenient, and do prudently hope that good Counsel may
take some place with them; but we may never revile them with opprobious
Language, nor treat them contemtuously: in this work especially we must leave
off all bitterness, anger, indignation, clamor and evil speaking, with all
malice, or envy, as the same Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 32. We must carry our
selves gently in all chings, that we may edify our Neighbor, and as
tenderhearted toward him, being (so far as it lies in us) always ready to
pardon him, as God in Christ has pardoned us (v. 32.)

If examining your Conscience, you find your self guilty of the like Offenses,
what have you more presently to do, than to repent and amend your own fault
first, before you think of admonishing, reproving, or correcting your
Neighbor; and in doing otherwise, you do but incur that great and just reproof
which our Saiviour uses in the Gospel (Luc. 6. v. 41.) against those busy
ill-sighted Hypocrites that could easily espy and take notice of small faults
in others, but in themselves could not observe the greatest. Quid vides
festucam inoculo fratris tui, etc. Why see thou in thy Brothers Eye the Mote,
and the Beam which is in thine own eye, thou considerest not. -- How can thou
say, Brother, let me take out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou
perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye? -- Thou Hypocrite, cast out
in the first place the beam out of thine own eye; and then thou shall see
clearly to take out the mote, that is in thy Brothers eye, As if he would have
said, Why do you censure, or have in contempt? why do you condemn little faults
in your Neighbors, being your selves guilty of far greater crimes? Is this
your kindeness? is this your Love to your Neighbor? Is this your perfection?
No, its mere hypocricy. You do but abuse your Neighbor, and insult over them,
who give you better example, than you are willing to follow. For, though they
be not altogether free from faults, yet if your eyes were not blear'd with
pride and envy, you migh easily see something of good in them, more than you
find in your selves. Nor is it to be doubted, but that by the Mote and Beam
mentioned in the foregoing words, the Evangelist meant to express the faults
of Both parties, to wit, of the Transgressors and the Contemner; the Mote
signified the smaller faults, which our Neighbor happens sometimes to offend
in; and the Beam, those rash judgments, and other grievous sins, whereof they
are, for the most part, guilty before God, who take upon them to censure and
condemn, to hate and despise their Neighbor for his small ones; being
quick-sighted and very observant in other men's concerns, but purblind and
wholly negligent in their own.

Sect. 6. Reflection upon the foregoing Matter.
Now reflecting seriously upon all matters beforementioned, tell me dear
Christian what reason you can have to be pufft up with Pride, or to swell (as
many do) with contempt of others, oft-times better than themselves in all
respects? Therefore I advise you, in most serious manner, and with all profound
humility, acknowledge your self to be a sinner, contemn none but your self;
saying with Saint Augustine, Woe is me! who am I? Forgive me, O Lord, my great
ambition, if I think my self to be any thing. What am I, but a corrupt and
rotten carcass! meat for worms! a stinking Vessel, full of putrefaction! Woe is
me, what am I? but the deepness of all obscurity! a thing buried in darkness,
as not worthy to be seen! What am I, but a child of wrath, a son of perdition,
full of rage, and full of contumely, living in miseries, and likely to die in
distress, anguish, and perplexity! O wretch! what will be come of me at the
last! who am but a mere dunghill, consisting of nothing but corruption, which
causes horror: being at present blind, poor, naked, and subject both to shame
and misery; neither knowing what my first beginning was, nor what my end shall
be; in fine, knowing nothing, but that I am miserable and mortal, consuming
daily away: As a Flower, that in the morning of my age seems to flourish for a
little while, and to advance; but in the evening falls and withers. I am
brittle and weak; and the more I increase and advance in years, the more I
decrease and decline in my life. I proceed, I go on and on, but it is toward
my end; and the more haste I make, the sooner I shall cease to be.

What then is this life of Man? The Prophet David puts me in mind, Psalm. 102.
v. 4. in these words, Cognovit sigmentum nostrum, recordatus est, quia pulvis
sumus. God (says he) knows very well whereof we be made, he remembers that we
are but dust, that our days are but as grass, and our flourishing as a flower
of the field. Saint James likewise tells me (Jac. 4. v. 14.) that our Life is
but a Vapor, appearing for a little time, and afterward shall vanish away. All
which reflecting upon, to to thee O Lord I come, Grant me thy Grace, that may
cause me to become humble, and to have no body in contempt but my Self, the
Devil, the Flesh, and this wicked World. I truly do acknowledge my self to be
more deserving of Contempt than any other, and the vilest Creature of the
World, unworthy to have preference of any one. For the future my glorying shall
be in thee, O my God, and I will rejoice in nothing else save in my
Infirmities; which show thy Strength and exalt the Power of thy Grace.

The Second Treatise (Of this SECOND PART) OF THE LANGUISHING DISEASES OF
CHRISTIANITY, Proceeding from Drunkenness.
SECTION I. Drunkenness a Pernicious Disease of Christianity.
SECT. 1. Drunkenness common to all. 2. Drunkenness of the Nobility and Gentry.
3. Drunkenness of the Richest sort of People. 4. Drunkenness of the Poorest
sort of People. 5. The Drunkenness of Youth.

Sect. 1. Drunkenness common to all.
WE see ordinarily, that when a Fowler intends to take Birds, he spreads his
Nets always in such places as he thinks to be most advantageous for his
purpose, and there he scatters his Corn, Chaff, or other Seeds; having likewise
in the same place tame Birds fastened to the Earth, or in Cages, which with
their singing, will call other Birds, which sly about to the place where they
may be taken; and by this means the Fowler takes great numbers of all sorts of
Birds. The same may be said of the great Fowler of poor Souls, Satan or the
Devil; for he like a Fowler intending to catch Souls, and to draw Mankind to
wickedness, spreads his Net in fit places, that is, commonly in Taverns and
Alehouses; which he knows to be Places most advantageous to that purpose:
where he has also for the most part, certain good Fellows, whom he uses as
decoy Birds, to call or fetch in more Company, till his Nets be full. And being
gathered together (the multitude never so great) this cunning Fowler so orders
the matter, that of the whole Company, not one in twenty shall be able with
truth to say, Anima nostra sicut passer erepta est, etc. My Soul as a Sparrow
is delivered out of the Snare, Psalm. 123. v. 7. But they are all made Captive
to him, either by Drinking to excess, or by taking pleasure in wanton and
filthy Speech, dishonest Songs, unchaste Looks, immodest Expressions, Swearing,
Cursing, and such like; which are as the Seeds and Bait that this infernal
Fowler scatters before them in such places, and by which he catches and hooks
their poor Souls so fast that nothing can set them free; but the all-commanding
and all-conquering power of Divine Grace; which God of his Mercy grant them to
find in the time of their greatest need, and whenever they truly seek it.

It is come to that pass now at present, that there is scarce any meeting for
Mirth or lawful Recreation, to be found unspotted; nor any Feast, or Banquet,
without some disorder in Eating or Drinking. He makes himself but a
Laughing Stock now, that either in fear of God, scruple of Conscience, or other
just and lawful Cause, forbears his Cups, being in company, and called upon;
his singularity, and that he will not drink till drunk with the rest, is matter
of great derision and scorn to the Bachanalian Crew; who account it an heroic
act, and cry it up for a point of Valor in their Tavern-contests, to exceed
others in drinking; (for which reason also every one of these Sons of Bacchus
and the Devil, study and strive to exceed each other what they can:) and he
that remains Victor over the rest, is so much applauded in his wicked Conquest,
that nothing pleases him more, than to see his Companions lie spewing,
senseless, or dead-drunk before him: And (which adds to his iniquity, and the
shame of these times) his Devilish Trophies are so divulged, and published
with such applause amongst all Pot-companions, that more than a few are
encouraged to emulate him, and to make trial of their strength in overcoming
him, or some other, in the like manner.

Sect. 2. Drunkenness of Nobility and Gentry.
This evil Disease is so rife among great Persons (both of Nobility and Gentry)
that I know not, whether many of them can be excepted. To the great shame, and
prejudice of Christianity it is doubtless. But who can withstand the torrent?
Evil custom carries all before it; and the pleasure of sin takes away the shame
of sinning. The wise Solomon foresaw the inconvenience of this long since, and
forewarned the world of it once and again: as namely Prove. 31. 4. in these
words, Noli Regibus, O Lemuel, Noli Regibus, etc. Give not Wine unto Kings, O
Lemuel, nor to Princes strong drink: least they drink, and forget the Law, etc.
and Eccles. 10. v. 16, 17. in these. Vae tibi terra, cujus Rexpuer est, Woe to
thee, O land when thy King is a child and thy Princes eat in the morning; that
is, are too much given to their gluttonous appetite of meat and drink. But
Blessed is the Land, whose King is the Son of Nobles, and whose Princes eat in
due season, for Strength, and not for Drunkenness. That Is a thing most
unbeseeming Princes, and all persons pretending to authority or honor: Both
which oblige them to Temperance, and to carry themselves so, as that their good
example may be instruction, and doctrine to others, and also procure authority
to their persons, for the better and more effectual reproving, or correcting
such as are addicted to these Vices. How much therefore are they to be blamed,
who being persons of great Honor, and no less Authority in the Public
Government, do every day almost, by their intemperance, put themselves, as it
were, into the rank of Drunkards, and Good Fellows, as foolish custom calls
them! greatly undervaluing themselves, and little dreaming of the great
prejudice, that will come upon them and others, by this means, through the
practice of their Mortal, and Immortal Enemies.

I say their Mortal Enemies; and by that term understand men like themselves;
who bearing enmity toward them, and watching fit opportunity to execute that
Violence, which Hell and their wicked hearts prompt them to, cannot long want
it toward those, that are given to Drunkenness. A man overcome with Drink is
but in bad case to encounter an enemy; when it were but to betray himself, so
much as to face him, or be seen of him. Did not the Prince Absalon take this
advantage to murder his Brother Amnon? Intending to kill him, in revenge of
the injury he had done to his Sister Tamar, he first invites him to a Feast, or
a great Banquet, where he would be sure to fill him with Wine; and then the
business was as good as done: having charged his Servants to watch, and observe
when Amnon should be elevated in Drink, and then to fall on him and kill him.
Mark (says he to his Servants, 2 Reg. 13. 28.) Cum temulentus fuerit Amnon
vino, etc. As soon as you perceive Amnon to be overcome with Wine, and that I
say to you strike, then fail ye not to strike and kill him; and so they did.
The like occasion will our Enemies take to be revenged on us when they find us
in like case, that is, to be deep in Drink; for then they know Men are
incapable to resist or make defense either for Body or Soul.

Sect. 3. Drunkenness of the Richer sort of People.
Great Persons offend herein, Nobility, Gentry; But are the meaner sort free?
Is there no excess of Meat or Drink to be observed amongst them? Are they
temperate and abstemious in all things (1 Cor. 9. 25.) as the good Soldier and
Servant of Christ should be? Nothing less. Frequent (that I say not daily)
experience shows the contrary; and what great excess there is in this sort of
People! What supersluity and costliness in Diet? What abundance of Wine goes
down their Throats? What variety of Strong Drinks! How do they strive to
surpass and outdo each other in the Sumptuousness and even Prodigality of
their Feasts and Banquets; emulating those of higher Rank, and despising them
which come short of their Measure. Insomuch, that what the Prophet spoke long
since concerning the People of Israel, is a very just reproof, and ought to be
a warning to these present times. Vae qui opulenti estis in Sion, etc. Woe unto
you that are Rich (says he, Amos 6. v. 1, 2, 3, etc.) that live at your ease
in Sion: Woe to you that approach the Throne of Iniquity, -- you that eat the
best Lambs of the Flock and fatted Calves out of the Stall, -- that drink Wine
in Bowls, and anoint your selves with the chiefest Ointments. Woe unto you: for
you are not grieved at the affliction of Joseph. You pamper your selves, you
feed your selves to the full with all manner of Dainties, but you let the poor
starve; you have no tenderness nor compassion for them. May not all this be
said of Christians? Are we a whit better in this kind than the Jews,
notwithstanding that we have been anointed with the Sacred Oils of Baptism and
Confirmation; the best Unctions in the World.

Saint Ambrose gives us a particular account of the Prodigality and Excess of
such People in his time, and describes the manner of it, saying, These Men in
sitting down to the Table, seem to marshal themselves for a Fight, encountering
one another with their Cups and Glasses, as with so many shots of Arrows in a
Fought Battle, Drinking and taking down all that is presented to their Hands;
nevertheless using great Art and Care, not to be overtaken with Drink all on
the sudden. Therefore at first small Draughts serve the turn; they begin for
the most part with lesser Cups, and advance by little and little, spinning up
their miseries by degrees; till being warmed in their Work, and the Fight
growing hot, they call for greater, till at length the largest Bowls are taken
off, and Long Flats brought in, to drink the Health of Friends, Kindred, and
Relations, as also (perchance) of the King, Queen, and Royal Progeny, with more
Ceremony and Solemnity. But Alas, for the folly of such Men! to think that any
true Love, Friendship, or Loyalty, can consist in Drunkenness; or that Men
should so much disorder the health of their Bodies and Souls, only to wish them
health in a Drunken Frollique. If they would see their folly, and learn how
they are to Love, how to show their Good Will, and how to prove themselves to
be Friends, good Subjects, and Loyal to their Princes, Saint Paul will teach
them, 1 Timothy 2. v. 1, etc. Obsecro igitur primum omnium, etc. I desire (says
he) above all things, that Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and
Thanksgiving be made for all Men, -- for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life (not in Drinking and
Fudling, but) in all Piety, Sobriety, and Chastity. Thus ought we to show our
Love to our Friends, and above all to our greatest and best Friend, the King
our Sovereign Lord.

Sect. 4. Drunkenness of the Poorer sort of People.
This beastly Vice (Drunkenness) oppresses all sorts of Men, but none more
generally and frequently, than the poor; amongst which there are a great many
that by their good wills, would scarce ever be seen sober; had they Money to
satisfy their insatiable desire of Drinking, they would be always tipled; you
should never meet them but more than half drunk. Amongst Tradesmen, and such as
converse much in the World, by occasion of Buying and Selling, there is no
Bargain made, nothing of any considerable nature Bought or Sold, without a Cup
of good Liquor; over which they consult and agree about the Price: and without
it scarce ever conclude any thing. Yea, some are so accustomed thereto, that
they spare not to profess they can make no good Bargain but in Drink, and that
things never succeed better to them, than when their Brains are well warmed
with the Spirits of good Liquor; so that they are oft-times seen to trapan and
lie upon the catch with each other upon this score; to wit, the Buyer with the
Seller, and the Seller with the Buyer; each pretending in their private
Thoughts to deceive or overreach the other, by the help of good Ale. Laborers
and Journey-men, will undertake nothing willingly, without a certain sum of
Money for to Drink cast into the Bargain; which being freely allowed, they will
do anything. So that it is plain, nothing is to be done, nothing Bought or
Sold, but good Drink Seals up the Bargain; and that Alehouses are the chiefest
Markets and Fairs for these Poorer sort of People, as Taverns are for the Rich,
where they dispatch all matters of Bargain, and Buy and Sell all sorts of
Merchandise and Commodities.

Verily it is a thing to be pitied in this poorer sort of People, to see how
diligently and industriously they take all opportunities and occasions they can
to meet with to Drink, which if it chance to be of free cost, they run to it
with such greediness, as if they were but so many Bruit Beasts in the shape of
Men; and so overload their Stomachs with it, that in fine, they seem and do
worse than Beasts, being forced to vomit and cast up what they have so much
beyond measure, and so intemperately taken in; and having a little eased
themselves (O the shameful insatiableness of a wicked Appetite!) they fall to
their Drink again, and again to their Vomit. Add hereunto, that when they are
thus elevated (as they call it) and overcome with Drink; if they be capable to
speak, nothing comes out of their Mouth, but what is seconded with Oaths one
upon another, or with some other cursed, filthy, and blasphemous Speech,
without end; singing and roaring in such manner, as if they were already in
Hell, making up an horrid Consort with the Damned Souls, who roar day and night
(as these also do) through the extremity and misery of their perpetual Torments.

Sect. 5. The Drunkenness of Youth.
What shall we say of the Debauch, and ill-manners of the Youth of this present
age? Verily we must say, it is corrupted in the highest degree almost that can
be expressed: and that if God ever had just occasion to drown all Mankind for
the Sin of Carnal Concupisence, he has it now, in such manner and to such a
height of provocation, as it is to be admired, how his merciful goodness can
forbear a second deluge; the Youth of this present age, being not only
deeep-sunk in the filthy mire of Concupiscence, and wallowing in all manner of
carnal Lusts, but extremely also over-gone with this horrid sinful Vice of
Debauch and Drunkenness. The great want of good Education contributes much to
this evil; which is such, that youth have no sooner attained the use of Reason
and Discretion, but they are ready to follow the Broad-way of Sensuality and
Sin; falling into lewd company, and from them learning the practice, and
getting the ill custom of Intemperate Drinking.

How prone this age of Man (viz. Youth) is to sins of intemperance, appears
sufficiently in the Parable of the Prodigal Son, mentioned in Saint Luk's
Gospel, Chap. 15. v. 12. This young Sot, wanting wherewithal to satisfy his
Carnal Sensuality in Drinking and Whoring ('it is the case of too many in this
our unhappy age) becomes discontent therewith, and impatient of delay, never
leaves importtuning his too indulgent Father, that he would forthwith give him
his portion, and let him use it as himself thought good. The Father consents to
his desire, and divides betwixt him and his Elder Brother his whole Substance.
The young Prodigal over-joyed at this, and little foreseeing the sad miseries
that were to befall him, nor those Quagmires of Dangers and Distress, which his
Sins and his Folly would ere long bring him into, makes no delay, but taking
his whole portion with him, leaves his Fathers House, and departs into a far
Country: where being at full liberty to unbridle his Carnal Appetite, he falls
into all manner of Excess and Wickedness; so that in a short time he had spent,
and wasted all his Substance with riotous living. Upon which, there being also
a great Famine in that Land, he presently fell into want, and was forced to
make himself Servant to a certain man of that Country; who set him to keep his
Swine. In which condition, his hunger was so great, and his misery so extreme,
that he would fain have filled his belly with the husks which the Swine did
eat; but could not. Behold here, in this Young Prodigal, the sad issue, which
riot and intemperance brings young men unto. Behold, I say, and Beware.
Hitherto we have seen his misery. What the final event was, and what succeeded
to him, when he came to himself, and saw his error, we shall have some fitter
occasion to show hereafter.

SECTION II. The Motives to withdraw all Christians from the Excesses of Meat
and Drink.
SECT. 1. The Sobriety of the Patriarchs and Prophets. 2. The Sobriety of the
Apostles and other Religious Christians. 3. The Sobriety of diverse great Kings,
and Eminent Philosophers. 4. The Sobriety of some Pagans, Ethnicks, and
Infidels.

Sect. 1. The Sobriety of the Patriarchs and Prophets.
HAving, in the precedent Discourses, represented to you in some measure the
Excesses, which are daily committed by several sorts of people, in Meat and
Drink, and the great Inconveniences and Mischiefs which follow upon them both
to Body and Soul, it behooves us now to offer you such Motives and
Considerations, as we judge may be most effectual to withdraw you from the
said Excesses, and to work in you a love of Temperance and Sobriety: not
forgetting also to mention some remedies, against the above said Vices; all, to
the intent that good Christians may avoid the same, and God be more honored by
their Virtuous Lives and Conversations.

The First Motive, which I now think of and shall propound, against Gluttony,
is, that we attentively consider, and reflect with our selves, upon the strict
Abstinence, and Sobriety, which the Prophets, and all those ancient Fathers of
the Old Law, did use. Good Examples are apt to work upon Good minds. Now truly,
so many Prophets, so many great Observers there were, and Practisers of
Sobriety, being therein the Avantguards, as it were, and Forerunners, to those
Armies of Ascetiques, which were to succeed them under the Law of Grace.
Amongst those of the Old Law was Moses, the Lawgiver, a great President, and
Example of Sobriety; of whom it is said in the Book of Exodus, (Chap. 24. v.
18.) Ingressus medium nebulae Moses, ascendit in Montem, and fuit ibi
quadraginta diebus and quadraginta noctibus, etc. That Moses, entering into the
midst of the Cloud, went up to the Mount (to wit, Mount Horeb, whither God
calle^ him) and remained there Forty Days, and Forty Nights, without any
manner of Food, neithe^ eating Bread, nor drinking Water* as himself testifies,
Deuteronomy. 9. v. 9. after which Abstinence and Sobriety he merited the Society,
Presence, and Familiarity of God, and to be made the great Lawgiver of Israel
^ God Almighty speaking unto him, and informing him of what both he, and all
the Children of Israel were to do and perform, pertaining to Divine Service and
Worship.

Who was more Sober and Abstemious than Elias, the Prophet? who in obedience to
Gods Will and Commandment, went into the Desert, and dwelt by the Brook
Cherith, over against Jordan; during which time he had nothing to eat, but what
the Ravens, by the special appointment of God, brought him morning and evening:
his Drink being the water of the Brook, 3 Reg. 17. 3, 4, 5, etc. After some
time of his abode here, the Brook dried up for want of rain, and then necessity
compelled him to change his habitation. So, by the inspiration of God, he
comes first to Sarephta, and is there maintained by a poor Widow, whose whole
sustance was a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruise; upon
which, through Divine Benediction, both he, she, and her Son, lived the space
of some years; (v. 15.) after this flying the persecution of Queen Jesabel, and
resting himself under a Juniper Tree in the Wilderness, an Angel of God comes
to him being asleep, and bids him, Rise and eat; for he had a great journey to
go: Thus we read of him, 3 Reg. 19. v. 6, 7, 8. etc. so he arose, and finding
at his head a Cake, baked on the coals, with a pot of water, he did both eat
and drink, and went his way, with such courage and alacrity, that in the
strength of that meal only, he continued his Journey for the space of forty
days an^ forty nights together, without any nourishment, till he came to Horeb
the Mount of God. Observe here, ^ pray you, how expressly the Scripture
mentions, that the Angel of God brought Elias Bread and Water for his refection
(a Cake of bread, and a cruise of water) and nothing else If your curiosity
moves you to know the reason, seeing the Angel could as easily have brought him
other meat to eat, and some other liquor to drink, more delicious and more
pleasing to the palate, yea and entertained him with varity too, if he had
pleased! the only reason of this, without question was, Because Bread and Water
were the usual Meat and Drink of the Prophets: they lived not upon delicacies
and dainties; they drunk not much Wine, but used such a repast, as became Men
that professed Temperance and Sobriety.

What shall I say of the wonderful Abstinence and Sobriety of the Prophet
Daniel and his three Companions! who, though they lived in the Court of that
great King, the King of Babylon, and were so favored, that they might have
freely tasted and taken their fill of all the Dain^ies and Varieties of Meats
and Drinks which that Court afforded; ^et neither this holy Prophet, nor any of
his three Brethren would receive the least portion of them, but contented
themselves with Pulse and Water. For so we read, Dan. 1. v. 8, 9, 12, etc.
Proposuit (Daniel) in cord suo, ne pollueretur de mensa regis, and de vino
ejus, etc. Daniel had proposed with himself that he would not be polluted with
the Portion of the Kings Meat, nor with the Wine which he drank; and to that
end made it his earnest request to the Governor of the Eunuchs (with whom he
was in favor) that he might have the privilege to abstain from the Meat that
came from the Kings Table; fearing (as the Annotations rightly observe) in the
first place, least otherwise he should happen to eat that which had been
offered to Idols. Secondly, for fear he should eat Meat forbidden by the Law of
Moses. Thirdly, for fear that by such delicate Diet as came from the Kings
Table, he might be provoked to Gluttony, or to any other Sins.

The Prophet Ezechiel may likewise rightly be put in the rank of these
Temperate and Abstemious Prophets, since he not only loved and practiced the
same, but exhorted others thereto, as may be seen in the Scripture. For what
concerns his own Practice and Observation thereof, we may take notice what is
said to him by God, Ezekiel. 4. v. 9. Sum tibi frumentum and hordeum, fabam and
lentem, etc. Take thee Wheat and Barley, Beans and Lentils, Millet and Fitches;
and put them in one Vessel, and make thee Loaves (or Bread) thereof, according
to the days of thy Captivity, for three hundred and ninety days shall thou eat
of the same, and by measure shall thou eat from time to time. What shall I say
of the Sobriety of the Rechabites, mentioned by the Prophet Hieremy (Chap. 35.
v. 6, 7, 8, etc. who to observe the Command of Jonadab the Son of Rechab, their
Father, drank no Wine, nor planted Vineyard all their days; they nor their
Wives, their Sons, nor their Daughters. Finally, what shall I say of all the
Sons of Israel, who although in the multitude of that Nation, there wanted not
some that gave themselves too much to Drunkenness and Excess; yet as to the
generallity of that People, Abstinence and Sobriety was held in great esteem
amongst them; for both Men and Woman would oft-times by solemn Vow unto God,
bind themselves to observe it; which Vow was so acceptable to God, that he was
pleased to prescribe unto them some particular Laws to be observed by them,
during the time of their Vow. To which end our Lord thus speaks unto Moses,
saying (Number. 6. v. 2, 3, 4, etc.) Loquere ad filios Israel, etc. Speak (says
he) unto the Children of Israel, and say unto them, When either Man or Woman
shall make a Vow to be sanctified, and will consecrate themselves to our Lord;
they shall deprive themselves of the privilege (or liberty) of drinking Wine
and Strong Drink; neither shall they drink any Liquor of Grapes, nor eat Grapes
moist or dried, all the days that he is by Vow Consecrated unto our Lord, he
shall eat nothing that comes or is made of the Vine, Kernels nor Husk. And all
such Persons as did voluntarily Consecrate themselves unto God, by making and
observing this Vow, were called Nazarites, that is, separated and set apart to
the special service of God.

To mention any more may seem tedious, and truly should I undertake to mention
all, or to give a full and perfect report of all the Sobrieties, Fastings,
Temperancies, and Abstinencies, which both the Prophets, and all Ancient
Fathers of the Old Testament used; the very nameing of them might swell my Book
into a great Volume. However, for the Honor of so great a Saint (of whom the
Savior of the World said; Inter natos mulierum, etc. Matthew. 11. 11. Among
those that are born of Women, there is not one greater than he) I must not
forget in the conclusion of this Paragraph, to remember (though but in few
words) the great Sobriety of Saint John the Baptist, the last Prophet of the
Old Testament, and the first of the New, being the Forerunner of our Lord
Jesus Christ. I will only give you the Testimony of the Evangelist concerning
him. Ipse autem Joannes habebat vistimentum de pilis came lorum, and zonam
pelliceam circa lumbos suos; esca autem ejus erat Locustae, and mel sylvestre,
says Saint Matthew. 3. v. 4. Saint John had his Raiment of Camels Hair, and a
Leathern Girdle about his Loins, and his Meat was Locosts and Wild Honey. His
Clothing mean, and his Diet neither rich nor costly; but in respect of both, a
perfect Ascetique, and the prime Pattern of such. The same Evangelist, Saint
Matthew, speaking of Saint John's Temperance, says (Matt. 11. v. 18.) that he
came neither Eating nor Drinking, to wit, after the ordinary manner of Men, but
living an austere Life, abstracted from the common and vain Conversation of the
World; for which reason the wicked Jews thinking (perhaps) he had been an
ill-natured Man, and done it out of hatred to Mankind, said he had a Devil. Our
Savior Christ came both Eating and Drinking, that is, in a more familiar and
sociable manner of Life, conversing more with Men, and Eating and Drinking with
them; and they call him a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and
Sinners. Thus neither of both, how innocent soever they were, could gain a good
word from them, or escape their malicious censures. So little marvel it is, and
so much the less ought it to trouble us, that wicked Men do also now adays so
easily misconstrue the Lives and Actions of Good Men; who, if they be great
Fasters, or lead a more strict and severe Life than others commonly do, then
they are traduced and accounted Hypocrites: if their Manners be more
condescending, and that they converse with Men in an ordinary way, then they
are dissolute, then they are cried down, censured, and condemned for Libertins
and Loose Persons. The Servants must not expect to be above their Masters; if
this were our Saviors Lot, they that will be his Disciples, must be content
when they meet with the like.

Sect. 2. Sobriety of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ.
The second Motive to withdraw Christians from excess in Meats and Drinks, may
be the Consideration of that Temperance and Sobriety, which was in the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ; who, as good Soldiers under their Captain and
Chief-Leader Christ, Fought the good Fight of Faith, and overcame their Ghostly
Enemies by this Virtue of Abstinence; chastizing their Bodies by Fasting, and
subduing all their sensual Appetites and Inclinations of Concupiscence to the
obedience of the Spirit; knowing full well there was no other way leading to
the Celestial Court and Kingdom of God, but the way of Temperance and Sobriety;
witness that of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 27. In jejuniis saepe. They fasted often;
and Romans 14. v. 17. Non enim est regnum dei, etc. The Kingdom of God (meaning
his Spiritual Kingdom, whereby he reigns in the Heart of his true and faithful
Servants) does not, consist in Meat and Drink, but on the contrary in Holiness,
in Purity, in Piety, in Abstinence, and the like. For which cause, if you
peruse the Saints Lives, you will find that all the Apostles and Disciples
generally speaking, were great Followers of their Masters Examples in this
Virtue of Abstinence.

Saint Peter, Prince of the Apostles (as Holy Fathers often style him) after
his Conversation, according to the report of Saint Gregory Nazianzen, never eat
Flesh, (understand it of his ordinary Diet) or any other Meat but Pulse, all
his Life long: though Willyam Gazet affirms that his Diet was Bread, some few
Olives, Figs and Herbs, and his Drink pure Water. However it were, this is
certain; that he has left good Counsel, and given express Warning, both to his
Successors and all those of his Flock, to love Sobriety and Temperance; saying
thus unto them (1 Pet. 5. v. 8.) Sobrii estote, and vigilate, etc. Be ye sober
and watch, because your adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion goes about,
seeking whom he may devour. The danger they were in, should admonish them to be
always upon their Guard, and in a posture not to close with their Enemy, but to
resist him. To Which end, in another place (1 Pet. 1. 13.) he exhorts us, To
gird up the loins of our mind, and to be sober, hoping to the utmost (or with
most perfect hope) for the Grace that is offered (or promised) to us at the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Saint Paul follows the same Tract with Saint Peter, and both by his good
Example and good Counsel encourages the Faithful to be Abstemious, and to
restrain their Natural Appetites of Meat and Drink, so that they run into no
excess. For his Example, we may take notice of what he says of himself, 1 Cor.
9. v. 27. Castigo corpus meum, and in servitutem redigo, etc. I chastize my
Body (says he, meaning by Fasting and Abstinence) and bring it in subjection
to the Spirit; and for his Counsel he gives it in many places; more
particularly, 1 These. 5. v. 6. Non dormiamus sicut caeteri, sed vigilemus, and
sobrisimus. Let us not sleep as others do, but watch and be sober: as if he had
said, we that are Apostles and Disciples of Christ, we that are Christians, let
not us sleep as others, as the wicked of the World do; in all Sensualities and
Prodigalities; but let us watch and be sober; for they that sleep (says he)
sleep in the night, and they that are drunk, are drunken in the night. But we
Apostles, Disciples, Christians, we are of the day, and ought to be sober;
having on the Breast Plate of Faith and Charity, and for an Helmet the Hope of
Salvation. For which reason also, he speaks to Titus (his own and beloved Son,
according to the Common Faith) telling him (Tit. 2. v. 11, 12.) that the Grace
of God had appeared to all Men, instructing us all, that denying impiety (which
as I shall show hereafter, comprehends Drunkenness, Intemperancies, and all the
Excesses of Meat and Drink, and Worldly Pleasures) We should live Soberly,
Justly, Piously, in this present World.

Saint Matthew, as Clemens of Alexandra reports of him, abstained from all
sorts of Meat, Bread and Herbs only excepted, and Water to Drink. Saint James
commonly styled our Lords Brother, never drank Wine nor Syder, nor any Strong
Drink; nor in all his Life time did ever eat Flesh-meat, as being a Nazarite
from his Youth. Saint Mark the Evangelist, according to the report of Eusebius,
and Saint Hierom, contented himself for Diet, only with Bread, Salt, and Hysop,
and for his Drink with Water. Saint Luke, was not only in the number of Persons
most Abstemious and Temperate, but has from our Saviors Mouth given us a very
great Caveat, to beware and to abhor all manner of Excess in Meats and Drinks
(Chap. 21. v. 34. of his Gospel) in these words, Attendite vobis, ne forte
graventur corda vestra in crapula and ebrietate, etc. Look to your selves,
least perhaps your hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and
the Cares of this Life; and that day come upon you on a sudden. And without
doubt all the rest of the Apostles did the like without exception; taking great
Pains and Labors in Teaching and Preaching the Gospel, to all Nations, and all
parts of the World, but scarcely accepting their Victuals from them, to whom
they Preached, that they might not be burdensome to any. Of which Charity and
Self-denial, Saint Paul, upon all occasions showed himself a great Example;
writing thus to the Christians of Thessalonica: Neque gratis panem ab aliquo,
etc. sed in labor, etc. (2 These. 3. 8.) We have not eaten of any Man's Bread
for nothing; but with Labor and Travail we have wrought night and day, that we
might not be a burden to any of you. And to the Corinthans he protests, that
no Man should hinder him of this boasting in all the Regions of Achaia; to wit,
of having Preached the Gospel to them freely, and without putting them to any
charge upon that account, 2 Cor. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. Showing the reason why he did
so; Non enim quae vestrae sunt quaero, sed vos. For I seek not yours, but you.
Your Souls I seek, I would gain them to God, and not any Tempo^al Profit to my
self.

^ect. 3. Sobriety of the Ancient Fathers, and of Religious Orders.
A third Motive to withdraw all ^hristians from the Vice of Intem^rance and
Drunkenness, and to ^^duce them to Sobeiety, may be ^e Consideration of the
Ancient Fa^^ers, who in their time were the ^stors and Governors of the Church,
^^d Presidents to their respective ^ocks in all sorts of Piety and Ver^e; whose
Lives, if they be well ^^^sulted and read, it will appear they were not in any
other kind more Eminent and Exemplary, than in the Virtues of Temperance and
Chastity; being absolute Masters of both Appetites: to wit, of Gluttony and
Lust: As likewise it may be to consider both the primitive and present Practice
of Religious Men and Women, in their several Monasteries and Orders, Hermits,
Anchorets, and all sorts of Ascetiques in the Wilderness, and in other places;
we shall find that Sobriety and Abstinence, was their chiefest Study and
Endeavor; all of them Laboring unanimously to follow their Captain, or Chief
Leader, and to please him, who had called them to that Holy Estate of Life, by
Mortification and Penance, by Fasting and Abstinence, and by a perfect, or
total subduing of all Cluttonous, and Carnal Appetites, to the Motions and Rule
of Gods Spirit, propounding to themselves herein, the pattern of the Apostles,
of whom we have already spoken somewhat, and of other Apostolical Men, of whom
we are now to speak.

And in this rank, Saint Hilarion, we think may not undeservedly be set in the
first place, either for his Age or Merit, who embraced such strict Abstinence
and Sobriety, even from his Youth, that by the relation of Saint Hierom, when
he was but fifteen years of age, he would eat nothing but Bread, and some few
dry Figs. This course he held till he was about twenty, or one and twenty years
old; from which till twenty four, he satisfied himself with Lentils, steeped or
moistened with Cold Water. From twenty four to thirty, his Food was Herbs and
Roots unboiled, which grew in the Wilderness. From thirty to thirty five, he
lived with Barley-bread and Herbs without Oil; at which time finding a kind of
dimness and obscuriry in his sight, with a continual itching all over his Body,
he used with his Herbs and Roots some little quantity of Salt and Oil. Thus he
lived, till he had attained to the Age of Three score and three years; unto
which period of time he had abstained wholly from Apples, Pears, and all other
Orchard Fruits. At this age he found himself in a manner spent, and all his
Body wearied, and worn to nothing; whereupon thinking with himself that his
time was come, and that he had not long to continue in this World, to prepare
himself for death; with an invinciple courage he resolves to Fast more strictly
than of late he had done: and thus he continued till he came to be above
fourscore, about which time he finished the course of this mortal life, which
he fustained with such Diet as I have here mentioned and no other.

Not unlike unto him, was the life of Saint Anthony, who as Saint Athanasius
(who wrote his Life) reports of him as an eyewitness, live^ all his Lifetime
in the Desert, spending whole nights in Prayer; and taking but one single
resection once aday, after Sunset; sometimes remaining several days together
without eating or drinking. His ordinary Diet, for the most part, was Bread and
Salt, and for his drink, Water: De carnibus vero and vino melius tacere, quam
qui cquam dicere; says the Author of his Life. As for Flesh-meats and Wine, it
seems to me better to involve that in silence, than to speak any thing of it.
The reason was, because it was a known thing, that not only Saint Anthony, but
all other Monks and Ascetiques beside, never used any such Meat or Drink. In
fine, this Holy Hermit remained, for the most part of his Life, not only in the
Desert, or Wilderness, but in the more Rocky, Desolate, and Inaccessible Places
thereof; where company could not, but with extreme difficulty come to him; and
scarce admitting in his Old Age, the small additament of a few Figs and Olives
to his wonted Diet.

What shall I say of Saint Paul, the first Hermit, and of his great Sobriety
and Abstinence! who lived in the Wilderness for the space of a hundred and
thirteen Years, in a Rocky Place, nigh unto a Fountain, of which he drank all
that time, having no other Garment than of the the Palm Tree Leaves. This Holy
Man seemed to be another Elias; receiving daily half a Loaf of Bread by a Raven
and that for the space of Threescorce years together.

Saint Hierom, speaking of some Monks, that were in the Wilderness in the time
of Saint Paul the Hermit, and of their wonderful Abstinence, fearing (as he
says) that the Reader should think it incredible what he was to report of
them; makes a protestation in these words, Jesum testor, and Sanctos Angelos,
etc. I call Jesus Christ to witness, and his Holy Angels, That in the same
place of the Wilderness, where Saint Paul heretofore lived (which is adjacent
to the Country of the Saracens) I have seen Monks, De quibus unus per triginta
annos clausus, hor deaceo pane and lutulenta aqua vixit; One of which being a
Cloistered Man for the space of thirty years together, lived with nothing but
Barley Bread and Dirty Water. Of another he testifies, that he lived for a
great many years together in a Cistern, or Pit, in the Wilderness; receiving no
other Food for his nourishment, than Five Figs a day; concluding his relation
in these words: Haec videbuntur incredibilia his, qui non crediderint. These
things (says he) will seem incredible to those that have not believed; yet
that which I have reported, is a most certain and real Truth. Now although by
reading these Stories of the wonderful Abstinence and Sobriety of these
Monastiques, you be not moved to follow or take upon you, such a strict and
austere course of Life, yet at least their Heroique Example should be a great
Motive to you, to withdraw you from all excess in Meat and Drink; and make you
to live temperately, though you cannot live so austerely; and to be content
with what is sufficient, though you know not how to suffer want.

For to encourage you the more, you may be pleased to take a short view of what
is at present to be observed of this kind in all Catholic Countries, where,
if you were to Travel, you would not fail to meet with or hear of objects
worthy of your admiration in both Sexs; Men and Women, living in the
Wilderness, that is, in desolate, unfrequented Places; or otherwise in or near
unto Cities and great Towns: exercising themselves with most severe Discipline
and Penance, and using an Abstinence, not much inferior, or less strict, than
those abovementioned, There you will find Monasteries, Convents, Nunneries,
Hermitages, and other Religious Houses, or Places; in which no doubt is to be
made, there live at this day many Persons of most exemplary Austerity, and
strictness in this kind: witness the Houses of the Carthusians, the discalceate
Carmelites,, the reformed Benedictins, the Minims, and the poor Clares of Saint
Francis, with many other Religious Orders, both of Men and Women, that never
eat Flesh-meat.

Consider the four great Orders approved by the Church; among them you will
find the Holy Order of the Seraphical Father Saint Francis, who was such a
Lover of the Virtue of Sobriety, that he very exactly observed Five Lents in
the Year. In the first he fasted forty days, next after the ^piphany, or Twelve
days of Christmas. His second Lent he fasted from the Feast of the Apostles
Saint Peter and Saint Paul, to the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary. The
Third Forty-days-Fast, he kept from the Assumption until Michaelmass. The
Fourth was from the Feast of All Saints, to the Nativity. And the Fifth he
observed Forty days before Easter, according to the Institution of the
Catholic Church. Besides, he Fasted all Frydays in the Year, all Vigils,
Ember and Rogation days; with diverse other particular days, according to his
own private Devotion.

Sect. 4. Sobriety of Great Monarchs and Ancient Philosophers.
We have declared in some measure, the wonderful Sobriety and Abstinence, which
the Ancient Patriarchs and Prophets of old time, the Apostles and their
Successors; the Ancient Fathers of the Church, and other Devout People since
Christ's time, have used; who were all Christians in Name or Effect, believing
in the True God, and unto whom the Living and True God had by Revelarion,
vouchsafed to make known his Holy Will, Commandments and Law. What shall we
say of the Gentiles who knew not God, had nothing but the Light and Law of
Nature to instruct them: Shall we find any such Virtue among them? Doubtless we
shall if we make search into the matter; in point of Moral Virtue (as this we
are speaking of is) we meet with many worthy Examples in the Gentiles History,
of Great Monarchs, Kings, Princes, Ancient Philosophers, who have excelled as
in other, so in this particular Virtue of Abstinence and Sobriety. Most certain
it is, that the Kings of Egypt were by their Law forbidden Wine, which they
never drank but upon some eertain days, and that by measure; which they were
not to exceed. The Turks generally observe the same Prohibition, being
contained in their Alcaron; though for the present I suppose their great ones
may dispense with themselves herein. Alexander the Great, how intemperate and
excessive soever his Ambition was, and the desire to enlarge his Dominions, yet
in respect of Moderation in Meat and Drink, his Practice is commendable. He
bore a great respect to the Ancient Philosophers; and from their Instruction
and Example, had conceived such a Love to the Virtues of Temperance and
Sobriety, that it is reported of him, that being in his Great Asian Expedition,
and Ada the Queen Caria, to gain his Favor, had sent him a great quantity of
extraordinary Provision, and many of her chief Cooks and Pastery-men to make it
ready for him in the most curious and exquisite manner; he returned her answer,
That he had no need of Cocks for the small Dinner he used, since one would
serve his turn very well.

Cyrus, that Great Monarch of the Persians, from his Childhood gave a notable
Testimony, how Sober and Temperate a Man he would be one day: For being, while
he was yet very young, demanded by Aslyages, his Grandfather, Why he would
drink no Wine? He presently answered, for fear of being poisoned by it. For
(quoth he) when you celebrated the Feast Day of your Nativity, I conceived that
some had mingled Poison in the Wine that was drunk, because at the latter end
of the Feast, there was not one of all those that were present, who were in
their right mind and senses. After which this Great Monarch lived most frugally
and temperately; for proof whereof, the answer which he once made to Artabazus
his Steward, may very well serve: This Steward marching with the King in his
Wars, asked him upon occasion, what he should provide for his Supper: Bread
(answered the King) for I hope before Supper-time, we shall meet with some
Fountain of Running Water, to furnish us with Drink. Of Porus, a Great King of
the Indies, it is reported that he lived only with Bread and Water. Phraartes,
a King of the same Country, did the like; and the greatest Feast which he
made, or permitted any of his Courtiers to make, was only with a kind of
Venison. Alphonsus, the King of Arragon and Sicily, a very Sober Monarch; being
once asked by some of his Courtiers, why he did drink no Wine; Because
(answered he) I know that Wisdom is hindered by Wine, and Prudence is darkened by
it: which two things are only able to make a King worthy of the name he
bears. Pompey the Great, having all his Life time, and during his Health,
loved Sobriety and Frugality, gave yet a more assured testimony thereof, and
how much he hated Luxury, and Excess in a time of Sickness: For being fallen
into a lingering Disease, which deprived him of all Appetite to Meat: his
Physicians could find nothing whereby to recover his Appetite, but to feed on
certain Birds, which at that time were quite out of season, and it was a very
hard matter to get any, except it were of Lucullus a Rich and Luxurious Roman,
who kept them all the year long for his Provision: Pompey's Servants therefore
wished their Master to send to him, and to request some of those Birds for his
use; but Pompey would not hearken to the motion; replying with some earnestness
to him that made it: What (says he) shall it be said that unless Lucullus had
been a Luxurious Glutton, Pompey could not have lived? Shall I owe my Life to
Lucullus his Luxury? No, no, it shall not be: let me have something made ready
that may be easily gotten.

Marcus Cato, after he had conquered Spain, and triumphed for his many notable
Victories, though he were now grown Old and was Rich, yet would he not add any
thing to his accustomed manner of Living, nor remit any thing of his wonted
Austerity; drinking nothing but Water, and eating but course Bread and Beef,
unless he happened sometimes to catch a Hare, which with Cabbage was his Venison.
In the time of Peace he lived for the most part at his Country Village, or
Farm, where he labored and took as much pains in Tilling his Ground, and other
Works of Husbandry, as the meanest of his Servants.

Epaminond^s, one of the Greatest Captains and Philosophers of his time, lived
so Temperately and Soberly, that being invited by one of his Friends to a
Supper; seeing such great Superfluities prepared, and so much sumptuousness in
every thing; he returned very angry at the sight of them: saying thus to his
Friend, I had thought you ^ad requested me to bear you company at a Sacrifice,
and that we should have spent some time together Soberly and Temperately: you
entertain me here as if I were some great Glutton, which I take to be no small
injury and affront to me.

Of Caius Fabritius, another notable (Roman) General, it is reported that when
the Samnites Ambassador came to him, upon the affairs of his Embassy, he was
found at Supper ^eeding upon Radishes, which had been roasted in the Ashes;
having no other Dishes of Meat for his Supper.

Massinissa, King of the Numidi^ns, was a Person of so great So^riety, that
even at Ninety years of ^ge he would eat but once a day, and that upon homely
Meat, without Sauce, or any thing to give it ^elish. Of Mithridates, King of
Pontus, they say, that though he ^^ved to be Old, yet he never in all ^is Life,
would sit at the Table to ^at; being in all other respects also ^ery Temperate.
Hannibal that ^ear Warrior, seldom fed upon other Meat, than the meanest of
his Soldiers.

Sect. 5. Sobriety of Pagans, Ethniques and Infidels.
Now if all these aforesaid Motives and Examples be not able or sufficient to
withdraw Christian People from their Excesses in Meat an^ Drink, what shall I
say to them. I have scarce any thing further to ad^ save only for the
conclusion of the Section, in few words to set before their eyes the Sobriety
and Frugal^ty of some other People, mere Pagans, mere Ethniques and Insidels
that by consideration of them the^ may be made, if not to mend the^ Lives, and
to correct their inte^perate Vices, yet at least to blush ^ their own extreme
Guiltiness, a^ to see themselves so far out-gone ^ the practice of Moral, and
most commendable Virtues, by People utte^ly deprived of Spiritual Grace, a^ the
Divine Light; having no knowledge of the True God, but Governing themselves,
and doing all that they do in this kind, merely by the Light of their Natural
Reason, and by Virtue of Humane Principles and Prudence.

It is a famed report of the Egyptians, that in the midst of their Feasts and
Banquets, they had a Custom or Law, to bring into the Banqueting Room, when
they were in the ^eight of their Jollity, an Anatomy, ^r the dried Corpse of
some Dead Man, that by the horror, and the ^epresentation of such a sorrowful
^bject, they might contain them^^lves in Modesty and Sobriety, in ^eholding of
the same. Upon which (or ^e like) reflection and consideration, ^ may not
improbably be thought ^at the Pious Emperor, Henry ^e Third proceeded, when
being ^ be married, he by public Pro^mation and Command, banished ^ sorts of
Pomps and Worldly Vanities from his Wedding, not suffering any Players, or
Jesters to be there; but in their stead, willing that great numbers of Poor
People should be invited and brought in; which was performed to the great
Edification of all the Princes and Courtiers that were present.

The Lacedaemonians had another Custom in use (especially while they lived under
Lycurgus his Laws and Authority) which deserves to be remembered. It was, that
when they departed from any Feast or Banquet, there should not be any Torches
o^ Lights carried before them in the night time. A most Prudent Institution,
and which made them bor^ careful and fearful, not to exceed i^ Drink, as also
to return from the Feast to their own Homes in goo^ time, to avoid the shame of
n^ finding their way home, and other inconveniences, which in the da^ they
might be subject to. In tho^ days of Temperance, Vines we^ cultivated, and Wine
made rather for the use of the Sick, than of those which were in Health;
neither was it commonly sold in Taverns, but in the Apothecaries Shop. Besides,
it is well known that the Ancient Sages (Ethniques) did for the most part
measure their Drink, and would upon no account exceed their stinted Custom;
saying with Anacharsis the Philosopher, That the First Draught which Men drink,
ought to be for to quench their Thirst; the second for nourishment, but the
third was for Pleasure and the fourth for Madness. Pythagoras was somewhat more
pre^ise in this matter, living only of Herbs, Fruits, and drinking Water: He
would usually say, That Grapes af^orded three sorts of Wine; one whereof
quenched Thirst, the se^ond Troubled, the third overthrew and inflamed the
Spirits; and his practice confirmed his Opinion, for himself was so abstemious,
that they ^ay of him, That he never drank Wine in all his days; no more did the
Great Orator Demosthenes (if reports be true) nor many other famous Men, of
whom the Histories make mention.

I find that I have dilated my self somewhat largely, in making report of the
Sobriety and Abstinence of so many particular Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Ancient Fathers, and other renowned Men, both Christians and those others
(morally Wise and Virtuous Men) among the Gentiles, Kings, Captains,
Philosophers, and others. The reason and chief Motive hereof, has been to show
the beastly intemperance of the Men of this present age; to whom it seems an
unpossible, vain, and contemptible thing to live in such Sobriety and Austerity
of Life; saying, That there were none but simple Philosophers and melancholic
Hermits, that lived after this manner. To let them see the contrary I have
taken this pains: They may here behold how much they are mistaken, and how in
all States, Qualities, and Conditions of Men, even from the greatest to the
meanest, Sobriety, Temperance, and Abstinence, have been both honored,
observed and practiced. So that in conclusion I may truly say of all the
Egyptian Priests, of all the Sages of India and Persia; yea generally of all
Priests that served at the Alters of Jupiter, and those other Pagans Deities,
that they did seldom eat Flesh-meat, but never drank Wine; which truly may
serve for a Subject of very serious reflection to some, that hold chief places
in the Church of the True and Living God, who ought to be as Lamps shining in
the midst of the Temple; and by their Example, as well as Doctrine, to guide
their Spiritual Subjects in the ways of True Piety and Virtue. Not that they
have these Gentiles only to look upon and follow as Presidents; seeing the Holy
Catholic Church does (her self) by the Grace of God plentifully afford
innumerable such, in all Christian Provinces, that is, Men of Holy and
Exemplary Lives, who had the True Love and Fear of God in them in such eminent
manner, that their Conversation has singularly edified the People under their
charge, and excited them to all Godliness and Honesty. So that (blessed be God)
it is not so much for want of good Presidents amongst Christians, that we
mention Heathens and Gentiles in this Affair, but more effectually to convince
some sort of People of their shameful Practices; who will not be moved by, nor
regard the example of good Christians so well as they ought to do. To conclude,
therefore I wish every one to take notice of a Saying of Socrates (that Wise
and Worthy Gentile) who was wont to say, That the Soul which had gotten the
habit and custom of Sobriety and was contented with her Estate, did pass away
her days in this World with as much ease as he that takes a short journey in
the Spring through a most pleasant and fruitful Country, with great
satisfaction to the mind and little labor.

SECTION III. Drunkenness, or the Excess of Meat and Drink, a most Pestilent
Disease.
SECT. 1. It causes several Infirmities. 2. It causes the Corruption of the
Soul. 3. It causes the Corruption of the Body. 4. Sad Examples of Drunkards.

Sect. 1. Drunkenness or Excess in Meat and Drink, causes several Infirmities.
IT stands with great reason, that if we believe the Virtue of Abstinence to be
a preservative of Health, as the Holy Scripture makes mention, and assure us
that it is (witness that of Ecclus. 37. v. 34. Qui abstinens est, adjiciet
Vitam. He that is abstinent, shall prolong his life:) it must likewise be
acknowledged that the Excess of Drink must be cause of many Infirmities, and by
them destroy the Body; which is also averred in the foregoing part of the Text
above cited; Propter crapulam multi obierunt. By means of Drunkenness, many
have come to untimely ends. The Physician knowing that his Patient has got a
Surfeit, whether by Eating or Drinking, presently prescribes him Abstinence;
and it is a Rule in Physic, That Contraria contrariis curantur. Contraries are
for the most part cured by contraries. If the root or cause of the Sickness be
too much Heat, it is cured by Cold, or rebating the Heat, if too much Moisture,
it is cured by Purging, dissipating and evacuating the peccant Humor: which
Saint Hierome also confirms, saying, We read of many particular Diseases and
Infirmities, that proceed from the Excess of Drink; as Gouts, Dropsies,
Fevers, and the like; which are cured and the Patients recover health again,
merely by being reduced to Abstinence and slender Diet; avoiding the
Superfluities and Excesses which at first caused the Distemper: the Drunkards
Wine and Strong Drink (if I may so speak) being in this respect like to the
little Book, mentioned in the Apocalypse (Chap. 10. v. 11) which was commanded
to be eaten; it is in the Mouth and going down, sweet as Honey, but in their
Stomach and Belly it is bitter, and hard of digestion.

So then, if you desire to preserve your selves in Health (I speak here only of
Bodily Health) you must follow the Counsel of Socrates, and be careful never to
eat but when you are Hungry, nor ever to drink but when you are Dry and
Thirsty; because to do otherwise, and to observe no order, time, and temperance
in your Eating and Drinking, is the cause of many Infirmities, Distempers, and
Languishing of the Body, Pain in the Head, Pain in the Stomach, Distillations,
Dropsies, and overflowing of gross Humors all over the Body; such an irregular
Diet tending rather to overcharge than to sustain nature. For the natural Heat
of the Body, not being able to concoct, or digest such abundance of superfluous
Humors, as follow Intemperance (or the Excess of Eating and Drinking) when it
is habitual, constant, and customary; the said Humors must unavoidably remain
crude, rawish, and of a temperament contrary; or not agreeable to the
temperament of the Body; and consequently must be a seminary for Fevers, and
other Distempers, and in fine, of an untimely Death (where the Art of the
Physician, or some good Providence of God does not hinder) to the Body.

With truth therefore we say (and in charity admonish all Offenders in this
kind) that all those who take such pleasure and delight in Eating and Drinking,
as to observe no mean or moderation therein, according to the Rules of Religion
and right Reason, neglect their own health, and in a very great measure (for
ought they know) concur to the shortning of their own days. Oh, but say the
Gluttons (and Drunkards too) Meat and Drink expel Hunger, which in a short time
would kill us; they satisfy and support Nature; Nature requires them; It Is
true, Experience teaches the same. But what says the Psalmist (Psalm. 93. v.
8.) Intelligit, insipientes in populo, stulti aliquando sapite. Understand ye
unwise among the People, yea Fools at length be Wise; and learn to distinguish
betwixt the Thing, and the abuse of the Thing. The Thing you speak of is good,
necessary, lawful, but the abuse of it is wicked, and destable. We allow you
the use of Meat and Drink in that due measure which Nature requires, and with
that Moderation, which Religion and the due Fear of God prescribes: but you
abuse it, you observe no measure, but run into all Excess and Intemperance; and
that we forbid you. That we tell you is hurtful both to Body and Soul; we tell
you that if you exceed due measure, you weaken Nature instead of strengthening
it, and pull it down by that, which you pretend should support it. For most
true and worthy of all belief, is that Admonition of the Holy Father Saint
Chrysostom, Take heed of Excess (says he, meaning in Eating and Drinking) for
the nature of Earth is not more soon and easily corrupted and dissolved with
the abundance of continual Rain and Water, than this humane (frail) Bo-Body of
Man is by the Excess, and Intemperate use of Meat and Drink. Know then ye
Wine-bibbers, ye Drunkards of Ephraim, know that Wine, and Meat, and Drink, are
by the mercy and special Favor of God given to us, not that we should abuse
them, or be made Drunk by them, but that we may live Soberly.

Sect. 2. Drunkenness, or rather the Excess of Meat and Drink, is the
Corruption of the Soul.
Saint Augustine, with diverse others of the Ancient Fathers, treating of the
Sin of Drunkenness, do frequently acknowledge what we here affirm; to wit, that
this Vice of Intemperate Drinking, is the Cor^uption of the Soul. Ebrietas,
ani^ae corruptela, being a Disposition, ^s it were, or Testimony given in
^avour of Truth, not unfrequently ^ either in terms or in sense) met with in
their Works. But for more ^lear proceeding, we are to know, there is a twofold
Corruption to be taken notice of in this case; to wit, Proper and Improper,
Substantial, or Corruption of Substance, and Accidental, or Corruption only of
Qualities and Manners. In the first sense, viz. of Substantial Corruption, the
Soul cannot be Corrupted, because it is by Nature a Spirit Incorruptible, and
Immortal. But in the second sense, viz. of Corruption Accidental, Corruption in
respect of Qualities and Manners, it may be, and is too often, Corrupted. Sin
Corrupts it, Vice Corrupts it; when it loses the Grace of God, or the
Innocence and Holiness which it had pleased God to indue her withal, then it
becomes Corrupted. Now this wicked Sin of Drunkenness being in the rank of
Deadly Sin, when it seizes upon the Soul, must needs Stain, Poison, and
Corrupt the same, depriving her of Grace, and the State of Innocence. It is
like a Plague, which so soon as it infects the Soul, Spiritua^ Life cease,
and the Soul appears in the sight of God odious and ugly. For a Dead Carcass or
a Body overspread with Ulcers and Putrified Sores for the most part stinketh,
or sends forth some unpleasant smell that is loathsome to behold; so is the
Soul of a Drunkard; it is Spiritually Dead, and so Corrupted and Tainted with
the Ulcers of Actual Sin, that it appears most Loathsome and Deformed in the
Sight of God, his Angels and Saints.

We commonly see by experience, that the Plague into what House soever it
comes, makes all the Inhabitants fly, and shuts them out of doors: in the same
manner does ^his Plague of Drunkenness; it no sooner enters the Soul, but the
Grace of God departs; it no sooner enters, out at the same instant it expels
all good Motions and Inspirations, ba^ishes and drives away the Holy Ghost,
with all its Graces, Virtues, and Pious Desires; infecting, or making
ungrateful, and unacceptable, even all the good Works done by such a Person,
which otherwise might be meritorious of Eternal Life: So that in conclusion,
the Soul being thus divested of all her Spiritual Ornaments and Graces, how can
she appear otherwise than wholly deformed and corrupted in the sight of the
Celestial Court. Saint Basil gives Drunkenness the Character of a bewitching
Devil, a pleasant Poison for to take, and a pleasant Sin to commit. But (says
he) whosoever holds the same, cannot hold himself; and whosoever is taken by
it, may be said not so much to Sin, as to be Sin it self, because his condition
renders him subject to all Sin; and he is readily to be reduced to all manner
of Wickedness. In conclusion (says this Father) the Sin of Drunkenness is
worse than that of Theft. Thieves commonly leave something behind them, they do
not always strip, or leave naked those whom they Rob. But Drunkenness deprives
of all Grace, takes away all whatsoever is of Spiritual Nature or Ornament;
strips us of all our Heavenly Clothing, and leaves the poor Soul as Naked, and
void of all True Grace and Merit, as when it came first into the World. Thieves
when they have got their Prey, usually run away, or make all the haste they can
to be gone: But Drunkenness sticks close, holds fast, and without all mercy
prosecutes the poor despoiled Soul to the last, even till her Death.

I add moreover, that if a Man be taken by Thieves, he may cry out, he may hope
to be rescued from them, or at least if he sees himself in danger of Life, he
may call upon God and beg pardon of his Sins; he has time to dispose himself
for Death, by an Act of Contrition and True Repentance; by which means though
he cannot save his Life, yet at least he may save his Soul; which Drunkenness
will not permit to do being in that regard worse than any Sin, but the Sin
against the Holy a host. For whotsoever kind of Sin

Man commits (be it of frailty, be it of presumption, be it mortal, be it
venial) and happens presently upon it to find himself in eminen danger of
Death, yet at least by Gods Mercy he may have the Grace of Internal Repentance
in Heart and Mind, and perhaps also the External Help of the Church; he may be
Confessed, he may may receive the most Holy Communion, he may have the last
Sacrament Administered unto him. But if one falls into present danger of Death,
while he is Drunk, he can do none of these. Drunkards while they are in their
Drink, are Senseless, neither able in the least to help themselves, nor capable
to receive help from others; I mean Spiritual Help, and that which should save
their Souls, as well as their Bodies: but if they die, perish in their Sin and
shame, with the eternal loss of their poor Souls; which the Wise Solomon
desiring to prevent, forewarneth us of the danger in those words of his Prove.
23. 31, 32. which we shall do well, often and very often to have in minn, Ne
intuearis vinum quando flavescit, cum splenduerit in vitro color ejus, etc.
Look not upon the Wine when it is well colored, when the color thereof shall
shine in the Glass; for though it goes down pleasantly, yet at the later end it
will bite like a Serpent, and as the Basilisk, diffuse and spead its Venom, to
the Corruption of your Soul.

Sect. 3. Drunkenness (or the Excess of Meat and Drink) the Corruption of the
Body.
Thus it appears in some part that Drunkenness is the Corruption of the Soul,
and how the Soul is said to be C^^rupted. I am now to show, that it is likewise
the Corruption of the Body, and that in a more absolute sense, because the Body
is absolutely and entirely Corruptible; which the Soul is not. The very
Substance, Nature, and Essence of the Body may be Corrupted, and is Corrupted
by Drunkenness; but the Substance, Nature, and Essence of the Soul cannot be
Corrupted, as we have shown above. Well then, we are next to show, that the
Vice we speak of (Excessive Drinking) is the Corruption of the Body. And what
can be more evident and manifest than this, even from daily experience? Does
not Experience tell us, that it is the original cause of innumerable Distempers
and Diseases to Man's Body, and by which the greater part of Manknd first or
last do perish, or find the end of their days in this World? Does not the Wise
Man give us a necessary caution concerning this, in those words of his, Ecclus.
37. 32. Noli ^vidus esse in omni epulatione, etc. In all Feasting be not you
greedy, nor let loose your appetite to every thing that is set before you. For
through many Meats come many infirmities, and overmuch Feeding increases
Choler. By means of Surfeiting (by Meat or Drink) many have come to their ends.
People addicted to good Fellowship (as they call it) when after some excessive
Drinking, they find themselves not well, how many shifts do they use to hide
their oversight, and hinder the effect from being charged upon the True Cause!
Their Distemper must not be imputed to the quantity, that is to say, their
Drinking overmuch, but to the quality, their Drink was not good, it was not
well brewed, it was raw and windy, or the Malt was not well made; and many
such vain pretenses do they use, adding a lie to their former sin of
Drunkenness; and all, that it may not be thought to be their Drinking so much
should cause their Malady.

Certain it is, a moderate quantity of Drink, and also of Meat, hurts not,
but is necessary to satisfy and sustain Nature; neither is it the use, but the
abuse of Meat and Drink (to wit, when we observe no measure) which causes
Diseases: when the Golden Mean is observed, all goes well, but when it is
neglected, great inconveniences follow; according as Apuleius seems not
unhandsomely to express it. The first Cup (says he) is drunk to the Health of
Nature; the second causes Cheerfulness, Mirth, and harmless Pleasure; the third
relishes somewhat of Sensuality, and invites to Disorder and Voluptuousness;
but the fourth breeds Infirmities and Indisposition of Body, and (especially if
you add the fifth) Madness. Excess herein makes Man Created to the Image and
Likeness of God, and Reasonable above all other Creatures of this World, to
become wholly difform and unlike to God, losing his Reason and Understanding.
The Traveller that wants Wisdom, being Thirsty in the heat of Summer, as soon
as he meets with a Ditch full of Water in his Journey, he presently runs to it
for to Drink, minding only to quench his Thirst, and not at all considering
whether the Water be good, pure, clear, and wholesome, or whether it be not
corrupted, impure, and muddy; nor whether it be cold (as Water to Drink, should
be) or whether it be not heated with the Sunbeams, and made unfit to Drink.
The unwise Traveller considers none of these things, nor what inconveniences
may follow, but sets himself to Drink as much as he can, and so Drinks
oft-times his own Death, or manifold Diseases and Infirmities. But the Wise
Pilgrim, though he feels as much Thirst as the other, yet he moderates his
Appetite, and will not Drink till he comes at a clear Fountain of Running
Water; and of this he will Drink with moderation, not to overcharge Nature, but
to extinguish his Thirst. In the same manner it is with many that dwell at
home, and seldom travels farther than the Tavern, or Alehouse that they haunt.
They rush into these Common Drinking Places (far more corrupt and dangerous to
the Soul, by reason of the many Transgressions committed in them, than any
standing Pool or muddy Water can be to the Body) and there fall to Tipple and
Drink with as much Discretion, and Consideration of what they do, as the Beast
uses that goes from the Stall to Watering. Thus do many run daily to Drink,
and by their enticements carry others along with them, and provoke them to
Drink, not so much (many times) as well considering whether the Drink be good
or bad. Whereas those that are Virtuous and Wise, will rather have in scorn
such Places, and would never with their good will be seen in them; Drinking
always moderately, either at home in their own, or abroad at some Friends
Houses, only to content Nature, preserve Health, and comply with the devoirs of
honest Friendship.

Sect. 4. Sad Examples upon great Drinkers.
Gabriel Prateolus, in his second Tome of Chronicles, at the year 1580, the
24th of July, mentions a very sad accident which happened to two great
Health-drinkers, at a Town called Mackerhoven in Germany. These two unfortunate
Men came into a Tavern and called for Wine, which seeming to them to be weak,
and little pleasing to their Pallats, they insisted for better. So having
tasted of all sorts, they pitched at length upon that they found to be
strongest, and fell smartly to it; drinking to the Health of every one, they
could think of, or call to mind upon that occasion. Beginning to be elevated;
the one said to the other, To whom shall we now Drink? The other replied, Drink
to the Health of God, and you shall see how it shall be answered; but he being
unwilling, and making difficulty at it, the wretch that made the motion,
suddenly snatches the Glass out of his Companions hand, and in these words
provokes Divine Wrath upon himself; saying, O God hear me, I will Drink to
thee in a full Glass, and if you do not pledge me, you do me injury. His
Companion had first asked him of which Wine he would drink: Fill me of the New,
replied the wicked, for though it be raw and small, yet I will drink it for
this once. Then stretching his hand toward Heaven, he said (as above!) To
thee, O God I drink in a full Glass, etc. and haven taken it clean off; he said
agian, O God, if you do not find this Wine good, blame not me; for if you had
afforded us better Wine this year, I had drunk to you of the best. Having spoke
these words, he fell immediately down headlong upon the place, and so lay, not
stirring Hand or Foot, void of all his Senses and Reason; his Speech gone, and
no motion to be perceived in any part of him, save only in his Eyes, which
moved continually. His Companion dismayed at the sad Prodigy which had befallen
his Comerade, gets him away in all haste, and leaves him. The People of the
House use all the endeavor they can to remove him from the place where he lay;
but alls in vain. They call for help, and send for the Magistrate, and Chief of
the Town, who presently came, and resolved that he should be tied with Ropes,
and drawn away by force; this was also in vain. In conclusion, they all
perceived, that it was an extraordinary Judgment of God inflicted upon him for
his Sin, and to terrify others. Then they resolve to consume him by Fire, but
the Fire will not burn. So he remained in this manner a long time Alive, not
stirring Hand or Foot, without his Speech, and without receiving any sustenance
of Meat or Drink (doubtless to serve and be an Example of Terrors to all such
Sinners as he was) and at last died miserably.

SECTION IV. Drunkenness or the Excess of Meat or Drink, causes several Sins.
SECT. 1. Drunkenness the Original of several Sins. 2. It is a dangerous Storm
to the Body. 3. It raises a furious Tempest in the Tongue. 4. It is the Wrack
of Chastity.

Sect. 1. Drunkenness the Origin of several Sins.
THe Devil, the Immortal Enemy of Mankind, knowing full well that the Sin of
Drunkenness is one of the most odious, abominable, and destable before God, as
containing so many Deformities, and being perpetually attended more or less,
with so many Ill Consequences (so many horrible Sins, of which it is the Spawn
and Seed) cease not every day to tempt Mankind there^o, till they be
overthrown by it. This I shall make to appear by the Example that follows; bing
a mat^er of undoubted Truth, and men^ioned by several Authors of great Credit
and Estimation: as namely, Saint Hierome, Saint Bonaventure, and other Learned
Divines; who have attested the same by several ^eports.

It happened that a Young Gentleman was very much troubled with a continual
Temptation of Carnal Concupiscence, relating to sundry Objects, by means of
whom he was in danger to offend God. For several years he remained firm and
constant in his Duty to God; yet not without being extremely troubled with the
frequent encounters which he had with Satan; and beginning in some manner to
doubt of the issue, and whether he should not in fine be conquered through his
assiduous Assaults. Being at a time in some great perplexity of mind upon this
occasion the Devil appears to him in Humane Shape, and promises him he should
be instantly set free of all other Temptations and Perturbations whatsoever, if
he would choose to comm^^ but any one of these Three followin^ Sins; to wit,
Drunkenness, Wi^ful-murther, or Adultery. The po^^ unfortunate Man, willing to
be r^^ once for all of so many troubleso^^ Agitations of Mind, and tedious
Contests, as he was daily subject to; yield so far to Satan's Suggestion, as to
consider of the Proposition made him; and as for Wilful Murder he apprehended
it to be such a horrid Sin in Gods Sight, that he would not in any sort think
of committing that Sin, but abhorred and detested it with all earnestness. The
like Sentiments he had concerning Adultery, resolving rather to die than to
transgress the Commandment of God, and do his Neighbor such wrong. But as for
Drunkenness, seeing it to be the common Practice of so many, he took that to be
but a Venial Sin, or an act of Humane Frailty, and so made no great Conscience
of it, but struck up the Bargain with the Devil, and consented to be Drunk;
thinking that to be the least Sin. Time, and Place is appointed, the Devil and
he fall to it stoutly, and in con^lusion the Poor Man is overcome with Drink,
as the Devil would have it. But see the malice of Satan, and the mischief of
Drunkenness; The Man no sooner began to be a little elevated with Drink, but
his mind was after the Woman of the House, to lust after her; which Satan
perceiving, and knowing he was now, by reason of his Drunkenness, in a
condition unable to resist his Temptations; plies him so, that he consents to
commit Adultery with that Woman; and being accidentally surpised, and taken in
the Fact by the Husband, to avoid the penalty of Law, which was likely to be
inflicted upon him by the Husbands procurement; he suddenly sets upon him, and
kills him in the same place. Thus by the event of this sad Example, you see how
he that thought t^ have chosen the least Sin, chose the greatest (so dangerous
a thing it ^^ to choose any Sin, even the smallest and saw himself involved in
the m^^ heinous and execrable of Sins; a^ all this caused by the Sin of
Dru^kenness.

Sect. 2. Drunkenness a dangerous storm to the Body.
Drunkenness may be well described a most dangerous storm to the Body; for as a
Boat, or some small Vessel at Sea, in a storm, is tossed to and fro by the
motion of the Waves, so is it with the Drunkard; he is in like manner tossed to
and fro by the force of his Drink: and this not more outwardly in Body, than
inwardly in mind. His Body reels not more than his Brains; as his Body
staggers, so his mind is not steady, but continually agitated with various and
contrary Phantasms, which draw him first to this vain, or sinful Object, then
to that: which the Wise Solomon has long since well observed, comparing him,
for this ^eason, to a Man sleeping upon the Waves at Sea. Eris (says he,
speak^ng unto, and instructing a Drun^ard) sicut dormiens in medio mari, etc.
Thou shall be like to one that sleeps in the midst of the Sea, or as the Pilot
of a Ship, who through slumber has lost his hold. The Holy Father Saint
Chrysostom, extends himself more at large upon this Simile, comparing the
Drunkard to a Ship at Sea, that is over-laden; which in a Tempest is soon cast
away. So (says he) is the case of every one that is overcharged with Meat and
Drink, that have taken in a greater lading of these things than Nature
requires, or can well bear; none are more subject to be cast away Body and Soul.

Most certain it is, that when a Ship is over-laden, especially when the Sea is
tempestuous or stormy, that neither the Masters Care, nor Pilots Skill, nor the
Help of all the People in the Ship, can save such ^^ Ship from sinking, unless
they unlade her. Such is the case of all the^ that are surcharged with Drink,
nothing can do them any good so lon^ as they are Drunk; no good thoughts take
place in them, no inspirations, no good counsel, no instruction can be given
them to any effect; neither the fear of God, nor the fear of what will come on
them at last, works ought, or prevails with them to cease their Drinking: all
means used to this proving vain and ineffectual, as woeful, and almost daily
experience shows.

If you would hear more of this Subject, viz. what agitations and tossings of
mind, no less than of Body, Drunkards do suffer in the stormy tempests of their
Drunken Fits, Saint Ambrose will tell you, that those who are in Drink, are
(like Men in a Tempest) tossed this way and that way; and with great
unquietness agitated in several respects: First, they are disquieted with vain
and contrary Cogitations; their Thoughts, and the inclinations of their Mind
reel and stagger, sometimes to the right Hand, sometimes to the left; not being
able either to discern Truth from Falsehood, or to resolve what is fit; or unfit
to be done. Their Sight ofttimes fails, they are unstable in their Goings, they
Trip, and Overreach, and Stumble almost at every Step, sometimes Falling, and
always in danger to Fall; in their distempered Fantasies imagining that they
saw Mountains and Valleys, and heard various Sounds, and Noises. All their
Bodies become at length Quagmires of Evil and Corrupt Humors, in which their
Spirits are so bemir'd and clamm'd up, that they find not such free passage, as
the Health and Constitution of their Bodies require. All their Members are as
it were disjoynted, and out of place; so that none of them perform their Office
well. Their Heads Wag, their Tongues Faulter and Stammer, their Hands Shake and
Tremble, as if they were Paralytique, or had the Palsy; their Knees and
Hamstrings Fail, their Feet Trip, and Strike so long one against the other,
that at length down they fall Headlong; and there the Beast lies, till Company
come to help him up. To this purpose speaks the Holy Father, and by this True
Description you may see, how dangerous a Distemper Drunkenness is, and how
prejudicial both to Soul and Body.

Sect. 3. Drunkenness raises a furious Tempest in the Tongue.
After so great a storm and disturbance to the whole Body, the Tempest of the
Tongue follows, which is a particular (but yet an unruly Member, as the Apostle
says, Jac. 38.) and the excess of Drink makes it much more unruly. Drunkenness
excites and moves the Tongue to all manner of mischief and ill-speaking. Hence
come filthy, lewd, and lascivious Expressions; hence come lying, and false
boasting; hence come insolent, contumelious and provoking Words; hence come
Envious, Malevolent, and Detracting Discourse, Censorious Language. The Tongue
of a Drunkard is the most prompt Instrument the Devil has, to tempt unto all
Evil, and to withdraw from all Good. The Drunkards Tongue is apt to Swear, to
Curse, and Blaspheme, The Drunkard makes no scruple to take Gods Name in vain,
to boast falsely and vain gloriously of himself, and to be extravagant in
Speech, relating as well to God as his Neighbor; whom he spares not
uncharitably and causelessly to traduce, whether absent or present, whether
alive or dead.

And from Evil Words they proceed to Evil Actions; for Drunkards are commonly
Quarrelsome and given to Contentions, especially in their Drink. As great
Friends as they will seem to be, yet none more apt to fall out, none more apt
to have wranglings, brawlings, and animosities one with another. Whosoever will
not say as they say, and do as they do, they take it for an affront, and resent
it, when they see opportunity. So true it is, what the Scripture says, Ecclus.
31. v. 39. Ebrietatis animositas, imprudentis offensio, etc. The Animosity that
comes by Drunkenness, makes the Fool to offend (or do something which he should
not do) it abates Valor, and procures him Wounds. The Discourse of Drunken
Men, what is it for the most part, but Vaunting, or Ribauldry, lewd or
detracting Speech, rash Judgments, hard Censures? Sin all. The Wise Man says,
In multiloquio non deest peccatum. In much talk there wants not Sin. And who
more talkative than Men in Drink? insomuch as it is taken for a Prodigy almost,
or at least for a Disease, to observe any of them to be deep in Drink and deep
in Silence at the same time, if they be awake.

Saint Ambrose touches some of these People to the Quick, Saying, When
Drunkards are got together, and set to their Drinking in Taverns and
Alehouses, though some of them have scarce a Shirt to their Back, or Meat to
Eat the next day, yet at this time they will have their Verdicts, and (with
equal Folly and Impudence) pass their Censures even upon Kings, Princes, and
all others, that are above them in Authority or Honor; and more especially,
when Things go contrary to their Will and Mind. This vain and contemptible sort
of People, seem to themselves to Reign, and Rule, and Command great Armies:
They seem in their own Conceits io be Rich and Powerful, who are in truth
Beggars, when they are sober. While they are in Drink, they have all Things in
Plenty; they give Gold, they scatter Silver, build Castles in the Air, and what
not? when as (perhaps) really they have scarce Money enough to pay their
reckoning. These people are not capable of advice, as contemning all good
counsel that can be given them, being of those whom the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 21.
20. styles, Contumaces and protervos, Froward and stubborn Children;
comessationibus vacantes: Giving themselves to Riot and Drunkenness, to
Feasting and Tippling; who, when they are once high-flown with Liquor, think
none so good, or so wise, as themselves; pretending to know allt things, when
indeed they know nothing as they ought, and themselves least of all; taking
upon them to dispute of all Matters, and to determine in all Cases, to
interpret all Laws, Divine and Humane; yea to Correct, and Control, if the
Humor be strong in them: for with too many of them it is a Custom, not only to
drink beyond measure, but in the midst of their Drunken Cups to fall into
dispute about Matters of Religion, and to discuss in that contentious and
profane manner, things most Sacred. So that full well is the Saying of St. Paul
(1 Timothy 6. v. 4.) verified of them; Superbi sant, ni hill scientes, etc. They
are Proud, knowing nothing, but languishing about Questions, and strifes of
Words; whereof comes Envy, Strife, Railings, Evil Surmizings, perverse
Disputings of Men, corrupt in their Minds, and destitute of the True Faith;
from whom we are to withdraw, and with whom we should have nothing to do. For
without doubt, where such indiscreet and blind Zeal is, there is none of that
Wisdom which descends from above, but that only whereof Saint James speaks
(Jac. 3. v. 15.) which is Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish: and where that is,
there is nothing but Inconstancy (a perpetual Symptom of the Drunkards
Disease) and all perverse Doing.

Sect. 4. Drunkenness the wrack of Chastity.
Never was it otherwise to be seen, never was any Person, never was any People
or Nation, infamed for the Sin of Drunkenness; but the same was likewise ill
spoken of for their unchaste Luxury. The Holy Scripture joins them commonly
together, to wit, Drunkenness and Luxury; so says the Prophet O see (Chap. 4.
v. 11.) Fornicatio, Vinum and Ebrietas auferunt cor. Fornication and
Drunkenness take away the Heart from God. And so says the Apostle Saint Paul;
Sicut in die honest ambulemus. Let us walk honestly in the day, not in Riot
and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness. Oculi tui videbunt
extraneas, etc. Thine eyes (says Solomon, applying his Speech to one overtaken
with Wine) shall look after Strange Women. This his Wisdom taught us; and it is
much to be feared that his Weakness and unhappy Failings at the end of his
days, were a further proof of his Doctrine. For we read 3 Reg 11. v. 1. that he
had Seven hundred Wives, ann Three hundred Concubines (so many Women could not
be entertained without much Wine) and averterunt mulieres, cor ejus. His Women
turned away his Heart, in his Old Age from serving God, to the worshipping of
Idols; Chamos the Idol of Moab, and Melcon the Abomination of the Ammonites.
This great and sad Example of Humane Frailty ought to be ever before our Eyes,
to put us in mind of what we ought to fear, in case we choose rather to follow
the Evil Example, than the good Counsel of this Great and Over-happy King;
Exodus 32. v. 6. is said of the Children of Israel (being now fallen to
Idolatry, and having made themselves a Golden Calf to Worship, instead of the
True and Living God) Sedit populus manducare and bibere; and Surrexerunt
ludere. The People sat down to Eat and Drink, and rose up to Play. Which Play
in this place signifies according to the Sense and Opinion of Learned
Expositors, not simple, or harmless sports, which People might use one with
another without sin; but a sinful Wantonness, and liberty of Luxurious Actings,
which usually attended Idolatry, and were as certain Privileges and Immunites
granted to the Attendants of Idolatrous Service. They were unchaste Sports
which the People gave themselves to, after they had filled their Bellies with
Wine and good Cheer in honor of the accursed Idol; which still shows how
inconsistent the Virtue of Chastity is with the Vice of Intemperance.

Lot, the Nephew of Abraham, is another sad instance of this truth, who in his
Drunkenness defiled himself with his two Daughters, committing a double crime
of Incest, according as the holy Text relates it. Lot, after the destruction of
Sodom, dwelling in a Cave of the Wilderness alone with his Daughters, they
conspire together to have issue by their Father, and to that end find means to
make him drunk; Come (say they, Genes. 19. 31, 32, 36.) our Father is old, and
there is not a man in the earth to come in to us after the manner of all the
earth. Come, let us make our Father drink Wine, and we will lie with him, that
we may preserve Seed of our Father. Which resolution being forthwith effected,
the Text concludes, Thus were both the Daughters of Lo^ with-child by their
Father. The example of Noah comes nigh also to this: For though he were eve^ by
the testimony of God himself (Genes. 7. v. 1.) the only just an^ righteous
person then living in the world, yet happening to be over come by Wine, he was
found lyin^ in such a manner, as Chastity would have blushed at; those parts
being uncovered

3. It causes Vainglory in Wicked Actions. 4. It causes Filthiness and
Uncleanness.
Sect. 1. The Excess of Meat and Drink causes Immoderate Pleasure and Vanity.
IT cannot be denied but foolish and wanton Mirth, immoderate Laugh^er, and
those other Sensual Vanities, which the World so much affects, ^ave their
Source in us from several Causes, and are exercised upon se^eral Accounts, yet
for the most ^art they proceed from the Excess of ^eat and Drink; they are as
it were ^^ inseparable Adjunct, though not ^^ essential Property of such
Excess. ^hey may be found and observed ^^metimes where no such Excess is, ^t
such Excess is never found with^^t them; witness that of Exodus ^hap. 32. v.
6.) where it is said of the Children of Israel, having newly made their Golden
Calf, and being very Jolly and Mirthful upon that occasion; Sedit yopulus
manducare and bibere (the people (first) sat down to Eat and Drink, and having
Eaten and Drink their fill, then Surrexerunt ludere: They rose up to Play; they
were then in a Disposition fit for idle Mirth and vain Pleasure. They were then
fit to Dance about the Golden Calf, which they had caused Aaron to make;
witness also all Feasts and Banquets that are made, where Wine and good Cheer
being in Plenty (and most commonly in Excess) they seldomend but with Play an^
vain Sport, Singing, Dancing, or the like; as we see in the great Feast which
King Herod made, Principibus, and T^^bunis, and primis Galileae; as Saint Mark
in his Gospel reports it (Ch^^ 6. 21.) to his Lords, High Captains, an^ Chiif
States of Galile upon his Birth day; the Feast ended with Danci^ and Sport;
which (as the Holy Gosp^^ shows) Filia Herodiadis introiit, etc. The Daughter
of Herodias came in and danced, and in her Dancing so pleased Herod, that with
a rash Oath he swore to give her whatsoever she would ask, though it were to
the half of his Kingdom; and she, according to her Mothers Instruction,
desiring the Head of Saint John the Baptist, the King, though sad and troubled
somewhat at her Request, would not displease her. So the Holy Man lost his Head
to contenta Harlot; and that was the end of a Riotous Feast.

Job that Good and Just Person, knew and well considered all this; and
therefore we read of him, that when his Sons and Daughters had Feasted and
entertained one another with Wine and Good Cheer, as their Custom was; their
Good and Careful Father did constantly at the end of every such Feast, offer
Sacrifice to God for them, and for the expiation of the Sins they might have
cmomitted in their Feasting and Jollity. For so the Holy Text says (Job 1.
15.) Consurgens diluculo offerebat holocausta pro singulis, etc. That he rose
early and offered Burnt Offerings for every one of them; Saying, My Children
(it may be) have sinned and offended God in their Mirth. And thus he did
continually: Endeavoring thereby to the utmost of his Power, that what by the
Spirit of God, he pronounces of the wicked in another place (viz. Chap. 21. v.
12, 13.) might not be verified of his Children. Tenent Tympanum and Citharam,
etc. They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the Sound of the Organ:
They spend their days in Vanity, and in a moment go down to Hell. This sad and
sorrowful conclusion of wanton and excessive Mirth, the paternal Care and pious
Solicitude of this good Father labored to prevent (as much as he could) in
those that were his; and conformably hereto. Saint Gregory, speaking of the
immoderate Pleasure and vain Sports that usually attend great Banquets and
Feasting; tells us, They end commonly in Voluptuousness; and it stands with
reason that so it should be: For the Body abounding, and as it were swimming in
the delectation which proceeds from Meat and Drink; both the Heart and Spirits
easily concur and helps toward that which is so agreeable to corrupt Nature,
that is, to vain Recreation and foolish Mirth.

Sect. 2. The excess of Meat and Drink causes undue multiplying of words, and
dishonest discourse.
Who can doubt of this, who knows in any sort the fashion of the World, or the
manners of Men? Luxuriosa res, vinum; tumultuosa, Ebrietas, says the Wise Man,
Prove. 20. 1. Wine causes luxury, drunkenness, tumult, and contention: And in
another place it is said, Cui, vae? etc. who has woe? who has sorrow? who
has contention and babbling? Nonne his, qui commorantur in vino, and student
calicibus epotandis. Do not all these (and more) happen to those that tarry
long at the Wine, that make it their Midnights work to take off their Cups?
none doubts it, none can be ignorant, what quarrels and quarrelsome brawlings
happen to this sort of men: And it is the same in respect of Ribauldry, and
dishonest discourse; for the Drunkards talk is never chaste when he falls upon
that subject, or that the least occasion be given him to utter his mind. Oculi
tui videbunt extraneas, etc. Prove. 23. 33. Your eyes (O ye Drunkards) will look
after strange women, and your hearts will (then) utter strange and perverse
things. Out of the abundance of your silthy hearts your unchaste tongues will
then speak. What shall I say of censorious speech, detracting speech,
slanderous speech, rash judgments? are they any where more frequent, more
vehement, more bitter, than in the Drunkards mouth? Even the meanest, when they
are in their drink, will not spare to speak their minds, and censure the best;
and they that have nothing, not (perhaps) a good shirt to their backs, or meat
to put in their mouths, will talk in their Cups, as if they had all things at
command. Pardon the expression, I pray, if it seems homely; I had it from S.
Ambrose, and have mentioned it already above.

All which excesses of vain and wicked words, proceed from the excess of Wine
and strong drink: That Is it which distempers their brains, and puts them so out
of order, that they speak at random, without sense, or any due consideration of
what they speak; not knowing nor remembering many times what they have said or
done the next day: And most true it is, what the Scripture mentions to this
purpose, 3 Esdr. Chapter 3. v. 18, etc. Vinum praevalet omnibus hominibus, qui
bibunt illud, etc. Wine prevails over all men that drink the same: It seduces
the minds of all men without exception, of the King as well as the Orphan, of
the Bond, and of the Free: it seduces the mind of the Rich, as well as the
Poor: It remembers no duty to God, nor to the King, nor to the Magistrate: It
makes a man speak all things by Talents (that is, magnificently and
boastingly:) It regards neither Friendship nor Kindred; it puts all Love, all
Civilities, all Obligations out of remembrance; and so long as one remains in
that stupid condition, he is sensible of no extravagances, how many soever he
commits; nor remembers when he is sober what he has done, or said in his drink.

Sect. 3. The excess of Meat and Drink causes men to take vainglory in their
wicked actions.
No marvel it should be so: For first, men are naturally apt to boast and speak
highly and vauntingly of themselves, oft-times much beyond the line of Truth
and Modesty, even when they are sober: Who can expect less of them when they
are drunk? and being, for the most part, such kind of people as have little or
nothing of good in them, who can wonder they should glory in that which is ill?
Let them alone, they boast but of their own; the vice, the sin, the naughtiness
which is in their wicked hearts, overflows at their mouth; it must have a vent
first or last, and a drunken fit is only a time when it comes forth with most
ease. Where there is excess of Wine, says S. Chrysostom, there the Devil
reigns; whose Kingdom consists in filthy and lewd talk, dishonest Songs, wanton
and unchaste actions. We read of a rich Glutton in the Gospel (Luc. 16. v. 19.)
Qui induebatur purpura and bysso, and ^pulabatur quotidie splendide, etc. Who
was clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and feasted it sumptuously every day;
and though, in the Parable, there be nothing expressly mentioned of his sin,
save only his luxury and hardheartedness toward the poor; yet by the punishment
which for his sins he met with in Hell, it is the pious and not improbable
conjecture of some, that he was a great Offender in that kind of sin whereof we
now speak; namely, of boasting, and glorying in his wickedness, through the
excess of his felicity, and intemperate pampeting of himself with meat and
drink. For we find him extremely tormented in his Tongue; insomuch that he
begged earnestly of Abraham for a drop of cold water to cool the burning heat of
it, v. 24. and it is a Rule which Divine Justice oft-times observes, Vt per
quae peccat quis, per ea puniatur, in those things, and by those things
wherewith we offend, we find our punishment, Sap. 11. v. 17.

Yea, such is the unhappiness of man, that partly through the force of Wine and
strong drink (which distempers their brains, and perverts their minds so, that
they consider not what they do) and partly through that spirit of satanical
emulation that is amongst them, envying one another even in doing ill, and
striving who shall do worst: it is a known thing, and frequently observed of
this sort of people, that in their Drink-revellings they will boast of much
more wickedness than ever they committed indeed; only that they may not seem to
be out-gone by others in this part of Devilish Gallantry, that is, in
contemning God, and transgressing his holy Commandments: Merely that they may
not seem to come behind others in the practice of ill, they will be-ly their
own Conscience, and profess themselves more guilty than they are; not for want
of will, you may justly think, but for want of opportunity, and ability
perhaps, to effect that which they had will, and bad inclination enough to have
done: And it being so, that he is most applauded that can speak the greatest
evil of himself, it makes this mad Crew ambitious to be thought superlatively
wicked; and to fear nothing more, than to be counted Sneaks, and poor-spirited
Fellows, not worthy of the name of Hectors, by this Brotherhood of Hell.

Neither is it any new thing. Thus it has been of old: The good Father S.
Augustine, in his Books of Confessions, does no less than report and confess
this fault to have been his own before his Conversion. He humbly acknowledges
of himself, that hearing his Companions boast of their wicked exploits, and
seeing that they rendered themselves more glorious in the opinion of their
Fellows, by how much they could speak beastly and dishonestly of themselves;
and being perpetually amongst them, he could not forbear doing as the rest did,
not for any appetite which he had to the thing whereof he boasted, but merely
for the complacency which he took in being applauded for the same by his
Companions, who gave credit to what he (feignedly and falsely) spoke of himself.
I was fain (says he) to counterfeit the evil which I had not, and to seem as
if I had done it; I durst not be thought innocent, for fear of being
disesteemed and rejected for a worthless Fellow. I was loath to be thought
sober, chaste, or continent, least chastity and sobriety should make me
condemned by them, and the world.

Thus does this good Father make public and penitent confession of himself in
this, and some other kinds of sin, which his Youth and ill Company, through
intemperance, had made him, for some time while he was young, subject unto. Oh
that his good example could be followed! Oh that we could be persuaded to break
off this devilish custom of boasting, and glorying in sin, and that there
might be no such people found among us as S. Jude speaks of, feeding themselves
without fear, no such sports in our feasts, no such raging waves, foaming out
their own shame! That we would dread the Judgment that is threatened to such,
quibus procella tenebrarum servata est in aeternum. Woe unto them walkers in
the way of perdition, walkers after their own lusts; to whom the blackness of
darkness, and the Hell of misery is reserved for ever, Jude 11, 12, 13, 16.

Sect. 4. The excess of Meat and Drink causes filthiness and uncleanness.
There is a double or twofold kind of filthiness here to be taken notice of,
The one, which is only sordid, and offensive to the eye of the Body: The other
is sinful, and offensive to the eye of the Soul, when she judges right, and
(which is more) to the Eyes of God. They both attend drunkenness, or the excess
of meat and drink, when it is immoderate. The Drunkard shows himself a filthy
Beast, in respect of this first kind of uncleanness, viz. that of the Body;
witness their frequent vomitings, spewings, and castings out of that which they
had intemperately taken in: For when their Stomachs, those devouring
Sepulchers, those Bellies of Harpies, which raven all by gluttony and excessive
drinking, have been in the daytime overcharged with all sorts of luscious meat
and strong liquors, it seldom happens but in the night they discharge
themselves by shameful vomiting and spewing.

Thus it was with the people of the Jews: The Prophet Isaias complains of it in
these terms (Isa. 28. 7.) Omnes prae Vino erraverunt, etc. All have erred
through Wine (says he) and through strong drink all are out of the way. -- All
Tables are so filled of vomit and filthiness, that there is no place clean. Is
it not a deplorable thing to see Christians at this day behave themselves worse
than the bruit beasts, they know when they have enough: the bruit beasts
neither eat nor drink till they vomit all up again: they eat and drink till
Nature is satisfied; and when they have arrived to that point, all the art, and
all the means you can use, shall not make them go further, till hunger and
thirst prompts them: Only Man, only unhappy and unwise man, eats and drinks to
such excess, as he is forced (to his shame, were he not past all shame) to cast
up his so unduly and indiscreetly received sustenance. Of all the Creatures
that God has made, Man only will drink to vomit, and vomit (O strange! O
devilish distemper!) to drink again; as to my knowledge is true.

Secondly, there is the filthiness and uncleanness of sin going along with
drunkenness, filthy and unchaste thoughts, filthy and unclean desires, filthy
and unclean fantasies and imaginations of things, filthy and unclean designs,
projects, purposes, filthy and unclean speech, discourse; songs, filthy and
unclean actions, fornication, adultery, incest, pollution: All these
filthinesses and uncleanness attend the Drunkard, and are the constant
relics and remains, as it were, of his Feasts. So that S. Chrysostom does here
again rightly pronounce, Ebrietas scortationis matter; Drunkenness (says he) is
the Mother of Whoredom; all filthy and lewd concupiscence proceeds from it: And
again, Nothing (says he) is more pernicious than gluttony, nothing more
ignominious than to exceed in drink, nothing more detestable than both, as
dulling the spirit, and blinding the understanding, not permitting those who
are addicted to them, to foresee and beware any thing that is hurtful to their
soul or body; but subjecting them to a slothful idleness, both spiritual and
corporal. For which cause, in the Gospel of S. Luke, Christ our Savior
admonishes us in these words (Luc. 21. v. 34.) Attendite vobis, ne forte
graventur corda vestra in crapula and ebrietate, etc. Take heed, and look well
to your selves, least perhaps your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, etc. and so that day (meaning the day of Judgment) come upon you
unawares. He that is so overcharged can think of nothing that is good, either
for himself, or others: he has lost the use of his understanding, together with
that of his limbs: his head, hands and feet failing him, he falls, and (without
help) there lies in his filthiness, to his deserved shame and confusion.

SECTION VI. Excess in Meat and Drink the cause of several other
inconveniences and miseries.
SECT. 1. It causes a voluntary madness. 2. It causes Men to be worse than
Beasts. 3. It causes want of necessary provisions. 4. A sad ezample upon that
account. 5. Remedies against Gluttony and Drunkenness. 6. Reflection upon the
foregoing matter.

Sect. 1. Drunkenness causes a voluntary madness.
IT stands with all reason, that if we call them Wise Men, who in their
infirmities (whether of Body or Soul) help themselves, and procure the best and
speediest remedies they can for their disease, to that end taking the advice of
the ablest Physicians and Doctors for their corporal Maladies, and following
the good counsel of their spiritual Directors, for the health of their Souls:
So on the contrary, we may justly call and account them fools, or mad people,
who being in health, and good disposition of body, will unadvisedly run into
those extravagancies and excesses, as will infallibly bring great disorder and
harm both to Body and Soul if they stop not in time, and that the mischief be
not prevented by better resolutions: Such for the most part are those that
haunt Taverns and Alehouses; to their great prejudice they expose themselves to
all the perils and dangers that usually attend those places, which are not few,
nor of small importance. Besides, if we call those Naturals who want the use of
reason (be it by birth, by sickness, or by any other accident) with how much
more reason may we style them so, that wilfully and of their own accord will
lose their Senses, will deprive themselves of the use of Reason, Understanding,
Memory; that will voluntarily disable their bodily limbs, and render them
useless and unserviceable; as namely, their hands, feet, etc. Can we think such
worthy of the name of Reasonable Men? yet all this do the Drunkards. They (for
a time) disable themselves both as to body and mind; they (for a time) deprive
themselves of Reason, Understanding, Memory, Senses; they (for a time) unman
themselves, and become mere Beasts in the shape of men: So that it may seem a
Solicism, even to call them Naturals. They deserve not so good a name, doing
things so contrary unto, and beneath the Dignity of Humane Nature.

And well it were for them, if the want and loss (for a time) of their
Understanding, Reason and Senses, their being so justly ranked and compared to
Beasts, with the other corporal prejudices which they suffer for a time, could
satisfy for their folly, and redeem them from further harm; But alas! it will
not. The Drunkard is not more odious in the sight of man, than he is in the
sight of God, when he lies like a Beast in his drunkenness, vomiting and
spewing; when he can neither stand nor go, he is not more despised by men, than
he is by Angels, Saints, and all the Celestial Court of Heaven: And a wise
custom it was of the Lacedaemonians, who (as it is reported of them) would often
show to their Children drunken men, in their fits of drunkenness, to the end
they might learn betimes to hate and abhor that wicked sin: For, without doubt,
there is nothing more apt to make drunkenness abhorred and detested, than to
observe the filthy and beastly behavior, both in word and deed, of those whose
Brains are distempered, and their Stomachs overcharged with excess of Wine.

Sect. 2. Drunkenness makes Men worse than bruit Beasts.
According to our Seraphical Doctor, S. Bonaventure, Drunkards are more
senseless and unreasonable than bruit Beasts; because Bruits do all things
according to kind, and as their Nature requires; whereas Drunkards do all
things contrary to, and otherwise then their Nature requires of them; and the
Opinion of that Saint is fully confirmed by Saint Peter (2 Pet. 2. 13, 14,
etc.) where speaking of the Sodomites (who were People given to this and all
other kinds of lewd Intemperance) calls them, Irrationabilia pecora,
unreasonable, Bruit Beasts, made to be taken and destroyed; walking after the
Flesh in the Lust of Uncleanness; and making a further description of them, he
says, they count it pleasure (or sport) to riot in the day time, and sport
themselves with their own mis-doings, while they Feast it; having Eyes full of
Adultry, and that cannot cease from Sin, alluring unstable Souls; having their
hearts exercised with covetous Practices; Children of Malediction; leaving the
right way, they follow the way of Balaam the Son of Bosor, who loved the reward
of Iniquity. But received a ch^ck for his Madness: the dumb Beast under the
Yoke, speaking with Man's Voice, and forbidding the Madness of the Prophet. Thus
largely does the Apostle by the Spirit of God descant upon the wickedness of
intemperate lewd People; showing thereby how much worse they are, by reason of
their Vices, than the Beasts of the Field.

They are in another respect also worse. The Brute Beasts have a sense and
tenderness, at least for those of their own kind, and be moved, if not to help
them, yet to show a compassion, or fellow-sufferance with them. Gluttons and
Drunkards have no such sense or feeling, for those of their kind. They are
wholly insensible of the wants and miseries of their poor Neighbor. Dives his
Dogs had more Humanity toward poor Lazarus, than their Master. His Cruelty
shut the poor Beggar out of Doors; but the Dogs came and licked his Sores, Luc.
16. 21. The Prophet Amos makes the same Observation or Complaint of the
Drunkards in his time; namely, How hard-hearted they were, and incompassionate
toward such as needed compassion; spending largely and superfluously upon
themselves, but finding nothing to bestow upon the Poor. They drink Wine in
Bowls (says the Prophet) they anoint themselves with the best Ointments; but
Super contritione Joseph; for the Afflictions of Joseph they have no sense, no
compassion; Wine and Drunkenness take away their Heart from being acquainted
with any such Thoughts: and as Beasts in their Eating and Drinking, follow
merely their Appetite without Discretion or Consideration of any thing else, so
do Drunkards and Gluttons; they regard neither time nor season, if their
Appetite invites, nor manner, nor measure, so long as it pleases their Palate;
it shall down, as long they are able to Swallow; never asking the question
whether it be necessary or no, but seeking only to fulfill their greedy
Appetites with all the variety and superfluity of delicious Meats and
Strong-drinks they can procure. Seneca styles such as these Abdomini Servientes
(Belly Slaves) and puts them in the rank of Beasts for that reason, rejecting
them from the society of Men, as being unworthy of that Name; and truly much
less worthy of the name of Christians.

Sect. 3. Drunkenness causes the want of necessary Provisions.
This Subject will not be very hard to be made appear, since we see it almost
by daily Experience, that Riot and Drunkenness consumes the Estates of all; it
impoverishes the Gentry, it wastes the Stock and Riches of the Merchant, and
brings to want many Able Persons, as well in City as Country; and to absolute
misery such as are of themselves Poor, and have nothing but honest industry and
frugality to maintain them; for of such the saying of Solomon appears to be
most true; Ecclus. 19. 1. Operarius ebriosus non locupletabitur. A Workman who
is a Drunkard shall not be Rich. It is needless to bring Arguments to verify
this Matter, and to prove it by Examples seems less necessary; since the
pressing wants and needy Condition of so many known Drunkards, and
Ale-house-haunters, as are in all Cities, and Towns of Note, may sufficiently
satisfy us of the Truth hereof: And though these Pot-companions should flatly
deny this, viz. that their Poverty proceeds from their Drunkenness, and
mis-spending their Time and Money in Alehouses, and should attribute the same
to Sickness, the Wars, Fire, Water, or other Accidents; yet the daily Clamours,
Lamentations, and sorrowful Outcries of their unfortunate Wives and Children
will manifestly convince the contrary; and show that their poverty proceds only
from their excessive Drinking, Idleness, and ill expense of their Money upon
such occasions. For of such People is verified that of the Prophet Aggeus,
(Chap. 1. 6.) Mercedes congregant, and mittunt eas in sacculum pertusum. They
gather wages, but put their Money into a broken Bag. These Mechanique Drunkards
(if you will observe) oft-times for the whole Week, or on Working-days, are
industrious and ply their Business; but when Sunday or an Holy Day comes, all,
or most of what they have, is seen to be put into a broken Bag: They spend it
idly, their unsatiable Appetite of Drinking devours so much of it, that their
poor Families (Wife and Children) live in perpetual need, wanting necessaries,
and are forced very often, by extreme necessity to sell, or pawn the Clothes
off their Backs, to supply their urgent occasions, and not seldom (such is
their unhappy condition) to take unlawful courses.

Sect. 4. A sad Example upon that Account.
Father John Benedict, a very Learned Divine of the Seraphical Order of Saint
Francis, verifieth what we have said above, by a lamentable Example that
happened in his days: A certain Person (says he) given to Drunkenness, had
consumed and wasted all that he had with excessive Drinking; and being through
Poverty forced to live by his Labor and Industry, he would take more p^ins and
care to get Money to Drink, than to provide Maintenance for his Wife and
Children; so that they starved at home for want of Victuals, whilst he lay
drinking at the Alehouse. Urgent necessity at length overcomes the patience of
the desolate Wife; who having used all the means possible at home and in
private, to persuade her Husband to better courses, and to withdraw from his
idle and extravagant Expenses; and not being able to prevail with him, she went
one day to the Alehouse, where she knew he was Drinking, and there openly
declared the woeful necessitous Condition that she and her poor Children were
in, being in likelihood to perish for Hunger; with all entreating her Husband
by all Love, with Tears, and by all means possible, perswadeing him to take
compassion of his poor Children and Family, ready to starve for want of Bread:
But this wicked wretch, instead of giving ear to her Complaints and
Persuasions, and instead of following her Counsel, falls into Rage and Passion
thereupon, and most inhumanely beats her; insomuch that for a while she was
left for dead.

But at length the poor Woman with much ado gets up, and going homewards, two
of her Children came to meet her, crying for Victuals, and pulling her on
either side by the Clothes, Saying to her, Da panem Matter; fame perimus. Mother
give us some Bread, we are ready to die for Hunger; it is two days past since
we eat any think. To which lamentable cry of her Children, the poor Mother
replies, Ha, my poor Babes, what remedy! from whence should I procure you
Bread! your Father spends faster than we can get! what shall we do! It Is better
to die once than to languish a long time, and to perish at last for Hunger, as
we do: We had better by one short Death redeem a thousand lingering Deaths?
Having uttered this doleful Speech, and become half out of her Wits, in a
desperate manner she takes a Knife and cuts the Throat of her Children: which
done, and intending to prosecute the same Bloody Resolution toward her
Husband, she expects his coming home, which according to his custom was about
Midnight: The Man deep in Drink, takes notice of nothing, but goes to Bed;
little dreaming what was to follow. The unfortunate Woman waited not long
before she found him fast asleep; whereupon, taking the Knife with which she
had killed her two Children, she cuts his Throat with the same; saying, Die
thou wretch, thy wicked Life has procured thy ruin and mine, and the ruin of
thy Children.

The Murder was no sooner done but discovered, and the Woman being apprehended
and brought before the Justice, she openly declared the Fact, and was condemned
to die for it; which she did not much refuse: but contrariwise went
courageously, and most willingly to the place of Execution, where, having given
warning to all bad Husbands, how they spend their Money (which should be for
the just Maintenance of their Wife and Children) in base Alehouses, with the
loss of their Souls; she was Executed and suffered Death.

Sect. 5. Remedies against Gluttony and Drunkenness.
Seeing that for the most part both the Soul and Bodies of Christians are
through intemperance and immoderate Eating and Drinking, so ulcerated and
corrupted, that many of them do not only languish and pine away under manifold
Diseases, but utterly Perish, through want of the true and proper Balsam, which
might heal their putrified Sores; I shall here willingly bestow my slender
Skill to declare unto them the Virtue and Property of several Ointments, which
in order to this effect, viz. of Curing Souls, I observe to be approved and
recommended (generally speaking) by all Learned Divines; so that if Patients
will be pleased but to make trial and use them, and be careful to apply them to
their Languishing Infirmities, in such manner as they shall be prescribed; I
dare promise them a pefect Cure of all their Maladies.

The First Antidote against Gluttony and Drunkenness, is that which both
Scripture and Ancient Fathers mention; to wit, Sobriety and Abstinence: As for
Scripture, the Wise Solomon says, Ecclus. 31. 32. Aqua Vita hominibus, Vinum
in sobrietate, etc. Sobriety in Drink makes a Man's Life happy, or to pass on in
an even and equal State, unmolested either with Grief or Anxiety; whereas, on
the contrary, according to the same Wise Man, when it is Drunk to Excess; it is
Amaritudo animae; Bitter, or Bitterness to the Soul: It provokes Wrath and
Anger, and causes many Inconveniences and Harms, both to Soul and Body. As for
the Fathers, Saint Prosper, not without cause, gives a high Commendation of
Sobriety; Saying, It is of such force, as to change the Mind and Spirit of Man
from Evil to Good, and to make him Temperate and Abstemious; who was before
Intemperate, and would observe no mean; and to love a spare Diet, who before
was a Glutton and Slave to his Belly: It makes him Honest, Chaste, Serious,
Bashful, and Modest, who before was given to all Dishonesty and Lewdness;
Unchaste, Foolish and Shameless both in his Words and Actions; and that when
Sobriety and Abstinence do together take possession of a Soul, and reside in
her, they bridle all Excess of Eating and Drinking, they repress Sensuality and
Carnal Lust, they put and keep in good Order, all the motions and dispositions
of the Mind; multiplying Good and Holy Thoughts, Desires, Affections, and
extinguishing the contrary. Sobriety Chastizes and Corrects all Vices, or
Ill-habits of the Mind; helps all Imperfections, rectifies all Disorder and
Confusion, that happens in Man's Life; strengthens that which is weak in the
order of Good, and very much disposes the Soul to receive and entertain the
motions of the Holy Spirit.

This great and excellent Virtue, extinguishes the heats of Concupiscences,
quenches the flames of Lust, supports and upholds the Mind in all the Tempests
and Storms of Temptations, which Satan raises against her. According to Saint
Augustine, the chief Parts and Powers of the Soul, viz. The Understanding, Will,
Memory, yea even in the Senses, throughout all the Parts and Members of the
Body, are sustained by it, and kept in their due State, and enabled the better
to exercise their proper Functions. It is (says he) the safeguard of the Body,
the strong Fortress of Chastity, the defense of Modesty and good Behavior, it
preserves Love with every one, and procures respect from all that are
Virtuously Minded; inseparably united with Honesty, the continuance and
establishment of Peace; making all Vice and Wickedness to retire and hide their
Heads for Shame.

What can be said of this so necessary Virtue? Saint Ambrose adds, that
Sobriety and Abstinence conduce much to Capacity of Learning, making Men fit to
Study, Meditate and Conceive aright of Things: it is the Rule of Discipline,
which brings all to Perfection, and the best Teacher of all Arts. He will have
the same to be the Stability and Constancy of all Right Wits, or Sound
Judgments, the unseparable Wisdom of the Memory; a Remembrance of all Spiritual
Good, the Keeper of Secrets: In a Word, this great Saint will have Sobriety and
Abstinence, to be of that Nature, as never to stand still in Idleness, but to
be always going forward in the Progress of Virtues; coveting Fame and good
Reputation, not for Vanity, but for Virtues sake; disposing all Things with
Truth and Reason, and always finding Place and a good Rank with those that are
most pleasing to God.

What can be thought more fit or more prevalent to overthrow the Vices of
Gluttony and Drunkenness, than the Virtues of Abstinence and Sobriety?
Therefore let us resolve and say with Saint Bernard If Gluttony sins alone, let
Abstinence alone be her Penance; if there go no other Sins along with
Gluttony, Abstinence alone shall suffice to Cure it. For the Transgressour that
is Sober and Abstinent, will soon reflect upon the Transgression he has
committed; he will soon repent of his Folly, and be ready to detest the same
with Tears and sorrows of True Contrition.

Sect. 6. Reflection upon the foregoing Matter.
The Spiritual Balsam of Sobriety and Abstinence being of such a Sovereign
Virtue and Operation, for the Cure of this Brutish and Beastly Disease of
Gluttony and Drunkenness; it behooves us, and all that make profession of
Christianity, to have a perfect Knowledge, how to apply the same in the right
way and manner, to our ulcerated Wounds; that is, how to use Abstinence and
Sobriety so, as they may effectually Cure our Spiritual Maladies; for to be
Sober and Abstemious only in point of Meat and Drink, and to refrain only from
Excesses in that kind, will availus nothing, if we refrain not also from Sin,
and abstain (so much as in us lies) from all other Vices, and vicious
Imperfections whatsoever. For though Abstinence alone may perhaps profit the
Health of our Bodies, yet it will never (a^one) do good to the Languishing
^tate of our Soul. Therefore if you will have perfect Cure of both, that ^s, of
your Spiritual as well as Cor^oral Distempers, and receive the ^ull Benefit of
this Holy Ointment of Sobriety and Abstinence, you must follow the Counsel of
David, which he gives Psalm. 36. v. 27. in ^hese words, Declina a malo, and ^ac
bonum, etc. Decline, in the first place from all Evil, and after that, do good;
that is, you must refrain and abstain from all sin whatsoever, from all Vice
whatsoever, from all Excesses whatsoeever, that are sinful and blameable, as
well as from the excesses of Meat and Drink; otherwise the good effects of
Sobriety and Abstinence, will not appear or be found in you.

Now to the end that they may appear, take for your Director, in the business,
Jesus Christ, and let his Sobriety and Abstinence, be your Example and Pattern
to imitate, who of his infinite goodness was pleased to take Humane Nature upon
him, for the Salvation of all Mankind; and to make satisfaction for our Sins,
and particularly for our Sins of Gluttony and Drunkenness; by which most
commonly all other Sins find Admittanre amongst Christians; and for which he
satisfied by enduring Hunger and Thirst, and by exercising Sobriety and
Abstinence all his Life long, at his Birth and in his Death. In his Birth his
Abstinence was such, that he appeared destitute even of all manner of necessary
Provision, being rejected from the Company of all Humane Creatures, and reduced
to the necessity of being Born in a Stable, among Bruit Beasts. In his Life,
through the whole course of it, he was most Abstemious (though the Pharisees
falsely and wickedly slaundered him for a Glutton, and Wine-bibber) recommending
unto us the Virtue of Abstinence by a miraculous Fast of Forty days and Forty
Nights; after which he suffered Hunger: and in his Death, Thirst in the highest
degree; and could find no Ease or Refreshment for it, but the cruel spiteful
kindness of a Spoonful of Vinegar and Gall.

Calling therefore to mind the Sobriety and Abstinence of this our Chief Leader
and Captain Jesus Christ, let us follow his Example, according to David's
Counsel: Declinemus a malo. Let us abhor and detest this filthy sin of Gluttony
and Drunkenness, and with the help of his Grace endeavor to overcome all other
wicked Desires and disorderly Appetites, proceeding from or leading to those
Sins; which of necessity we must conquer, and subdue by the Virtue of Sobriety;
for otherwise, if we yield to Gluttony and give way to Drunkenness, we shall
(our selves) be overthrown, and easily made Slaves to innumerable other Vices
and Sins.

Wherefore, Declina a malo, and fac bonum, etc. Eschew Evil and do Good;
refrain from Vice and be Sober; remembering the Gall and Vinegar, which Christ
was contented to taste in your behalf, and for your sakes, before his Death;
that he might redeem you from all Evil, and make reparation for the Sin of
Gluttony, and all other Sensualities of Mankind.

The Third Treatise OF THE LANGUISHING DISEASES Among CHRISTIANS, Proceeding
from Carnal Concupiscence.

LONDON, Printed 1677.

SECTION I. Carnal Concupiscence a great Disease to Christianity.
SECT. 1. It causes several Corporal Diseases to Mankind. 2. It infecteth all
the whole World. 3. Is detestable to God, therefore to be avoided. 4. It
includes several other Sins.

Sect. 1. Carnal Concupisence causes several Corporal Diseases to Mankind.
THere are several sorts of Carnal or Sensual Concupiscences: Since ^a large
and general sense, all Con^upiscenses. or inordinate Desires, whatsoever, may
be styled Carnal or Sensual, as being the Motions and Inclinations of Corrupt
Nature, and deprived Sense; according to which Saint Paul reckons Idolatry;
Witchcraft, Hatred, Murder, Envying, etc. among the Works and Sins of the
Flesh, no less than Adultery and Fornication. So that in this sense every
Voluptuous Man, as the Drunkard and Glutton, and every one that takes pleasure
in sin, may be said to be a Carnal or Sensual Man, and that Carnal
Concupiscence reigns in him; and according to Plutarch, and such Authors, he is
put into the Rank of Sensual and Voluptuous Persons, not who haunts
Brothel-houses, or defiles his Neighbors Wife; but he that is sluggish in
weighty Matters, that neglects the good of the Commonwealth, when his place
requires him to attend it, that omits to perform the Offic^ of a good Parent,
or good Friend* when there is just occasion to show himself such. But we take
Carnal Concupiscences here in the strictest sense, as signifying that
particular sort of Concupiscence, or Fleshly Lust, which tends unto, and is
exercised in the unlawful Conjunction of Man and Woman; to wit, in Adultery,
Fornication, Incest, etc. or in some other Actions of Affinity and like Nature
with these. This is of all kinds of Voluptuous and Carnal Concupiscence, the
most Unclean, the most Filthy, the most Vile, and most Pernicious; being
styled, even by the very Heathen (Philosophers and others) a Furious and Raging
Passion, which corrupts ^he Senses of Men, and like a Burn^ng Flame, wastes and
consumes (more or less) all Mankind.

Hippocrates, according to the Relation of Peter de la Primauday, Master of the
French Academy, as^erts that Carnal Copulation has a ^ery great Affinity and
participates ^ot a little in Nature with the Disease called Epilepsie, or in
the Common English Expression, the Falling Sickness: and according to the same
Author, together with diverse other Physicians, there is nothing held more
certain in Physic, than that the immoderate use of Venerous Pleasure, spoils
the Natural Beauty, defiles the Body, causing it to Stink and Corrupt, dries up
the Natural Moisture overmuch (which is the Foundation of Life) makes the Face
Pale, Wan, and to look Yellow, weakens the Limbs and Joints; ingendreth the
Sciatica, Gouts, Colic, Griefs and Pains of the Stomach, Passions
Lipothymical; as Swoonings, Faintings, Giddiness of the Head, Dimness of the
Sight, and (that which is worst of all) the Leprosy of the Pox: it shortens
Life, and impairs both the Mind, Understanding and Memory very much, finally,
according to the Prophet Osee Chap. 4. v. 11. it takes away the Heart from God,
and from all Good. Fornicatio, Vinum, and Ebrietas auferunt cor.

What can be more said to make a Vice odious, to all that regard God, or
themselves, or that desire to enjoy Health of Soul or Body! How detestable
therefore ought it to be unto us! How should we hate and abhor all Adulteries,
Fornications, Incests, and all other Violations of Chastity; which ought not to
be so much as named amongst Christians: according to that Commandment of the
Apostle. Ephesians. 5. v. 3. Fornicatio autem and omnis immunditia, etc. But
Fornication and all Uncleanness, let it not be once named among you -- as
becomes Saints -- knowing that no Whore-monger, nor Unclean Person, has any
Inberitance in the Kingdom of God. What Curses are there threatened by God
against this foul Sin! Search the Scripture, and it will tell you. Under the
Law of Moses, it was Death; Deuteronomy. 22. 21. The Prophets proclaim all manner of
Judgments against it; witness that alone of the Prophet Hieremy, speaking in
the Person of God, against those high-handed sinners, who assembled themselves
by Troops in Harlots Houses, and were like Fed-Horses, every one after his
Neighbors Wife: Shall I not visit for such things as these, says he, and
shall not my Soul be avenged on such a People as this; Jer. 5. 7, 8, 9.
Doubtless he will be avenged; and so the Apostle assures us, saying, Heb. 13.
4. Honorabile connubium in omnibus, etc. Marriage is Honorable with all, and
the Bed that is Undefiled; But Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge. God
himself will be their Judge, first or last; let them look to it; if they escape
Temporal Punishment, he has the Flames of an Eternal Fire ready for them,
which they shall never escape. It was this Sin that brought Fire and Brimstone
from Heaven upon the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, Genesis 19. 13. It was this Sin
that brought a Plague upon the People of Israel in the Wilderness, whereby
Twenty four thousand of them, and more, were in an instant (as it were) swept
away (1 Cor. 10. 8.) and the Wrath of God was so incensed against them, that
had it not been for the Holy Zeal and Prayer of Phineas, the Son of Aaron the
High Priest, he had destroyed them utterly; as we may read, Numb. 25.

How hurtful and dangerous a thing then is it, to suffer these Carnal and
Fleshly Appetites to reign in us; considering how vehemently they draw us to
the Practice of those things which bring Destruction upon Body and Soul. From
this vile sin it comes, that Men abuse themselves so much beneath the Dignity
of their Sex, as to submit both their Bodies and Souls to the unconstant will
and lawless desires of a dishonest Woman: which we see by too frequent and sad
Experience, in many Persons, who forgetting at once both Conscience and Honor,
are so bewitched with the inveiglements of some lewd Women, (their Whore or
Concubine) that if she commands, or desires it, they are ready to hazard all
that they can hazard, Life, Liberty, Reputation, etc. to give her content: yea,
so far are they oft-times transported with this damnable, wicked, blind,
desperate passion, that in fine they make themselves an Example to a whole
Kingdom or Country, upon an open Scaffold; and yet this is called Love. These
lewd and wicked people cover their vile and unlawful affections with the holy
name of Love; which where it is rightly such, is always grounded upon Virtue,
and is the Cement, not of lustful and wanton amorousness, but of loyal and
honest-amity and friendship. The love of Carnal Concupiscence is not true love,
but lust, an unlawful passion or affection, grounded upon the apprehension of
some pleasing (but false) good, which will in the end be found a most real and
pernicious evil; from which God deliver us.

Sect. 2. Carnal Concupiscence infecteth the whole World.
By what has been said above, you will have learnt, in a general way, how that
Carnal Concupiscence, when it is immoderately and unlawfully yielded unto,
causes much harm, and many Diseases both of Body and Soul to Mankind: Our
endeavor is next to be, by declaring some particularities, to make this truth
further to appear; namely, that the World at present is, and has ever been,
from time to time through all Ages, generally infected, corrupted, and
poisoned, as it were, with this contagious Vice. According to the Seraphical
Doctor, S. Bonaventure, in the first beginnings of the World, this disease
prevailed so much upon men, and caused so great distempers both of Flesh and
Spirit in those Inhabitants of the Old World, that Gods Service was generally
neglected, and all manner of wickedness and lewdness so practiced, that
Almighty God did therefore resolve to bring that general Deluge upon the whole
World, and by a Flood of Waters at once to drown and destroy all Mankind; of
which we read Genesis 6th. and 7th Chapters. Noah only (who was righteous before
God, Chapter 7. 1.) and his Family being saved. And yet, notwithstanding this
general washing, the World could not be so totally purified and cleansed, but
that the filthiness of this sin (beside so many others) still remains, and
sticks to the Posterity of Noah unto this day; all Mankind (generally speaking)
and all the Nations of the Earth laboring under it in a most sickly and weak
condition, and many absolutely perishing by means thereof: The World still
abounds with lewd persons, walking in the lusts of Concupiscence,
notwithstanding that the blessed S. Paul so expressly warns and threatens them
with death for it, Romans 8. 13. Si enim secundum carnem vixeritis, moriemini,
etc. If you live according to the lusts and sensualities of the flesh, ye shall
die, all of you without exception; which S. Hierome in his Comment upon this
place of the Apostle confirms, saying, that, Whosoever, living in the body,
uses Carnal Copulation with any out of lawful Wedlock, at the same instant he
dies spiritually, and perishes as to the life of his Soul. Hugo, that Worthy
Author, reflecting seriously upon the infectious nature of this Disease, could
not forbear crying out in this manner; Who is able to recount the particular
infections, and pestilent strength of Carnal Concupiscence! who is able to
conceive the mischief it has done in all times, and still continues to do unto
this day! This it was that drowned the whole World; this it was that destroyed
Sodom and Gomorra, with the adjacent Countries by Fire from Heaven; this it was
that turned those fertile and pleasant Lands into a stinking and poisonous
Lake. It was Concupiscence that slew the Sichemites, and destroyed their City,
Genes. 34. 26, 27, etc. It was Concupiscence that rooted out (almost) the whole
Tribe of Benjamin from among their Brethren, for the sake of a Woman. This
destroyed, in the Wars with the Philistims, the Sons of Heli the High Priest.
This procured the death (though und eserved) of Vrias, the Husband of
Bethsabee. This murdered Amnon the Son of David. This brought his Fathers
Curse upon Reuben (the Eldest Son of Jacob) instead of his Blessing. It was
Concupiscence that betrayed Sampson, first into the power of a Harlot, and by
her means soon after into the hands of his Enemies. This stoned to death many
under the Ancient Law of Moses. So that in fine it is most true what the wise
Man says, Eccles. 9. 9. Propter speciem mulieris multi perierunt; through the
beauty of Women (and their lusting after it) many have perished.

For which reason it is, that our blessed Savior in the Gospel (Mat. 5. v.
29.) does so absolutely and strictly forbid the looking after Women with any
lustful or unchaste affections; pronouncing, that whosoever does so, is guilty
of Adultery, though he never perpetrates the outward act of that sin with any
person. Ego autem dico vobis, etc. But I (says he) tell you, that whosoever
looks on a Woman to lust after her, has already committed Adultery with her
in his heart. The Adulterous Woman is in this respect like the Serpent called
the Basilisk, whose Eyes are said to dart such a poison, as kills the beholder
forthwith: and for that reason, if we love our Souls, we are to avoid the very
sight of such lewd Creatures as much as may be; but upon no terms, or for any
reason whatever, to admit of private and familiar conversation with them. Qui
tetigerit picem, inquinabitur ab ea, says the Wise Man, Eccles. 13. 1. He that
touches pitch, shall be defiled therewith; and he that keeps Company with
dishonest persons, will soon learn to be like them. Can a man carry Coals in
his Bosom, and not be burnt by them? No more is it possible to frequent the
society of unchaste people, without prejudice to Chastity: A muliere iniquitas
viri, from the company of naughty Women Men become naught, as the Moth proceeds
from the Garment: All which is agreeable to the sense of the holy Fathers,
teaching, that all fleshly sensualities of this kind, how pleasing soever they
seem, are but a delicious poison, swallowed with much ease; but working direful
effects afterward; an Epidemical Plague raging amongst men, of which many die;
and all languish; all, even the whole Race of Mankind (some few only excepted)
being much weakened in point of spiritual strength, and their spirit and
courage to all good much abated by it.

Sect. 3. Carnal Concupiscence detestable to God; therefore to be avoided.
Pleasure is the Bait by which the Ghostly Enemy catches Souls, as Fishes are
caught by a Hook; and not without great reason: For Plea^ure, generally
speaking, but more ^specially the pleasure of the Flesh ^or Carnal
Concupiscence) is a thing which darkens the light of the Soul, ^ot letting her
see or perceive the ^ook that is under the Bait, that is, the great and long
pain which attends the short pleasure: it hinders all good counsel, and all
good thoughts that come to mind, from taking place; and through its luscious
inticements, turns men quite out of the way of Virtue, and throws them headlong
into the Gulf, or into the bottomless Pit of Sin and Wickedness; which renders
it a most abominable Vice, and (in some respects) more than all other Vices
detestable in Gods sight; because there is no Vice that does so debase the
dignity of man's Nature, and violate the Prerogative of his Creation, as this
Vice of Lust, o^ Carnal Concupiscence does. Shall we look any further into the
nature of this pleasure? Yes, the better to avoid and hate the same, by
considering the cursed Fruit it brings forth, it may be expedient to do so.

The definition of Carnal Concupiscence, according to Divines, is to this
effect; Luxuria est impurae and ^ibidinosae voluptatis inordinatus ap^etitus.
Carnal Concupiscence is nothing else but an inordinate appe^ite, and desire of
Venereous or lust^ul pleasure: which kind of plea^ure, though it tickles and
affects the ^enses much for the present, yet most commonly it leaves behind it
^ather matter of repentance and re^orse, than of remembering again ^ith delight.
For how many un^appy Souls (Men and Women) have ^y means of this vile pleasure,
un^awfully and immoderately pursued, ^allen into great inconveniences,
con^racting grievous and loathsome dis^ases, and ruining themselves both ^oul
and Body? What prejudice has ^ not done to men's Estate? What ^orrows (I speak
here only in a ^orldly sense) what affliction and ^isturbance of mind has it
not cau^ed? yea, what sottishness, what loss ^f wonted wisdom and sound
judg^ent have not proceeded from it? How has it efferated some, and made them
insolent, fierce, froward! How has it cowardiz'd, dejected, and dispirited
others! Add hereunto the infamy and shame which this Vice is perpetually (in a
manner) attended withal, and the spot and stasn which it leaves upon all such
persons as are given to it, rendering them unsavory and despicable, not only in
the sight of God, Angels, and Saints, but even of men: Insomuch that what the
Author of Ecclesiasticus, by way of Apostrophe speaks of Solomon (Chap. 47.
v. 21.) may be rightly applied to all that follow Solomon in this kind of sin.
Inclinasli femora tua mulieribus, etc* Thou did bow thy loins unto Women, by
thy Body thou wast brough^ into subjection: Thou have made ^ blot in thy glory;
Thou have staine^ and polluted thy Seed, and brough^ wrath upon them. So it is
Sinners so it is. By this filthy Vice that yo^ give your selves unto, you do
no^ only offend God, but you stain your Honor, you bring a blot upon your
Name, upon your Reputation, your Honor, your Conscience, and a shameful,
disgraceful blot upon your selves. The Covetous Man by his Sin gets Money; he
sells his Soul to the Devil for something that is va^uable; but you Fornicators
and Adulterers, you get nothing but shame. Turpitudinem and ignominiam
congre^ant sibi, Prove. 6. 32. Dishonor and ^eproach you heap to your selves,
but nothing else; and such a reproach, ^s (without your exemplary Pe^ance for
it) shall never be wiped ^way, and those your lewd Para^ours, Companions in
your sin, your ^hores and Concubines, must look ^o find it one day verified
upon them, that the Wise Man threatens. Om^is mulier, quae est Fornicaria,
quasi ^ercus in via, conculcabitur: They ^^all be trodden upon as dung in the
^reets.

Sect. 4. Carnal Concupiscence includes several other sins.
That Carnal Concupiscence is a most horrid and detestable sin, I suppose may
sufficiently appear by what has been said. If you ask me now what are the kinds
of it, or how many ways this sin may be committed I answer, in the first place,
two manner of ways, that is to say, in affection or action. Concupiscence i^
Affection, are those inward and impure desires of the Heart (which i^ feels and
fostereth oft-times to much) to commit Fornication, Adultery, or any like sin,
but for wan^ of opportunity, or by the mercy o^ God restraining the ill mind of
the sinner, it goes no further. Concupiscence in act is, when the dishone
desires of the heart are actually fu^filled, or when the unlawful action^ of
Adultery, Fornication, Unclea^ness, etc. are actually perpetrate done; of which
there are many kinds (not necessary to be here mentioned) but the chief and
more general, are Fornication, Adultery, Incest, Uncleanness, or Pollution,
etc. All which are by Almighty God strictly forbidden in those two Precepts of
the Law delivered unto Moses upon Mount Sinai, viz. Non ^naehaberis, non
concupisces uxorem proximi tui, Exodus 20. v. 14, 17. Thou shall not commit
Adultery; Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, etc. Under these two
Precepts are included all Carnal Concupiscences whatsoever, or howsoever
committed, whether by thoughts, words, or deeds. And for the greater ter^our of
Transgressors, they are again Deuteronomy. 27. 20.) together with diverse other Laws
confirmed under a Curse, which the People are commanded ^y God to pronounce
against themselves, in case they did not observe and keep them. Maledictus sit,
etc. Cursed be he that sleeps (or heth) with his Neighbors Wife, or any of his
near Relations, there specified: And all the people shall say, Amen. If you
desire more particularly to see the several kinds of Incestuous Concupiscences,
read the eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus, from the beginning to the end: in
which Chapter, after the Enumeration of those several degrees of Consanguinity,
which render Marriage unlawful, there is at last a strict Charge and
Prohibition given, not to have unlawful access to any Woman whatsoever, in
these words, Ad muliere^ ne accedas, Thou shall not aproach to any Woman, to
reveal her Turpitude; that is, to commit any unlawful and unchaste action with
her such as are immodest, wanton, an lascivious Kisses; all unchaste Touches,
all lewd, filthy, and unclea^ behavior by word or deed; and i^ fine, all
manner of persuasion or i^ticement, tending to Carnal Concupiscence: none of
all which action are to be done, or used toward any Woman whatsoever, by any
Man whatsoever, under pain of High Treason against Divine Majesty, and
incurring both Temporal and Eternal Judgments. And for that reason also God
gives us special warning, in the same place, saying, Custodite legitima mea,
etc. See that you keep all my Statutes and Ordinances, and do not any of these
abominations: For all these execrable things have the Inhabitants of the Land
done before you. Beware therefore, least in the like manner the Wrath of God
fall upon you, as it has fallen upon them. Be ye not deceived; but know for
certain, that every Soul that shall do any of these abominations, shall perish
from the midst of the People.

Sect. 5. Malediction upon the Transgressors.
The better to avoid the sin of Carnal Concupiscence, and to banish it utterly
from the Society of Christians, the Evangelists take much pains, not only in
giving good counsel, good admonitions and instructions to that end, but also in
denouncing Judgments in Christ's Name against Offenders, and declaring the
Curses and Maledictions which will certainly follow, and fasten upon all such
as shall be found tainted in Heart with the filthiness of Carnal Lusts, yea,
though outwardly before men they appear never so Chaste: For such Hypocrites
there are in the World, unto whom our Savior, Mat. 23. 25. denounces woe,
saying, Vae Vobis, etc. Woe unto you (Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites) because
you make clean the outside of the Cup, and the Platter, (that is, of your
Exterior you are very careful) but inwardly (in your hearts) you are full of
all uncleanness. Thou blind Pharisee, make clean first the inside of the cup
(your hearts) that your outside may be clean also; that is, that your outward
conversation and actions may be right before God. And again he says to them,
upon the same account (v. 27.) Vae Vobis, etc. Woe unto you (Hypocrites:) for
you are like whited Sepulchers, which outwardly appear unto men beautiful, but
inwardly (or within) are full of dead men's bones, and all uncleanness: So ye
also appear outwardly to men chaste, just, and upright, but within you are full
of Hypocrisy, and all Iniquity, to wit, Lust, Carnal Concupiscence, and the
like.

Where yet (by the way) I would have you observe, that many may be (really and
indeed) in the unhappy Rank of voluptuous and lewd Men; and yet we may have no
just Authority, or ground to call them so. Our Savior knew their Hearts, and
the wicked sinister intentions which they had in every thing almost that they
did; and therefore might justly by himself, or by the Evangelist, condemn them
for what he knew them to be: But to us the inward secrets of the Heart are
covered, and unknown; and therefore where we see outward appearances, and shows
of good, though they be in reality no better than those of the Pharisees,
Hypocritical and seigned; we ought to judge the best, and not hastily to
censure or condemn them for Hypocrites, or to suspect them for unchaste
persons, Fornicators, Adulterers, or Sinners, in any other kind. We are to
judge charitably of every one, especially where there is no Evidence to the
contrary, and to think and speak of them according to the good which we see,
and not according to the evil which we see not.

To reassume therefore our chief purpose, I say, that if Christ our Savior;
according to the Evangelist, reprehends so severely, and even curses those
that only entertain and foster Carnal Concupiscence in their hearts, though
they proceed not to the outward acts of that foul sin, how much are they to be
reprehended and reproved, and what Curses are due to them, that give themselves
up to the acts of filthy Lust; abounding in all kinds of Carnal Sensuality, and
committing uncleanness even with greediness, as the Scripture speaks of them;
being wholly defiled in their thoughts, in their words, and in their deeds;
that are become impudent in sin, taking pride, and even glorying in that which
is most vile. This made the Apostle complain, writing to the Corinthians (1
Cor. 5. 1.) Omnino auditur inter vos Fornicatio, etc. There is plainly heard
talk of Fornication among you, and of such Fornication as is not found amongst
the Heathen: And hereof they were so far from being ashamed, or sorrowful for,
as they ought, that they even bragged and boasted of it; as appears v. 2.
Inflati estis, instead of being humbled for your sin, ye are puffed up, you
swell with pride and vainglory upon that account; and v. 6. Haec gloriatio
vestra non est bona: Your glorying herein is not good. This was their sinful
condition; but the Apostle took such a course with them, as soon brought them
to a better posture of mind: and so should the Pastors of the Church now do,
if the Spirit of true Apostolical Zeal and Charity were strong and vigorous in
them; and not suffer this vile passion to reign and rage amongst those that are
called Christians, so as it does, even to such a height of insolency and
impudence, as to contemn and brow-beat all Authority (both Divine and Humane)
that should repress it.

Wherefore to avoid the curses and maledictions pronounced against this Sin,
follow the counsel of Saint Paul (1 Cor. 6. v. 18.) Fly Fornication, abominate
the practice of all carnal vileness whatsoever. For as much as every sin, that
a man sins, ordinarily speaking, is out of the Body, that is, it is
exercised and done by the abuse of some external or outward thing, not
pertaining to the Body; whereas he that commits Fornication, or any other
Carnal Villainy, sins against, and abuses his own Body; he does that which
is oft-times very hurtful and prejudicial to the health and sanity of his body;
and also commits sacrilege in violating the Temple of God. For the Body of
every faithful Christian is Gods Temple, the habitation of the Holy Ghost; a
thing, which Christ our Lord, with that price of his precious blood, has
purchased for his own possession; according as the Apostle testifies in the
same place, v. 19, 20. An nescitis? Do ye not know (says he) that your Body is
the Temple of the H. Ghost, who dwells in you; which ye have of God: and that
ye are not your own, to use and dispose of your Body as you list? For ye are
bought with a price. Christ has purchased you, Body and Soul, with his own
Blood. Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit; which are Gods.
Will you take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot?
God forbid. What can be more unworthy of your selves, and injurious to God! So
that by all it appears, what a great and heinous sin Fornication is; and
considering, that the right of our bodies, in so many respects, belongs wholly
to God, it also appears, how much we are bound not to abuse our bodies by any
kind of forbidden filthiness, but to keep them pure and entire to God, in all
Chastity and Holiness; glorifying God in them: and casting away the works of
darkness, to live and converse chastely, soberberly, and devoutly in this
present world, as the Apostle requires, Tit. 2. 12. knowing, and having always
in remembrance what the same Apostle likewise says, Ephesians. 5. 5. That no
Adulterer, no Fornicator, or Unclean person, has inheritance in the Kingdom of
God. No, they are to be shut out: Witness Christ himself in the Apocalypse,
chap. 22. 15. Without shall be Dogs, Whoremongers, Sorcerers, etc. Their
portion is to be in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone for ever;
chap. 21. 8. unless they repent: which on bended Knees every day we beg, that
God would give them the grace to do.

Sect. 6. A Serious Admonition to Sensual Livers.
Let not so much good counsel, given by the Apostles, Evangelists, Ancient
Fathers, and others, be as water spilt upon the ground, or words spoken in
vain. Let us reflect seriously and consider, how much it behooves us to cleanse
and purify our selves from the filthiness of the Flesh, with the tears of true
contrition, and penitence! How should we drown our hearts in floods of Godly
sorrow, and Sighings, for all the sinful and vile pleasures we have taken, and
for all the wicked and foul actions that we have committed in this kind,
against God, our Neighbor, and our Selves! How should we abhor and detest
all thought, all desire, all memory, and imagination, concerning those vile and
beastly sensualities, which we have heretofore hunted after, and pursued with
all greediness of unclean appetite! How should we hate, with what solicitude
ought we to declaime, and avoid those hooks, those baits of Lus^ and
Sensuality, whereby Satan draw^ so many souls unto him every day to their
eternal perdition?

Carnal Concupiscence, what is it but the Mother of all Sin, the spaw^ of all
wickedness? Wantonness of the Flesh, what is it, but the sting of Death Lust,
what is it, but Nurse to the worm which never dies, and F^^el to those
Eternal Flames; which for the present sootheth men with the pretense of
pleasure, and delight agreeable to corrupt Nature, but after a short time,
strangling and empoysoning their souls, it makes them repent for ever? Thou
shall mourn at the last (says Solomon, speaking unto, and instructing a
Brothel-hunter) when it is too late, when thy Flesh and thy Body are consumed,
then thou shall mourn and say, How have I hated instruction, and my heart
despised reproof! and Sap. 5. 7. they are brought in, making their fruitless
moans one to another in these words, Lassati sumus, etc. We wearied our selves
in the ways of wickedness and perdition; unbridling our lusts and appetites to
all lewd ^ctions, conceiving that to be a plea^ure, which we now find to be
pain: we now find to our grief and sorrow, that a Woman is more bitter than
Death, being the snares of Hunters; and her heart a net to entangle men. He
that pleases God shall avoid her Company: But he that continues in sin shall
perish by her. Finally, it is in respect of Carnal Concupiscence, and the
overspreading prevalency of those sins of the Flesh; Fornication, Adultery,
Uncleanness, Incest, and the like; the Angel in the Apocalypse (Chap. 18. 2.)
Cries with such a loud voice, Cecidit, cecidit, Babylon, etc. Babylon the
Great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the Habitation of Devils; the Hold of
every soul Spirit, and a Cage of unclean and hateful Birds: meaning the
Universal Society of Fornicators, Adulterers, and other incestuous and lewd
Sinners, in whom the Devil dwells, and whose filthy fellowship is carefully to
be avoided by all the Servants of God, according to tha^ which follows v. 4.
Exite de illa, etc* Depart from her my People, com^ out of her, quit your
selves of he^ communion, or fellowship in sin, tha^ you receive not of her
Plagues.

SECTION II. Reasons why Carnal Concupiscence is prohibited.
SECT. 1. By it many are corrupted at the same time. 2. By it the Temple of God
is vilified and polluted. 3. Malediction upon Transgressors. 4. Serious
Admonition to Sensual Livers.

1. By it many are corrupted at the same time.
THere be many good reasons to be given, why the sin of Carnal Concupiscence is
so strictly forbidden by God; yet we are to observe, according to St.
Bonaventure, that the chief reason is, because it is so advantageous to Satan,
who destroys more Souls by it than by any other sin. This sin brings him always
double gain, whereas other sins brings him only single gain. By the wicked Act
of unlawful Copulation, he gets two Souls at least, if not more: by other sins,
unless by chance, and per accidens, he gets but one Soul at a time.
Fornication, Adultery, Incest, and the like sins of Carnality; are seldom
committed, but besides the two principals, there are other persons accessory
thereto, as commonly some Old Bawd, withered with Age and ill Practices, and
others, that by connivence, consent, procurement, assistance, or
occasiongiving, do lend their help, and serve instead of Bawds, to the lewd
business. In other sins there is no such need of help; they may be (all)
committed solitarily (as I may say) or by one single person alone by himself.
For this cause (I say) it is the opinion of some, that the immortal enemy of
Souls, takes more pains, and is more industrious and vigilant to induce and
tempt mankind to sins of Carnal Concupiscence, than to any others: and to this
agrees the observation of Saint Isidore; who affirms, Humane kind to be more
subdued, and made more slave to Satan, by means of Carnality and Sensuality
than by any other Vices whatsoever.

And verily it stands with great reason. For as St. Augustine positively ^avers,
'There is no Virtue, no Goodness, no Wisdom (or Sound Judgment) that can abide
with the sins of the Flesh. And says not the Scripture the same? Is it not
said, Sap. 1. 4. Into a malicious Soul Wisdom He means Divine Wisdom, or that
which comes from God;) shall not ^nter, Nec habitabit in corpore sub^itio
peccatis; nor be found dwelling ^n the Bodies that are subject unto ^n. Such
Bodies are not the Temples of God, but of Satan; and we know who has said (2
Cor. 6. v. 15.) What Concord (or Cohabitation) is there betwixt Christ (who is
God, Blessed for ever) and Belial? who is the proper Spirit, or Devil of
Lewdness and Dishonesty? Upon this account it is, that like a Roaring Lion,
this wicked Spirit runs about night and day, never ceasing to assault
mankind with temptations agreeable to his lewd and devilish disposition; to
wit, by presenting carnal, or unchaste objects (whether of persons or actions)
to his eyes; wanton discourse, or filthy speech, to his ears; lascivious
thoughts to his mind: after this manner he is continually hunting for his Prey,
and seeking to devour unhappy Souls; it is his whole employment, by a thousand
arts and wiles to draw mankind into the snare, and inslave him to this filthy
Vice. He is an adversary, that wakes and watches perpetually to do us mischief;
he sleeps not, being incessantly attent to his employment, which is first to
deceive, and then to destroy us. So that we may rightly say of him, what the
Holy Job said of his Afflicters (Job 30. v. 17.) Qui me comedunt, non dormiunt:
They that consume me, do not sleep. They consume, they make me weary of my
Life, by the constant pursuit of their temptations, and sleep not; that is,
they give not over their tempting so much as for a moment.

The Chariot of Concupiscence, like that of Jehu (4 Reg. 9. 20.) marches
furiously, as it needs must, Belial himself, the Prince of Impurites, driving
it; it goes through all Countries and Kingdoms, never stopping, or staying
long in any place: It is in the Court, it is in the Country, it is in Cities,
it is in Towns, it is in every poor Village; all in a moment, and being made of
Hellfire, it casts abroad Sparkles, of Concupiscence and unclean Desires; on
all sides a bit goes, which inflame lustful hearts, and set them on fire to
work wickedness. Thus go Drabbers (commonly) by Troops to Hell; the Devil drves
them like so many Herd of Swine (as they are, and more filthy) into the
infernal Lake, where they perish for ever; whereas other sinner go either
single, or in small companies thither.

Again, (generally speaking) all other sins are proper to some particular
Persons, or States of Life: As Pride (for example) seems most proper for People
in high place, and for great ones: it being a strange indecorum, that people of
low and mean rank should be proud. Covetousness, should not be found any where
but amongst professed Usurers, and such as make Gold their God; and the like is
to be said of other sins; only this sin (this vile sin of Lechery, or Carnal
Concupiscence) is common to all: All sorts of People, High and low, Rich and
Poor, Young and Old, Churchman and Layman (all of them more or less) have a
smack of it, and are too generally tainted with it.

There goes a story, that the Devil had a Wife, of whom he had begotten Seven
Daughters, very much resembling their Father: all which, when they were grown
up, he bestowed upon several sorts of People. His Eldest Daughter was called
Pride (Madam Pride) whom he bestowed upon Women; not doubting, but she would be
well received by that Sex; whose minds he knew, were so given to Vanity,
Costliness of Apparel, and tricking up themselves (no small Symptoms of Pride)
that they seem to spend the greatest part of their time (except when they are
in Bed, or at the Table) in consulting their Looking-glasses, combing, and
plating their false Hair, or some other way trimming, and making themselves
fine. The Devils second Daughter was called Usury: and her he bestowed upon
Citizens, Burghers of Great Towns, and some Rich Chubs in the Country, that
looked after her. His Third, called Felony, and Robbery, he bestowed upon
Highway-men, casheer'd Soldiers, and Cadets; Men commonly of high Spirits, but
low Fortune. His fourth Daughter, called Simony, he commended to certain
Churchmen, whom he knew much more willing to hold the place, than to discharge
the Office of a Bishop, Cure, etc. The fifth, called Hypocrisy, he bestowed
upon Bigots, and Professors; a sort of People (successors to the Old Pharisees)
in outward behavior and Show, very Demure, and Seeming-Good; but inwardly in
Heart and private Practice, far otherwise. His sixth, a Meager Girl, called
Envy, he could not tell what to do withal; she was so ill favored, that he
thought none would receive her, unless she could change her Countenance; so he
sent her to the Universities, to be bred up amongst Young Students, whose
Emulations pass for Virtues, and are not counted Vice, till they be come ^o
full Age. His seventh was named Luxury, or Carnal Lust, and her he bestowed
upon all sorts of People, knowing that she would be welcome to all of what
condition soever, and to Women as well as to Men. You will easily moralize the
Fable, and learn by it, how general and over-spreading this sin is; and that,
whereas other Vices are, as it were, peculiar and proper to some persons, and
more frequently observed in some sort of People than in others; the Vice of
Lust and Carnal Concupiscence possesses all sorts, pursues and molests all
sorts, and finally masters and prevails upon all sorts; insomuch, that (as I
have already intimated above) it is the Opinion of some Considerative and Good
Men, exercised in the Care and Conduct of Souls, that by means thereof, our
Ghostly Enemy intraps, and gains more Souls, than he does by any other (or even
by all other) kind of sin; notwithstanding it is so expressly forbidded by God,
and so much spoken against by all, that ever spoke to the World in Gods Name;
that is to say, by Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Ancient
Fathers, Bishops and all Good Pastors of the Church. Avoid it therefore;
repent of your sin, break off your abominable custom of sinning, as many as are
concerned in what I speak, least ye perish with the rest.

Sect. 2. By Carnal Concupiscence the Temple of God is defiled.
Domum tuam decet sanctitudo, Domine, in longitudinem dierum; Psalm. 92. 5. Of
the Temple of God, the Psalmist says, Holiness becomes thy House, O Lord for
ever: And the Apostle adds, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Siquis templum Dei violave rit, etc.
If a Man defile the Temple of the Lord, him shall God destroy. That which is
Holy must not be profaned, and when it happens to be so, God threatens to
vindicate the Profanation. Now we have been taught above, that our Bodies (no
less than our Souls) are the Temple of God, even of the Holy Spirit. The
Apostle tells us so, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Know ye not, that your Bodies are the Temple
of the Holy Ghost, which dwells in you. Doubtless therefore to defile this
Body of ours by Lust and Uncleanness, must needs be a great and grievous sin.
Why? Because it is a great and grievous Violation of Gods Temple, which is a
thing so Holy, and whereof he is so tender and chary, that it be kept Holy.
Upon this Ground the Holy Doctor Saint Augustine observing, to his great grief
and sorrow, so many of his People addicted to Carnal Concupiscence, and
plunging themselves daily in the deep mire of Lust, he could not refrain crying
out in his Admonition to them, and saying, What do you mean, ye unhappy ones!
what do you intend to do with the Temple of God, which you do so pollute, and
profane, by your lustful Concupiscence? It would trouble you much, you would be
offended, if a Church, Chapel, or any other Place dedicated to Gods Worship
and Service, should be taken and made a Brothel-house, or Stews, a place for
the publickly-known, and free committing of Adultery, Fornication, and other
like Carnal Lasciviousness: You would think it hugely strange to see the
Actions of wicked unlawful voluptuousness, openly perpetrated and done in any
part of the Sanctuary. You would be ready to say, What can be compared to such
Wickedness, to such abominable Practices! And truly you judge not amiss, for
nothing can be more detestable in the sight of God, than to see his Holy Temple
so hrribly polluted and profaned. But why then will you not remember, why will
you not lay to heart what the Apostle tells you, 1 Cor. 3. 16. Templum Deo es
tu. You (your selves) are the Temple of God, Your Bodies and Souls are the
Temples of Holy Ghost, wherein he delights to dwell. Why will you defile
these Temples of the Living God, and make them Temples of Satan by your sins
and uncleanness! How much ought you to fear and dread, least the Holy Ghost,
displeased with your abominations and turpitude, should forsake you for ever?
Saint Isidorus, for this only reason concludes Luxury to be one of the chief
(or the chiefest) Capital sin, because that by all such Transgressions the
holiness of Gods Temple is so greatly violated. And indeed, what can be more
injurious and contumelious to Christ, than to take his members, (to wit, your
own Bodies) and make them the members of a lewd Woman, a Harlot. For he that is
joined to such a creature, becomes one Body with her, as if it were in lawful
and holy marriage. Qui adhaeret meretrici, unum corpus efficitur, says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 16. Shall we dare to commit such a vileness? God forbid. Or
can we do it, and not expect the plague and vengeance of God to fall upon us?
Fly therefore Fornication; Fly Adultery, Fly all sins of Carnal
Concupiscence, as you would fly from a Serpent, that bites and stings to
death. Abominate, hate, abhor, that foul Spirit of Belial, that haunts you.
Bless your selves from him; resist him (by the grace of God) and he will fly
from you. It is the absolute will and command of God, that you do so; and if
you will not hear, and obey, wrath from God attends you, and will find you out
(first or last) to your shame and confusion; according to what he has, in all
ages from time to time, commanded the holy Prophets, and Apostles, with all
their lawful Successors, to proclaim and publish, to denounce and threaten, in
his name, to all offenders; to wit, that under pain of his displeasure, and of
judgments Temporal and Eternal, we forbear all Carnal Uncleanness whatsoever,
whether in Expressions and Words, whether in Imaginations and Thoughts, and
whether in Actions or Works; that we abstain from all Carnal Sensualities,
Wantonness of Behavior, Lewdness of Discourse and Speech, Unchaste Looks,
Lascivious Gesture, and from every thing in this kind, by which the holy Temple
of God (our Body) may come to be polluted, in any sort, by carnal impurity.

Be it therefore known to all you (Offenders in this kind) that who^ver defiles
Gods Temple (his Body) ^y any actions of Fleshly Lust, he ^oes in effect
destroy himself; as ren^ring himself thereby obnoxious to ^he wrath of God,
which, if not ap^eas'd, and averted by timely repentance, will in the end be
his destruction: if you fear not by Sin to defile, and destroy the houses of
God which are your selves, and your own Bodies, expect in time to see Gods
judgment upon the houses you dwell in; at least you have cause to fear, and
dread what he threatens, that you may amend your lives, and cease from that
Sin, by which, in the judgment of Saint Augustine, You do foulely corrupt your
selves, dishonor and do injury to God, and totally deface the Image of Christ
that is in you.

SECTION III. By what means Carnal Concupiscence that is in the Heart and
Inward Intentions, comes forth to Action.
SECT. 1. By toleration of Seusual Complacency. 2. By Wilful Delectation in the
Lustful Objects. 3. By Wilful Consent of performing the same.

Sect. 1? By toleration of Sensual Complacency.
DIvines observe, That the Sins of Carnal Concupiscence have their proceeding,
occasionally, from all the exterior senses. Sunt in quolibet sensu aliquae
delectationes ad luxuriam spectantes. In every particular sense of the Body
there are delectations, which pertain and tend to the Sin of Luxury; applying
to this purpose, that which is spoken by the Prophet Hieremy (chap. 9. 21.)
Ascendrt Mors per fenestras, etc. Death comes in at our Windows: Understanding
here by Windows our Five Senses; viz. Seeing, Hearing, Touching, Tasting, and
Smelling, and by Death Sin, which is the cause of Death; and the meaning of the
Text to be, that by our Senses, through inordinate Pleasure taken in them, Sin
enters into the Soul, and Death by Sin: from which the Opinion of Saint
Antoninns, and the Divines that follow him, dissenteth not: Who teach, That in
the proceeding, or going forward of Carnal Concupiscence to its full and comple
at act, there are to he observed seven degrees, or steps: of which the three
first are enclosed in the heart, and there exercised by inward imagination, or
fancy; but the other four are out of the heart, and exercised by the members
and actions of the Body.

As to the first Step of Carnal Concupiscence it is the toleration of sensual
complacency, or a delightsome, voluntary resting in lascivious Thoughts (coming
to mind, either by natural occasion, or by the temptation and suggestion of
Satan:) an infirmity, to which depraved Nature is too much subject, and
insinuated by the Apostle Saint James, in that passage of his (Jac. 1. 31.)
where he says, Nemo cum tentatur, dicat, etc. Let no man, when he is tempted,
say that he is tempted of God; for God is not a tempter of evils, and tempts
no man. But every one is tempted of his own Concupiscence, being therewith
carried away and enticed. Which Concupiscence, when it has conceived, brings
forth sin; and sin, when it is consummated, genders death. Concupiscence, does
then begin to carry us away from God, when we suffer our mind to wander about
such matters, though without any intention to sin: which the Prophet seems to
express a little more plainly (Isa. 1. 16.) where he says, Wash you, and be
clean; Auferte malum cogitationum vestrarum, etc. Take away the evil of your
thoughts from before mine eyes; to wit, those evil Thoughts, with which you
suffer your minds to be so taken up, that you can find no time, to think upon
what I command you. Cast such Thoughts out of your mind, as soon as you can
perceive them; take no delight, nor pleasure in them; for though, perhaps, they
are not always sinful, yet they are always dangerous, and will quickly lead
you to sin, if you rest in them.

I accknowledg it to be most true, that though the Evil Spirit plies us, and
pursues us never so much with his suggestions, and putting lascivious thoughts
into our mind, they can do us no harm, so long as we resist them, or give no
consent to them; but are rather matter of merit to us: for so often as we do
so, we do foil Satan in his assault, we repulse our Ghostly Enemy, and get a
Victory over him, for which we may expect a Crown one day, if we persever to
the end. But if we let his Suggestions (evil Thoughts) to rest in us, and our
mind to be taken up with them after relexion, especially if it be with any
sport or pleasure taken, we do not fight with our Ghostly Enemy, but play with
him: and that is dangerous. Temptation verily is no sin; yet it serves as the
seed of sin; to which Delectation giving nourishment, sin at length comes forth
by willing consent: and then we are utterly lost, till repentance restores us.

But, having the grace to be free from complacency or delight-taking in evil
thoughts, and the care (conscientious and diligent care) to cast them out of
your mind, so soon as you percieve them, or reflect upon what you are thinking,
fear not, you are pure, you are innocent, you are clean, how impure, foul, and
nocent soever your thoughts be. Consent not to them, and the badder they are,
the better it shall be for you: for the greater the Temptation is, that you
overcome, the greater shall be your Victory and Crown.

Sudden, and voluntary motions, to whatsoever they incline, are no sin,
according to that of Saint Paul, Romans 7. 17. Nunc autem jam non ego operor
illud, etc. It is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me: By which
expressions (as the Annotations observe) the Apostle means, That though the
Flesh, and the inferior parts do stir up disorderly passions, motions, and
perturbations in the mind, on the sudden, and invade the same before we are
well aware of it, or that reason can gather up it self to put them by (by
reason whereof man is for a while entangled with them against his will) yet so
long as upon reflection he does perceive them, and perceiving them, does make
what resistance he can against them, condemning, and casting them out of his
mind, and deverting himself to better Thoughts, there is no fear, nor scruple
to be had of sin: many just and holy persons suffering the like perturbations
in the inferior, or sensitive part of their mind (otherwise called the
Fantasy) and also in their exterior members; to which their Understanding
and Will never consents: which so long as we do not, it is most true what Saint
Augustine says, viz. That we need not say, God forgive us our sins, for any
contingencies of this nature: and it ought to be a most certain and assured
sign to us, that we if do not consent to such things, but merely and passively
suffer them against our wills, if we find our selves to take no pleasure, or
delight in the feeling, or remembrance of them (but are rather grieved and
ashamed for such our frailties) and that so soon as we do take notice of them,
we be seriously diligent to put them out of our minds, and to divert our
Thoughts to God, or some other good matter. If our conscience upon
interrogation tells us, that it is thus with us, it were sin to have any
scruple, or apprehension of sin for such matter. But where it is otherwise,
that is, when our conscience does not thus answer us, but that we find our
selves negligent in putting such Thoughts out of our mind, as soon as we do
perceive them, or that we take complacency, and delight in the sense and
feeling of such Thoughts present, or remembrance of them past, then indeed it is
best to fear the worst, and to deem our selves guilty of sin, more or less
according to the nature of such evil Thoughts, or Phantasms, and the measure of
the Complacency taken in them. For so soon as we yield, or give way to Sensual
complacency in lustful Thoughts, or Imaginations, we fall into the Boggs and
Quagmires of Sin presenly.

Now of all that has been above said, we have an example in the person of
Saint Paul, who, by his own acknowledgment seems to have been much exercised in
such conflicts as these (viz. between the Flesh and the Spirit) and troubled
with the suggestions of the Ghostly Enemy. For so he says of himself, Romans 7.
v. 22. Condelector enim legi Dei secundum interiorem hominem, etc. I am
delighted (I consent and conform my self) to the Law of God, according to the
inner man (that is, according to the spirit of my mind, understanding, reason
and will) but I see another Law (that is another, and contrary inclination) in
my members (to wit, in the members of my Body, and the inferior parts or
powers of my Soul, which sympathize with them) repugnant to the law of my mind,
and captivating (that is, rendering me in some sort subject) to the Law (that
is, to the motions and inclinations) of sin. Whence it is evident, that the
Apostle, though he selt motions, and inclinations to sin in his outward, and
inferior parts, yet as to his inward and superior, he kept himself free, and
dissented from them.

Let us then, to the best of our power imitate the steps, and follow this
Valiant Champion in the Christian Warfare. Let us not fear, nor be troubled at
the Suggestions of Satan, but resist them first, and then despise them;
knowing, that the best, and most perfect men, that ever were in the world, have
been frequently assaulted, and much molested with the like. The Son of the
Living God (our Savior himself) was not altogether free from Temptations, as
the Gospel shows, Matthew. 4. v. 1, 3. It is nothing to be tempted; but it is
all, to be led into Temptation, so as to fall by it. It is not in our power to
be free from the motions of Concupiscence; but it is in our power, through the
grace of God, to resist them, and give no consent to such motions: and so long
as we do not, let Concupiscence trouble us never so much, yet we truly say with
the Apostle, Ego non operor, I do nothing, I do not work, or do any thing, by a
free, deliberate, humane act, and consequently, nothing, that shall be imputed
to me for sin. Concupiscence indeed works some natural effect or motions in me:
But Concupiscence alone, without my voluntary yielding to it, can never work
sin, and that is my comfort: for which I bless God.

Sect. 2. By Wilful Delectation in the Lustful Object, or Act.
As to the second degree, or step, by which Carnal Concupiscence comes forth
into act, it is the Delectation, or Pleasure taken in the sinful Object, or
unlawful Action, as it is represented in the Fancy, or Imagination. This
frequently happens in sins of Carnality; wherein for want of the grace of God,
or good instruction, frail people ofttimes give liberty to their Thoughts to
wander, and their Mind to muse about carnal matters; taking a sensible and
deliberate pleasure in that representation of lewd and unlawful actions, which
their phansy makes to them, or their memory brings to mind: which is always
Sin, though there follows no actual consent of the Will, ever to execute, or
perpetrate the sinful action, in the imagination whereof they take pleasure;
yea though they actually purpose, and determine with themselves, never to do,
or attempt the doing of it. This delectation (I say) and taking pleasure in
sin, or sinful actions, represented and conceived in the imagination, all
Divines (I suppose) put in the rank of those sins, which are, Ex genere suo
mortal and deadly; Saint Augustine seems absolutely to be of that opinion;
avouching, that when the will and understanding take delight or complacency in
Carnal impurities (or the sensual appetites of Concupiscence) though the mind
and will be totally bent not to commit the outward and complete act, yet seeing
the Spirit demurs, or rests willingly and pleasingly in such impure conceits,
it cannot be denied to be sin, according to the nature of the wicked act
conceived, and the measure of the complacency, or delight taken therein.

Therefore for all such Delectation, Forgiveness is to be asked of God, with
sorrow and repentance for the ^ame. And much it is to be feared, that many,
especially amongst the ^ounger sort of people, do expose their Souls, and
Eternal Salvation, to much hazard, who being prone to ^uch frailty as this,
because they find ^ot themselves to have any intenti^n to perpetrate the actual
sin, make ^ot that scruple of these Lustful De^^ctations of mind, which they
ought, but pass them away, as if there were no sin in them; which is a great
error, and of perilous consequence. The holy man, Job, thought it so I am
sure: of whom we read, Job 31. 1. that he made a covenant with his eyes, Vt ne
cogitare quidem de Virgin, That he would not so much as think upon a Maid; to
wit, with any carnal delectation, or affection toward her. He averted his
sight from all objects of lascivious delight, in such strict manner, that he
would not so much as think of them, or look after them, for fear, least by
means of such Thinkings and Lookings he should unawares be led into temptation,
and made to yield, in some unlawful and sinful sort, to the motions of Carnal
Concupiscence; at least of being in danger to take delectation and pleasure in
impure* Thoughts and Fantasies. There is a continual war betwixt a chaste Mind
and rebellious Flesh. The Flesh never ceases to obtrude Objects and Matters of
Unchastity to the Mind; and for this reason it was, that this holy man (by
Divine grace) was able to make such a strict condition of Truce between these
Two Enemies, as that his eyes should never betray his heart; his eyes should
never give the occasion, by which his Spirit should be tempted to any carnal
impurities: and by this means he was safe-guarded, both from the cogitation,
and also from the delectation of sin.

This holy man knew full well, that God was offended by all such voluntary
delectations as are taken inwardly in the mind, from and about sin, though the
actual perpe^ration thereof does not follow. It a^aileth nothing, according to
Saint Chrysostom, that the Body be chaste, ^f the Soul be involved in sinful
^houghts and imaginations, or takes delight in obscene phansies. For as we
judge, when the roots of Trees are ^orrupted, or decaies, that the Trees will
not come to their full perfection of growth; so in like manner, when the Soul
takes delight in unlawful sensual pleasures, all the chaste comportments of the
Body avail nothing in the Sight of God; by reason that those prohibited
Delectations, being willingly and deliberately taken, d^ foil and deprave the
heart and bannish all holy inspirations out of i^ The Author of Purity and
Chastity cannot take delight there, where the author of Impurity and
Uncleanness is freely admitted: For he being a most pure Spirit, yea Purity i^
self, has nothing more in abomination, than the Impure Delectation of our
Spirit: which are therefore t^ be abandoned and shaken off with a^ diligence,
as the sparkles of the infe^nal Chaos; for fear, least otherwi^^ they should
inflame our mortal bodie^ with the fire of Lust. Wash your hear^ from iniquity;
says the Prophet Hi^remy; that you may be saved. V^que quo morabuntur in Vobis
cog^ tationes noxiae? How long shall evil, and hurtful Thoughts abide in you?
It is good counsel for us all, and it behooves us to consider how we make use of
it. Solomon says, Prove. 6. 27. Nunquid p^^^est homo abscond^re ignem in (...)
suo? etc. Can a m^n hide fire in ^is bosom, that his Garments burn not? Can he
go upon hot coals, and his ^eet not be burnt: and it is as much as to say, he
that turns himself loose to carnal impudicities, and lets his mind and heart
take pleasure in them, entangles himself in the briars of Sin, and will quickly
find himself burnt, with the fire of Sensual Concupiscence, which he keeps so
close, and carries about with him, in his Bosom. Beware therefore; stand upon
your guard ^t all times; but especially then, when you perceive impure motions
and lustful representations to stir ^n your mind: repress them at the first;
for if you do not, but neglect them, they will take hold of the rubbish of your
soul, and kindle such a fire there as will consume, and burn up all the good
that is in you.

Sect. 3. By wilful consent to perpetrate the outward act of Sin.
It is clear then, that by toleration of Sensual Complacency, and delight taken
in the impure Thoughts and Imaginations of Sin, as by Two Steps, the Sin of
Carnal Concupiscence proceeds, or comes forth, out of the heart and inward
intentions, to the outward and perfect act. It remains that we consider next,
whether the willful, or voluntary consent of the mind to perpetrate the outward
act, opportunity being given, be not a Third Step. Truly, noobjections can be
alleged to the contrary. All Divines, without exception of any; are of that
opinion; and affirm the same, as a thing evidently warranted and grounded in
Holy Scripture. For first, acording to the holy Evangelist Saint Matthew, chap.
15. v. 19. We read; that from the heart come forth evil cogitations, Murder;
Adulteries, Fornications, and the like: which things defile a man. It seems as
much as to say, that whenever Voluntary consent is given; to commit; either
Murder, Adultery, Fornication, or any other forbidden Act of Carnal Lust, then
is the Sin of Murder, Adultery, Fornication, etc. committed, and then is the
Soul defiled with such sin, or sins respectively.

As for example, if one gives consent, in mind and heart to deflowre a Virgin,
or defile his Neighbors Wife, though for want of opportunity, or for some
other occasion, the outward act of such sin, or sins, is not perpetrated, or
done, yet is the party that so consents, culpable and guilty before God, as if
it had been done; because the holy Scripture does not only forbid the outward
act, but also the will, purpose, consent, or desire to do it. It is not only
said, Thou shall not commit Adultery, in the outward act, but thou shall not so
much as covet thy Neighbors Wife, by any desire, or purpose of thy heart, to
defile her. And therefore our Savior in the Gospel of Saint Matthew, says
(chap. 5. v. 28.) Audistis, quia dictum est antiquis, etc. You have heard, it
has been said of old, Thou shall not commit Aduletery. But I say unto you, that
whosoever shall look upon a Woman, to lust after her (though but in his heart,
or internal consent) he has already committed Adultery with her, by reason of
the said internal consent. So that this passage of the Evangelist is not only a
full Declaration of our Saviors mind touching this matter, but also a fair
warning given to all, to be careful to avoid, not only the outward, corporal
actions of Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, and the like, but also the
inward consent, or the fostering of any will, purpose, or desire to commit the
same, if we had opportunity.

Most certain therefore it is, and not at all to be doubted of, if a man
willingly gives away, or consents in his mind to any such lustful Action, he is
in the same instant that he gives such consent, overthrown, and utterly fallen
from the state of Grace, all good Thoughts, or Purposes, of what kind soever,
vanquish and die, as to any acceptance with God; all former merits is lost, and
the sinner made a subject and slave of Satan, no less really, than if he had
committed the sin it self in outward deed: and so he continues, till true and
hearty repentance restores him to better state. And as in all sins generally,
so especially in these of Carnal Concupiscence and Lust, we may observe this
method of Satan, viz. that first he suggests the sin to mind upon the sight,
remembrance, company, or conversation of some person, or otherwise, upon the
suggestion follows the Temptation, that is, some thought cast into our mind,
and as it were bidding us take notice of such a pleasing object: from this
Temptation (if we be not upon our guard and resist it) follows Delectation, or
taking pleasure in the unlawful thing represented, and suggested to us: from
Delectation follows Consent, or a determinate purpose of the heart to
perpetrate the act of sin, opportunity being given: from Consent, time, places,
and other circumstances concurring, follows the outward act, or deed of sin;
from the act (reiterated) proceeds the ill custom of sinning; from custom,
impudence, and to be insensible of sin; from thence vaunting, glorying, and
boasting of our sins, and defense of sin; from hence despair, and final
impenitence: which is concluded with eternal damnation. Behold here the several
steps and degrees, by which the Ghostly Enemy advances in his wicked practices
upon poor Souls, who have not had the care to keep themselves out of his snare:
Behold here the sad issue, which Concupiscence having conceived (as the Apostle
Saint James speaks, Jac. 1. v. 15.) that is, being impregnated by the Devil and
her own unadvised Consent, brings forth in time. In fine behold here,
explicitly and particularly set forth, what is implicitly contained, and
involved in that Text of the Apostle now alleged, Concupiscence, when it has
conceived, brings forth sin: and sin when it is consummate, ingendreth Death.

Yet observe here, if you please, I do not say, that Concupiscence, precisely
of it self alone, or as it signifies merely a natural motion and inclination,
stirred up in the fancy, to such or such a thing, is damnable, or so much as
sin, properly speaking, though some teach it to be so, whom we are not bound
much to regard. It is then only sin, when it is consented unto; that is, when
after perfect advertency, and taking notice of evil Thoughts, and Fantasies,
to be stirred up in us; we do voluntarily and of our own accord, either rest
and continue in the said Thoughts* and take pleasure and delight in the things
they represent to us, or (which is a farther degree and step in sin) do
actually consent in heart and will to commit the sin, or sins. that we think
upon, if opportunity were given us: So that it is not Concupiscence alone, but
our voluntary, free, and deliberate yielding to it that brings forth sin, or
makes us guilty of sin before God.

SCECTION IV. Carnal Concupiscence causes continual trouble.
SECT. 1. It is the most troublesome sin of any. 2. The troubles and usual
proceedings of fond and lewd Women. 3. The troubles and usual proceedings of
foolish and lewd Men.

Sect. 1. Carnal Concupiscence the most troublesome sin of any.
THat Wise, Gentle, Socrates, verifies our assertion, to wit, that Carnal
Concupiscence is a most troublesome sin, by this Expression of his. The
Lascivious Man is of all others the most miserable, being in a condition of
perpetual disquiet and sufferance. Poor Creature! he never thinks upon any
thing that is truly good; and upon what concerns the good of his Soul, least of
all: being wholly taken up, and employing all his Study, and endeavor, to find
the means to fulfill his untamed desire of pleasures, and of lust to the utmost.
Saint Ambrose consents hereunto. Carnal Concupiscence (says he) is without
question the most fierce, froward, and troublesome of all other sin (how
pleasing and agreeable so ever it may seem to those that consider not things
well) and causes the greatest unquietness to the Soul, besides other mischief,
especially where it is much entertained, and prosecuted. Do but reflect upon
the course of their lives, and you will easily see, in what a continual
unquietness and disturbance they remain. As for example, If they go to Bed,
desiring to take their rest, they are assaulted with innumerable temptations,
suggestions, and representations of the Ghostly Enemy, so that they cannot take
rest. If they chance to slumber, their sleep is presently broken with
Lascivious Dreams, and Objects, which their Unchaste and Lustful Fantasy
presents to them: so that all night long they are in trouble. When the day
appears, their pain increases, for then their Cares, their Studies and
Endeavors return upon them, to think how they shall satisfy their Lusts;
which they cannot rest till they have satisfied; what difficulties soever lie
in the way, and what hazards and perils soever they run: their Lust must be
satisfied whatsoever it costs. Their spare hours most commonly passing away in,
or about matters of Poetry, Love Letters, singing unchaste and dishonest Songs,
studying Compliments, and fine Courting Expressions; which serve them with more
ease to enveigle and overcome some poor silly Woman.

No good Actions proceed from them. To pray is the most tedious thing in the
World; to read Spiritual Books, dulls their Spirits too much; to attend to
Sermons, or any Pious Discourse, a cold and but frivolous Entertainment* to
Fast, is too too troublesome, and a kind of killing themselves. In conclusion,
nothing pleases them, nothing is delectable, or agreeable to their mind, but
that which tends to Mirth and Wantonness: in pursuance whereof, and for the
satisfying of their Sensual Appetites, they easily suffer themselves to be
drawn from all occasions of doing good, and from attending to their callings,
charges, and other honest and necessary employments; and wastefully to spend
their estates and time, altogether careless, and neglecting their Vocation. So
that in fine, being themselves devoid of all reason, and unable (through the
prevalency of blinding lust) to take, or follow good Counsel; they run with all
unhappy speed and precipitancy to their own confusion, both as to Body and
Soul: not only troubling themselves, but enticing others to their Sensual
Inclinations: which bad and most blameable disposition of mind (as I have
partly observed before) being once rooted in a Lascivious Heart, according to
Saint Ambrose; It rejects all Counsel and good Advice, disturbs and disquiets
those that give it Entertainment, though never so little, and destroys those
that are given up to it; proclaiming Wars to those that are Chaste and
constantly resist it, but inflaming those tha^ yield to it; and finally
consuming such as will not withdraw from it. To which end it is usually
attended also with a train of many other Evils and Vices, that wait upon it and
contribute what they can to the perfecting its wicked work; as namely,
Flatteries, Dissimulation, Lying, Deceits, innumerable Feigning,
Counterfeiting; and the like: none of which (and many other) evil Arts shall be
wanting, when occasion requires, for the Conquest of some one poor, silly,
Woman; whom Saint Paul calls the Weaker Vessel.

Sect. 2. The troubles and usual proceedings of fond and lewd Women.
Granatensis, that worthy Guide and Director of Christian Souls, pondering in
his mind the usual proceedings of vain Women (especially of those that are
wantonly and lewdly inclined) and the various Arts they practice, to attract
and allure Men; moved with a passionate zeal for their Salvation, he could not
forbear to check their Exorbitant Vanity and Lustfulness, in these words; Oh,
(says he) what Devilish Art and Cunning, cannot Women invent, to entice M^n
to their wanton Desires! and yet for all their Craft and Cunning, in conclusion
deceive themselves, and plunge their Souls into Eternal Perdition! To what
other thing (for the most part) tends all their Care, Studies, Employment? but
to be looked upon, and to entice Men? wherein do they exercise their wits and
spend their time, but in making themselves fit and ready for that work. To
relate particularities in this kind would be an endless work, being they are
numberless, and not to be reckoned up in a short time. However, for your
satisfaction, I shall instance in some few.

In the first place, how much time is consumed every day in Combing, Curling,
and Dressing their Heads, and in Frouncing their deformed Perrukes; which make
many of them look more like Monsters, or Mad-Women, than like Modest and Sober
Christians! How many varieties of Patches, Vermilion, and other Colors are
used to Paint, and them false Faces! What sorts of Waters, Unguents, Perfumes,
and other Ingredients have they not, to smooth withal, and to hide, or fill up
Wrinkles; sparing no cost, nor leaving any means untried, to make them appear
Young, Fair, and Beautiful, when they are nothing less! Some hours are thus
spent every day in Trimming and Dressing up their Heads: Their Care and
Curiosity is no less for their Bodies; both the one and the other wholly
according to the will and operation of Satan to allure and entice Men to evil.
Bu^ what would you say, should you se^ the abundance of their Jewels laid
before you in one heap; their Ru^bies, their Diamonds, their Agats their
Pearls, and what not? Truly you might say, it were the Wealth of a City, and
that Father Causi^ had reason to wonder, how suc^ small timber'd Creatures were
abl^ to stand under the burden of their own Bravery, especially dragging after
them such a long train of superfluous Vest, as comman^^ they do. Is it not a
miserab^^ and unworthy thing, that all the Elements (almost must be searched,
robbed, and plundered (as it were) of what they have, to find (I say not
necessary Covering but) superfluous, and unnecessary Ornament, for so many
wanton and dishonest Females; which are nothing else but a mere Face of sin and
vanity, and affect such Ornaments for no other end more, than to deceive, to
tempt and draw men by them to their ruin and destruction.

Is it not a great illusion, so to bolster out, and trick up Dung-hills of
filthiness; which, perhaps, too morrow, or ere long, must be carried to their
Graves, and be made Meat for Worms. Tell me, O miserable, wanton, Creatures,
tell me, what will those Creeping Things, that are to Eat and Consume your
Rotten and Impure Carcasses, care, whether your Hair be of several sorts or
not; or whether your Eyebrows have been pulled with little Pincers, or not, or
whether your Cheeks have put on the Vermillion Tincture, or not, your Bodies
been drowned and soaked in Sweet Odours or not! What will they care whether
your Garments be Plaited or not Plaited, Streight-body'd, or Loose-hang'd;
charged with Gold, Silver, Jewels, or not. In the Grave there will be no regard
of these things; here they may serve your turn a little, as helps, whereby to
ensnare the more easily some fond and foolish Amourist, some Witless Gallant,
that wants the Grace and Discretion to beware of your Wiles. Take heed, O ye
Lewd and Wanton Women, take heed that you draw not suddenly upon you the Wrath
of Divine Justice, for your Evil Practices. Many are the Warnings which you
have, both from the Holy Scriptures and the Ancient Fathers, to refrain from
such Vanities and Ill-doing.

For though you want not your vain Excuses, and will seem to think it lawful to
do what you do, upon pretense of Living according to your Condition and
Quality. I pray, Is it according to your Condition and Quality, to be Lews, or
to entice Men to Lewdness? That Is the thing we blame in you at present; namely,
That you trouble your selves so much, take such pains, are at such cost, for
your Apparel, on purpose to allure Men, and to make them look after you with
Unchaste and Carnal Affections. What is to be thought of your excessive
Costliness and Curiosity about your Apparel, has been spoken to in other
place. Apparel may be made an instrument both of Lust and Pride. How you abuse
it to Pride, has been already shown, in the first Treatise of this second
part, which you may do well to consider. Here we tax it only as it is an
instrument of Lust. Your Attire is the Attire of Harlots; and under your Skirts
(or Playtings) (as the Prophet Hieremy speaks, Jer. 2. 34.) Sanguis animaru
inventus est, The Blood of Souls is found; which perish by your Allurements.
What will you say, when this Blood shall be discovered by the Angels, when they
gather you together unto Judgment; Matthew. 24. 31. What Excuse will you make at
that day? Think of this well, and in the mean time hear with patience, the
large and true Description which the Wise and Inspired King, Solomon, makes of
the Harlots Practices, Prove. 7. v. 7, 8, 9, etc. how they entice Men to sin,
and by sin to their ruin. They are met in the Streets (says he) in the
Twilight, in the Evening of the Day, when it begins to be Dark; impatient of
keeping within Doors, they lie in wait at every Corner, subtle of Heart, and
prepared to deceive. Here they meet with their Prey; to wit, Young Men (unwary,
inconsiderate rash Young Men, living after their Lusts, and wanting the true
Fear of God) and them with impudent Faces, and false slattering Words, they
caress, till they have caught them in their Snares, and made them to yield to
their lawless and lustful Passions; which is done without difficulty. For they
(poor Creatures) know not what resistance means, to such pleasing Motions. They
know not how to refuse such lascivious Baits. So they are taken and led away
with ease, even as the Ox is led to the Slaughter, or as the silly Lamb, which
sports before his leader; so go these wanton Fools into Bonds, till an Arrow
pierce their Liver: As Birds, they make haste to the snare, not knowing that
it is laid for their Life. Unto whom in the words of that Wise King and Prophet,
I desire to speak, and to leave them the Admonition following; to be found in
the place above cited. Nunc ergo audite me, etc. Now therefore my Sons, hear
me, attend to the words of my mouth. Let not your hearts be drawn into their
ways (the ways of Lewd Women) and go not astray in their paths; For they have
cast down and wounded many; yea the most strong (Sampson himself for example)
are slain by them. Their Houses are the way to Hell (at your Peril therefore ye
haunt them, O besotted ones) going down to the inner parts of the Region of
Death. Thus much of the Practices and Proceedings of Women in this affair: it
remains, that we see and consider how it goes with Men upon the same score.

Sect. 3. The troubles and usual proceedings of Foolish and Lewd Men.
We have seen in some competent measure the Proceedings, and usual Practices,
that Wanton and Lewd Women use for the enticing of Men (Young Men especially)
to their Lustful and Carnal Appetites. What may we think of Men? are they any
better? are they less guilty in this kind? not one whit I fear. Let their
Practices and Manners be well observed, they will be found, not to come much
short of the other Sex in any point of uncommendable Excess, pertaining to this
Vice: no less tainted in their Reputation, no less drowned, and deep sunk in
the Mire of filthy Lust, then they: nay it is certain, that Women (generally
speaking, and except some few of prostituted impudence) do yet retain some
sparks at least of Modesty (that Natural Virtue of their Sex) in their Breasts,
which will make them blush many times, and be troubled, to hear filthy words
belched out of unclean mouths; Women have not as yet altogether abandoned
themselves to unshamefastness; as amongst Men too many now adays, may seem to
have done: with whom it is accounted a piece of Gallantry (a sign of Manhood,
say some: Ah, What kind of Men will they be found, when a time of trial shall
come!) to be, both in words and actions, so far as they dare, shameless, and
not to seem either to fear God, or to regard Man. Is not every day (almost)
witness of the deceitful Carriage and Comportment of Men toward Women? and of
some Devilish Art and Practice of theirs, to trapan, and bring over some one
or other of that frail Sex, to their Sensualities and Lusts? In the first place
do they not share with Women in the Excess and Vanities of Apparel and Habit?
It is a thing too visible to be denied. Nay, is it not come to that height,
that many Men, to the shame and disgrace of the Masculine Sex, wear Patches
upon their Effeminate Faces, like Women, and make use of Vermilion Tincture
upon their Cheeks (just as Women ^o) to seem what they are not. Truly it is my
Opinion, if such Practices be discommendable in Women, they must of necessity
be abominable in Men; who give up themselves to such Womanish and unworthy
Vanities.

Costliness of Apparel (it must be confes'd) is a great fault in Women: But do
not Men offend in the same kind? Do not Men apparel themselves oft-times much
otherwise than Modesty requires, and also much beyond their Estates and
Conditions, to ingratiate themselves with Women, and in fine, to deceive them?
What Practice, or Means, fit for their purpose, do they neglect or forbear to
use, in order to this end? For their Entertainment they have the most exquisie
Music that can be procured, as well of the Charming Voice, as the Ravishing
Instrument: Both which serve as Wings for Unchaste Minds, to mount up to the
height of their immodest Pretensions. Music seldom goes without Dancing,
Frisking, Capering, and other Courting Liberties (not to say Immodesties)
usually attending, and bringing up the Rear of these Voluptuous Treats: whereby
both Bodies and Minds are by little and little dissolved, as it were, and made
susceptible of the most Corrupt and Wicked Impressions.

To Entertainment (I speak still of Gallants, pursuing dishonest and unchaste
Pretensions upon Women ^ to Entertainment (I say) they add the winning Artifice
of good Behavior, Civil and most Complacent Carriage; Modest, Humble,
Submissive upon occasion; and to Behavior, Discourse, in all things suitable
to the gust and inclination of their party; with whom having by these Arts
scrued themselves into some Familiarity of Converse; they cease not still to
comply and conform themselves, most exactly to their Humor and Disposition;
entertaining them now with Praises, applauding their Beauty, and taking Notice,
not without show of Admiration, and special good-liking, of some pretended
Virtue, or Virtues in them, in case they find any; and if not, impudently (yet
cunningly) feigning them to have, and flattering them upon that account. And
weak Creatures (God knows) are as easily taken with sweet words, as Bees with
Honey: fair, smooth, and flattering Language, well set off, and made more
luscious by agreeable Deportment, takes their Heart, and makes them yield to
whatever such a pleasing Orator propounds to them.

If chance seperates them never so little, and hinders their accustomed
Enterviews; no day passes without our Gallants feigning great affliction for
such forced absence, and complaining of his ill Fortune, that it should be so:
and upon this occasion, Love Letters, and Verses of the same strain, are sent
to and again: a principal Art of gaining upon Women's Affection, and a great
means of assuring it when it is gained. So that upon return, Visits are more
frequent, Caresses more tender, Addresses more familiar and free: and in fine,
the poor (pursued) Creature, unable to resist, or bear up, against the stream
of such Eloquent and Obligeing Compliments, made good by all manner of
Benevolence, Respect, Submission, and so many real Testimonies, and Assurances
of Good Will; hearing her self Exalted above the Skies for Goodness, Virtue,
Beauty, and what not? and being made to believe that nothing in the World is so
dear to him, that he is ready to expose Life, Estate, and all his Concerns to
serve her; being (as all Women are) naturally inclined to have a good conceit
of her self; she at last gives Credit to all that her Gallant tells her, and
believing all to be true that he says; she gives consent to all that he asks,
though never so much to the prejudice of her Soul, Body, Conscience, Honor,
etc.

Thus are Women (silly, weak, Women) with no less Industry and Art, pursued by
Men to their Shame and Ruin, than Men are enticed and allured by Women. But
what follows of both? Certes, nothing but Infamy, nothing but Sorrow, Grief,
Fruitless Repentance (for the most part) and Tears, not of Godly, but Carnal
and Worldly Sorrow; conceived not for having offended God, but for having
incurred the Obloquy of Men, and prejudiced themselves in the Esteem of the
World. What follows? Very often, Envy, Ill Will, Hatred, and extreme Aversion:
very often Mischief, sometimes Madness, sometimes Death it self: all which
might be instanced in sundry Examples, if time would serve. None rejoicing, but
the Devil and his Angels of Darkness, at the success of their damnable Deceits,
and for the Conquest they have got over Two unhappy Souls.

SECTION V. Carnal Concupiscence causes many other inconveniences.
SECT. 1. It causes Poverty and Misery. 2. By the same Men become Senseless,
Stupid, and void of Understanding. 3. By reason thereof Men abide, or remain in
sin, and entangle themselves more and more therein. 4. Remedies against the
same. 5. Advice to all sorts of Persons, to overcome the Vice of Carnal
Concupiscence. 6. The main and chief Remedy of all is, to avoid the Occasions.

Sect. 1. Carnal Concupiscence causes Poverty and Misery.
AH Parents! How am I troubled for you, that you take so much Pains, and labor
so hard to leave great Estates to your Children: you never cease joining House
to House, and Land to Land, till there be no place; you never cease Building
and Planting, Buying and Purchasing great Estates, great Rents; you Heap up,
and Hoard up Gold and Silver without end, never knowing when you have Wealth
enough: whereas many times it falls out, that you leave all to a Prodigal Son,
who in a few years time will scatter that, which you have been covetously
gathering together all your Life long. Do you not see, how you damn your own
Souls, to leave matter of Luxury to your Children? never so much as remembering
or thinking upon that great charge, which the Apostle gives to Rich Men (1 Timothy
6. 18.) namely, That they set not their minds too much, nor trust in uncertain
Riches, but that they do good with their Wealth, and be rich in good works, in
Almsdeeds, in Charity and Liberality toward the Poor. These Things ought you
to think upon, Rich Men, and not suffer your selves to be so blinded with
Natural Affection toward your Children after the Flesh, as to think of nothing
but Enriching them, and leaving them great Estates to consume in Luxury. A just
Judgment and Curse of God upon you, for your extreme Hard-heartedness, and
great unmindfulness of those Children of God (the poor of his people) whom
their Heavenly Father has left, and so specially recommended to your Care and
Compassion. O wretched Luxury! How many, how great Estates have thou wasted,
and brought the Heirs and Owners of them to great Poverty in this World, and to
eternal miseries in the next!

Looking into Scripture, I find there even Sampson himself in the Rank and
Number of these Spendthrifts. He, though he were not only an Israelite by
Nation and Birth, but also a Nazarite from the Womb (as he is peculiarly styled
by God himself, Judge. 13. 5. 7.) that is, a Person dedicated to Gods special
Service, even from the first day of his Nativity; yet he must have his Dalila,
his Female Associate, to serve his Lust; with whom falling in Love, and Living,
he soon brought himself to Ruin, being by her betrayed into his Enemies hands;
who forced him, having first put out his Eyes, to undergo hard Labor, even to
Grind (by a Hand-mill) in the Prison House, all the days of his Life; as you
may read more at large in the Book of Judges, Chap. 16. Sichem (of whom we
read, Genes. 34.) was such another. He, though a Prince by Descent, and much
beloved of his People, yet for being taken with Carnal Concupiscence toward
Dinah, the Daughter of Jacob, and defiling her, he lost both his Kingdom and
Life. What shall I say of the Prodigal Son, mentioned in Saint Lukes Gospel
(Chap. 15. 12, 13, etc.) who by Living Riotously with Whores and Lewd Women,
wasted his Portion in a short time, and was reduced thereby to extreme misery.

To these Examples of Holy Scriptures, I shall add one out of Humane Story.
Bromiardus, reports of a Man, who having consumed and wasted all that he had
upon a Whore, came at length to be rejected and scorned by her. He had spent a
good Estate upon her, and now seeing himself reduced to absolute Beggary, and
that (his Wealth being gone) the Strumpet scorned him, struck with shame, he
leaves the City: which the Lewd Woman (his Paramour) hearing of, she follows
him with Cries. The Old Bawd, that waited upon her, thinking it had been out of
some Passion she had for him, comforts her, and bids her be content. Let him go
(says she) he has nothing: and ere it be long, I Will procure you one Richer than
he. The wicked Harlot hearing this, presently replies: You much mistake me; I
cry not for him: I am only vexed that he carries away a good Shirt on his Back,
which I meant to have had before his departure. Behold here a full Verification
of what was long before Prophesied by the Wise King, Solomon; Prove. 29. 3. Qui
nutrit scorta, perdit substantiram. He that maintains Harlots shall waste his
own substance. Beware therefore, take heed of it: of all Prodigal and Wicked
Expenses be sure you shun that (which is the worst of all) for fear, least it
destroy you Body and Soul; and least you find your selves (you that swim in
Luxury and Wealth at present) before you be aware of it, reduced to a Morsel of
Bread. Do not think that the Scripture gives you so many Warnings for nothing.

The sin of Carnal Concupiscence is for this reason, not unrightly compared by
some to the Horse-leach, which being applied to Man's Body, sticks fast to it,
sucking the Blood, and not ceasing, so long as she is able to hold. In the same
manner the Vice of Concupiscence, seizing upon any person, draines him off his
Wealth, lies continually sucking and drawing from him, till nothing be left but
a Diseased and Foul Carcass, which for a time he must carry about him; till at
length, through Rottenness and Corruption, that also falls and becomes Meat for
Worms. It is a Plague that infects and destroys all, even Virtuous Persons
sometimes, if they take not heed: according to that Saying of the Wise Man,
Ecclus. 19. 2. Wine and Women, apostatare faciunt sapientes, etc. make even
Wise Men to fall away, and he that joins himself to Harlots, will be naught.
Rottenness and Worms shall have him to Herritage. He shall be set for an
Example of Dread and Terror; and his Soul shall not be reckoned in the number
of the living.

Sect. 2. By Carnal Concupiscence, Men brcome Senseless and Stupid, and void of
Understanding.
That they are Companions, and go usually together (to wit, Carnal
Concupiscence, and a Senseless, Shameless Spirit) appears by the Prayer of the
Wise Man, which he makes Ecclus. 23. 6. Aufer a me ventris Concupiscentiam,
etc. Remove far from me (says he) the Concupiscences of the Belly and Lust;
and animae irreverenti and infrunitaene tradas me: To a shameless (besotted)
Spirit deliver me not up. Thus he prayed; and rightly thereupon does the
Seraphical Doctor, Saint Bonaventure (speaking of Concupiscence) pronounce,
that by means thereof (more than by any other sin, commonly speaking) Man is
deprived of or depraved of his Understanding, Mind, Reason, Wit, and becomes in
a manner, like the Bruit Beasts, insensible of his Shame and Folly: from which
desperate and sad condition of mind, the Wise Man in the Prayer
abovementioned, begs to be delivered. And that no doubt may be made of this
Verity (to wit, that Concupiscence, obeyed in the Lusts thereof, and commonly
practiced, does extremely blind and pervert the Understandings of Men) Solomon
himself, the Wisest Man (by Gods own Verdict and Special Promise; 3 Reg. 3.
12.) that ever had been or was to be, is brought as an Example thereof: for of
him it is said (3 Reg. 11. 4, etc.) that in his Old Age, his Wives (whom he had
taken contrary to the Commandment of God) Exodus 34. 16.) of the Moabites,
Sidonians, Ammonites, and other Gentile Nations, merely out of Lust and Carnal
Concupiscence) turned away his Heart from following the Lord, to Worship
strange Gods, and to Burn Incense to Idols; namely, Astarte, Goddess of the
Zidonians, and Moloch, the Abomination of the Ammonites, etc. Now if such a Man
as Solomon falls under the power of Lust, who can think to stand? if his Wisdom
could not save him from becoming a Sot in his Old Age, and from doing things so
strangely, and horribly repugnant to Reason and Conscience, what shall we think
of our selves? How can we promise our selves, in the end, any better issue of
our Lust, than that we shall, with Solomon, become insensible both of
Conscience and Honor, and be given up to do, and act in all things contrary to
Reason, contrary to Prudence, contrary to all Virtue and Honesty; yea, unless
Gods Mercy save us, even with Nabuchodonosor to degenerate into Bruit Beasts,
Dan. 4. 33. through the prevalency of lustful Passions, and the extreme
blindness of Mind, and perversion of Judgment, which they cause, being overlong
indulged unto; and that God in wrath delivers impenitent, obstinate Sinners up
to them; according, as by the testimony of Saint Paul he did the Gentiles: of
whom it is written (Romans 1. 24, 26, 28, etc. that God (for their sins of
Whoredom, Idolatry and Uncleanness, Corporal and Spiritual) gave them up to a
Spirit of Uncleanness, to Vile Affections, to a reprobate mind, (void of all
sound Judgment) and to do things that were not convenient: and all to teach us,
what the horrid effects of unbridled lust are upon the minds of Men, destitute
of the Grace of God, and given up to the power of Satan.

The Luxurious Man is so senseless, that for the prosecution and obtaining of
his Lust, he puts all other Concerns in Oblivion, and does things without any
consideration or reason. He gives his poor Soul to the Devil and Eternal
Damnation for nothing. Can any thing be more unreasonable? He loses the Kingdom
of Heaven and Eternal Glory for nothing; he brings upon himself everlasting
misery for nothing. I say for nothing, or for a thing of no value with good and
wise men. If some Temporal Kingdom, or Principality, were exposed to sale, or
sold away for a small inconsiderable sum of money, I suppose no body would tax
me, if I should say, such a Kingdom or Principality were sold or given away for
nothing; because the price was not in any reasonable sort comparable, or
proportioned, to the thing sold: So when I say the Adulterer, Fornicator, the
Incestuous and Unclean Person, sells his Soul to the Devil for nothing, gives
away his Portion in the Kingdom of Heaven, Eternal Bliss, Eternal Glory, for
nothing, I am sure I speak Truth; no man can justly blame me for what I say;
seeing all this is done for a momentary, short, vile pleasure or delectation of
the Flesh, and for the satisfaction of a sensual Appetite, which no wise man,
that is Master of himself, values; neither should any wellinstructed Christian
admit, or think of, but in order to some higher and more virtuous ends; viz.
the lawful procreation of Children, to be brought up in the Knowledge and Fear
of God, and for the Conservation of Conjugal Fidelity and Amity.

Saint Augustine is of the same mind with me, and confirms what I have said by
his own Testimony, saying, That whoever, for a little, short, pleasure of this
world (he means the pleasure of a Voluptuous Carnal Act) gives away that for
which Christ gave himself to death: (to wit his Soul) there can be no doubt
made, but in doing so he forfeits his reason quite, and at the same instant
shows himself to be an unreasonable, senseless brutish person, scarce
deserving the name of man. Which considering also, another most learned Divine
compares a lasci^ious (lustful) Man, to a foolish and unskilful Merchant, who
undervalues his own Merchandise, and sells things, that are of great worth and
estimation, for an inconsiderable price; applying to this purpose that which is
said, Prove. 6. 26. Pretium scorti vix est unius panis, and c. The price of a
Harlot is scarce worth a loaf of Bread; it hardly comes to so much; and yet
such a Woman catches the precious Soul of Men. The meaning is what we have
already said, That such as join themselves to Harlots, do pawn their Soul (the
most precious thing they have in the world) for that which is worth just
nothing.

The Luxurious Man therefore, besides his transgressing Gods Commandment, does
great injury to Christ, in presuming to sell that at so mean a rate, which he
thought worth the purchasing at so great a price. Besides, he sells that, which
is not at his own disposing; he sells that, which he has not power to sell or
give: for according to the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Our Souls are not our
own; we are bought with a great price (Bodies and Souls) we have both our Souls
and Bodies of God; our Bodies and Souls are the Temples of the Holy Ghost which
dwells in us; and therefore we ought, by our chaste and holy Conversation, to
glorify God both in our Souls and in our Bodies.

Sect. 3. By reason of Carnal Concupiscence Men abide or remain in Sin, and
entangle themselves more and more therein.
Have you never observed the Snails, how that naturally for the most part they
lie bathing and soaking themselves in their own Jelly or filthy Pickle; and if
they put out at any time, they carry their Shell on their Backs; into which,
upon the least disturbance or hinderance that they met with, they presently
shrink and shut up themselves; being of the slowest motion of any Creatures
that move. This sordid Creature is a perfect Emblem of a Voluptuous Man, who is
(or by his good will would be) always wallowing in the filthy Mire of unclean
Lust; a loathsome Creature both for Body and Soul; slow to any thing that is
Good; and most of all to that which would be his greatest good: True
Repentance, and breaking off his evil custom of Sinning, which is as it were
the Shell upon his Back, in which he resides for the most part of his Life; and
whither upon every little Temptation, yea sometimes to divert himself from
other Griefs, he retires, and makes an unhappy retreat. He is more filthy and
stinking, than any Dunghill, by reason of his frequent and vile uncleanness.
He is a Swine, that delights in nothing more than to be lying on a Dunghill,
or wallowing in some Miry or Dirty Puddle; placing his whole Felicity in
Lustful Pleasure, and satisfaction of his Inordinate Appetites in that kind;
persevering therein too often (unhappy Man that he is) till Death seizes upon
him, and carries him in a moment to Hell.

There is a saying of the Prophet Joel (Chap. 1. v. 7.) to this purpose,
Computruerunt jumenta in stercore sua. The Beasts are rotted in their own Dung.
Upon which passage of the Holy Scripture, Saint Gregory Commenting, teaches
that by the Beasts here said to be rotted together (or putrified) in their own
Dung, may well be understood Voluptuous, Carnal, and Sensuallyminded Persons,
who Perish, and Corrupt (Bodies and Souls) in the Dung of their own filthy
Actions: that which made Pope Innocent; reflecting upon the same words, to cry
out: Oh, the extreme turpitude of Sensuality, which not only defiles Body and
Soul, but renders them unsavory; makes them stink, and to be abominated in the
Sight of God, Angels, and all Men, that are not Beasts like themselves: In
which sense also it is most true what the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 6. 19, viz.
That the Adulterer, Fornicator, and all such like Sinners, do violate Gods
Temple (which is their own Body) because by defiling it with Lust, they make it
of the Temple of God (wherein the sweet Odor and Incense of Virtue and Good
Works, ought to be continually offered and ascending before the Divine Majesty)
a very Sty of Satan; wherein nothing can be perceived but the filthy Steam and
Ill-sent of Sin and Uncleanness.

Add to all this, That by Carnal Concupiscence, Men are entangled and tied
fast, in their Inordinate Affections toward Women: for which reason the Wise
Man says, Ecclus. 7. 27. Laqeuus Venatorum, and Sagena, cor Mulieris, etc. The
Lewd Women is as a Hunters-snare to Men (the Devil is that Hunter, hunting and
pursuing poor Souls to Death, by this means) her Heart as Nets, and-her Hands,
Bands. In which words, they that observe the Passage more curiously, seem to
observe three several ways or methods, by which Women, through Concupiscence,
entangle Men; that is to say, by Snares, by Nets, and by Bands: and according
to this, they likewise observe three several sorts of Men, that are more
especially subject to be entangled and caught by each of those ways or methods
respectively. Snares are proper to catch Birds that fly in the Air; and by
them they understand Vain, Proud, High-minded, and Lightminded People. Nets are
commonly used to catch Fishes, that swim in the Water, understanding by them
the Glutton and Drunkard, and all such as give themselves overmuch to the
pleasures of their Palate; always (by their good will) swiming in their
Delicacies and Varieties of Meats and Drinks. Bands, are for the catching of
wild and stronger Creatures; by which they intend the multitude of Covetous,
Unjust, and Worldly-minded People, who offend commonly by some way of Violence,
Oppression, Rapine, Injustice, Fraud, etc. So that in fine, all sorts of People
are taken, one way or other, by them, none (or at least very few) escaping: the
consideration whereof extorted from the good Father Saint Hierome, this
pathetique Exclamation, Oh Hellfire (says he) O those Everlasting Burnings!
of which Gluttony and Drunkenness are the Fuel; Pride and Ambition the Flame;
Lewd and Filthy Speech the Spa^kles; Infamy and Shame the S^inking Smoke;
Impudicity and Uncleanness the Ashes; and the effect Eternal Misery and Torment.

Sect. 4. Remedies against Carnal Concupiscence.
To the Soul that remembers her self, and, desirous to live Chaste, would know
what Remedies may be found against the poisonous force and infection of Carnal
Concupiscence, I shall in the first place, with Father Causin, give this
Advice; to wit, That so long as she lives in this sinful World (where
Temptations to Vice are so many and great) how well soever things at present
seem to go with her, yet that she always judges it most impossible for her to
persevere to the end in that state, but by the singular Gift, Favor, and Grace
of Almighty God, according to that Confession of the Wise Man, beginning his
Prayer to God; Sap 8. v. 21. Scivi, quoniam aliter non possem esse continens,
etc. I know (says he) full well, that I cannot otherwise be continent, unless
God give me the Gift; and a point of Wisdom it is, to know whose Gift the Grace
of Chastity and Continency is. It is therefore absolute necessary, that for the
Gift we have particular recourse to God, even to the most Holy and Undivided
Trinity; begging it of him, who, according to Saint Gregory Nazianzen, is the
first of Virgins; that is, God our Savior; and in the second place, that we
address our Prayers to like purpose, unto the Blessed Mother of God, the Virgin
Mary, to our good Angel, and to such other of the Blessed Saints and Angels in
Heaven, as we have chosen, or that our Faith and Devotion have made to be our
Patrons in Heaven; begging their Mediation and Prayers for us, that we may be
always delivered from the reproaches of Belial, the Spirit of Impurity; and
that we may pass over our Life Innocently and Holily in this present evil
World; possessing our Vessels (that is, these Bodies of ours) as the Apostle
speaks (1 These. 4. v. 4.) in Sanctification and Honor; not in the Lust of
Concupiscence: and finally, that through the mercies of God, and the help of
his Grace, we may come to enjoy those Crowns and Garlands of Heavenly Glory,
which shall be given to those, who in this Fight betwixt the Spirit and the
Flesh, overcome the wicked one, and continue Faithful unto their Captain and
General Christ Jesus unto the Death.

Wherefore my Advice and Counsel to all is, that of the Apostle (1 Cor. 10.
12.) He that thinks he stands, let him take heed least he fall. If at present
you feel your selves at peace, and unmolested with the suggestions and bad
inclinations which others lie under, and combat with daily more or less; give
thanks to God for his Mercy, and beg the continuance of his Grace to you; but
enter not into any vain Complacence, and Opinion of your self, as if it were
the effect of your own Forces: it is the effect of Heavens Benignity toward
you; and if you presume to think otherwise, it is to be feared you will find
your error in the sad experiment of some unhappy fall. Therefore walk humbly
before God, trusting to his Grace, not to your selves; and be sure, as much as
you can, to avoid all occasions of sin.

Sect. 5. Advice and Exhortation to all sorts of Persons, to overcome the Vice
of Carnal Concupiscence.
I find nothing more proper for this purpose, viz. of subduing and
extinguishing the motions of Carnal Concupiscence, than what I have extracted
(for your use) out of the Holy Court, 1. Treatise of Love; Sect. 1. S. 9. where
the Pious and Learned Author, Father Causin, delivers himself thus: Give your
selves a little leisure to recollect your thoughts together, and with the Eye
of attentive Consideration to behold the many Disasters which wait on the
experiencing of Carnal Sensualities. If you be a Virgin, stain not the Honor
of your State; vilify not in your Flesh on Earth, a Virtue to which Angels
afford such Glory in Heaven. Beware of that damnable curiosity, which makes you
desire to know what cannot be known by you, but by becoming criminal. If you
understand what this sin is, profit by your experience, and betray not an
eternity of Blessedness for a Pleasure so short. If you be a Master of a
Family, or a Person of Quality, mark what Saint Gregory Nazianzen says, A Man
(says he) by means of this sin totally ruins Body and Soul, Estate and
Reputation. He is terrible at home to his own Honshold, and shameless abroad;
serving as an Executioner to his chaste Wife, whom his unkindness and
ill-carriage vexes to Death every day. He is a Tyrant even to his own Children,
a reproach to his Friends, a scourge to all his Domestiques, a dishonor to his
Kindred, and a blemish to his own good Name; a shipwreck to his Fortune, and a
Fable (or Talking-stock to all the World.

If you be a Maid, ever fear how you become a Woman, and cast not the Garland
of your Virginity under the Feet of Swine: give not a Hair of your Head to
them, who promise you Mountains of Gold; and when they desire you in quest of
Marriage, then is the time that you must be least inclined to
Marriage-pleasures; all what you grant to their importunity in this kind,
contrary to Chastity before Marriage, will be the subject of your disgrace and
misfortune after it: for when they shall have wedded you, they will be
continually imagining you liberal to others of that whereof you were prodigal
to them: it will be a source of jealous thoughts and surmizing concerning you,
as long as you live together.

If you be a Married Woman, and (and as charity commands us to think) chaste,
innocent, and of good reputation, what color or pretense, can you have in
reason, to engage your self in a Crime, for which Husbands have such furious
Passions and Aversion; the Laws thundering out threats against it, Judges ready
to pass Sentence, and Gibbets and Scaffolds prepared for the punishment
thereof; not to speak of the many poor creatures, which have by occasion of
this sin, ended their unhappy Lives in an untimely manner, being surpised in
the Fact, and in the heat of their sin made to exchange their Lustful Flames,
for the Fire which shall never be quenched.

If you be a Man of the Sword, know, it is given you to defend the Honor of
Chastity, and not to violate it either in your self or others; and that the
Man, who suffers himself to be led and overcome by Women, what Rhodomantadoes
soever he speaks or talks, where just occasion requires valor, he is often
times found a Coward. If you be a Judge, or Magistrate, or raised up into an
Eminent Place, degrade not your self of the Honor which God has imprinted on
your Forehead; mount not up to the Throne of Judicature, to condemn there what
you practice at home; and never think that the Purple (which will not be died
but by the Virgins Hands) ought to be worn on any other but a chaste Body.

If you be an Ecclesiastic, and (which is more) engaged to Religion, or
advanced in Prelacy; will you be so unnatural, as ever to consent to a sin,
which in your person cannot be less than Sacrilege? What a madness is it, that
for the poor satisfaction, which an infamous Act of Brutish Lust gives you,
you will become either an Excomunicate, or a Persecutor of Jesus Christ?
Excommunicate, I say, if of your self, and out of the consciousness of your
self, you do abstain from coming to the Altar; and a Persecutor of Jesus
Christ, if you do come to consecrate, or receive the Blessed Sacrament in the
guilt of this horrible sin: you strike a Nail into his Hand, you pierce his
side with a Lance, you are a Wolf that devoureth the Flock of Christ, and
destroys, so much as in you lies, his Brethren by your ill example.

It is the observation of Epictetus, That Carnal Lust, or Concupiscence, is an
odious thing, and unbeseeming, in what Person soever it is found. In a Maid it
is a shame, and a thing, the thought whereof is to be blushed at: In a Woman
it is a Rage, and argues a furious Commotion and Disorder of those Passions,
which in her ought to be more calmed and better ordered: In a Man it is
Lewdness: In Youth a Folly deserving great blame; and in Old Age a disgrace
worthy of all scorn.

Sect. 6. The main and chief Remedy of Concupiscence, is, to avoid the
occasions thereof.
Flight from the occasions of Carnal Sensuality is a most assured Bulwark for
the defense and security of Chastity; and he that constantly makes use of this
stratagem is sure to overcome, in this so perilous warfare. Let the great
Conquerours of the World, Fight out their Battles by dint of Sword, the
Christian Soldier gains his point better (that is, more safely, and no less
honorably) by flying them, than by sighting. No man doubts, but to retreat and
gain the Victory is more honorable, than to fight and lose it. They that know
any thing in this affair, cannot be ignorant, that this cursed Evil (the sin of
Carnal Concupiscence) proceeds for the most part, and is occasioned by overmuch
Familiarity, and private Conversation with Women; of which the greater part are
either apt to tempt, or easy to be tempted to sin: and therefore all such
acquaintance (or being alone together) of unmarried persons of different Sex is
absolutely to be avoided by all that desire to live chaste. It Is as possible to
carry Fire-Coals in your Bosom, and not be burnt, as to converse familiarly
with a Woman in private, and not be touched with some Sparks of Lustful passion
(such is the frailty of Humane Nature) which if indulged unto, will soon break
out into a greater flame; which is the reason why we are so often, and so
earnestly called upon in the Holy Scriptures, to beware of all such evil and
unnecessary conversing with Women. Use not their company, says the Wise Man,
Ecclus. 9. 4. Look not on them (v. 5.) Turn away thine eye from their Beauty
(v. 8.) least thou fall by it. Sit not with them; especially not at the Wine
(v. 9.) Keep from them, decline them; shun their Company, Prove. 5. 8. 6. 14.
and the like: according to which the Ancient Fathers, and all good Preachers of
the Catholic Church, dissuade us what they can, and give us all good Counsel
and Admonition to avoid all unnecessary Familiarity and Converse with those of
the other Sex; and more especially when there is probable occasion of sin
feared or suspected.

To conclude, finding the whole Ninth Chapter (almost) of the Sacred Book,
Ecclesiasticus, to contain instructions, so very opposite and proper to the
Subject we have in hand, I could not think it amiss, to set it down here
verbatim (or word for word) in English, as the Epilogue of this my small work;
and to recommend it, together with some few other Additaments of like nature;
to the most serious Reflection and Consideration of my Pious Reader: Thus,
therefore it begins, Ecclus. 9. v. 2, 3, 4, etc. Ne des mulieri potestatem
animae tuae, etc. Give not (says this Wise Man) power over thy Soul to a
Woman, least she enter (or set her Foot) upon that which is thy strength or
substance, and thou be put to shame for it. Look not upon a Woman, whose mind
goes after many things, least (perhaps) thou fall into her Snares. With her
that is a Dancer, be not daily conversant, that thou perish not by her
procurement: Gaze not upon a Virgin, least thou be scandalized, or stumble at
her Beauty: Give not thy Soul to Harlots in any sort, least thou destroy thy
self and thine Inheritance thereby. Turn away thy Face from a Trimmed Woman,
and look not upon another Beauty; for by the Comeliness of Women, many have
perished; and hereby Concupiscence is inflamed as a Fire: Every Woman that is
an Harlot, shall be trodden upon as Dung in the way: Many through admiring the
Beauty of their Neighbors Wife, have become reprobate; for her Talk (or to
have Communication and Familiarity with her) burns as Fire.

Sit not at all with another Man's Wife, nor repose upon the Bed with her; and
chat not with her at the Wine, least (perhaps) thy heart incline toward her,
and with the Blood thou fallest into perdition. The like Counsel is reiterated,
chap. 41. v. 27. Look not after another Man's Wife, and be not too private with
his Maidservant, neither stand thou by her Bedside; and chap. 42. 12, 13.
Gaze not after Beauty, and sit not in the Company of Women: For, from Garments
comeeh a Moth, and from Women Wickedness. In which sense, and by reason
whereof, it is a great Truth, that, which the Wise Man pronounces in the verse
immediately next following; though otherwise it may seem hard and unequal.
Melior est iniquitas Viri, quam mulier benefaciens. Better is the iniquity
(that is, the unkindness and churlishness) of a Man, than a Woman that is
overkind, and so courteous to Men, as that she leads them thereby into the
shame and reproach of sin. The unkindest, churlishest Man in the World, is not
so great an evil, as that goodnatur'd Woman, of whom Solomon speaks, Prove. 5.
v. 3, 4, etc. Favus distillans labia meretricis, etc. The Lips of an Harlot
drop as an Honeycomb, and her Mouth is Smoother than Oil; but her later end is
bitter as Wormwood, and sharp as a Twoedged Sword: Her Feet go down to Death,
and her Steps as low as Hell. Now therefore my Son (says that Holy Prophet)
hear me, and depart not from the words of my Mouth: Remove tby way far from
her, and come not nigh the door of her House: Her House is the way to Hell (7.
27.) none that go in unto her, return again, neither take they hold of the
paths of Life. What should be more said! The consequence then I deem to be most
clear, that if we would avoid Carnal Concupiscence, together with all the
Evils, Impieties, Mischiefs (Spiritual and Corporal) that follow upon it, when
it is obeyed and yielded to; it is absolutely necessary not to frequent Women's
Company unnecessarily, or without great Circumspection and Caution; and most of
all not to be Private or Familiar with them.

Seeing then, by what we have read and heard, witnessed to us, by so many
Testimonies of the Holy Prophets of God; of our Savior himself (who is the
Living and the True God) his Apostles and other Penmen, and Preachers of the
Eternal Gospel; we cannot but be sufficently admonished, how much it concerns
us to suppress all motions, and to decline all occasions, that lead us to this
soul and vile sin of Carnal Concupiscence; to strengthen such Holy Resolutions,
as the good Christian may be moved to take hereupon; and to help him the better
to put them in execution, my last (and short) advice to him is, that he take to
himself some Spiritual Guide and Director, whom he shall find to be a person
able and intelligent, of Experience, or well practic^d in the Affairs of
Spiritual Conduct, and (above all) of good Life and Conversation; resign your
self wholly up to his Advice; follow in all things his good Counsel and
Instructions, and doubt not but his help (the Grace and Favor of God
concurring, which is never denied to those that seek it with a good heart)
doubt not (I say) but by his help you will in a short time, find your self
(with the Just and Righteous Man Lot, 2 Pet. 2. 8, 9.) happily drawn out, and
delivered from those Flames of Sodom and Gomorrah (with which you were
inflicted) and placed in repose and safety upon the Mountain of Holiness, and
of the Everlasting God.

In the mean time, dear Christian Reader, let the Contents of these foregoing
Treatises suffice, for the present Remedy of your Languishing Diseases,
occasioned by Self-love, Pride, Gluttony, and Carnal Concupiscence: If time,
occasion, I may hereafter (by Gods Grace) dilate my self further upon these or
the like Subjects.

LAUS DEO SEMPER.

FINIS.

