THE Poor Man's Proposal, To Supply the MINT, AND Prevent Counterfeiting the
COIN when Mended.
Gentlemen,
I Humbly conceive that any Proposal for Supplies, that may be both Effectual
and Expeditious, will be very Acceptable; and if you would not hear of the
deficiency of Taxes, they should be laid where Men are able to pay them; and I
suppose not only the necessity of the Case, but the Grandeur of the Nation,
will make that Tax easy, that has such Properties. And farther, the Addresses
to some of the Worthy Members, by their Representatives, that they would raise
their Supplies equally, might embolden me to hint something of this nature; for
I humbly conceive there can be no Tax laid, but will be in some cases
Oppressive, but what I am now about to offer, if it be in any case hard, it
will most certainly fall upon the Rich; and although these be the Persons that
must make our Laws, and raise the Taxes, yet since they would have the word
Effectual put into Their Address, I do not doubt, but they will (more than in
Words) raise Effectual Supplies. Which I humbly conceive may in part be done,
by laying a Tax upon all Plate in this Nation, both in use, and out of use; and
not only what is made, but what shall be made for Seven Years to come; or so
long as the War shall continue.

Now supposing there be but Eight Millions worth of Plate, this at Sixpence
per Ounce, will raise 800000 l. but if it should raise but 600000 l. and bring
2000000 l. of Silver to be Coined, I hope it would be a very necessary Tax at
this time, and if you think fit to double the Tax upon all Plate used in
Public Houses, and to lay an Imposition upon all Bullion to be Exported out of
the Nation, and the Resiners to pay for what they use, it might add much to the
Sum that would be raised hereby.

The Proposal above having been offered on the 19th of December, to a worthy
Member of this House, and since hearing of no more effectual means than this, I
thought good to make it more Public, by Printing of it, with some Additions,
to prevent the Counterfeiting our Coin when Mended.

The Deficiency of our Coin, was a thing so noto^^ous, that I cannot but highly
approve of your Resolve, to restore it to its former Value.

The Methods whereby this Evil was brought upon us, need not so much as to be
hinted. But if I can engage the Goldsmiths themselves, and all the Bankers to
watch against the Counterfeiting of it for the future, I hope this will be a
Means ( Effectually) to prevent the like mischief; which if laying a Penalty of
Forfeiture of Estate, and the Estate of the next Heir, upon any Person that
shall be found Guilty, will not do, I doubt not but making of it Penal for
every Person that shall Vent it, will make every one Careful of whom they
Receive their Monys, and if Bad, they must either Return it in such a Time, or
else in such a Time Swear, whom they Received it of, and they shall be obliged,
not only to make it good to the Person that Received it, (and have it defaced
before the Justice of Peace,) but shall pay.. -- to the Poor, and the Justice
to Record it, and every Quarter Sessions Examine who are Common Venters of Bad
Money, and Proceed against them accordingly; and if any Person for the Future
shall Presume to Coin any Bad Monys, this will be a Means to make it Sink in
their hands, or at least they will Run more Risk then the Profit will
Countervail, Yea, were it Possible, to Corrupt the Mint it self, this would
certainly discover them.

I should be willing to answer such Objections that may be raised; and might
say much more to Recommend this, but submit all to your Wisdom.


