THE LIFE OF THE Right Reverend Father in God SETH, Lord Bishop of SALISBURY,
And CHANCELLOR of the Most Noble Order of the GARTER.

With a Brief Account of Bishop Wilkins, Mr. Lawrence Rooke, Dr. Isaac Barrow,
Dr. Turbervile, And others.

Written by Dr. WALTER POPE, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

-- Quid foret Iliae,
Mavortisque Gener, si Taciturnitas,
Obstaret meritis Invida Romuli?
Hor. LONDON: Printed for William Keblewhite, at the Swan in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1697.

To the Honorable Colonel JOHN WYNDHAM, of DORSETSHIRE.
SIR,
I Might easily bring into the Field, and Muster, a Brigade, if not an Army of
Motives, which compelld me to Dedicate this Book to you; but because I know you
love Brevity, I shall content my self to declare to the World only one of them,
viz.

Amongst the few Friends I have, for Old Men generally outlive their Friends,
I could not pitch upon any Patron so fit as your Self.

For you were intimately acquainted with the deceased Bishop, the Subject of
this Treatise, lovd him, and was entirely belovd by him.

I appeal therefore to you, as Competent Judge, and an Eye witness, whether
what I have said concerning his Hospitality, his humble and obliging
Conversation in Salisbury, be not rather less, than more than it deservd.

You also, as I find by Experience, bear no small Affection to me, which I
humbly beg you to continue, as long as I shall approve my self,

SIR, Your most humble, obliged, and Grateful Servant, Walter Pope.

ERRATA.
PAGE 17. Line 23. Read London. p. 44. l. 5. for Town r. College. p. 45. l. 19.
r. Protector. p. 76. l. 11. r. is our. p. 80. l. 8. r. Chaplain. p. 82. l. 18.
r. ten pounds. p. 145. l. 3. r. omnium or panfarmacon. p. 151. l. antep. r.
Multum. p. 156. l. penult. r. Absentem.

THE LIFE OF THE Right Reverend Father in God SETH, Lord Bishop of Salisbury,
etc.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
THE Motives that encouraged me, to write this ensuing Treatise, were such as
these, viz.

1. The deceased Bishop had conferred many Favors upon me, and I thought this
was a fit opportunity to publish my Gratitude, for them.

2. That his Life was worthy to be transmitted to Posterity; and that it would
be more acceptable to the Learned, that it should be done by me, as well as I
could, than not at all; for I have not yet heard of any person who has
designed, or attempted it, tho there are more than eight years past, since he
died.

3. I am not altogether unprovided for such a Work, having, during my long
Acquaintance with Him, and his Friends, informed my self, of most of the
considerable Circumstances of his Life.

4. And in the fourth and last place, because I shall run no risque in so
doing: for tho some may blame my Performance, yet, even they, cannot but
approve my pious Intention; and the worst that can be said against me, if I do
not attain my end, will have more of Praise, in it, than Reproach, it is what
Ovid says of Faeton, Magnis tamen excidit ausis, i. e. 'Twas a noble Attempt,
but the Success was not answerable.

I at first designed to have written it in a continual Narration, without
breaking it into Chapters, making any Reflections, or adding any Digressions;
but upon second thoughts, which usually are the best, I steered another Course,
I have cut it into Chapters, which may serve, as Benches in a long Walk,
whereupon the weary Reader may repose himself, till he has recovered Breath,
and then readily proceed in his way. I have also interwoven some Digressions,
which, if they are not too frequent, foreign, impertinent, and dull, will afford
some Divertisement to the Reader. But I fear the Gate is too great for this
little City.

CHAP. II. Of the Bishops Parentage, Birth, and Education, till he was sent to
Cambridge.
I Think it not worth my pains, to play the Herald, and blazon the Arms
belonging to the numerous Family of the WARDS, or to tell the World the
Antiquity of it; that that Name came into England with William the Conqueror;
that there is at present one Lord, and very many Knights and Gentlemen of very
considerable Estates who are so called: For supposing this to be true, as it
is, it makes little, if any thing, to the Praise of the the Person whose Life I
am now writing. Vix ea nostra voco. Virtuous Actions, not great Names, are the
best Ensigns of Nobility. There are now, always were, and ever will be, some
bad Men, even of the best Families, I shall therefore go no further back than
to his Grandfather, who lived near Ipswich in Suffolk, and had the misfortune
to lose a considerable hereditary Estate; whereupon the Bishops Father, whose
Name was John, settled himself at Buntingford in Hertfordshire, following the
Employment of an Attorney, and was of good Reputation, for his fair Practice,
but not rich. His Mothers Maiden Name was Dalton; I have often heard him
commend her extraordinarily, for her Virtue, Piety, and Wisdom, to whose good
Instructions and Counsels, he used to say, he owed whatever was good in him.
And that this Character was due to her, I have the testimony of that worthy
Gentleman, Ralph Freeman Esquire, of Aspenden in Hertfordshire, who has faithfully
served his Country, as Knight of the Shire for that County in several
Parliaments; this Mr. Freeman lived in the same Parish, and well remembers the
Bishops Mother. I never heard the Bishop speak of his Father, possibly he died
before his Son came to years of Discretion; on the contrary, I find Horace
never mentions his Mother, but is very frequently praising his Father; but to
proceed.

John Ward left three Sons, and as many Daughters, the Sons were John, Seth,
and Clement, John died a Batchelour, Clement left three Sons, and several
Daughters, to the Care of his Brother Seth, who had then no other Preferment or
Income, than the Place of the Savilian Professor of Astronomy in Oxford, and
even then, he gave two hundred pounds to one of his Sisters in Marriage, which
Sum he borrowed of a Friend of his, whom I knew, who lent it him upon his own
Bond, without any other Security, (...), which let me thus translate, since
it is not e Cathedra, nothing doubting, or not despairing to be repaid, as he
was, in a short time, with Thanks and Interest. This Friend of his perceived
evident signs of a rising Man in Mr. Ward, which must infallibly advance him,
if Merit alone can elevate, as it has often, without Friends, under some Kings,
and some Archbishops: and it will certainly, at long run, if, as the Saying is,
The Horse does not die, before the Grass is grown.

For all these Male and Female Children, and Relations before mentioned, he
provided more than a competent Maintenance, binding some of them Apprentices,
breeding others at Schools and Universities, till they were fit for the
Ministry, and then placed them in good Benefices, whereof he had the
Presentation. He also took care of his Nieces, and provided them Husbands, or
to speak more truly, they married themselves to deserving Men, and he preferred
their Husbands. I remember he once showed me a Letter, he had lately received
from a Sister of his, who was a Dissenter, which began thus, Brother, for she
would not call a Bishop Lord, Since there is Corn in Egypt, it is not meet that
the Children of Israel should want. I cannot say that this Address prevailed
with him, but I am sure it did not hinder him, from filling her Sack. I will
anticipate no more of the Bishops Life, but henceforwards proceed methodically.

He was born at Buntingford, in the year of our Lord 1618, famous for the
appearing and long duration of a great Comet, which some will have to
prognosticate the German Wars, which happened not long after; but I may as
truly say, it foreboded the Greatness of this Man, and I do as much believe the
one as the other, that is, not at all.

His good Mother, whom we have mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter,
taught him her self, till he was fit for the Grammar School, bending the young
Twig to Virtue, and inculcating to him all things that were good and
praiseworthy, wherewith he was so well imbued, that he lost not the Savor of
her Education till his death. I have often heard him say, that the Precepts
which his Mother gave him both Moral and Political, were not inferior to those
which he afterward found in the best Filosofers.

He had his first rudiments of Latin in the Grammar School at Buntingford, tho
not the benefit of an happy Institution, his Master being a weak Man; yet by
the encouragement of his Mother, and his own Industry and Parts, he made such
improvement, that, by competent Judges, he was esteemed fit for the University,
at the age of fourteen years, and accordingly he was sent to Cambridge, and
admitted into Sidney College, Anno Dom. 1632.

He was recommended to Doctor Samuel Ward, the Master of that College, by Mr.
Alexander Strange, Vicar of Buntingford, a Person of great Integrity and Piety,
by whose care and solicitation, the Chapel and School-house of that place were
erected. This Dr. Samuel Ward was a Person of that eminency for Piety and
Learning, that King James I. made choice of him amongst others, to assist at
the Synod of Dort, and a great Friend to Mr. Strange, upon whose
Recommendation, he took young Seth into his more especial care, lodging him in
his own Apartment, and allowing him the use of the Library; in a word, treating
him, as if he had been his own, and only Son.

CHAP. III. Of his being at Cambridge.
WHEN he first went to the University, he was young and low of stature, and as
he walked about the streets, the Doctors, and other grave Men, would frequently
lay their Hands upon his white Head, for he had very fair Hair, and ask him of
what College he was, and of what standing, and such like Questions, which was
so great a vexation to him, that he was ashamed to go into the Town, and, as it
were, forced to stay in the College and study. I said before, that he had the
benefit of the College Library, and our young Student showed this Favor was
not ill bestowed upon him, by making good use of it, and so happily improving
that advantage, that in a short time he was taken notice of, not only in that
College, but also in the University, as a Youth of great Hopes and Learning,
beyond what was usual in one of his age, and standing.

All his Improvement was the product of his happy Genius and Love to Learning,
and not due to any Instructions he received either from his Schoolmaster or
Tutor, for Mr. Pendrith his Tutor, tho he was a very honest Man, yet he was no
Conjurer, nor of any fame for Learning. I have often heard the Bishop repeat
some part of his Tutors Speeches, which never failed to make the Auditory laugh.

To omit his other Studies, for there were no Regions of Learning which he had
not visited, I think it not improper here to relate, that his Genius led him to
those which are above vulgar Capacities, and require a good Head, and great
Application of Mind to understand.

In the College Library he found, by chance, some Books that treated of the
Mathematics, and they being wholly new to him, he inquired all the College over
for a Guide to instruct him that way, but all his Search was in vain, these
Books were Greek, I mean unintelligible, to all the Fellows of the College.
Nevertheless, he took courage, and attempted them himself, proprio Mart,
without any Confederates, or Assistance, or Intelligence in that Country, and
that with so good Success, that in a short time he not only discovered those
Indies, but conquered several Kingdoms therein, and brought thence a great part
of their Treasure, which he showed publicly to the whole University not long
after. When he was Sosister, he disputed in those Sciences, more like a Master
than a Learner, which Disputation Dr. Bambridge heard, greatly esteemed, and
commended. This was the same Dr. Bambridge who was afterward Savilian
Professor of Astronomy at Oxford, a learned and good Mathematician; yet there
goes a Story of him, which was in many Scholars Mouths when I was first
admitted there, That he put upon the School Gate an Affiche, or written Paper,
as the Custom is, giving notice, at what time, and upon what Subject the
Professor will read, which ended in these Words, Lecturus de Polis and Axis,
under which was written by an unknown Hand, as follows, Doctor Bambridge, came
from Cambridge,
To read De ^olis and Axis.
Let him go back again, like a Dunce as he came,
And learn a new Syntaxis.


But this by the by, let us return to our Charge, at his Act for Batchelour of
Arts, his Questions were concerning the Julian and Gregorian Account of the
Year, which gave occasion to Mr. Thorndike, then Proctor, to take especial
notice of him, and entitled him to the Acquaintance and Friendship of most of
his ingenious Contemporaries, amongst whom, some proved afterward very
eminent, as Dr. Pearson, the learned Bishop of Chester, Sir Charles
Scarborough, Mr. Rook, etc. Of some of them, I shall have occasion to speak
elsewhere.

In the year 1640. Dr. Cousins was Vice Chancellor, and he pitched upon Mr.
Ward to be Praevaricator, which in Oxford we call Terrae-filius, and in that
place he behaved himself to the general Satisfaction of the Auditory; but yet,
it must be acknowledged, that the Vice Chancellor took some offense at his
Speech, and suspended him his Degree.

Dr. Cousins was not an Enemy to Wit, but perhaps he thought not fit to allow
it to be so freely spoken, in so sacred a Place. I say he took some offense
against him, but whether 'twas given or only taken, I determine not, but
however the next day before the end of the Commencement, for what at Oxford is
called the Act, is styled by that Name at Cambridge, he reversed his Censure.
The Reader may imagine his Fault was not great, when so severe a Judge, as
Bishop Cousins, should impose no greater Punishment upon him, and take it off
in so short a time. I had not mentioned this his Suspension, neither ought I,
had it not, many years after, made a great noise at Oxford, which we shall
mention in its proper place. Both Dr. Cousins, and Mr. Ward, were, not long
after, Fellow Sufferers in another and far greater Cause; and he certainly
suffered without any Fault then, whatever he did before.

The Civil Wars breaking out, the Effects of them were first felt by the
Bishops, and afterward by the Universities: Cambridge suffered first, lying in
the associated Counties, and subject to the Parliaments Power; Oxford, which
was then a Garrison, and the Kings Headquarters, drank of the same bitter Cup
some years after. At Cambridge, several Heads and Fellows of Colleges and Halls
were imprisoned, for refusing the Covenant, some in the Town, and some in St.
John's College, made a Gaol by the Parliament Forces, commanded by the Earl of
Manchester; and amongst the rest Dr. Samuel Ward, Master of Sidney College was
imprisoned, whither Mr. Ward accompanied him voluntarily, and submitted to that
Confinement, that he might assist so good a Man, and so great a Friend in that
Extremity. I have heard him say, that Imprisonment seemed at first to him very
uneasy, but after he had been a little time used to it, he liked it well
enouf, and could have been contented, not to have stirred out all the days of
his Life. The great Inconvenience of so close a Confinement, in the height of
a hot Summer, caused some of Doctor Wards Friends to mediate for his Removal,
at least for some Weeks, which was granted, and in the beginning of August, the
Doctor was permitted to go to his own House, to which also Mr. Ward accompanied
him, and carefully ministered unto him. Within a Months time after his
Enlargement, the good old Man fell into a dangerous Distemper, caused by his
Imprisonment, whereof he died the seventh of September following, in the year
of our Lord 1643. Mr. Ward, who never left him, was with him in the last
moments of his Life, and closed his Eyes, after having received his last Words,
which were these, God bless the King, and my Lord Hopton, who then commanded a
great Army in the West. What befell him afterward, during his stay at
Cambridge, shall be the Subject of the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. A Continuation of the Precedent Matter.
UPON the Death of Dr. Ward, the Fellows assembled to choose a new Master, Mr.
Ward, with nine of them, gave their Suffrages for Mr. Thorndike of Trinity
College; for Mr. Minshull there were eight Votes, including his own, but while
they were at the Election, a Band of Soldiers rusht in upon them, and forcibly
carried away Mr. Parsons, one of those Fellows who voted for Mr. Thorndike, so
that the number of Suffrages for Mr. Mynshull, his own being accounted for one,
was equal to those Mr Thorndike had. Upon which Mr. Mynshull was admitted
Master, the other eight only protesting against it, being ill advised, for they
should have adherd to their Votes. Two of them, whereof Mr. Ward was one, went
to Oxford, and brought thence a Mandamus from the King, commanding Mr. Mynshull
and the Fellows of Sidney College, to repair thither, and give an account of
their Proceedings, as to that Election, this Mandamus or peremtory Summons was
fixed upon the Chapel door, by Mr. Linnet, who was afterward a Fellow of
Trinity College, but at that time attended on Mr. Thorndike. On the other side,
one Mr. Bertie, a Kinsman of the Earl of Lindsey, being one of those who voted
for Mr. Mynshull, was also sent to Oxford in his behalf; this Gentleman, by the
Assistance and Mediation of my Lord of Lindsey, procured an Order from the
King, to confirm Mr. Mynshulls Election, but he, not thinking this Title
sufficient, did corroborate it with the Broad Seal, to which Mr. Thorndike
consented, Mr. Mynshull paying him and the rest of the Fellows the Charges they
had been at, in the Management of that Affair, amounting to about an hundred
pound. The next Spring Mr. Ward and Mr. Gibson were summoned to appear before
the Committee of Visitors, then sitting at Trinity College, and tendered the
Covenant, and other Oaths, which they refused, declaring themselves unsatisfied
as to the Lawfulness of them. Then they desired to know if the Committee had
any Crime to object against them? they answered they had not; they declared the
reason why they asked was, that they understood, some were ejected for not
taking the Covenant, and others for Immoralities; to which they received this
Answer, that those were words of course, put into all their Orders of Ejection.
Such was the Carriage of those Commissioners, not only to take away the
Livelihood of those they expelled, but also their good Name and Reputation, and
so render them unpitied, and not worthy to be relieved.

In the Month of August following, Mr. Ward, who was then absent, received the
news, that his Ejection was voted and put into Execution.

Being now exiled from Cambridge, he diverted himself with Dr. Wards Relations,
in and about London, for a season, and sometimes with the Reverend Divine and
Learned Mathematician, Mr. William Oughtred, invited thereto by his Love to
those Sciences, in which Mr. Oughtred had showed his Ability, and acquired a
great Name by publishing his Clavis Mathematicae, a little Book as to the bulk,
but a great one as to the Contents, as the understanding Reader must
acknowledge.

Mr. Ward was so well known, and of so good a reputation at Cambridge, that in
his Exile he wanted not places of resort and refuge. He was invited by the E.
of Carlisle, and several other Persons of high Quality, with proffers of large
and honorable Pensions, to come and reside in their Families: Nay, I have
heard him say, that even then when he was in those straights, and might have
truly said, Silver, or Gold, or Preferment I have none, he was proffered
several rich Matches, but he had no inclination to Matrimony, whilst he
labored under those Circumstances. At last he chose to accept the Invitation,
or to speak more properly, to yield to the importunity of his Friend and
Countryman Ralf Freeman Esquire, of Aspenden in Hertfordshire, in the Parish
wherein he sucked his first Milk, and imbibed his first rudiments of Virtue,
about five and twenty mile distant from Ladon; he instructed his Sons, and
continued there off and on, till the Year 1649. Then he was earnestly invited
by my Lord Wenman of Tame-Park in Oxfordshire, about ten miles distant from
that City, thither he went, and lived some time with him, rather as a Companion
than Chaplain, it being more safe for him to be near Oxford than Cambridge, and
as it proved in the event, much more advantageous, for this was the first
visible step to his preferment. He was not in this Family many months before
the Visitation of the University of Oxford began; the Effect whereof was, that
many Heads of Colleges and Halls, as also many Fellows of Colleges were turned
out, as before at Cambridge, and at last the Visitation reached the learned and
eminent Person Mr. Edw. Greaves, Savilian Professor of Astronomy, and Fellow of
Merton-College, the same who had but a little before published that learned
Exercitation concerning the Measuring of the famed Egyptian Pyramides near
Grand Cairo.

Although this Gentleman was for a season skreen'd against the fury of the
Visitation by some powerful Friends, yet finding that 'twas impossible for him
to keep his ground, he made it his business to procure an able and worthy
Person to succeed him. Upon that design he took a Journey to London, to advise
with some knowing Persons concerning that Affair; and amongst the rest with Dr.
Scarborough, who had then very great Practice, and lived magnificently, his
Table being always accessible to all learned Men, but more particularly to the
distressed Royalists, and yet more particularly to the Scholars ejected out of
either of the Universities for adhering to the Kings Cause. After mature
Consultation, it was agreed upon by a general consent, that no Person was so
proper and fit for that employment as Mr. Ward. Mr. Greaves, who had heard much
of Mr. Ward, but had no acquaintance with him, readily consented to what they
had concerted, and undertook to find Mr. Ward out, and make him the proffer,
and accordingly he made a Journey to Oxford. Mr. Ward wholly ignorant of this
design upon him, or rather for him, rides casually from Tame-Park to Oxford, as
he frequently used to do, either to consult some Books in the public Library,
or to visit his Friends and Acquaintance. Just as he was entering the Bear-Inn,
luckily meets Mr. Greaves coming out of it, who being informed who he was,
accosted and courteously saluted him, testifying his great joy by many kind
Expressions, for this fortunate and unexpected rencounter; after which, taking
him aside, he imparted his business, the design he had to have him for his
Successor, urging him with great importunity, not to deny him this favor. I
remember I have heard the Bishop say, that amongst other Arguments, Mr. Greaves
told him, if you refuse it, they will give it to some Cobbler of their Party who
never heard the name of Euclid, or the Mathematics, and yet will greedily snap
at it for the Salaries sake. But Mr. Greaves was out in his Divination, for the
other Place, I mean the Professors of Geometry, was filled with a very learned
Man in that Science, as his elaborate Works have sufficiently manifested to the
World. This Address of Mr. Greaves did so surprise Mr. Ward, that it did at
once assault his Modesty, and perplex his Council. After many thanks for so
great and unexpected a Favor, he objected the difficulty of effecting it,
saying, he could not with any reason expect, to enjoy quietly a public
Professors place in Oxford, when 'twas notoriously known, that he was turned
out of Cambridge for refusing the Covenant. Mr. Greaves replied, that he and
his Friends had considered that Obstacle, and found out a way to remove it, and
it was effectually removed a little while after by the means of Sir John
Trevor, who though of the Parliament Party, was a great lover of Learning, and
very obliging to several Scholars who had been turned out of the two
Universities. Sir John had great Interest in the Committee which disposed of
the Places of those who were ejected, and by that brought Mr. Ward into the
Professors Chair, and preserved him in it, without taking the Covenant, or
Engagement. So that the very same thing that caused his ejection out of
Cambridge, was the cause also of his preferment in Oxford. The first Astronomy
Professor, I mean of Sir Henry Saviles Foundation, was a Cambridge Man, placed
in by the Founder, as was also the Geometry Professor put in now by the
Visitors, the difference of Universities being not esteemed a sufficient
obstacle to hinder any deserving Persons from obtaining either of these Places.
Mr. Ward being now settled in the Professors Chair, was in the first place
careful to express his Gratitude to those Persons, by whose assistance he had
obtained it; and first to Mr. Greaves, for whom he procured the full Arrears of
his Salary, amounting to five hundred pound, for part, if not all the Land
allotted to pay the Savilian Professors lies in Kent, which County was in the
power of the Parliament, who withheld the Money, and it had been difficult, if
not impossible, for Mr. Greaves, who was not Rectus in Curia, ever to have
recovered it; and he also designed him a considerable part of his Salary, but
he, I mean Mr. Greaves, died soon after. To Sir John Trevor, Father of that Sir
John, who was afterward Secretary of State in the Reign of King Charles the
Second, he dedicated one of his Books, and therein publicly declares to the
World, how many and great Obligations he had to that worthy Person. How Mr.
Ward behaved himself at Oxford, and what befell him there, will be the Subject
of the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. V. Of his being at Oxford.
AND now I have brought him to Oxford, where I first became acquainted with
him, I can proceed upon more certain grounds; I promise not to put any thing
upon the Reader now, but what either I knew, or have heard attested by those
whom I could trust. Hitherto I have been guided, for the greatest part, by what
I have recived from the Bishop himself, casually, and at several times. I am
also indebted, for the Names of the Bishops Relations, to that worthy Person
Ralf Freeman Esquire, whom I have had occasion so often to mention before, and
shall again; one whom he loved and honored all his Life, and to whom, and his
Heirs, he left, at his Death, the sole power of putting in his Alms-men, as
will be related in its due place.

The greatest Light concerning the Cambridge Transactions before related, I
received by a few short indigested Notes, which Dr. Sherman had collected, in
order to write the Bishops Life, this Dr. John Sherman, was the Bishop of
Salisburys Chaplain, and Archdeacon of North Wiltshire, a very learned Person,
and would, had he outlived the Bishop, been the fittest Man in the World to
have undertaken the Task, which I, for want of others, am engaged in. But he
was untimely cut off by the Small Pox, at the Bishop of Salisburys Lodgings in
Charterhouse-yard, March 24. Anno Dom. 1671. many years before the Bishop,
whose Life he had designed to have written.

The first thing Mr. Ward did, after his Settlement in Oxford, was to bring the
Astronomy Lectures into Reputation, which had been for a considerable time
disused, and wholly left of. He therefore read very constantly, and, that being
known, he never failed of a good Auditory; I have heard him say, and he was no
Liar, that in all the time he enjoyed the Astronomy Professors Place, he never
missed one reading Day. Besides this, he taught the Mathematics gratis to as
many of the University, or Foreigners, as desired that Favor of him. I
remember he told me that a certain German Nobleman made application to him upon
that account, and that when Mr. Ward was in the middle of a hard Demonstration,
which required the utmost Intention of Mind to understand, for if by
Inadvertency, one Link of it is lost, all the rest is to no purpose and
unintelligible; this Person interrupted him and said Sir you have a fine Key,
his Key by chance lying then upon the Table; it is so, replied the Professor,
and put an End to his Lecture, and would read no more to that Pupil.

Besides this, he preached frequently, though he was not obliged to it, for Sir
Henry Savile had exempted his Professors from all University Exercises, that
they might have the more leisure to mind the Employment he designed them for.
His Sermons were strong, methodical and clear, and, when Occasion required,
pathetical and eloquent: for, besides his Skill in the Mathematics, he was a
great Lover of Tully, and understood him very well. In his Disputations his
Arguments were always to the purpose, and managed with great Art, his Answers
clear and full. I remember I heard him oppose, in the Act time, a Head of a
House, who then did his Exercise for Doctor in Divinity, the Question was,
concerning the Morality of the Fourth Commandment, against which he urged, That
the same time might be Saturday, Sunday and Monday, or Sunday and any two other
days equally distant from it: for supposing two Ships to set sail from the same
Port, one westward, according to the Motion of the Sun, it will make every day
longer than four and twenty Hours, and consequently there must be fewer days in
that Year; and the other, which we suppose holds its course Eastward, must have
the contrary Effect, and consequently make more days in the same space of time.
Let us then suppose that these two Ships sailed at the same time from the same
place, and return thither that day twelvemonth, it shall be to one of them
Monday, and to the other Saturday. Or, supposing two Swallows, with greater
Celerity, to make the same Voyage, both of them starting upon the same Sunday
from the same place, and granting one of them to gain, and the other lose,
about half a quarter of an hour, or eight minutes in four and twenty hours
which they may do, at their Return to the place from whence they set forth, tho
'twill be Sunday to those who remained there, it shall be to one of these
Swallows Tuesday, and to the other Friday. Again, if the Sabbath is to be
accounted from Sunset to Sunset, as some observe it, then to those who
inhabit under the Poles, it must be a year long for the Sun under the Northern
Pole sets only in September, at the Autumnal Equinox, and to those under the
Southern Pole it sets only in March or the Vernal Equinox. To those who lie
more Northward than the Arctic Circle, or more Southward than the Anctartic,
the Sunday shall not only be several Days, but Weeks and Months long. And
several other Arguments of this Nature: To all which the Respondent vouchsafed
no other Answer than this, Omnia hujusmodi Argumenta sunt mere Astronomica. As
much as if he should have said, These are all but Demonstrations, and
therefore, I think them not worthy of an Answer.

Whilst he continued in that Chair, besides his Public Lectures he wrote
several Books, one De Astronomia Eliptica, one against Bullialdus, one about
Proportion, one of Trigonometry, one against Mr. Hobbs, who never pardoned him
for it to his dying Day, as we shall have occasion to show hereafter, and one,
in English, and a jocose style, against one Webster, asserting the Usefulness
of the Universities. He also preached often, at St. Mary's, to the Admiration
of all the Auditory, some of which Sermons are published in the Collection
printed for James Collins.

At his first coming to Oxford, he made choice of Wadham Col. to reside in,
invited thereto by the Fame of Dr. Wilkins Warden thereof, with whom he soon
contracted an intimate Acquaintance and Friendship, their Humors and Studies
lying the same way; but Dr. Wilkins was so well known, that I need not dilate
in his Praise, for if I should, my near Relation to him, might make my
Character of him suspected, therefore I shall say no more of him at present,
but that he was a Learned Man, and a Lover of such; he was of a Comely Aspect,
and Gentleman-like Behavior; he had been bred in the Court, and was also a
piece of a Traveller, having twice seen the Prince of Auranges Court, at the
Hague, in his Journey to, and Return from Heydelburgh, whither he went to wait
upon the Prince Elector Palatine, whose Chaplain he was in England. He had
nothing of Bigottry, Unmannerliness, or Censoriousness, which then were in the
Zenith, amongst some of the Heads, and Fellows of Colleges in Oxford. For which
Reason many Country Gentlemen, of all Persuasions, but especially those then
styled Cavaliers and Malignants, for adhering to the King and the Church, sent
their Sons to that College, that they might be under his Government. I shall
instance but in two eminent Sufferers for that Cause, Colonel Penruddoc who was
murdered at Exeter, and Judge Ienkyns, who was kept a close Prisoner till the
Kings Return, for not owning the Parliaments usurped Authority, these two had
their Sons there. I could name many more, who for Dr. Wards sake, left
Cambridge, and brought their Pupils with them, and settled themselves in Wadham
College, as Dr. Gaspar Needham, and Mr. Lawrence Rooke, of whom I have much to
say in its due place.

The Affluence of Gentlemen was so great, that I may truly say of Wadham
College* it never since, or before, was in so flourishing a Condition, I mean,
it never had so many Fellow Commoners as at that time, tho it cannot be denied,
but that it has always had more than its proportion; may it for ever flourish
and increase in Riches and Reputation: this I heartily wish, for the Kindness I
have received from it.

At this time there were several Learned Men of the University and in the City,
who met often at the Wardens Lodgings in Wadham College, and sometimes
elsewhere, to improve themselves by making Filosofical Experiments. Some of
these, for I will not undertake to reckon them all up, were Mr. Robert Boil,
then well known, but since more famous in all parts of Europe, for his great
Piety, and Skill in Experimental Filosofy, and other good Literature; Mr.
Matthew Wren, afterward Secretary to the Duke of York; Dr. Willis, Dr Goddard,
Warden of Merton, and Professor of Fysic at Gresham College in London, Dr.
Wallis, Dr. Bathurst, Mr. Rooke, etc.

About this time that Learned and Reverend Person Dr. Brownrig, the ejected
Bishop of Exeter, came and lived a retired Life, at Sunning in Berkshire,
whither Mr. Ward, who was his Chaplain used to go often to wait upon him. This
Bishop sent once for him, and collated on him the Precentorship of the Church
of Exeter, the Incumbent whereof was lately Dead, and at the same time told
him, That he was confident the King would be restored, and you may live, said
he, to see that happy day, tho I believe I shall not, and then this, which
seems now (...), may be of some Emolument to you. It fell out as the good
Bishop foretold, for he died in the dawn of the Restoration, and Mr. Ward lived
to enjoy this collated Benefice, which was worth to him several thousand
pounds. I have heard him often declare, that had he not been Chanter of Exeter,
he could not have lived at the rate he always after did, and done those Deeds
of Charity, without immersing himself into so great Debt, that he could never
be able to pay, and he hated nothing more, than to lie in any Man's debt. To
evidence this, I remember, that afterward, when he was Bishop of Salisbury, he
never would go out of the Town, either to London, whither his Business often
called him, or elsewhere, if he intended to make any stay, before he paid all
the Tradesmen, with whom he dealt, the uttermost Farthing.

But to proceed, for this Instrument of his Collation, he paid Bishop Brownrigs
Secretary the full Fees, as if he were presently to take possession of the
Place, tho this happened in the darkest night of Despair, when there appeared
no Probability, scarcely any Possibility, that the Sun would ever rise again; I
mean, the King, Laws, and Church should ever be restored. I know he was
sufficiently laughed at, by some of his Friends, for so doing, I have heard them
tell him, they would not give him half a Crown for his Procentorship, to whom
he replied, since it was the good Bishops Kindness, tho he should never make a
penny of it, it was as acceptable to him, as if he were to take possession the
next moment.

This was the first fair Flower that ever grew in his Garden, and the
foundation of his future Riches and Preferment.

Anno Domini 1654. both the Savilian Professors did their Exercises in order to
proceed Doctors in Divinity, and when they were to be presented, the other
claimed to be Senior. Mr. Ward demanded what pretense have you for this demand,
you cannot deny, but that I was your Senior in Cambridge. The other urged that
he was suspended from his Degree, as we have mentioned before in the Second
Chapter, not remembering, or at least not calling to mind, that he was restored
before the End of the Commencement, and completed Master, by the
Vice-Chancellors putting on Mr. Wards Cap before his. When this pretense
failed, he had recourse to another, and owned himself to be possessed of an
Estate, whose value put him into the number of Grand Compounders, who because
they pay greater Fees, have the privilege to be Seniors in all Faculties and
Degrees of their Year. Thus he obtained the Seniority, and paid for it, and
enjoyed it, till Dr. Ward was made a Bishop. But since this slight difference
bred no Animosities, or ill blood, betwixt the two Professors, and they lived
in mutual kindness till Bishop Ward's death, I shall insist no longer upon it.

Though he was so complyant and useful in his Station at Oxford, yet he could
never wear off, neither indeed did he desire it, the imputation of being a
Cavalier, and Episcopaly inclined, this was often hit in his teeth, as the
unpardonable Sin, and the Leaven of the Farisees, but it did him no hurt.
Amongst the rest a Person of Honor, afterward married to a Peer of this
Realm, who then lived about twenty miles distant from Oxford, in a Family well
known to Dr. Wilkins and Dr. Ward, and often visited by them. This Lady
drolling with him, used these words. Doctor Ward, I am confident you believe*
the King will come in, and that you shall be a Bishop. Madam, replied he, I
think neither the one or the other impossible. But I esteem it so improbable,
said she, that if it happens in my lifetime, I promise, before these
Witnesses, to present you with a pair of Lawn Sleeves of mine own handiwork,
which would be no small Mortification to one of our persuasion, said she
laughing, for she was a Presbyterian, and yet, nevertheless, which is
remarkable, a very Ingenious Lady. Doctor Ward returned her his humble thanks,
adding, If there should be an occasion, he would give her Ladyship timely
notice. And he was as good as his word, giving her advice of his Nomination to
the Bishopric of Exeter. She also was not worse than hers, presenting him the
first Lawn Sleeves he ever wore; and still, notwithstanding his being a Bishop,
kept the same Friendship and acquaintance with her, as before. About this time
happened a Controversy in the University of Oxford about Formalities, in which
I bore a great part, and for varieties sake, would have related here, but
because this Chapter is long enouf, I reserve it to the next.

CHAP. VI. The Controversy concerning CAPS and HOODS.
IN the Year 1658. the reigning Party in the University of Oxford, or if you
will style them by the name they assumed to themselves, the Godly Party, began
to put all things into Confusion; and to that end, in the first place they
resolved to take away those decent distinctions of Degrees, Caps, and Hoods,
and they had done it by a Law, had not I stood in the Gap. Memenisse juvat, the
remembrance whereof is pleasant, Sumo superbiam quaesitam meritis, Let no Man
rob me of my deserved Honor. The manner was thus; but before I enter into that
Narration, I Will tell you one property of this Party: They continually
complained of Persecution; I heard one of them Preach at St. Marys, his design
was to prove, that Afflictions were the lot of the Righteous; but he made this
Objection against his Doctrine; How is this, said he, true of us, can we say,
we are afflicted and persecuted? When we have all the good things our hearts
can wish, we are the Favourities of the Government, and in possession of the
best Places, both in the University and Country. To which, said he, thus I
answer; We are, my beloved, Tongue-persecuted; the Wicked forbear not to say of
us, we are Knaves and Hypocrites, which was too true of a great number of them.
But to return to my Relation: This Party resolved to abolish the Statute,
enjoining the wearing of Caps and Hoods, crying out against them as Relics of
Popery, and Rags of the Scarlet Whore. To effect this their design, they sent
an Envoy to me to engage me to comply with them, well knowing that without my
concurrence their design would prove abortive. The Person whom they employed,
was a Schoolfellow and intimate Friend of mine, who although the Son of a
Royalist, upon some disappointments, especially a great one, that happened to
him at Westminster by the means of Mr. Busby, of which perhaps more hereafter:
I say, upon this, and other Misfortunes, he became a Presbyterian and
Commonwealths-Man, if this addition be not superfluous. He was a Man of
Learning, and knew it, and very hot and zealous in his way; he, I say, came to
my Chamber and told me his Message. Well, said I to him, what have you to say
against Caps and Hoods? He made a long Discourse, which I heard with patience;
and when I perceived he was silent, Ned, said I to him, prithee go back to thy
Chamber, and put in writing all that thou have said, and bring it to me. And
what will you do with it then, said he? I will, I replied, blot out the words
Caps and Hoods, and in their places insert Gowns; will not your Arguments be
every whit as strong against them, as against Formalities? I confess they will,
he answered, but we are not come thither yet. I replied, I Would make it my
endeavor to keep you where you are, and so we parted.

As I was confident the Party would drive on the design furiously, so I saw
that without me they could never bring it to take effect; there being a
Statute, which says in express Terms, That no Statute be deemed abrogated or
repealed, without the attestation of the Vice Chancellor, and both the
Proctors, under their hands, that it was formally taken away in the
Convocation. But before I proceed any further in this Contest, give me leave to
make a small digression, and recount what afterward befell this my Friend. I
hinted before a great disappointment he had received from Mr. Busby the
Schoolmaster of Westminster, the matter of Fact was thus; Mr. Vincent the
second Master, left that Station, and went to Travel for his Health, then did
Mr. Busby write to my Friend, who was Master of Arts, and Student of
Christ-Church, to come and be Second Master. After he had received this Letter,
brimful of joy, he brought it me, thinking I should, as his Friend, be also
much pleased at this good News, and encourage him to accept of this proffer:
But I, contrary to his expectation, used my utmost endeavor to diswade him
from it. He answered, that I spoke out of prejudice against Mr. Busby, but he
knew better things. It Is true, when he was a Kings Scholar at Westminster, he
was a little, well-favour'd, white-hair'd Youth, and his Father was liberal to
the Master; all which concurring with a good docible Inclination, made him one
of Mr. Busbys White Boys, or chief Favorites. But I foresaw the Case would
soon be altered, when he should pretend Equality, and not content himself to
keep at such a distance as the former Usher did; I told him, there is a great
difference betwixt you and Mr. Vincent; he was a very honest and learned Man,
but of mean Parentage, Mr. Busbys Servitor at Oxford, and but one remove from
it, at Westminster, you are a Gentleman, and of no submissive Temper, you have
had liberal Education, and kept good Company, and know the World, it is
impossible you can submit to such Usage, as you will find there. For I very
well knew both their Humors, and easily foresaw, that 'twas absolutely
impossible for those two, as the Saying is, to set their Horses together. The
event proved that I was on the right side of the Hedge, he found such Usage as
I foretold, and I doubt not, but his Behavior was, as I conjectured it would
be, but the particulars thereof are too long, and not necessary to be here
related. Upon this he turns, turns with a vengeance, goes over to the Gentiles,
and that he might be revenged upon Mr. Busby, Sacrifices to Moloch, worships,
and adores the worst of Men, even the Judges of King Charles the First; but Mr.
Busby, who Plowed with the same Heifers, had too much compliance, cunning, and
money, to be hurt by him. Upon this, he returns to his Students Place at
Christ-Church, makes me a Visit, and rails so bitterly against Mr. Busby, that,
even I was forced to take his part. He remained at Oxford, propagating his
Commonwealth Principles, and when he was Censor, which Office in other Colleges
is called the Dean, whose business it is, to Moderate at Disputations, and give
the Scholars Questions; he gave some in Politics, and ordered the Respondents
to maintain them against Monarchy and Episcopacy. There he continued till the
King was restored, then some considerable Friends of his, whom I knew, advised
him to go into the Country, and there to live peaceably, and conformably, for
the space of one Year, at the end of which, they assured him, they would
procure him some considerable Preferment in the Church. Accordingly he went,
and tried, but not being able to hold out so long, in a short time he repaired
to London, seven times more embittered against Ecclesiastical and Kingly
Government than when he went into the Country: And now he sides Tooth and Nail
with the Fanatics, and made a great Figure amongst them, exceeding most, if not
all of them, in Natural and acquired parts. King Charles sent for him,
designing to work some good upon him, and do him a kindness; but he found him
so obstinate and refractory, that he was forced to leave him to his own
Imaginations; he afterward married a blind Woman, who fell in Love with him
for his Preaching; after which I met him in Covent Garden, and accosted him
freely; after the usual Complements past, Ned, said I to him jocularly, I hear
thou have married a blind Woman, do thou intend to beg with her? Upon this I
perceived his Countenance change, and he returned me this Answer; What Is that
to you; may not I Marry whom I please? Nay, said I, if you are pleased, I have
no reason to be offended, and so we parted, and I never saw him after, but I
understood since, that he died a Prisoner in a House near Newgate, whither he
was committed for his violent opposition to the Government. It is now full time
I should reassume the Clue of my Narration. The Vice Chancellor summons a
Convocation, having most of the Heads of Houses, and many Masters of Arts on
his side. It was very remarkable, that all the Antediluvian Cavaliers, I mean
Fellows of Colleges, who had the good fortune to survive the Flood of the
Visitation, and keep their Places, and who had ever since that lived retired in
their Cells, never meddling with Public Affairs in the University, nor appearing
in the Convocation, or Congregations, came now as it were in Troops, Velut
Agmine facto, habited in their Formalities, to give their Votes for their
Continuation, most of whose Faces were unknown to the greatest part of the
Assembly; with these unexpected recruits we easily carried our Cause, though we
could have done it without their Assistance. After the Cause of the Convocation
was declared, as the Custom is, the Vice Chancellor put it to the Vote, Whether
the Statute commanding the Use of Caps and Hoods, should be abrogated, or not:
After the Scrutiny, he declared, though he knew nothing of the matter, that it
was taken away, the other Proctor not resisting or opposing, then I took the
boldness to tell the Vice Chancellor, that the majority of Suffrages was to the
contrary, as it was in truth; but if it had not been so, I had a Sheet Anchor
in reserve, which I would have cast out, rather than have lost my Ship. That
was this; There is a Statute, amongst others to which we were Sworn, that
declares their Votes Null who are not in Habits suitable to their degrees;
almost all their Party, not knowing, or not minding this, came and Voted
without their Habits, and consequently lost their Votes; but I was not forced
to make use of this last Shift, I told the Vice Chancellor that the Statutes
entrust the Proctors only, to gather and compare the Suffrages, and pronounce
where the Majority fell, and that, with his favor, he had nothing to do in
that Affair; to which he replied, Egregie Procurator tace, Good Mr. Proctor
hold your tongue: Upon this, the Masters, in a tumultuary manner, rose from
their Seats, and began to Mutiny, which caused the Vice Chancellor to Dissolve
the Convocation. One would have thought this business should have ended here,
but it did not, for the very next day the Vice Chancellor sent one of the
Beadles to me, desiring me to come to his Lodgings, and there attest under my
hand, that the Statute in debate was legally abrogated in the Convocation held
the day before. I was wonderfully amazed at this Message, I therefore bid him
that brought it, to present my Service to the Vice Chancellor, and withal, to
tell him, that I wondered he should esteem me so great a Fool, Knave, or
Coward, or all of them together, that I should be prevailed upon to give it
under my hand, that I was Perjured, when I had acted according to my Oath, and
the Truth; I bid him tell him farther, that I should as soon, nay sooner, cut
off my Hand and send it to him, as to do what he required, to which there was
no rejoinder, and so this Affair ended. The event whereof was, that they who
before cared not whether they wore Caps or Hoods, or not, now immediately
procured them; never had the Makers and Sellers thereof a better vent for their
Ware, as it appeared the next Sunday, for there was then a greater number of
Scholars at St. Marys in their Formalities, than ever I saw before or since,
that time, and the Use of them continued, though not to that height, till the
happy Restoration of King Charles, which was in less than two Years after.

CHAP. VII. What happened to Dr. Ward at Oxford.
IT IS the natural effect of Eminency, to create Envy in those who despair to
arrive to it; the brighter the Sun shines upon any body, the darker is the
Shadow, which is inseparable from it. 'Twas well said of Cleaveland, It Is
Height makes Grantham Steeple stand awry. Upon this account, Dr. Ward, as well
as Dr. Wilkins, became liable to the Persecutions of those peevish People, who
ceased not to Clamor, and even to Article against them, as Cavaliers in their
hearts, mere Moral Men, without the Power of Godliness; for you must know, that
a Moral and unblameable Person, if he did not Herd with them, was an
Abomination to that Party. I have heard one of the chiefest of them out of St.
Marys Pulpit, deliver himself concerning them in this manner; There Is more hope
of a Whoremonger, a common Drunkard, a profane Swearer, than of these Moral
Men; they justify their selves; Do not we, say they, do our Exercises
constantly, do we ever miss College Prayers? Are we out of the Town after Tom
has Tolled, and the College Gates shut? Do we Injure any body, do we not pay
our Battles and Debts? Are we Drunkards, Swearers, or Whoremasters? Who can say
black is our Eye? My Beloved, such are in a desperate Condition, Jesus Christ
can take no hold upon such Persons; and much more to this purpose.

Dr. Ward rid out this Storm, but Dr. Wilkins put into the Port of Matrimony,
marrying the Protectors Sister, Widow of Dr. Peter French, a Canon of
Christ-Church, who really was a Pious, Humble and Learned Person, and an
excellent Preacher, and, if I should say the best of all that Party, I should
not give him more than his due praise; in a word, this Party were rigidly and
unmercifully Censorious against the Moral Men, and fondly and ridiculously
tender toward those of their own Communion: If a Woman happened to be got
with-Child by a Moral Man, 'twas in him a reigning Sin; but if it was by a
Church Member, 'twas a failing, whereunto the best Saints were subject, not
excepting the Man after Gods own heart. This Matrimony of Dr. Wilkins,
beforementioned, did him good Service at hand, gained him a strong Inteterest,
and Authority in the University, and set him at safety, and out of the reach of
his Adversaries, and also preserved the University from running into Disorder
and Confusion; but after the Kings Return, it was for a while a Spoke in his
Cart, and hindered his Preferment, as we shall make appear in its due place.

About this time the Headship of Jesus College became vacant, and by the
direction of Dr. Mansell, the legal, but ejected Principal, who lived privately
in that College, and by the Votes of the Fellows Dr. Ward was chosen and
admitted Principal, but he was thought too dangerous by the Ruling Party, and
they complained of it to the Proctor; whereupon he, and the Fellows who chose
him, were cited to appear at White Hall, and being there, were severely
reprimanded, and in particular Mr. Vaughan, Brother to the late Lord Chief
Justice, and threatened to be all Expelled, but Dr. Ward was treated with great
Civility, and highly Complemented, and dismissed, not without promise of
particular Favor. But he was no sooner returned to Oxford, but he found there
an Order to yield Possession to Mr. Howell, one of the other Party, and then
Fellow of Exeter Cellege, and he, I mean Dr. Ward, was promised upon so doing,
a Stipend of Eighty pounds per Annum, which promise was never performed, and so
he was defeated; but as all disappointments proved generally to his advantage,
so did this also, for a short while after, he was not only chosen, and
admitted, but enjoyed a better Place. Dr. Wilkins, Dr. Goddard, and perhaps two
or three more, whom I need not name, used their constant endeavor to oppose
the Fury, and moderate the Heats of the fiery, giddy Party, and to advance the
interest of Learning, and in order to that, they concluded to get Dr. Ward more
firm rooting amongst them, and did not despair of it, notwithstanding this
disappointment. But here it is necessary for me to look a little backwards: In
the Year of our Lord 1649. Dr. Kettle President of Trinity College died; he
was, as I have heard, an honest Man, and a good Governor, but in his latter
time peevish, and froward, and had never any great stock of Learning. When
Oxford was a Garrison for King Charles the Martyr, he would stand at the
College Gate, and observe what Persons came to walk in Trinity Grove, for that
was then the Oxford Hide-Park, the Rendesyous of the Nobility and Gentry. I
say, he took notice of all, and usually had a Saying to every one of them,
which instead of vexing them, made them laugh, then would tell the next of the
Fellows he chanced to see, I met some Jack Lords going into my Grove, but I
think I have nettled them, I gave them such entertainment they little looked
for. At my first coming to the University of Oxford, there were innumerable
Bulls and Blunders fathered upon him, as afterward upon Dr. Boldero of
Cambridge. Upon Dr. Kettles death, the Fellows proceeded to an Election of a
President, and it lay betwixt Mr. Chillingworth, a Person justly of great Fame
for his Learning, and Dr. Potter. Mr. Chillingworth had the majority of Votes;
but being then at a considerable distance from Oxford, and not able to come
suddenly, and take Possession, Dr. Potter laid hold upon this advantage, and
was admitted; in a short time after when the University was Visited, Dr. Potter
was Ejected, and Dr. Harris, Rector of Hanwell in Oxfordshire, put into his
place. This Dr. Harris was a very eminent Preacher, his Hair rather white than
gray, his Speech Grave, Natural, and Pathetical; I never heard any Sermons
which became the Persons who pronounced them, so well as his did him. After Dr.
Harris's decease, the Fellows chose Mr. Hawes, a Loyal, Learned and Modest
Person, but of an infirm constitution of Health; he enjoyed this Headship but a
little time, and some days before his death resigned it; whereupon Dr. Ward, to
the great contentment and joy of the Moral, Sober Party, was elected President,
which he accepted, and accordingly took possession of it. He used great
diligence and care to put all things in order, and settle the troubled Affairs
of it, governing with great Prudence and Reputation; but he continued in that
Station a very little while, only till 1660, that memorable Year, for the happy
Return of King Charles the Second, when he resigned it to Dr. Potter; it is
true, he left Trinity College, and Oxford, (...), with an unwilling
willingness, for he was contented with his Condition, and so pleased with a
Collegial Life, and the Charms of that sweet place, that he would willingly
have remained there the rest of his days, and in order to that, proffered Dr.
Potter an Equivalent, which was refused, but yet, had he resolved to have kept
it, he had not wanted sufficient ground to dispute the Title at Law; for though
it must be confessed, Dr. Potter was illegally turned out, yet he never had a
Statutable right to that place, as is before made manifest. But Dr. Ward not
being willing to contend, lest it, and also resigned his Savilian Professors
Place, and retired to London; what he did there, shall be the Subject of the
next Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Of Dr. Wards being in London.
WE have observed before, that all Disappointments which happened to Dr. Ward,
even since his first ejection out of Cambridge, have proved to his advantage;
but this last of not retaining the Presidentship of Trinity College, turned
more notoriously not only to his private Emolument, but to the public good
also: For had he kept that Headship, I mean been buried alive in Trinity
College, hiding his glorious Light under that Bushel, Exeter and Salisbury
could not have boasted of so good a Bishop, and Benefactor; the Church of
England had wanted such a Pillar, and Asserter of its Rights, and the Poor the
Houses and Benefactions he has provided for them; he might have published more
Treatises in Divinity, and Mathematics, but he could not possibly have done so
much good.

On May the 29 th. since made a perpetual Holiday by Act of Parliament, King
Charles returned in Glory to his Kingdoms, from which he had been unjustly
Exiled for many Years. He was no sooner fixed in his Throne, but he resolved to
settle the Church, as by the Ancient Laws Established, to restore and to
confirm it, all its Lands, Rights and Privileges of which it had been
Sacrilegiously robbed and despoiled. To this end, several new Bishops were
Consecrated, who, together with those who out lived the Storm of the
Persecution, were commissioned by the King to do it effectually. Those
Ministers who were ejected out of their Livings for adhering to the King's
Cause, were restored, and notice was given to all who had any pretension to any
Ecclesiastical Places or Dignities, at, or before such a day, nominated, to
appear, and enter their Claims, for after that day the Commissioners intended
to fill all the Vacancies in the Churches. You may remember what I said in the
Fourth Chapter, that Bishop Brounrig had conferred the Precentorship of the
Church of Exeter upon Dr. Ward many Years before. And now that Title which had
lain so long dormant, and as to outward appearance dead, awaked, revived, and
took place, and was accepted by the Commissioners, by whose order he was
admitted Precentor, not long after he was chosen Dean, and in the same Year
consecrated Bishop of Exeter. During these Transactions, Dr. Ward had frequent
occasion to ride betwixt London and Oxford, which Journey he always performed
in one day, upon a high-mettled, dancing, I might say, a runaway Mare, for
almost any body besides him would have found her so; but he was indeed a good
Horseman, and valued himself upon it: I have heard him say when he was a young
Scholar in Cambridge, and used to ride in company of others to London, or
elsewhere, he frequently changed Horses with those who could not make theirs
go, and with those tired Jades lead the way; but this is to be reckoned amongst
the least of his Accomplishments. By so often taking this Journey in the heat
of the Year, he threw himself into a dangerous Fever, and lay long sick of it
in Gresham-College, which not being well Cured, by reason that Dr. Goddard his
Fysician, was then very full of Employment, and could not give him due
attendance; I say it was not well Cured, he having not Purged after it, as it
was necessary, it left in him an ill constitution of Health during the rest of
his Life, and though he wrestled with it, and bore up against it for many Years,
yet he could never subdue it; Morbum tolerare potuit, superare vero non potuit.

Upon the promotion of Dr. Reynolds to the Bishopric of Norwich, the Church of
St. Laurence Iewry became Vacant, and it being in the Kings Gift, was conferred
upon Dr. Ward, who kept it till he was nominated Bishop of Exeter, and upon his
resignation procured it for his Friend Dr. Wilkins, who was at that time wholly
destitute of all Employment and Preferment; for upon the Kings Restoration, and
the new Modelling of the University of Cambridge, he lost the Mastership of
Trinity-College, having no other Title to it than the Presentation of Richard
Cromwell the short-lived Protector; however, he wronged no body, for the
Incumbent was dead, and none pretended any Right or Claim to it. And as if
Fortune took delight in persecuting of him, and to heap Afflictions upon
Afflictions, not long after, I mean in that dreadful and almost Universal
Conflagration of London, he lost not only his Books, an irreparable loss, as I
my self have also since experienced, but the unsatiable and devouring Flames,
consumed and reduced to Ashes all his Household Stuff, his House, and his
Parsonage also. Add to this, he, I mean Dr. Wilkins, was out of favor, both at
White Hall and Lambeth, for his Marriage mentioned before in the Sixth Chapter;
upon that account Archbishop Shelden, who had the Keys of the Church for a
great time in his power, and could admit into it and keep out of it whom he
pleased, I mean disposed of all Ecclesiastical Preferments, entertained a
strong prejudice against him, so that he was now not only without any Place,
but also without probability of obtaining one; so that his Fortune was as low
as it could be, but he did not stay there long. I remember Bishop Ward told me
at that time, I am much concerned for your Brother, and write to him oftener
than I otherwise should, to keep up his Spirits and assure him of my utmost
assistance, for the bettering of his Condition, lest he should imagine that I,
in my Prosperity, should be unmindful of him in Adversity. And these good words
were soon followed with answerable Actions, he procured for him the Precentors
place at Exeter, which was the first step he ascended toward a better Fortune;
then did also the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn make choice of him for their
Lecturer, and not long after, upon the death of Bishop Hall, he was made Bishop
of Chester, not only without, but against the Consent of the Archbishop of
Canterbury. After which, Bishop Ward introduced him into the Archbishops
presence and favor, who entertained him very obligingly, declaring that the
prejudice he had against him was unjust, and if he had known him sooner, he
would have been sooner preferred. Before Dr. Wilkins was settled in his
Bishopric, a certain Person addressed himself to the Archbishop, and desired
his Graces Recommendation to him for a Place in his Gift. No, replied the
Archbishop, that I can by no means do, it would be a very unreasonable thing in
me, to desire a Favor from one whose Promotion I opposed; and they ever
afterward kept a fair Correspondence. The two other Bishops continued their
old Friendship till death, though it is not to be denied, that they afterward
differed in their Opinions concerning the Bill of Comprehension, the Bishop of
Salisbury opposing it, and the Bishop of Chester with great zeal espousing it.
Upon the translation of Bishop Gauden to Worcester, Dr. Ward, without knowing
any thing of it, by the Interest of the Duke of Albemarle, and Sir Hugh
Pollard, then Controller, and some other of his Western Friends, whom he had
obliged during his residence at Exeter, was nominated the Bishop thereof An.
Dom. 1662. After he was completed Bishop, he put all things in order to go to
his Diocese, and reside there; accordingly he went to Exeter, whither we will
accompany him, and relate what he did there in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IX. Of his being Bishop of Exeter.
UPON his arrival at Exeter, he found all things in Disorder; the Bishops
Palace was in the possession of a Sugar-Baker, and put to that sweet use; the
Church was parted by a Traverse, the Presbyterians and Independants dividing it
betwixt them, which Inconveniences the former Bishop took no care to remove,
expecting to be translated to a better Bishopric, as afterward he was. But
before we speak of Dr. Ward as a Bishop, give me leave to take a short view of
what he did when he was Dean of Exeter. He first cast out of the Temple the
Buyers and Sellers, who had usurped it, and therein kept distinct Shops to vent
their Ware. At his Majestys Restoration the Nonconformists there being buoyed
up by some powerful Friends, who for their private Interest drove on, and hoped
to obtain a general Toleration of all Religions, excepting Popery, took the
boldness to petition the King, that the Partition in the Cathedral might not be
taken down, that they might enjoy Altar contra Altar. But to give them their
due, they were so generous, as to allow one half of the Church to the use of
the Episcopal Party, to whom all did of right belong, that therein Divine
Service might be celebrated according to the Act of Parliament for Uniformity
of Worship, reserving the other part to their selves to Meet and Hold-forth in;
but their design was prevented by the early application of the Dean to the King
and Council, from whom he procured an Order, to restore the Church to its
ancient Form and Shape, and remove the Innovations; he accordingly caused the
Partition to be pulled down, and repaired and beautified the Cathedral, the
Expenses whereof amounted to twenty five thousand Pounds; he also bought a new
pair of Organs, esteemed the best in England, which cost two thousand Pound.
But it may be demanded, how came he by such vast Sums of Money? I answer, it
was not done out of his private Purse, but out of the Church Revenues; for all
the Leases belonging to that Ancient and Rich Church being expired, the
renewing of them caused that plenty. But now let us consider him as Bishop: He
first retrieved the Palace out of the hands of the Sugar-Baker, whom his
Predecessor found and left in quiet possession; he repaired it, and made it
habitable, for it was very ruinous, having been deserted before the Civil War,
by the Bishops, who lived in other Houses; he took care of executing his
Majestys Letters, commanding the Augmentation of poor Vicarages in that
Diocese, and did it effectually; he also increased the Prebends Stipends, from
Four, to Twenty Pounds a Year: He kept his constant Trienial Visitations, in
the first whereof he Confirmed many thousands of all Ages and different Sexes;
he also settled the Ecclesiastical Courts, and without any Noise or Clamor,
reduced that Active, Subtle, and then Factious People, to great Conformity,
not without the approbation even of the Adversaries themselves. At this time
Falmouth, from an inconsiderable Village, usually called Pennycome-quick, being
grown a great and beautiful Town, equal, if not superior to Truro, procured a
Charter from King Charles, wherein the new name of Falmouth was established,
and a Penalty put upon those who should call it by its old scandalous
Nickname. The People of this New Town had also built a stately Church, and
sent to the Bishop entreating him to Consecrate it, which he did, dedicating it
to the blessed Memory of King Charles the Martyr, having first taken care, that
about a hundred pound per annum should be settled for the maintenance of the
Minister. During his residence at Exeter, he gained the love of all the Gentry,
and had particularly the help and countenance of the Duke of Albemarle, who in
all things showed himself most ready to assist him in the execution of his
Jurisdiction. The Bishop did not leave Exeter till he had made that Bishopric
better than he found it, which he did by procuring the Deanery of St. Burien,
near the Lands-end in Cornwall, to be settled upon the Bishops of Exeter for
ever, by the Kings Letters Patents, after the death of Dr. Weeks, who then was
the Incumbent; he did not this to profit himself, for he had no prospect of
ever being the better for it, 'twas only for the pleasure of doing good: It did
not become void till Bishop Sparrows time, who was Bishop Wards immediate
Successor; he first enjoyed it, and it does still, and I hope ever will
continue in the possession of the Bishops of Exeter, and their Successors.

Dr. Thomas Wykes the last Dean of St. Burien, was heretofore Chaplain to
Archbishop Laud, I have often seen his Name to the Licensing of Books
particularly to Ovids Metamorfosis Translated by Mr. Sandys, and Printed Anno
Dom. 1640. He had Wit enouf, but it was not in a wise Man's keeping, as it often
happens; this appears by an Answer he gave to King Charles the First when he
was in Cornwall, in the time of the Civil Wars. The Doctor being well mounted,
and near his Majesty, the King spoke thus to him, Doctor you have a pretty Nag
under you, I pray how Old is he? To which he, out of the abundance of the
Quibbles of his heart, returned this Answer; If it please your Majesty, he is
now in the Second Year of his Reign, pleasing himself with the ambiguity of the
sound of that word, signifying either Kingship or Bridle. The good King did not
like this unmannerly Jest, and gave him such an Answer as he deserved, which
was this; Go, you are a Fool. While the Bishop was at Exeter, as he told me at
my return from Italy, he received a Letter from me, dated at Rome; when there
were some of the Church and Citizens with him, he craved leave to open and read
it, and when he had done put it up into his Pockets; then some of the Company
took occasion to ask him whence it came; he replied, from Pope at Rome. In a
trice it was buzzed abut the City, that the Bishop was a Papist, and held
Correspondence with the Pope; and this would have been believed, and have past
for current amongst those who rejoice to hear ill of Bishops, if he had not
timely undeceived them. Upon the Exaltation of Bishop Sheldon to the Sea of
Canterbury, Doctor Henchman Bishop of Salisbury, was translated to London, and
Dr. Alexander Hide, a Kinsman of the Chancellor, from being Dean of Salisbury
was made Bishop thereof upon his death, for he enjoyed it but a small time. The
Bishop of Exeter by the Kings favor, was made Bishop of Salisbury A. Dom.
1666. After the Ceremony of the Translation was over, he set forward for
Salisbury; I waited on him at his first going thither as Bishop, and spent much
time with him there. He was very acceptable to his Diocese, innumerable Persons
coming in throngs to meet him, and striving who should be forwardest in showing
him Respect; but what was more remarkable, the tide of their Love and Affection
for him was not then at the highest, but still flowed and increased as long as
he lived, as we shall make appear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. X. Of his being Bishop of Salisbury.
AFter his public Entry and Reception, which was as great as the place could
afford, the Mayor and Aldermen in their Formalities welcoming him, the
Schoolmasters of the two Free Schools at the head of their Scholars
Congratulating him, two choice Boys pronouncing Latin Orations upon that
Subject, full of his Praises, and declaring how happy they esteemed their
selves to have such a Bishop, sent them as it were from Heaven. His first care
was to beautify and repair the Cathedral, though it did not want much
reparation; for to the eternal Honor of the Loyal Gentry of that Diocese,
whose Names I wish I knew, that I might, as much as in me lies, Consecrate them
to Posterity, during the whole time of the Civil Wars and the Kings Exile, when
there was neither Bishop nor Dean to take care of it, they employed Workmen to
keep that Sacred and Magnificent Pile in repair. I have been told by some who
then lived in Salisbury, that they have several times seen Men at Work,
sometimes on the inside of the Church, and otherwhiles on the outside; and
asking them, by whom they were set on Work, received this Answer; They who
employed us will pay us, trouble not your selves to inquire who they are,
whoever they are, they do not desire to have their Names known. There being
therefore not much to be done as to the reparation, he employed himself in the
Decoration of the Cathedral: First, at his proper Charges, Paving the Cloister,
I mean that side of it which leads out of his Garden into the Church. At his
Exhortation, and more than proportinable expense, the Pavement of the Church
was mended where it was faulty, and the whole Quire laid with white and black
Squares of Marble, the Bishops, Deans, and all the Prebendaries Stalls made New
and Magnificent, and the whole Church was kept so clean, that any one who had
occasion for Dust to throw upon the Superscription of a Letter, he would have a
hard task to find it there. I have seen many Metropolitan Churches, but never
any, nay, not that glorious Fabrique of St. Peter's at Rome, which exceeds the
imagination of all those who have not beheld it, was kept so neat as this in
his time: Nay, the Sacrifice therein was as pure; there might be heard
excellent Preaching, and Divine Service celebrated, with exemplary Piety,
admirable Decency, and Celestial Music. His next care was to repair, I might
almost say rebuild his Palace, which was much ruined, the Hall being pulled
down, and the greatest part of the House converted to an Inn, having a Passage
opened through the Close Wall to give Entrance to the Market People, and other
Travelers who came through Harnham from the Western parts; what remained of the
Palace was divided into small Tenements, and let out to poor Handicraft-men.
This dilapidation and spoil was the work of one Van Ling a Dutchman, by Trade
a Tailor, who bought it of the Parliament, when Bishops Lands were exposed to
Sale: See Salisbury Canto, Part 1. Stanza 20. His Expenses in altering,
repairing, and rebuilding, amounted to above two Thousand Pounds, there being
little or nothing done in order to it by his Predecessors, who had the Cream of
the Bishopric. While he was thus employed, I remember he came to me one morning
and desired me to take a turn in the Church with him, he having a private way,
as I have said before, through his Garden and the Cloisters; when we were
entered, Come, said he to me, which think you will be the most convenient place
for me to be buried in? Oh my Lord, said I, may that day be far off. Come,
come, said he tell me your opinion, for I am in earnest. Whereupon we viewed
several places, and at last agreed upon that wherein he now lies interred; so
that it is not true of him, what Horace said of a Noble Roman in his time,
Struis domos, Immemor Sepulchri. i. e. You build Palaces and are unmindful of
your Grave. While he was Bishop of Exeter, he had made, as I may call it, the
Notitiae of that Bishopric, with no small pains and industry, which he
bestowed, upon his removal to Salisbury, upon Bishop Sparrow his Successor;
which proved not only an ease, but a light and guide to him in the management
of his Affairs. After he settled at Salisbury, he began, and in a short time
finished such another Book for that Diocese, wherein were particularized all
the Rectories and Vicarages in that Bishopric, all the Patrons Names, with
their undoubted and disputable Titles; as also the Names of all the Incumbents,
with their several qualifications, as to Conformity, or Nonconformity,
Learning, or Ignorance, peaceable, or contentious Conversation, Orthodox or
Heretical Opinion, good or scandalous Lives; for all which he had framed
peculiar Marks, which he showed and explained to me: He found by daily
experience, that this stood him in great stead, and did him eminent service:
For when any Clergyman of his Diocese came to him, as soon as he heard his
Name, he knew his Character, and could give a shrewd guess at his business, and
so was out of danger of being surprizd. He had not been long thus employed,
after his arrival at Salisbury, when he was seizd with a violent Looseness, and
a Scorbutical Atrosie, for which, by Dr. Sydenhams advice, he betook himself to
riding upon Salisbury Plains, which he continued the latter part of the Summer,
all the Autumn, and as often as the Weather permitted in Winter: That he might
perform this Exercise with more convenience, and not neglect the Affairs of his
Bishipric, he borrowed a House of the Earl of Abington at Bishops-Lavington,
situated in a pleasant and healthful Air, near the End of the Plains Northward
of Salisbury, and the Center of Wiltshire, and so more convenient for any of
that County who had business with him, than Salisbury; it was also about four
miles distant from the Devizes, a good Market Town. Hence he set out every day,
except Sundays, if the Weather permitted, nay, and sometimes when it was not
seasonable, for we have been often caught in Storms of Rain and Snow, and forcd
to seek shelter on the Lee-side of the next Hay-Rick we could gallop to: We
used to ride ten miles forwards or tantamount by our Watches, before we
returned, and after Dinner, we repeated the same, or the like Journey. The
Bishop continued this Exercise, till upon account he had travelld more than
three thousand miles. The longer he rid, the stronger he grew, so that he did
not only tire me, but even the Grooms and Servants who usd to attend him, that
he has sometimes been forcd to content himself with the Company of one of his
meanest Servants. This Exercise set him right, and I may truly say, it was the
only time that ever any Fysicians Recipe did him good; yet he was a great lover
of them and their Prescriptions, and very Liberal, I may say Prodigal in his
Fees to them: He also delighted much in Fysic Books, which wrought the Effect
upon him, which they usually do upon Hypocondriacal Persons, that is, made him
fancy that he had those Diseases which he there found describd, and accordingly
take Remedies for them. He would take Pills and Potions when he had no need of
them, from which, not only I endeavored to divert him, telling him 'twas
spending the Ammunition before the Town was besiegd, but even Mr. Eyres his
Apothecary, a very honest and skilful Person, who died Mayor of Salisbury, has
joynd with me in that request, even against his own Interest.

To keep his Diocese in Conformity, he took great care to settle able Ministers
in the great Market and Borough Towns, as Reading, Abingdon, Newbery, the
Devizes, Warminster, etc. and because they are for the most part Vicarages of
small value, as Prebends in the Church fell void, he bestowd them on the
Ministers of these Towns He also used his endeavor to suppress Conventicles,
which so angerd that Party, that in the Year 1669. they forgd a Petition
against him, under the Hands of some chief Clothiers, pretending that they were
Molested, and their Trade ruind, and that some of them imployd a Thousand Men,
others eight Hundred, and that this Persecution took away the Livelihood of
eight Thousand Men, Women and Children. But it was made appear at the
Council Table, that this Petition was a notorious Libel, and that none of those
there mentiond to be Persecuted and Ruind, were so much as Summond into the
Ecclesiastical Court; as also, that many whose Names were subscribd to that
Petition, knew nothing of it: So that instead of lessening the Bishops Favor
with the King, they augmented it. Let this be said once for all, he was no
Violent Man, nor of a Persecuting Spirit, as these Petitioners represented him;
but if at any time he was more active than ordinary against the Dissenters, it
was by express Command from the Court, sometimes by Letters, and sometimes
given in Charges by the Judges of the Assizes, which Councils alterd
frequently; now in favor of the Dissenters, and then again in opposition to
them; as it is well known to those who livd then, and had the least insight
into public Affairs. It Is true, he was for the Act against Conventicles, and
labored much to get it pass, not without the Order and Direction of the
greatest Authority, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, not out of Enmity to the
Dissenters Persons, as they unjustly suggested, but of Love to the repose and
welfare of the Government; for he believd if the growth of them were not timely
suppressed, it would either cause a necessity of a standing Army to preserve
the Peace, or a general Toleration, which would end in Popery, whether all
things then had an apparent tendancy. That Act had this Effect, it showed the
Dissenters were not so numerous and considerable as they gave themselves out to
be, designing thereby to make the Government believe it was impracticable to
quell them; for where this Act was duly executed, it put an end to their
Meetings, as it was evident in his Diocese; for in Salisbury there was not one
Conventicle left, and but a few in the skirts of Wiltshire, bordering upon
Somersetshire, where for want of a settled Militia, by reason of the nonage
of the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Lieutenant of that County, they sometimes met
in Woods, but upon Complaint their Meetings were suppressed, and his Majesty
was pleased to own and accept this as good Service to the Public, and to
encourage the Bishop in it. But a little after, I know not upon what ground,
the Weathercock of the Court-Council turned to the contrary Point, and one
BLOOD, a Person notorious for stealing the Crown out of the Tower, and offering
that barbarous violence to the Duke of Ormond, being of a sudden become a great
Favorite at Court, and the chief Agent of the Dissenters; this BLOOD, I say,
brought the Bishop of Salisbury a verbal Message from the King, not to Molest
the Dissenters; upon which he went to wait on his Majesty, and humbly
represented to him, that there were only two troublesome Nonconformists in his
Diocese, whom he doubted not, with his Majestys permission, but that he should
bring to their Duty, and then he named them. These are the very Men, replied
the King, you must not meddle with; to which he obeyed, letring the Prosecution
against them fall.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the Bishops Hospitality.
BIshops are commanded by St. Paul to be Hospitable; never did any yield more
punctual obedience to that Apostolical Injunction, than this Bishop of
Salisbury did; for, be it spoken without any reflection, no Person in that
County, or the Diocese, that ever I heard of, kept constantly so good a Table
as he did, which also as occasion required, was augmented. He usd to say, that
he expected all his Brethren of the Clergy, who upon any business came to
Salisbury, should make use of his Table, and that he took it kindly of all the
Gentry who did so. Scarce any Person of Quality passed betwixt London and
Exeter, but if their occasions permitted, Dined with him. The meanest Curates
were welcome to his Table, and he never failed to drink to them, and treat them
with all affability and kindness imaginable. He often told his Guests, they
were welcome to their own, for he accounted himself but their Steward. Never
was there a more hearty Entertainer; I have heard him say, It Is not kind nor
fair, to ask a Friend that visits you, Will you drink a Glass of Wine? For
besides, that by this Question you discover your inclination to keep your
Drink, it also leads a modest Guest to refuse it though he desires it: You ought
to call for Wine, drink to him, fill a Glass and present it; then, and not till
then, it will appear whether he had any inclination to drink or not. When any
Persons of greater quality than himself came to Salisbury, as there not
infrequently did in their way to Ireland, he went to their Lodgings and invited
them himself, and never failed to Treat them very splendidly. He knew not who
Dined with him, unless, as I said just now, they were of his own Invitation,
till he saw them at the Table. After Morning Prayers, which he seldom, unless
upon urgent occasions, missed; he constantly walked up to his Chamber, and
stayed there till a Servant brought word that Dinner was upon the Table. After
Dinner, if any extraordinary Company were present, he would stay with them,
drink a Dish or two of Coffee or Tea, while they, who had a mind to it, drank
Wine, whereof there was plenty, and of the best. When the Bell Tilld, to use
the Salisbury Frase, to Evening Prayers, then he called for his Habits and went
to Church, carrying with him, for the most part, all the Company, who were
obligd to go to Prayers with him out of Civility, if not Devotion. Besides what
he gave away at the Palace-Gate, where he constantly relievd a great number of
Poor, he inquird after those the French call Paures honteaux, who wanted and
were ashamd to beg, and sent them Money to their Houses. He had also a Band of
Pensioners, if I may so call them, the number whereof were limited, but I do
not remember of how many it consisted; these were paid Weekly, and as one died
another was substituted in his place; and those poor People who could get their
selves listed in this Troop, counted their selves sufficiently provided for, if
not for their own, yet for the Bishops Life, for the continuation thereof they
daily and heartily put up their Petitions. He never went to take the Air, which
he usd to do very frequently, but he gave liberally to the Poor, not staying
till they askd, 'twas enouf if they stood in the way, or casually met him on
the Plains; nay I have often seen him call those who were at a distance from
him and expected nothing, and give them Money. When his Coach, or if he went
out a Horseback, or any of his Retinue appeard in Harnham, through which we
usually passd to the Hare-Warren, all the Children would immediately leave
their Play and cry out, My Lord Bishop is coming, my Lord Bishop is coming:
Upon which Alarm, all the poorer Inhabitants appear at their doors, praying God
to bless his Lordship, and receivd his Alms. He never went from Salisbury to
London, or upon his Visitation, but he was accompanied part of his way by many
of the Citizens, I may say of all, who either had Horses of their own, or could
procure them for Love or Money, wishing him a happy Journey, a speedy and safe
return. Both at his going forth, and returning back to the City, all the way
from the Palace to the Close-Gate, usd to be lind with regiments of Poor, many
whereof upon their Knees, with their Hands elevated to Heaven, loudly, and I
dare say, devoutly and heartily, praying God, either for his good Journey, or
praising him for his return in safety: I write not this by hearsay, but as an
Eye and Ear witness, and that not once only, but very frequently. I have said
before, he often rode out for his Health, and when we were upon the Plains, I
say We, for I was his Fidus Achates, as constant to him as the Shadow to the
Body; sometimes we by chance chopped upon the Dogs, and sometimes by my
contrivance, knowing whereabouts they intended to Hunt, but however, and
whenever it happened, the Bishop would ride a Ring or two very briskly, but
when it came to Picking work, or Cold H^^ting, he would leave them, and proceed
in his Promenade; but first I was sent to invite all the Gentlemen to Dine with
him, whether he knew them or not; and this not once only, but Toties quoties,
as long as his Health permitted. Our Airing was usually to a Hedge in
Shaftsbury Road, about ten mile distant from Salisbury, thence we returned and
reachd home by Dinner time. Yet notwithstanding his hospitable way of living,
and splendid treating of Persons of Quality, his Alms, his private and public
Benefactions, of which we shall treat in the next Chapter, I may boldly and
truly say, there never was in that, or any other Episcopal See, so careful a
Steward, for so he used to term himself, or so good a manager of the Episcopal
Demeans. I have heard him say, If these Lands had been mine own, either by
Purchase or Inheritance, I could not have been so solicitous to preserve them
from damage. He had good Woods about six or seven mile from Salisbury, of which
he cut down annually only so much as he made use of in repairing or building
the Palace, and sold only so much as defrayd the price of the Coals which he
burnt in his Kitchen; neither would he suffer one Stick to be cut down for any
other purpose, though often solicited thereunto. I remember he told me, I am
resolvd, who ever succeeds me, shall have no occasion to be sorry that I was
his Predecessor in this Bishopric, for I will leave it better than I found it;
and he did not fail to be as good as his word, as we shall make manifest in the
next Chapter. He used once every Year, and sometimes oftener, ride to the Woods
above-mentiond and visit all the Coppices, and ask the Woodward several
Questions, and give him strict charge concerning the Mounds, Fences, etc. But
for all this, said he to me, for I always accompanied him when ever he rid out,
these Fellows may easily Cheat me, but I suppose my frequently coming hither,
unawares to them, and seeming so inquisitive, will make them more cautious. To
show his care yet farther, even when the Kings Commissioners came to Salisbury
to buy Timber for the Royal Navy, he would not consent to the felling of one
Tree, till he had received the Kings express Orders for so doing.

CHAP. XII. Concernings his Acts of Charity.
WE have declard in the Ninth Chapter what he did for the Church of Exeter, I
mean his procuring the Deanery of St. Burien, to be annexed to the Bishops of
that Place. It our is work now, to show what good he did to the Bishopric and
City of Salisbury, and whether he left them better than he found them. He was
very kind to the City, granting them what ever they desird of him, and in
particular, his Picture at full length in his Garter Robes, the work of Mr.
John Greenhill, who was a Scholar of Sir Peter Lelies, an excellent Painter;
this Piece is set up in the Town House, and esteemed as an inestimable Relic.
He also renewd to the City a Lease of the Mansion House, and some Lands, which
were formerly my Lord Awdleys, Earl of Castle-Haven in Ireland, which, for that
Lords committing Crimes not fit to be named, and being Convicted and Executed,
became forfeited to the Crown, and so fell to the Bishop, to whom all
Forfeitures are granted by the Kings Letters Patents. For doing this, he would
accept of no other gratuity than a pair of Gloves, as an acknowledgment. He
also contributed largely toward making their River Navigable, not only with
his Money, but Advice, and dug the first Spadeful himself when they began that
Work. He also made several Journeys in their behalf to the King and Council,
and answered the Objections which several Hampshire Gentlemen made against it,
as I have briefly mentioned in the Salisbury Canto, Part 1. Stanza 23. To the
Bishopric of Salisbury he was also a great Benefactor, by prevailing with the
King to annex and unite to it for ever, that Honorable and not unprofitable
Place, the Chancelorship of the most Noble Order of the Garter, the Ensigns
whereof are, a Medal of Gold hanging upon a Chain of the same Metal, and he was
the first Protestant Bishop who had the honor to wear it. And here I think it
will not be impertinent to give a short History of this Office. The first
Chancellor of the Garter was Bishop Beauchamp, Anno Dom. 1450, and that Honor
was enjoyed by his Successors the Bishops of Salisbury, till the time of
Cardinal Campeggio, who having incurrd the displeasure of King Henry the Eighth
for differing from him in the matter of the Divorce, retird to Rome, and died
there, A. D. 1539. and lies buried in the Church of Santa Maria Tras Tevere.
Then had the Bishops of Salisbury enjoyd that Honor Eighty nine Years, since
which time it has always been in the hands of Laymen, till it pleased King
Charles the Second, upon the humble petition and claim of Dr. Ward, to restore
it to him and his Successors the Bishops of Salisbury for ever, after the death
of Sir Henry de Vic, the last Lay-Chancellor, and after it had been out of the Sea one hundred thirty and two Years: The Letters Patent bear date November. 25.
Anno Domini 1671. He was also very forward and liberal in promoting any good
design in the way of Learning, as Dr. Castle in his Epistle Dedicatory before
his Learned Lexicon testifies, in these words. Enimvero universae hae literae,
plus minus septingentas libras tantum mihi porrexerunt, ad promovendum opus, in
quo millenas plures infaustus exhausi, praeter plurima, atque ingentia valde,
quae contraxi debita, Quid quod praenominatae Collectae summae pars maxima,
quadringenta scilicit librae, procuratione atque opera solertissima
prudentissimaque Reverendi admodum in Deo Patris Sethi Domini Episcopi
Sarisburiensis, intra quatuordecem dies fuerant conquisitae. That is,

But all these, speaking of the Kings, the Archbishops and other Bishops
Commendatory Letters, produced me but seven hundred pound, a little more or
less, and that to promote a Work wherein I had spent some thousands, besides
contracting some very great Debts. The major part of which Collection, viz.
Four hundred pound, was procurd for me in fourteen days, by the care and
diligence of the Right Reverend Father in God Seth Lord Bishop of Salisbury. I
have heard the Bishop speak with pleasure concerning this Collection, saying,
the four hundred pound was contributed by the Clergy of the Dioceses of Exeter
and Salisbury only; but his Modesty would not permit him to tell me what
proportion thereof he gave. But the greatest and most seasonable Act of
Charity, and public Benefaction, was building and endowing that Noble Pile, I
mean the College of Matrons, for the entertainment and maintenance of Ten
Widows of Orthodox Clergymen. I have often heard him express his dislike, if
any one called it an Hospital; for, said he, many of these are well descended,
and have lived in good reputation; I would not have it said of them, that they
were reduced to an Hospital, but retird to a College, which has a more
honorable sound. He accounted himself fortunate in purchasing Free Land
whereupon to erect this Fabric, and yet more fortunate, that it was in the
Close; for had it lain any where else, he must have been at the charges of a
greater Structure, and endowing a Chapter, which was now needless, the
Cathedral being so near, whereunto they might with ease, and were all of them
engaged to repair both Morning and Evening, and stay out the whole time of
Prayers, under a pecuniary penalty. During his Life he put in the Widows
himself, and at his Death, he left a Catalogue of of the Names of others whom
he knew, or by the recommendation of others, believed to be fit objects of his
Charity, these were next in succession, and afterward the Election was to be
in the Dean and Chapter, and the Bishop of Salisbury, Alternis vicibus, by
turns. This College of Matrons is a strong regular Building, within the Close
of Salisbury, and a great Ornament to it. It is fitted for the reception of Ten
Women, the Widows of Orthodox Ministers of the Diocese of Salisbury; and in
case there should not be found so many therein, their vacancy is to be supplied
out of the Bishopric of Exeter, but I fear this will never happen. They have
each two Chambers and a little Garden peculiar to their selves. To the
maintenance thereof the Bishop settled more than two hundred pounds a year in
Free Land, which lies in the Neighborhood; over the Gate is written in Letters
of Gold, the Inscription following. D'. OF. Mo. Collegium hoc Matronarum
Humillime Dedicavit Sethus Episcopus Sarum Anno Domini MDCLXXXII.

That is, To the Honor of Almighty God This College of Matrons Was most humbly
Dedicated By Seth Bishop of Salisbury, In the Year of our Lord 1682.

Two Years after he built an Hospital at Buntingford in Hertford-shire, the
place of his Nativity, for Ten poor aged Men, allowing each of them Ten pound
per annum, which is also a Noble Structure, and bears this Inscription. Anno
Domini 1684. This Hospital was Erected and Endowed By Seth Ward, Doctor of
Divinity, Lord Bishop of Salisbury, and Chancellor of the most Noble Order Of
the Garter. Who was Born in this Town, within the Parish of Aspenden, and
Educated In the Free School of Buntingford.

These poor Men are put in by Mr. Freeman and his Heirs for ever. Besides this,
he augmented the Stipend of the Minister and the Schoolmaster in that Town.

Though I am conscious that I have not ennumerated all his Benefactions, yet I
will conclude this Chapter with his Erecting of four Scholarships at
Christs-College in Cambridge, and endowing them with pound per Annum, which in
that University is a considerable Allowance, the Scholarships there being
generally inferior to those at Oxford, as the Fellowships better. He had
designd to have placd this his Benefaction at Sidney-College, but upon some
disgust altered his intention, tho it is not improbable but that that College
might refuse his proffer upon very good Reasons: For at Oxford no College will
accept a Benefaction which only increases the number of Fellows, or Scholars,
for thereby the Society is rather injured, than profited, unless the Benefactor
also builds Chambers for their reception; for taking away so many Chambers,
takes away from the Fellows so many Pupils; but on the contrary, a Benefactor
who will increase the Stipends of the Members of the Society, will always be
very gratefully embraced.

CHAP. XIII. Of his Friends.
SHould I enumerate all his Friends whom I knew, I must fill two or three
Leaves with Names and Titles, and this Chapter would look like a Money Act,
wherein the Commissioners were all particularly set down. I shall not therefore
use that dry way, I will insert but few, and those distributed into several
Classes; according to the laudable Custom of England, giving Precedence to the
Female Sex, and placing them in the Van. Even from his unjust expulsion out of
Cambridge, which we have mentioned in its due place, he never was destitute of
Friends of the fair Sex, till some few Years before his Death, never without
prossers of Wives, much beyond his deserts; as the Markets go in Smithfield, to
several of whom, he, to my knowledge, recommended good Husbands, and his
recommendation was effectual; of these I will mention but one, for whom he also
procured a good Parsonage, and he shall be Mr. Gibson, a Contemporary, a
Fellow-Collegian and Fellow-sufferer in the Common Cause; he many Years after,
when his Children were like Olive Branches about his Table, came from
Hertford-shire to Salisbury to give the Bishop a Visit, and accosted him in
this manner: My Lord, I am come to wait upon your Lordship, and to return my
most humble and hearty Thanks for your many and great Kindnesses to me, I owe
all to you, you have got me all that I have in this World, except my Children.
The reason why he did not Marry then, as I have received from himself, was
this; he had not an Estate or Preferment sufficient to maintain a Wise suitable
to the Fortunes which was prosserd with them. And that he would not put it into
the power of any Woman, if they should happen to disagree, as there are few,
very few, if any Marriages without Dissentions, those being the happiest where
they are less frequent, to upbraid him that she had made him a Man, and that
had it not been for what she brought, he would not have been worth a Groat.
Being made a Bishop, first of Exeter, and afterward of Salisbury, and
consequently become greater and richer, it is not to be imagined those proffers
should diminish, I am certain they increased; I knew several Persons of great
Quality and Estates, who found ways to make it known to him, that if he would
address himself to them in the honorable way of Marriage, he should not want a
kind entertainment. But at that time he was furnished with another reason to
continue in Celebacy; he thought it not unlawful, but undecent, for a Bishop to
Marry; perhaps he had in his eye the Fate of one of his Predecessors, Bishop
Jewel, who married after he was Bishop of Salisbury, and upon that account
received so severe a Reprimand from his Brother the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and laid it so much to heart, that it accelerated his death. Upon these reasons
he continued unmarried till his death. But this rare Example has been followed
by none of his Profession, except only Dr. Barrow, as we shall have occasion to
show hereafter. It Is time now to take my leave of the Ladies, and proceed.
While Bp. Ward resided at Exeter, George Duke of Albemarle began his Friendship
with him, which continued, and augmented till his Graces death; he did him many
good Offices at Court, and defended him against the Clamours and Calumnies of
the Fanatics. The Bishop also was serviceable to the Duke, he instructed his
Son in the Mathematics, he also waited upon him frequently while he was in
Health, and was never absent from him in his Sickness; he was with him in the
last moments of his Life, he gave him the Holy Sacrament, closd his Eyes, and
preachd his Funeral Sermon, which was printed, both by it self, and amongst his
Works, published by James Collins as abovementioned. To him I will add the
Earl of Sandwich, Vice Admiral of England, who was his Contemporary in
Cambridge, a great lover and very well skilld in the Mathematics, but most
famous for his skill in Maritime Affairs, for his not only adventuring, but
sacrificing his Life for his Country. The next shall be my Lord Chancellor
Hide, who had the Bishop in great esteem, and treated him with intimate
Familiarity. I remember when we were at Astrop Wells, he sent the Bishop a
pleasant Letter by his youngest Son, wherein amongst other things, he strictly
enjoins not to infuse any Mathematics into him, for fear they should render him
unfit to be a Politician. To which the Bishop returned in answer, That he would
obey his Lordships Commands, and principally because De Wit was a famous
Instance, That a good Mathematician could not be an able Statesman. The
Gentleman who brought this Letter, together with my Lord Faulkland, my Lord
Roxborough, and several other of the Nobility of England and Scotland, perished
in the memorable Shipwreck of the Gloucester, which was then carrying the Duke
of York to Scotland, upon the Lemane Ore, on Friday May 5. 1682.

This Story is so wonderful and honorable for the English Seamen, that I
cannot forbear telling it here; it is an amazing thing, that Mariners who are
usually as rough as the Element they converse in, when inevitable Death was
before their eyes, and to be incurred within a very few minutes; that Mariners,
I say, should have that presence of Mind, that inestimable value and deference
for the Duke of York, as being of the Blood Royal, and Brother to their King,
as to take care of his safety and neglect their own, to put him into a Boat,
and permit no other Persons to enter into it, but those he called out of the
sinking Ship, for fear of over-lading it, and as soon as they perceived the
Boat clear of the Ship, and the Prince out of danger, that they all of them
should throw up their Caps, and make loud Acclamations and Huzzas of Joy, as if
they had obtained some signal Victory over their Enemies, and in this rapture
sink to the bottom immediately, at the same instant concluding their Lives and
their Jubilation. Many Reflections may be made upon this remarkable Story, but
I being in haste, leave that work to others.

I cannot positively determine, whether my Lord Clarendon was in earnest, and
believed that Mathematics would render those who understood them, unfit to
manage State Affairs; but if he did, I put into the Scale against him another
great Man, and Politician, I mean the late Duke of Lauderdale, who has often
declard in the presence of diverse Persons of Quality, from some of which I had
it, that in his opinion the Bishop of Salisbury was the best Speaker in the
House of Lords. I will muster but one more, that shall be Anthony Earl of
Shaftsbury, who was for a considerable time a great Friend to our Bishop; they
enterchanged many Visits, as they might conveniently do, their Houses in the
Country being but at a small distance one from the other, and often consulted
about Public Affairs; nay, after they went several ways in Parliament, tho
their Intimacy was at end, yet their mutual Esteem continued: I have seen a
printed Speech of the Earls, wherein he Treats the Bishop very honorably,
preferring his Speeches before the rest of his Opponents, as having more of
Argument in them, and being closer to the purpose.

CHAP. XIV. A Continuation of the former.
IF I should persist in this way of enumerating the Bishops Friends Dr.
Lluellyn.
; There Is one, there is two, and so on like Faggots, I should tire the Reader
and my Self; therefore as to those that remain, I shall serve them up in
Clusters, excepting two or three, concerning whom I intend to treat more at
large. The Bench of Bishops had that esteem for him, that they selected him to
observe and reply to the Earl of Shaftsbury, if he should move any thing to the
detriment of the Church; for this Earl was a Person of great Ability, and had a
peculiar Talent to promote or hinder any thing passing the House of Peers. To
mount a step higher, our Bishops Probity, Wisdom, and Ability to manage the
great and Arduous Affairs of State, was in so great esteem for a considerable
while, that he was spoke of both at Court, and in the City, as the fittest
Person to supply the place of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Keeper, or
Lord-Treasurer, if any of them should become vacant. And I am confident it
pleased him more to be esteemd worthy of such Trusts, than to have enjoyd the
best of them I well remember the time, when he told me, he had the proffer of
the Bishopric of Durham, after Bishop Cousins death. Pray my Lord, said I,
accept it, we shall have brave Horses there, and the long Journey betwixt
Bishops-Auclands and London, will conduce much to the meliorating of your
Health He replied, I just now enterd it in my blue Book, that this day I refusd
it. I replied, and pray my Lord, why did you so? Because, said he, I did not
like the Conditions; but what they were, it would have been unmannerly for me
to inquire, and he did not think it convenient to tell me. This is refusing so
rich a Bishopric, is so great an Act of Selfdenial, that I have reason to fear,
'twill not be credited upon my single Testimony; I shall therefore call in
another Witness, against whom there can be no Exception, to corroborate mine;
he shall be no lesser a Person than the present Bishop of Durham, whom not long
after I met at Reading, being then there with the Bishop of Salisbury in his
Visitation, I having had the honor to have been acquainted with the Bishop of
Durham, even from his first admission into Lincoln College in Oxford, laid hold
on this occasion to felicitate his promotion to Durham: He replied, 'Twas
proffered to your Bishop, meaning the Bishop of Salisbury, but he did not think
fit to accept of it. And here now I should add the Nobility and Gentry of
Wiltshire, Berkshire, Devonshire, and Cornwall, whose Diocesan he had been, but
I remember my promise, to ease both the Reader and my Self. I proceed to the
greatest of his Friends situated in high Places: He was very much in favor
with the King, and the Duke of York, before he declared himself of the Romish
Persuasion, whom he Treated magnificently at Salisbury, and also with the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who used to entertain him with the greatest kindness
and familiarity imaginable; in his common discourse to him, he used to call him
Old Sarum: And I have heard the Archbishop speak of him more than once, as the
Person whom he wished might succeed him.

About this time, as it is notoriously known, there were Intrigues carried on
by a Party at Court, to introduce the Romish Religion, and make the Power of
the King Unlimited, and Arbitrary, whereunto all Persons were to obey without
reserve; which words were in one of the Proclamations sent to Scotland. But the
Bishop of Salisbury not swimming with the Stream* he lost at least one of his
great Friends, and with him his favor at Court; the Effects whereof appeared
not long after, the manner thus.

The Revenue belonging to the Order of the Garter, was usually received by the
Chancellor, and he paid the Officers and the poor Knights of Windsor, the
Surplus the King had formerly granted to Sir Henry de Vic, and it was quietly
possessed by him till he died, out of which he was to defray the Charges and Fees
of Admission of foreign Princes and Noblemen who were elected into that Order:
For this also, the Bishop of Salisbury had the Kings Hand, which Grant had been
firm and irrevocable, had the Bishop Sealed it with the Seal of the Order, which
he kept in his possession, or causd it to pass the usual Offices, which had
been easy for him to have done then, being in much favor at Court. But he
made use of neither of these Corroborations, and afterward smarted for it
sufficiently. In the last Year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, and the
first of the precipitous decay of the Bishop of Salisburys Intellectuals, some
sagacious Courtier found out a Flaw in this Grant; whereupon the Bishop was
sent for up to London, and obliged to refund the uttermost penny, which in so
many Years amounted to a considerable Sum, all which his Majesty took, without
any scruple or remorse.

CHAP. XV. Concerning my Self.
YOU may remember, at the beginning of the last Chapter, I threatened to treat
at large, of two or three of the Bishops second rate Friends; and here, as the
Saying is, I will make bold to Christen mine own Child first, for Charity
begins at home, and take this opportunity to put in my claim to that glorious
Title. I say therefore, and proclaim it to the World, that I was his hearty,
intimate, and unfeigned Friend; I doubt not but that this proud Assertion will
provoke some testy old-fashion Filosofer, to take me up severely, that such an
inconsiderable Fellow as I, should presume to style my self a Friend to so
great a Prelate, since it is evident out of Aristotle, that Amicitia est inter
pares, Where there is no Equality there can be no Friendship. But, I pray you
Sir, have a little patience, and hear how I defend my self against Ipse dixit,
I will make use of the Shield of Horace, who lived in a greater Court, and may
be presumd to understand good Manners as well as Aristotle, and I make no
doubt, but that he had as much Wit too. This I rather believe, because he did
not think fit to trouble the World with entelecheias, entities and quiddities,
and such other abstruse unintelligible Metafysical Notions. I say, this Horace
uses the word Friend reciprocally betwixt Mecenas and himself; Quod te sortitus
Amicum. i. e. That you are my Friend. And in another place, Iubesque esse in
Amicorum numero. That is, You have orderd me to be registerd amongst your
Friends. Nay, he goes yet farther, and boldly averrs, that he deservd to be so,
and that, whoever doubted of it, must esteem Mecenas a Fool, and not able to
choose a worthy Friend, when he took so much care and caution about it.
Presertim cautus dignos assumere. That is, You do not choose your Friends
hastily and hand over head. But I shall not bear pace with Horace so far, I
only assert, that there was not a greater inequality betwixt the Bishop of
Salisbury and Me, than betwixt Mecenas and Horace. Our Poet was meanly
descended, and Poor, Mecenas had the Etrurian Kings Blood in his Veins, and was
immensly Rich, and, what is yet greater, chief Favorite to Augustus, the most
happy and glorious of all the Roman Emperors, and Governor of Rome, the Queen
of Cities, and at that time, the greatest and richest Town in the known World.
Having thus made the way plain, I hope I may say without contradiction, that I
was the Bishop of Salisburys Friend, and he was mine. But some may yet object,
how will you make this appear? Have a little patience, and read on. I did him
all the Services in my power, I sufferd Cold with him upon Salisbury Plains,
and Heat in his Chamber where there was always a great Fire, tho he did not use
to sit by it; I made it my business to delight him, and divert his Melancholy,
nay I may truly say, I profited him too. I presented him with an excellent Pad
Nag, in whom he took much delight, not permitting any one to ride him besides
himself, and valued him so highly, that he refusd fifty five Guineas, which Mr.
Baptist May, Privy Purse to King Charles the Second profferd for him; but this
Nag afterward unfortunately died, by a tread upon one of his hinder Heels,
notwithstanding the joint endeavors of the best Farriers to cure him: But I
forget my self, I am writing the History of Horses. This Nag was given me by my
honored Friend Charles Lord Clifford, whose kindness I can never enouf
acknowledge, and whose death I can never sufficiently lament. I presented him
also with some curious Books which I had collected in my Travels, and I taught
him French and Italian, and went through several Treatises with him in those
Languages. I read to him frequently, till my Eyes, by a vehement Inflammation,
were useless to me, and renderd me less serviceable to him, for above a Years
time. This Malady was perfectly curd, by Gods blessing upon Dr. Turberviles
application, as I have gratefully acknowledged in the eighteenth and nineteenth
Stanzas of the First Part of the Salisbury Canto. I hope therefore, twill not
be thought that the Bishops kindness to me was wholly undeservd, for Amor, ut
Pila, vices exigit. That is, Love, like a Ball or a Shuttle-cock, must be
returned, and held up on both sides. I acknowledge he was very kind and obliging
to me, but yet I would not have the Reader run away with an opinion, that he
heapd mountains of Gold upon me; I had, I acknowledge, my Diet and Lodging with
him as long and as often as I pleased; and when we Traveld together, or to speak
with more respect, when I accompanied him or attended him in any Journey, he
defrayd my Charges, as one of his Retinue. Besides this, I never received of
him, directly or indirectly, in Money, or Moneys-worth, to the value of Ten
Pounds; and after his death, my Name was not so much as mentioned in the Will,
and it cannot be imagind that I expect any Reward for writing his Life now, so
many Years after he has been bereavd of it; though I confess he did, more than
once, proffer me Money when I was Sick in London. To what I said before, that
his Favors were not wholly undeservd, I will take the boldness to add here,
neither were they wholly cast away, for they fell into good Ground, and have
produced a Gratitude in me, which lives, and increases still, though he is dead.
It Is not every one that will continue his Devotions and Thanks-Offerings, when
the Altar is turned to Dust, and the Saint removd. He did as great and greater
Favors to many others, which puts me in mind of that Saying in the Gospel,
Nonne December facti sunt mundi? Sed ubi sunt novem? That is, Were there not Ten
cleansed? but what is become of Nine of them? not any returning Thanks besides
this one. There are yet two other good Friends of the Bishops, and mine also,
who must not be passd over in silence; Persons of that Eminency for Learning,
Piety, and Virtue, that I never thought my self worthy to unloose their
Sh^o-latchets, though they did not make that figure in the World, as those great
ones mentiond in the last Chapter. These were Mr. Laurence Rooke, Professor of
Geometry in Gresham-College, and Dr. Isaac Barrow, of whom we shall treat in
order, in the ensuing Chapters, only begging leave for a small digression
between, concerning. Dr. Turbervile,

CHAP. XVI. Of Doctor Turbervile.
HAving casually mentiond Dr. Turbervile in the precedent Chapter, I should
esteem my self unpardonable, as guilty of the greatest Ingratitude, to dismiss
him in so few words; him, to whom, under God, I owe my Sight, a blessing, in my
opinion, equal, if not preferable, to Life it self, without it* It was he, who
twice rescued me from Blindness, which without his aid, had been unavoidable,
when both my Eyes were so bad, that with the best I could not perceive a Letter
in a Book, nor my Hand with the other, and grew worse and worse every day.
Therefore, tho I might treat of him as a Friend to the Bishop, I chose rather
to introduce him as mine, because I was more intimately acquainted with him,
and as it appears, by what has been said before, infinitely obliged to him.

Dr. Turbervile was born at Wayford, in Somersetshire, Anno. Dom 1612, of an
ancient Equestrian Family, there being in the Church of Beer only, the Tombs of
no less than fifteen Knights of that Name, as I am credibly informd, for I
confess I have not seen them. By his Mothers side he was Nobly extracted from
the Family of the Da^bignies, which has afforded this Kingdom many Peers; this
Name did his Mothers Father, who was also his Godfather, give him when he was
Baptized. Upon his going to the University, his Mother advisd him to make the
Diseases of the Eyes his principal study, assuring him, he would find it turn
to a good account. He was admitted in Oriel College in Oxford, and there took
the Degree of Dr. of Fysic* When the Civil Wars broke out, he left the
University, and bore Arms in defense of the King, Church, and the Established
Laws; he was in Exeter when it was besiegd, and till it was surrendered to the
Parliament Forces. Whilst he was shut up therein, he and his Comrade run in
Debt a hundred pounds each, in Chalk behind the Door; he told me, that his
Landlord came into their Chamber, leading his Daughter by the hand, and
courteously profferd to Cancel the Debts of either of them who should Marry
her: The Dr. valiantly resisted this Temptation, and chose rather to pay his
Debts in ready Money, which he did shortly after; the other accepted the Terms,
and had his Wifes Portion presently paid him; viz. His Scores wiped out with a
wet Dishclout.

By the Articles, the Garrison might return to their Dwellings, and live there
unmolested; he accordingly went to Wayford, and Married his only Wife, by whom
he had no Children, and who died a few Months before him. At his own House, and
at Cr^okhorn, the next a^jacent Market Town, he practisd some time, but finding
those Places not capable to entertain the multitude that resorted to him, he
removd to London, with an intent to reside there; but the Air of that City not
agreeing with his Constitution, he left it, and fixd his abode in Salisbury,
whence he made several Journeys to London, either upon his own occasion, or
called thither by some Persons of Quality, wanting his Advice. Once he was sent
for by the Duchess of York, to Cure the Princess of Denmark, then a Child,
laboring under a dangerous Inflammation in her Eyes, and a breaking out in her
Face, the Cure of which had been attempted in vain by the Court Fysicians.
These despisd Dr. Turbervile, looking on him as a Country Quack, and demanded
what Method he would use, and to see, approve, or reject his Medicaments,
before he applyd them, which he refusd, telling her Royal Highness, that if she
pleased to commit her Daughter to his sole management, he would use his utmost
endeavor to Cure her, but he would have nothing to do with the Fysicians. He
told me, he expected to learn something of those Court Doctors, but, to his
amazement, he found them only Spies upon his Practice, and wholly ignorant as
to the Ladys Case; nay farther, that he knew several Midwives and Old Women,
whose Advice he would rather follow than theirs. The Duchess yielded, the
Surgeons and Fysicians were dismissd, and he alone entrusted with the Lady,
whom, to his great reputation and some profit, in few months, fewer than could
be expected, he perfectly cured of both those Distempers. I said some profit,
for tho the Duke orderd him six hundred pound, he could never receive more than
half of it; which, considering the Quality of the Patient, the Expense of the
Doctors Journey to and from London, and for Lodging, and Diet there, his long
attendance at Court, and neglecting other Patients, cannot be esteemd a
competent Gratuity.

Many Years after he was called up again, by one of the greatest and ancientest
Peers of this Kingdom, to whom, after having attentively inspected his Eye, he
spoke after this manner; My Lord, I might bear you in hand, a Western Frase,
signifying to delay or keep in expectation, and feed you with promises, or at
least hopes, that I should Cure you in some competent time, and so cause your
Lordship to be at great expense to no purpose; I cannot Cure you, and I believe
no Man in England can. The Earl answered, Such and such will undertake it for a
hundred pound. To which the Dr. replied, I have so great an Honor for your
Lordship, and so much wish your Welfare, that I will joyfully give a hundred
Guineas out of my own Purse, to the Person who shall restore your Sight in that
Eye. I confess I am not able to Cure it, but I can reduce it to a better
figure. Thus they parted; this Nobleman is living, and in a very Eminent
Station at my writing this, but has not recoverd that Eye, nor is in any hopes
of it, being long since convincd it is incurable.

Dr. Turbervile was no boaster, nor would he promise to Cure any Distemper; but
when Patients came, he would first look into their Eyes, then tell them their
Diseases, and his opinion concerning them; to some he would say, you're
Incurable, and would not meddle with them; to others, that he had often Cured
such a Malady, and sometimes faild of it, but if they would make use of him, he
would do his best.

He generally prescribd to all, shaving their Heads and taking Tobacco, which
he had often known to do much good, and never any harm to the Eyes. He did not
rely upon two or three Waters or Powders, as most do, for he throughy
understood all the Simples and Ingredients, conducing to the Cure of Eyes,
compounding Medicaments out of them, with the manner and season of applying
them. He has often said to me, during my long being under his hand, after
inspecting my Eyes, I know what to give you now, but cannot tell what I shall
to morrow; this Water would make others blind, but your Eyes will bear it.
Hence it follows, that it is at best, but by Chance, if such Maladies are cured
at a distance, I mean, when the diseased are so far removd from the Artist,
that he cannot visit them often, and observe the Operation of his Medicaments.

I have said before, that the Doctor was Loyal, I will add, he was also a Pious
Man* and a good Christian, that he constantly frequented the Public Prayers,
and Sermons, and often receivd the Holy Sacrament with exemplary Piety and
Devotion.

Add to this; He was far from being Covetous; he Curd the Poor Gratis, and
receivd from others what they pleased to give him; never, that I knew, making
any Bargain for so much in hand, and the rest when the Cure is perfected, as
some do. I could not force any thing upon him, for his Medicines and
extraordinary Care, unless it were a Cane, a Tobacco-Box, or some new Book, tho
I was indebted to him for all the Comforts of my Life.

He has curd several who were born blind, but I do not look upon that as so
great a thing; for the cure of such, if curable, for there are several sorts of
Cataracts uncurable, consists wholly in this; viz. In knowing when the connate
Cataract is fit to be Couchd, in having a steady Hand, and skill to perform
that Operation, to be able to prevent, or at least, remove the pains which
usually follow, and sometimes kill the Patient: But to reduce fallen and
inverted Eyelids to their proper place and Tone, to cure inveterate Ulcers,
and Inflammations of a blackish color, requires a consummate Artist. Hic
Labor, hoc opus est.

To proceed; his Fame brought multitudes to him, from all parts of this and the
neighboring Kingdoms, and even from America, whereof take this Instance: I met
casually a Friend upon the Exchange, who told me, as he was walking upon
Tower-Wharf that morning, he saw a young Woman coming out of a Boat, who as
soon as she had set foot on Land, kneeld down and said these words, which he
being near overheard. Oh Lord God, I pray thee, that I may find Dr. Turbervile
living, and not make this long Voyage in vain. To whom he replied, Madam, be of
good comfort, he is alive, and in good health, I have receivd a Letter from him
very lately. Your News, she answered, is more acceptable to me than if you had
given me a thousand pounds. What follows I had from the Doctors own mouth: She
went to Salisbury, and by Gods blessing on the Doctors endeavors, was
perfectly cured; but her Joy did not last long, for in her return to Iamaica,
of which Island her Husband was one of the principal Inhabitants, she died of
the Smallpox in London.

This Concourse forementioned, was very beneficial to the Inns and private
Houses in Salisbury, being dispersd through all the quarters of the City,
insomuch, that one could scarce peep out of doors, but he had a prospect of
some led by Boys, or Women, others with Bandages over one, or both Eyes, and
yet a greater number wearing green Silk upon their Faces, which if a Stranger
should see, without knowing the reason of that Fenomenon, I should not wonder,
if he believd and reported the Air of Salisbury to be as pernicious to the Eyes
as that of Orleans is to the Nerves, where almost one third of the Inhabitants
are Lame. The Rendevouz of these Hoodwinkt People was at the Doctors House,
whither I frequently resorted, either to be dressd my self, or see others: I
saw many remarkable Passages, whereof I shall relate but two.

The first is of a Countryman, whose Eye was Blood-shot, who spoke thus to the
Doctor: I am a little troubled with a sore Eye, which I am come to thee to
mend. Which Eye is it, said the Doctor? This, he replied, pointing to it. The
Doctor answered, That is your best Eye. I see as well with that, replied the
Country Fellow, as thee do, or any Man in England. Whereupon the Doctor claps
his Hand before that Eye he complaind of, and askd, What see you now? At which
he cried out, I see nothing, I am blind; tho to all the rest who were there,
that seemed a good Eye.

The other is of such another Person who came to the Doctor upon the like
account; his Eye was Protuberant and could not be containd within the Lids, and
seemd like a piece of raw Flesh; the Doctor placd him in a Chair, and with a
pair of Scissors cut large Gobbets, the blood trickling down his Cheeks in
abundance, and yet he seemd no more concernd, than if it had been a Barber
cutting his Hair: I was surprizd at his behavior, and said to one of the
bystanders, Without doubt, this is a Married Man, otherwise 'twere impossible
he should be so patient: Which he over-hearing, in the midst of his Torment,
burst out into a loud laughter, and replied, No indeed, I am but a Bachelor.

To conclude this long Chapter, Dr. Turbervile died at Salisbury the 21 st. of
April, in the Year of our Lord* 1696, and of his Age the 85 th. and left a
considerable Estate in Money, betwixt a Neice of his Wifes, and his Sister Mrs.
Mary Turbervile, who now practices in London with good Reputation and Success:
She has all her Brothers Receipts, and having seen his Practice during many
Years, knows how to use them. For my part, I have so good an opinion of her
Skill, that should I again be afflicted with sore Eyes, which God forbid, I
would rely upon her Advice, rather than upon any Pretenders or Professors in
London, or elsewhere. He is Buried in the Cathedral Church in Salisbury.

ADIEU my dear Friend, a rivederci, till we meet and see one another again,
with Eyes which will never stand in need of a COLLYRIUM.

His EPITAF.
M. S.

NEar this Place, lies Interrd the most Expert, and Successful Oculist that
ever was, perhaps that ever will be, Doctor Dawbigny Turbervile, Descended from
two Families of those Names, than which, there are few more Ancient and Noble.
During the Civil Wars, he bore Arms for the King. After the Surrender of
Exeter, he livd at Wayford, and Crookhorn; but those Towns not affording*
Convenience to his numerous Patients, he removd to London, intending to settle
there, but not having his health, he left it, and livd in Salisbury more than
Thirty Years, doing Good to all, and being belovd by all. His great Fame causd
multitudes to flock to him, not only from all parts of this Kingdom, but also
from Scotland, Ireland, France, and America. He died April 21st. 1696, in the
85th. Year of his Age. And left his Estate betwixt his only Sister and Neice,
at whose Expenses this Monument was Erected.

Doctor WALTER POPE wrote this Epitaf, to perpetuate his Gratitude, and the
Memory of his Friend and Benefactor.

CHAP. XVII. Of Mr. ROOKE.
MR. Laurence Rooke was born in Kent, of a good Family, and educated in
Cambridge, and when Dr. Ward was transplanted to Oxford, he came thither, and
seated himself in Wadham-College, for the benefit of his Conversation, bringing
with him two young Gentlemen of the Family of Oxenborogh, to whom he was Tutor.
He was very eminent in the famous Filosofical Meeting, which was after turned
into the Royal Society. After the Kings Return, he left Oxford, and repaird to
London, with his Friend Dr. Ward, and was chosen, first Professor of Astronomy,
and afterward of Geometry, in Gresham-College. He was also one of the first
Members of the Royal Society. He was of a melancholy Temper and Aspect, his
Complexion swarthy, his Eyes sunk in his Head more than ordinary, his Voice
hoarse and inward, a sign that his Lungs were not sound; he was also much
subject to the Scurvy, for which he usd frequently to take the Juice of
Scurvygrass pressd out of the Leaves without any other Preparation. He was
profoundly skilld in all sorts of Learning, not excepting Botanics and Music,
and the abstrusest Points of Divinity. He was my intimate Friend, and in my
judgment, the greatest Man in England for solid Learning, Semper excipio
Platonem, Tranne Rinaldo, for Dr. Barrow had not then reachd his Zenith. I
durst venture my Life upon the Truth of any Proposition he asserted, either in
Mathematics, Natural Filosofy, or History; for I never knew him affirm any
thing positively, that was dubious. I have said to him, Mr. Rooke, I have found
out the reason of such a Fenomenon* and given him my Arguments for it, which
when he had heard, he has often replied in this manner; And why may it not as
well be thus, bringing his reasons for another Hypothesis. Lord, said I then to
him, now you confound me, pray tell me what is your Opinion? To which his usual
Answer was, I have no Opinion. He was very modest and sparing of his words,
unless amongst intimate Friends, and never talkd idly; I may truly say, I never
was acquainted with any Person, who knew more, and spoke less. I usd in all
Company to magnify and extol his Learning and Ingenuity, as it deservd;
insomuch, that an eminent Citizens Wife desird me to help her to a sight of
this prodigy of Perfection, and to bring him upon a day appointed, to Dine with
her Husband, who was an ingenious Person, and well known to us both. I prevaild
with him to go, though not without some reluctance. Thither we went, and found
there several Strangers, whom Madam had invited, like the Widow in the Gospel,
with a Come, come Neighbors, and for the Man that is so Famous. Amongst the
Guests there were some who valued their selves for their Wit and Learning, more
than they ought; these toward the latter end of the Dinner, began to show
their Parts, and fell upon several Arguments, talking ignorantly, dogmatically,
and ridiculously, which Mr. Rooke heard, I cant say with patience, but without
interposing one word. After Dinner, the Mistress of the House came insultingly
to me, saying, I Will never take your word more for an Ingenious Man; you saw,
how he let my Friends assert what they pleased, and was not able to hold up the
Cudgels against them; nay he did not speak one Quibble, or make one brisk
Repartee all Dinner time; is this your magnifyd Wit? Madam, I replied, there is
a time for all things; I assure you he can discourse as well as those City Wits
your friends, but I cannot tell you the reason of his silence. Afterward I
askd him why he let those Fools run on at such a rate, when it had been easy
for him, with one word, to have convincd them of their ignorance, and put them
to silence. I remember he gave me this Answer. It Is true, they were a company
of positive, ignorant, and self-conceited Fools; if I had interposd, it was a
thousand to one, I should not have made them wiser, and as much odds, that I
should have made them mine Enemies. I will make bold with my Self, and here
relate a Passage, which equally shows my Folly, and his Wisdom and Sagacity.

When I was a young Student at Oxford, I had an old cast Soldier for my
Bed-maker, amongst other questions, I askd him where he had servd; he answered,
both in Flanders and France: Then you speak French, I replied: Yes, Master,
said he, and very well: What, said I, is French for such and such a thing? To
which when he had answered, Will, said I, you shall be my Master, and teach me
French: With his help, and some silly Books, I soon thought I had attaind to
the mastery of the French Language; and not long after I went to London,
carrying this opinion of my self with me. Being arrived there, I wishd with
great impatience, for Sunday: Sunday came, I repaird early to the French Church
in Thread-Needle-street: I was very attentive, and staid there a considerable
time, but, to my great mortification, I understood not one word the Minister
spoke. I was amazd, and considerd how this could be; at last it came into my
remembrance, that I had heard, the French and Dutch did once a Month
interchange Churches, which was true, and that it was my misfortune to come
upon that Day. This satisfied me, and kept alive my good opinion of my skill in
French, which this accident had almost destroyed. Upon this I went to Mr. Rooke,
and declard to him my Adventure; Mr. Rooke, said I to him, you know I
understand French very well: I know, said he, that you say so: I Will tell you, I
replied, a strange Accident that befell me: I went to the French Church, and tho
I was very attentive for a good while, I came away as ignorant as I enterd the
Church, not understanding so much as one word. But at last I found out the
reason of it, and contented my self, considering that it might be the turn of
the Dutch to Preach there that Sunday, for you know they once a Month change
Churches. It Is true, said he, it might be so, but answer me one Question; Did
the Minister Preach with his Hat on or off? I replied, His Head was covered:
Then, said he, 'twas a French Sermon; and now I hope you are convincd how well
you understand that Language. This just reproof abated my Pride, and made me
entertain a meaner opinion of my Accomplishments, and went a great way toward
my Cure, which was afterward completed by an Accident which befell me in
France, and I think I have had no return of that Disease since. Which Story,
though it makes little to my Credit, take as follows.

In making the Grand Tour of France, we lodgd at a Village near La Rochelle,
whose Name I have forgot; the Travelers were so many, that we were forced to
Sup in a Barn, upon several Tables and Forms, there being no room in the Inn
capable of so great a Company. The Supper and Wine was good, and I had taken a
cheerful Cup, tho not to excess, yet sufficient to cause me to do that, which
otherwise I should not have done. The Scholars of Oxford, and I amongst the
rest, had a foolish Frolic when they were in their Merriment, to twirle round
the Hats of those who sat near them, and call them Cuckolds. This did I, not
considering where, or in what Company I was, to a French Gentleman who sat
over against me: upon which he immediately leaps from his Seat, runs to me, and
kisses me on both Cheeks, adding these words; Sir, I am more obliged to you
than to any Person in the World. And why, Sir? replied I. Because, said he, you
have picked me out for so good a naturd Man, that would not take this action of
yours for an Affront. I replied, with much shame, Sir, you have Cured me, I
humbly thank you for it; had I met with a Person of less discretion, who could
not distinguish betwixt an ignorant Strangers Frolic, and a designd Affront, it
might have endangered my Life, whereas I shall now only lose an ill Custom,
which is better lost than retaind.

But to return to Dr. Rooke: He had with great Study, and many Observations,
almost completed the Theory of the Satellites of Jupiter; I say almost, for he
told me, he wanted but one Observation more, upon such a Night, which happened
when he was sick in Bed, and very near his death. He desired me to go to the
Society, who were then sitting, and present his Service to them, and acquaint
them, that if he had been in Health, to have made an Observation that ensuing
Night, he should have completed the Theory of the Satellites of Jupiter, but
since now it was impossible for him to do it, he desired some others might be
employed; but nothing came of it, and his Papers, which he left to the Bishop
of Exeter, for ought I know, have since perished. Dr. Scarboroughs House was, as
I have declared before in the Third Chapter, the Rendezvous of most of the
learned Men about London, especially of those of the Royal Party, in the Year
1649, but how long before I cannot exactly pronounce, but I guess it must be
about three Years, that is from the Surrender of Oxford, after the King had
made his escape thence in disguise, and retird to the Scotch Army, who then, in
conjunction with the English, besieged Newark, Anno Dom. 1646. At which time,
Dr. Scarborough left Oxford, and began to practice in London; amongst those who
frequented his House, was Mr. Hobbs, then newly arrived from France, where he
had obtained a great reputation for his Book De Cive, which is a good Book in
the main, and much better than his Leviathan; for in the first, there is Verbum
Sapienti, enouf said, to let the intelligent Reader know what he would be at;
but in his Leviathan he spreads his Butter so thin, that the courseness of his
Bread is plainly perceived under it. This Mr. Hobbs, I say, was just come from
Paris, in order to Print his Leviathan at London, to curry favor with the
Government. He had a good conceit of himself, and was impatient of
Contradiction: As he was Older than any of that Convention, he also thought
himself Wiser; if any one objected against his Dictates, he would leave the
Company in a passion, saying, his business was to Teach, not Dispute. He had
entertaind an aversion to Dr. Ward, for having written something against him,
as we have mentioned in the Fourth Chapter; and before he would enter into the
Assembly, he would enquire if Dr. Ward was there, and if he came not in, or if
Dr. Ward came thither while he was there, Mr. Hobbs would immediately leave the
Company. So that Dr. Ward, tho he much desird it, never had any conversation
with Mr. Hobbs. About this time Mr. Hobbs published a little Treatise
concerning Mathematics, wherein, amongst other things, he pretends to give the
Square of a Circle; which when Mr. Rooke read and considerd, he found it false,
and went to Mr. Hobbs to acquaint him with it, but he had no patience to hear
him; therefore when he went next to visit Mr. Hobbs, he carried with him a
Confutation of his Quadrature, and left it behind him at his departure. Mr.
Hobbs finds and reads it, and by want of attention, casts it up wrong, for it
was accurately Calculated, and truly written, and thence insultingly concludes,
since that Learned Persons Confutation was false, his own Quadrature must of
necessity be true. A Year or two before Mr. Rookes death, the Marquis of
Dorchester, who professd so great knowledge in almost all sorts of Learning,
being a Doctor of Fysic, admitted into the College and practicing, a
Counselor at Common Law, and at Doctors-Commons, etc. was pleased to make
choice of Mr. Rooke for his Companion, and Fellow Laborer in Filosofy and
Mathematics; the Marquis lived then at his House at Highgate, from whence every
Wednesday, he used to bring Mr. Rooke in his Coach to the Royal Society, then
sitting at Gresham-College. The last time Mr. Rooke came from thence, he walkd
it, and that so fast, in the heat of Summer, that he sweat, and caught Cold
upon it, and finding himself much indisposd, lodgd at his Chamber in the
College that Night. Next morning I went to visit him, and perceived his
Countenance much altered, more than is usual in sick Persons, in so short a
time; he was not very hot, nor was his Pulse high, his Fever being Internal
and very Malignant. All the best Fysicians in London, for they were all his
Friends, and Acquaintance came to see him, and went away presently, shaking
their Heads, and despairing of his recovery; but yet that they might seem to do
something, they ordered him to Bleed, to be Blisterd, to have Plasters applied
to his Wrists, and the soles of his Feet: when the Surgeon came, he appointed
him to open such a Vein, for under that there lies no Artery; this he did to
prevent an Aneurism. He made a Nuncupatory Will, leaving what he had to his old
Friend Dr. Ward, then newly nominated to the Bishopric of Exeter; the Bishop
Buried him decently, at St. Martins Outwich, near Gresham-College, and his
Corpse was attended to the Grave by most of the Fellows of the Royal Society who
were then in Town, lamenting theirs, and the Learned Worlds loss. In his Will
he ordered that his Executor might receive what was due to him by Bond, if they
who were bound did proffer the payment willingly; but I would not, said he,
have him Sue the Bonds; for as I never was in Law, or had any Contention with
any Man in my life, neither would I be after my death. In the Memory of his
deceased Friend, Bishop Ward gave to the Royal Society a large Pendulum Clock,
made by Fromantel, and then esteemed a great Rarity, and set it up in the Room
of their Meeting, upon which were engravd these words:

Societati Regali ad Scientiam Naturalem promovendam institutae, dono dedit.
Reverendus in Christo Pater Sethus Episcopus Exon, ejusdem Societatis Sodalis,
in memoriam Laurentii Rooke viri in omni literarum genere instructissimi,
Collegii Greshamensis primum Astronomiae deinde Geometriae Professoris
dictaeque Societatis nuper sodalis, Qui obiit Junii 26. Anno Dom. 1662. That is,

Seth Bishop of Exeter, gave this to the Royal Society to be set up in the
place of their Meeting, in Memory of Mr. Lawrence Rooke, a Person thoroughly
skilld in all sorts of good Literature; first, Astronomy, afterward Geometry
Professor in Gresham-College, who died the 26. of June, in the Year of our
Lord, 1662. What I have more to say of him, shall be delivered in the ensuing
Chapter.

CHAP. XVIII. A Continuation of the precedent Chapter.
THey who are desirous to know more of Mr. Rooke, may, if they please, have
recourse to what Dr. Barrow says of him in his Auguration Speech, when he
succeeded him in the Professor of Geometrys place in Gresham-College. This
Oration is printed in the fourth Volume of Dr. Barrows Works; and what concerns
Mr. Rooke, begins in the Ninety third Page, toward the bottom of it. There
they will find a great, and yet a just and true Character of him, as all those
who knew him must acknowledge, and that managed with much Art, and written with
great Eloquence; but what is most remarkable, he begins with an admirable turn
of Wit, making use of a Topic to gain Credence with his Auditory, which seems
adapted to work the contrary Effect. Before he enters upon his Panegyric, he
francly confesses that he did not know Mr. Rooke; now one would think, this
should strike a damp upon the Auditors, and cause them to reason thus: If this
Orator knew not the Person whom he undertakes to praise, what reason have we to
believe what he says of him? certainly we have none at all. Which Objection he
thus anticipates: Even for that, says he, you ought to give greater Credit to
my Words; for had he been my Acquaintance, near Relation, or intimate Friend, I
might have been bribd by my Love to him, and suspected to have looked on him
with Magnifying Glasses, and have both perceivd and represented his Virtues
greater than they were; but now I am free from any such suspicion, speaking of
him only by Hearsay, or Report; but what Report? The constant, universal, and
uncontradicted Suffrage of all Learned and Wise Men: But it sounds better in
his own Words. Antecessorum, ut tempore postremus, ita nulli postponendus, vir
infelici ne dissimulem mihi, non nisi de longinquo and famae tantum beneficio
cognitas, famae tamen haud vulgaris aut dubiae, sed optimorum complurium and
prestantissimorum virorum consona autoritate subnixae quo paratiorem mea verba,
non ab effectu privato dictata sed veritatis vi expressa, non Amicitiae juri
debita sed virtutis reverentiae data, sibi fidem deposcant. Quid enim qui
virtutum suarum segniter animos irritanti fama, non admodum credulae
facilitatis homines admiratione perculit, corripuitque amore, qui sibi necdum
visos penitasque ignotos studio devinxit sui, and desiderio inflammavit, qualem
quantumque esse virum oportuit? Tui certe similem, Divine Laurenti, ut potein
quo, cum omnigena Scientia rerum, incorrupta Probitas morum, cum intelligentia
magis quam virili, plus quam virgi pudor, cum sagacissima prudentia,
candidissima simplicitas, cum profunda soliditate judicii perspicax Acumen
ingenii, cum vivida alacritate mentis, invicta laboris patientia, cum illibata
denique severitate vitae suae, suavissima conversandi tenitas, raro quodom, and
vix credibili temperamento conspirarint. Non unius, is scilicet aut alterius
Scientiae tenui rore aspersus, sed omnium fuit denso imbre perfusus, nec
extimam duntaxat cutem rerum perstrinxit notitiae, sed abstrusissima viscera
pervasit, etc. That is,

He was the last of my Predecessors in Time, but in nothing else behind the
best of them: I must not dissemble my infelicity, in not knowing him but at a
distance, and by report of others; but what report? Not a dubious and uncertain
Rumor, spread abroad by a few, unlearned, and inconsiderable Persons, but by a
constant and uncontradicted Fame, grounded upon the agreeing Suffrages of all
the wisest and best Men; my Words therefore are more worthy of belief, as not
proceeding from Affection to him, but from the force of Truth, not due to
Friendship, but offered to the reverence of Virtue: For what manner of Man ought
he to be? Who could affect Persons not credulous, or of an easy Impression,
with an admiration of him, and inflame those with Love to him whom he had never
seen, and who were perfectly unknown to him? It must only be, such a one as
you, Divine Laurence, in whom an incorrupt probity of Manners, was joynd with
an universal knowledge of things, a more than Virgin Modesty, with a more than
Virile Understanding, a most Candid Simplicity, with a most Sagacious Prudence,
a Perspicatious sharpness of Wit, with a profound Solidity of Judgment, an
invincible Patience of Labor, with a vivid Cheerfulness of Mind, and lastly,
with a severe unblamable Life, a most sweet manner of Conversation; all these
conspird in thee, by a rare, and almost incredible Temperament. He was not
lightly sprinkled with the thin Dew of one or two Sciences, but thoroughly
moistened with plenteous Showers of all; He did not content himself with a
superficial skin-deep Knowledge of things, but penetrated into their Bowels,
and most abstruse Recesses, etc.

Before the Bishop of Exeter resolvd to give a Pendulum Clock to the Royal
Society, to preserve Mr. Rookes Memory, he designed to have put up an
Inscription over or near the place of his Interrment; for that end, Dr.
Bathurst, now Dean of Wells, composd an ingenious Epitaf, very worthy to be
here inserted, this was communicated to me by my worthy Friend Abraham Hill
Esquire, so often before mentioned, it is as follows. M. S.
Hic subtus sive dormit, sive meditatur,
Qui jamdudum animo metitus est,
Quicquid, aut vita, aut mors habet.
V. C. Laurentius Rooke, e Cantio oriundus
In Collegio Greshamensi
Astronomiae primum, dein Geometriae Professor,
Utriusque Ornamentum and Spes maxima;
Quem altissima Indoles, Artesque omnifariae,
Mores pellucidi, and ad amussim probi,
Consuetudo facilis, and accommoda,
Bonis, Doctisque omnibus, fecerunt commendatissimum.
Vir totus teres, and sui plenus,
Cui virtus, and pietas, and summa ratio,
Desideria motusque omnes sub pedibus dabant,
Ne se penitus saeculo subducere mortuus possit,
Qui iniquissima Modestia vixerat,
Sethus Ward Episcopus Exon.
Longas, suavesque Amicitias,
Hoc Saxo prosecutus est.
Obiit Iunii 27. Anno Dom. MDCLXII*
AEtatis suae XL.


In English thus. To the Pious Memory
Of that Excellent Person, Laurence Rooke,
Who either sleeps, or meditates under this Stone,
Who was born in Kent, and successively
Enjoyd the Professors Place of
Astronomy, and Geometry,
In Gresham-College,
Of both those Sciences being Ornament
and greatest Hope.
In his Lifetime, he had measurd
and comprehended
What ever is in Life or Death.
He was highly esteemd by all good and
Learned Men,
For the admirable Temper of his Mind,
Universal Erudition, sweet and transparent
Manners,
Exact and consummate Virtue, easy and
profitable Conversation,
Being full of Knowledge, but not puffed up.
By his Piety, Virtue, and exalted Reason,
He had subdued, and trod under his Feet,
All Worldly Desires, and Fears.
But lest he, whom a most unjust Modesty
Obscurd so much in his Life,
Should be unknown to all after his Death,
Seth Ward, Bishop of Exeter,
In return for their long and most sweet
Friendship,
Has endeavored to perpetuate his Memory
by this Monument.
He died June the 27. in the Year of our
Lord, 1662. in the Fourtieth
Year of his Age.


Doctor Barrow did not only succeed Mr. Rooke in his Place at Gresham-College,
but also in his intimate Friendship with Bishop Ward; and as such, I shall
treat of him in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. XIX. Of Doctor Barrow.
IT is not my design to write Dr. Barrows Life, and if it were, I am not
furnished with sufficient Materials for that undertaking. It is already done,
tho with too much brevity, by a better hand, dedicated to the Reverend Dr.
Tillotson, then Dean, and afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, by my worthy,
learned, and ingenious Friend, Abraham Hill, Esquire out of whose Account I shall
take what I before was ignorant of, concerning his Birth and Education, before
he arrivd to be so Eminent at Cambridge, adding thereunto, several particular
Accidents which happened during my intimate acquaintance with him, and
sometimes going out of the way for a season, to make the Narration more
delightful. I may possibly insert some particulars, which will seem trivial,
tho in my opinion, the less considerable Words, and Actions, and Circumstances
of great Men, amongst whom, he has a just title to be inrolld, are worthy to be
transmitted to Posterity.

Mr. Hill fixes Dr. Barrows Birth in the Month of October, A. D. 1630. But I
hope he will not be offended if I dissent from him, both as to the Year and
Month, and produce Reason for so doing; it is this: I have often heard Dr. Barrow
say, that he was born upon the Twenty-ninth of February; and if he said true,
it could not be either in October, or in 1630, that not being a Leap-Year. I
would not have asserted this, merely upon the credit of my Memory, had it been
any other Day of any other Month, it being told me so long since, had I not
this remarkable Circumstance to confirm it: He used to say, it is in one
respect, the best Day in the Year to be born upon, for it afforded me this
advantage over my Fellow Collegiates, who used to keep Feasts upon their
Birthday; I was treated by them once every Year, and I entertaind them once in
four Years, when February had nine and twenty Days.

Dr. Barrow was born in London, and well descended; his Great Grandfather was
Fillip Barrow, who published a Method of Fysic, whose Brother Isaac was a
Doctor of Fysic, and a Benefactor to Trinity College in Cambridge, as also a
Tutor therein to Robert Cecill Earl of Salisbury, and Lord-Treasurer of
England. His Grandfather was Isaac Barrow Esquire, of Spiney-Abbey in
Cambridge-shire, a Person of a good Estate, and a Justice of Peace during the
space of forty Years. His Fathers Name was Thomas, a reputable Citizen of
London, and Linnen-Draper to King Charles the First, to whose Interests he
adherd, following him first to Oxford, and after his Execrable Murder, he went
to his Son Charles the Second, then in Exile, there with great patience
expecting the Kings Restoration, which at last happened, when it was almost
despaird of. I remember Mr. Abraham Cowley, who also was beyond Sea with the
King, told me, at our first coming into France, we expected every Post would
bring us News of our being recalld; but having been frustrated for so many
Years, we could not believe it when the happy News arrivd. This Thomas had a
Brother whose Name was Isaac, afterward Bishop of St. Asaf, whose Consecration
Sermon, his Nevew and Namesake our Dr. Barrow, preachd at Westminster-Abbey.
His Mother was Ann, Daughter of William Buggins Esquire of North-Cray in Kent. This
Genealogy, tho short, has quite tird my patience, it so little concerns him,
for it is certainly the least of his Praises, if it be any at all. To be Nobly
or Royally extracted, is the gift of blind Fortune; A Principibus nasci
fortuitum est. This may happen to an ill and ignorant Person, but to be
eminently Learned and Pious, cannot be obtaind, without indefatigable Industry,
and a sincere love and constant practice of Virtue. He was first put to the
Charterhouse School, where he made little or no progress, there appearing in
him an inclination rather to be a Soldier than a Scholar, his chief delight
being in Fighting himself, and encouraging his Play-fellows to it; and he was
indeed of an undaunted Courage, as we shall make evident in its place. His
Father finding no good was to be hopd for there, removd him to Felstead in
Essex, where contrary to his expectation, and even beyond his hopes, his Son on
a sudden, became so great a proficient in Learning, and all other praiseworthy
Qualifications, that his Master appointed him Tutor to the Lord Viscount
Fairfax, of Emely in Ireland, who was then his Scholar. During his stay at
Felstead, he was admitted into Peter-House, of which College his Uncle the
Bishop had formerly been a Member. When he was fit for the University he went
to Cambridge, and was admitted in Trinity in Febr. A. D. 1645. He was there
kindly treated by Dr. Hill, whom the Parliament had put in to that Mastership,
in the place of Dr. Comber, ejected for adhering to the King. This Dr. Hill, I
say, one day laying his Hand upon young Isaacs Head, Thou art a good Lad, said
he, it is pity thou art a Cavalier; and afterward, when he had made an Oration
upon the Gunpowder Treason, wherein he had so celebrated the former Times, as
to reflect much on the present. Some of the Fellows movd for his Expulsion, but
the Master silencd them with these word, Barrow is a better Man than any of us.
This is very remarkable, and an evident Testimony of our young Scholars
irresistible Merits, which could, as the Poets feign of Orfeus, -- Lenire
Tigres rapidesque Leones; that is, Tame Savage Tigers and fierce Lions, make a
Presbyterian kind to a Cavalier, and Malignant, which Names the adherers to the
King, Church, and Laws went under in those days. Anno Domini 1649. He was
chosen Fellow of the College, carrying it merely by the dint of his Merits,
having no Friend to commend him, as being of a contrary Persuasion to those who
then carried all things in that University. This brings to my Memory, a
Certificate or Testimonial, which my worthy Friend Dr. Gilbert Ironside, then
Warden of Wadham-College in Oxford, and now Bishop of Hereford, gave to a
Member of that College, who was Candidate for a Fellowship in another College,
it was to this purpose. If this Person, whom I recommend to you, be not a
better Scholar than any of those who are his Competitors, choose him not; and
he did upon Examination and Trial so far surpass the rest, that they could not
refuse him, without being, and appearing Partial, and unjust. I mention this as
a Parallel to Dr. Barrows Case.

When Doctor Duport resignd his Greek Lecture, he recommended his Pupil Mr.
Barrow for his Successor, who justified his opinion of his fitness for that
Employment, by an excellent performance of the Probation Exercise; but the
governing Party thinking him inclind to Arminianism, put him by it. This
disappointment, the melancholy aspect of Public Affairs, together with a desire
to see some of those places mentioned in Greek and Latin Writers, made him
resolve to Travel; which, that he might be better enabled to do, he converted
his Books into ready Money. He began his Travels, Anno Dom. 1654, and went
first to Paris, to crave his Fathers Benediction, who was then in the English
Court praying for, but scarce hoping, much less expecting the Kings
Restoration, to whom, his pious Son, out of his small Stock, made a seasonable
Present. After some Months stay there, he went to Italy, and remained some time
at that most beautiful City of Florence, where he had the favor, and neglected
it not, to peruse many Books in the Grand Dukes Library, and ten thousand
curious Medals, and to discourse concerning them with Mr. Fitton, who found his
ability so great in that sort of Learning, that upon his recommendation, the
Grand Duke invited Dr. Barrow to take upon him the Charge and Custody of that
great Treasure of Antiquity. From Florence he went to Leghorne, Anno Dom. where
he was much Caressd by the English Merchants residing there: Thence he saild to
Smyrna, where he met with the like kindness and entertainment from Consul
Breton, and the rest of that Factory: As he did also afterward at
Constantinople, from Sir Thomas Bendish the English Ambassador at the Ottoman
Court, Sir Jonathan Dawes, and the rest of the English Merchants, from whom he
received many Favors, and with whom he ever after continued an intimate
Friendship. At Constantinople the Sea of St. Chrysostom, he read all the Works
of that Father, whom he much preferrd before the rest. He remained in Turkey
more than a Year, and then returned to Venice, where he was no sooner Landed,
but the Ship which brought him took Fire, and was, with all its Cargo, consumd
to Ashes, the Men only savd. From Venice, in his way to England* he passd by
through Germany and Holland, and has left a Description of some parts of those
Countries in his Poems.

Anno Dom. 1660, He was chosen without a Competitor, Professor of the Greek
Tongue in Cambridge; two Years after, he was elected Professor of Geometry at
Gresham-College, in the place of Mr. Laurence Rooke, concerning whom, we have
discoursd at large in the two preceding Chapters.

Anno Dom. 1669, Mr. Lucas Founded, and richly endowd a Mathematical Lecture in
Cambridge, which his Executors, Mr. Raworth and Mr. Buck, conferrd upon Dr.
Barrow, enjoining him to leave every Year Ten Lectures in Writing to the
University, the better to secure the End of so Noble and Useful a Foundation.
The Lectures which are printed, and others of his, ready for the Press, will
give the best Account how he behavd himself in that Employment. Almost all I
have hitherto said, is, I acknowledge, taken out of Mr. Hills Account of Dr.
Barrows Life; but now I am got within mine own knowledge, and can proceed
securely without his Clue, or the help of any other Guide. I promise, I will
advance nothing, but what I have good Authority for, but what I have either
known my self to be true, or heard from Dr. Barrows mouth.

I am not unmindful of my promise, to make it appear in its due place, that Dr.
Barrow was endued with an undaunted Courage; to prove which, I think these two
instances following will be sufficient. In his passage from Leghorn to
Constantinople, the Ship he saild in was attackd by an Algerine Pyrate; during
the Fight, he betook himself to his Arms, staid upon the Deck, cheerfully and
vigorously fighting, till the Pyrate perceiving the stout defense the Ship
made, steerd off and left her. I askd him, why he did not go down into the
Hold, and leave the defense of the Ship to those to whom it did belong: He
replied, It concernd no Man more than my self; I would rather have lost my
Life, than have fallen into the hands of these merciless Infidels. This
Engagement, and his own slout and intrepid behavior in it, to defend his
Liberty, which he valued more than his Life, as he asserts in that Verse,
Almaque libertas vitali charior Aura, he describes at large, in a Copy of
Verses in the Fourth Volume of his Works, Printed by Brabazon Aylmer. To this I
will add another Accident, which befell him in England, it being of the like
nature: He was at a Gentleman's House in the Country, if I mistake not in
Cambridge-shire, where the Necessary House was at the end of a long Garden, and
consequently at a great distance from the Room where he lodgd, as he was going
to it very early, even before Day, for, as I shall show hereafter, he was
sparing of sleep, and an early riser, a fierce Mastiff, who used to be chaind
up all Day, and let loose late at Night for the security of the House,
perceiving a strange Person in the Garden at that unseasonable time, set upon
him with great fury. The Dr catchd him by the Throat, threw him, and lay upon
him, and whilst he kept him down, considered what he should do in that Exigent;
once he had a mind to kill him, but he quite alterd this resolution, judging it
would be an unjust Action, for the Dog did his duty, and he himself was in
fault for rambling out of his Lodgings before it was light. At length he called
out so loud, that he was heard by some of the House, who came presently out,
and freed both the Doctor and the Dog, from the eminent danger they were both
in.

Anno Dom. 1672, Upon the death of Bishop Wilkins, Dr. Pearson, Master of
Trinity College in Cambridge, was promoted to the Bishopric of Chester, and the
vacant Mastership was, by the King, conferrd upon Dr. Barrow. I will leave him
possessed of that Post, and look a little backward, and declare some Accidents of
his Life, which happened before he had arrivd to that eminent Dignity; but
because this Chapter is long enouf already, for the Readers sake and mine own,
I will here make a Halt, reserving what remains, to the following Chapters.

CHAP. XX. The same Matter continued.
AS soon as Dr. Ward was made Bishop of Exeter, he procured for his old Friend
Dr. Wilkins, the Rectory of St. Laurence-Iewry, who was then destitute of any
Place, the reason whereof I have given before: He being Minister there, and
forcd by some Indisposition to keep his Chamber, desird Dr. Barrow to give him
a Sermon the next Sunday, which he readily consented to do. Accordingly, at the
time appointed, he came, with an Aspect pale and meagre, and unpromising,
slovenly and carelessly dressed, his Collar unbuttond, his Hair uncombd, etc.
Thus accoutred, he mounts the Pulpit, begins his Prayer, which, whether he did
Read or not, I cannot positively assert, or deny: Immediately all the
Congregation was in an uproar, as if the Church were falling, and they
scampering to save their Lives, each shifting for himself with great
precipitation; there was such a noise of Pattens of Serving-Maids, and ordinary
Women, and of unlocking of Pewes, and cracking of Seats, causd by the younger
sort hastily climbing over them, that I confess, I thought all the Congregation
were mad: But the good Doctor seeming not to take notice of this disturbance,
proceeds, names his Text, and preachd his Sermon, to two or three gathered, or
rather left together, of which number, as it fortunately happened, Mr. Baxter,
that Eminent Nonconformist was one, who afterward gave Dr. Wilkins a Visit,
and commended the Sermon to that degree, that he said, he never heard a better
Discourse: There was also amongst those who staid out the Sermon, a certain
young Man, who thus accosted Dr. Barrow as he came down from the Pulpit; Sir,
be not dismayed, for I assure you, it was a good Sermon. By his Age and dress, he
seemed to be an Apprentice, or at the best, a Foreman of a Shop, but we never
heard more of him. I askd the Doctor, what he thought, when he saw the
Congregation running away from him? I thought, said he, they did not like me,
or my Sermon, and I have no reason to be angry with them for that. But what was
your opinion, said I, of the Apprentice? I take him, replied he to be a very
Civil Person, and if I could m^^^ with him I Would present him with a bottle of
Wine. There were then in that Parish a company of formal, grave, and wealthy
Citizens, who having been many Years under famous Ministers, as Dr. Wilkins,
Bishop Ward, Bishop Reynolds, Mr. Vines, etc. had a great opinion of their
skill in Divinity, and their ability to judge of the goodness and badness of
Sermons: Many of these came in a body to Dr. Wilkins, to expostulate with him,
why he sufferd such an Ignorant, Scandalous Fellow, meaning Dr. Barrow, to have
the use of his Pulpit. I cannot precisely tell, whether it was the same day, or
sometime after in that Week, but I am certain it happened to be when Mr. Baxter
was with Dr. Wilkins. They came, as I said before, in full Cry, saying, they
wonderd he should permit such a Man to Preach before them, who looked like a
starvd Cavalier who had been long Sequesterd, and out of his Living for
Delinquency, and came up to London to beg, now the King was restord; and much
more to this purpose. He let them run their selves out of breath, when they had
done speaking, and expected an humble submissive Answer, he replied to them in
this manner: The Person you thus despise, I assure you, is a Pious Man, an
Eminent Scholar, and an Excellent Preacher: For the truth of the last, I appeal
to Mr. Baxter here present, who heard the Sermon, you so vilify: I am sure you
believe Mr. Baxter is a competent Judge, and will pronounce according to Truth;
then turning to him, Pray Sir, said he, do me the favor to declare your
Opinion concerning the Sermon now in Controversy, which you heard at our
Church the last Sunday. Then did Mr. Baxter very heartily give the Sermon the
praise it deservd, nay more, he said, That Dr. Barrow Preachd so well, that he
could willingly have been his Auditor all day long When they heard Mr. Baxter
give him this high Encomium, they were pricked in their hearts, and all of them
became ashamd, confounded, and speechless; for, tho they had a good opinion of
their selves, yet they durst not pretend to be equal to Mr. Baxter; but at
length, after some pause, they all, one after another, confessd, they did not
hear one word of the Sermon, but were carried to mislike it, by his unpromising
Garb, and Mien, the Reading of his Prayer, and the going away of the
Congregation; for they would not by any means have it thought, if they had
heard the Sermon, they should not have concurrd with the Judgment of Mr.
Baxter. After their shame was a little over, they earnestly desird Dr. Wilkins
to procure Dr. Barrow to Preach again, engaging their selves to make him
amends, by bringing to his Sermon their Wives and Children, Man-servants, and
Maidservants, in a word, their whole Familes, and to enjoin them not to leave
the Church till the Blessing was pronouncd. Dr. Wilkins promised them to use
his utmost endeavor for their satisfaction, and accordingly solicited Dr.
Barrow to appear once more upon that Stage, but all in vain, for he would not
by any persuasions be prevaild upon to comply with the Request of such
conceited, hypocritical Coxcombs. Some time after, the Bishop of Salisbury, I
mean Dr. Ward, invited Dr. Barrow to live with him, not as a Chaplain, but
rather as a Friend and Companion, yet he did frequently do the duty if the
domestic Chaplain was absent. Whilst he was there, the Arch-deaconry of
North-Wiltshire became void, by the death of Dr. Childerey, if I mistake not;
this the Bishop profferd Dr Barrow; but he modestly and absolutely refused it,
and told me the reason, which it is not necessary I should declare. Not long
after a Prebendary died, whose Corpse, I mean Revenue, lay in Dorsetshire, this
also the Bishop offered him, and he gratefully accepted it, and was Installd
accordingly. I remember about that time, I heard him once say, I wish I had
five hundred pounds. I replied, That's a great Sum for a Filosofer to desire,
what would you do with so much? I would, said he, give it my Sister for a
Portion, that would procure her a good Husband: Which Sum, in few Months after
he received, for putting a Life into the Corpse of his new Prebend; after which
he resignd it to Mr. Corker, a Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge. All the
while he continued with the Bishop of Salisbury I was his Bedfellow, and a
witness of his indefatigable Study; at that time he applied himself wholly to
Divinity, having given a divorce to Mathematics, and Poetry, and the rest of
the Belles lettres, wherein he was profoundly versd, making it his chief, if
not only business, to write in defense of the Church of England, and compose
Sermons, whereof he had great store, and, I need not say, very good.

We were once going from Salisbury to London, he in the Coach with the Bishop,
and I on Horseback; as he was entering the Coach, I perceivd his Pockets
strutting out near half a Foot, and said to him, What have you got in your
Pockets? He replied, Sermons. Sermons, said I, give them me, my Boy shall carry
them in his Portmanteau, and ease you of that luggage. But, said he, suppose
your Boy should be robbd: That's pleasant, said I, do you think there are
Parsons Padding upon the Road for Sermons? Why, what have you, said he, it may
be five or six Guineas, I hold my Sermons at a greater rate, they cost me much
pain and time. Well then, said I, if you will insure my five or six Guineas
against Lay-Padders, I Will secure your bundle of Sermons against Ecclesiastical
Highway-men. This was agreed, he emptied his Pockets, and filled my Portmanteau
with Divinity, and we had the good fortune to come safe to our Journeys end,
without meeting either sort of the Padders forementioned, and to bring both our
Treasures to London. He was of a healthy Constitution, used no Exercise, or
Fysic, besides smoking Tobacco, in which he was not sparing, saying, it was an
instar omi^um, or panfarm^con: He was unmercifully cruel to a lean Carcass, not
allowing it sufficient Meat or Sleep: during the Winter Months, and some part
of the rest, he rose always before it was light, being never without a
Tinder-Box and other proper Utensils for that purpose; I have frequently known
him, after his first sleep, rise, light, and after burning out his Candle,
return to Bed before Day. I say, I have known him do this; I report it not upon
hearsay, but experience, having been, as I said before, is Bedfellow whilst he
livd with the Bishop of Salisbury. There cannot be a more evident proof of his
indefatigability in Study, immense Comprehension, and accurate Attention to
what he sought after, than what Mr. Hill attests he saw written with his own
Hand, at the end of his Apollonius. April. 14./Man. 10. Intra haec temporis
intervalla peractum hoc opus: That is, In twenty seven or twenty eight days,
this Work was finished: For there may be five, and must be at least four
Sundays, whereon I suppose he was otherways employed, betwixt those days. He was
careless of his Clothes, even to a fault; I remember he once made me a Visit,
and I perceiving his Band sat very auwkardly, and askd him, What makes your
Band sit so? I have, said he, no Buttons upon my Collar. Come, said I, put on
my Nightgown, here is a Tailor at hand, for by chance my Tailor was then with
me who will presently set all things right. With much ado I prevaild with him;
the Buttons were supplied, the Gown made clean, the Hands and Face washed, and
the Clothes and Hat brushd; in a word, at his departure he did not seem the
same Man who came in just before. He had one Fault more, if it deserves that
name, he was generally too long in his Sermons; and now I have spoken as ill of
him as the worst of his Enemies could, if ever he had any: He did not consider,
that Men cannot be attentive to any Discourse of above an hours duration, and
hardly so long, and that therefore even in Plays, which are Discourses made for
Diversion, and more agreeable to Mankind, there are frequnt Pauses and Music
betwixt the Acts, that the Spectators may rise from their Seats and refresh
their weary Bodies and Minds. But he thought he had not said enouf, if he
omitted any thing that belongd to the subject of his Discourse, so that his
Sermons seemd rather complete Treatises, than Orations, designd to be spoke in
an hour; hereof I will give you two or three Instances. He was once requested
by the Bishop of Rochester then, and now Dean of Westminster, to Preach at the
Abbey, and withal desird not to be long, for that Auditory lovd short Sermons,
and were usd to them. He replied, My Lord, I will show you my Sermon; and
pulling it out of his Pocket, puts it into the Bishops hands. The Text was in
the Tenth Chapter of the Proverbs, the latter end of the eighteenth Verse, the
words these; He that utters Slander is a Liar. The Sermon was accordingly
divided into Two Parts, one treated of Slander, the other of Lies. The Dean
desird him to content himself with preaching only the First Part, to which he
consented, not without some reluctance, and in speaking that only, it took up
an hour and an half. This Discourse is since published in two Sermons, as it
was preachd. Another time, upon the same Persons Invitation, he preachd at the
Abbey on a Holiday: Here I must inform the Reader, that it is a Custom for the
Servants of the Church upon all Holidays, Sundays excepted, betwixt the Sermon
and Evening Prayers, to show the Tombs, and Effigies of the Kings and Queens in
Wax, to the meaner sort of People, who then flock thither from all the corners
of the Town, and pay their Twopence to see The Play of the Dead Volks, as I
have heard a Devonshire Clown not improperly call it. These perceiving Dr.
Barrow in the Pulpit after the hour was past, and fearing to lose that time in
hearing, which they thought they could more profitably employ in receiving.
These, I say, became impatient, and causd the Organ to be struck up against
him, and would not give over playing till they had blowd him down. But the
Sermon of the greatest length was that concerning Charity, before the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen at the Spittle; in speaking which, he spent three hours and
an half. Being askd, after he came down from the Pulpit, whether he was not
tird; Yes indeed, said he, I began to be weary with standing so long.

Hence I infer, if Dr. Barrow thought, as other Men do, which without doubt he
did, these Sermons must be of a prodigious length when they came fire-new from
the Forge. For every Man who collects Materials for a Building, lays in more
than he shall have occasion for. Every Statuary provides more Marble than is
necessary to make his Image, much whereof must be cut off with the Chissel,
before any proportion or design of the Workman can appear. Every Carpenter
makes some Chips, and he is the best Workman who makes fewest, in bringing the
Timber to the Figure he designs. It is very easy to make a long Discourse, or
a prolix Letter, but to contract it, to remove the Rubbish, to amputate the
needless Branches, which keep out the Light, and bear no Fruit; in a word, to
leave nothing but what is necessary, or at least convenient, is very difficult.

The first Schetse of a Comedy called the Paradox, which has never seen the
Light, was five times as long as the whole when it was finished; and yet were I
to review it, I make no doubt, of making more Weeds, and make it yet shorter.
In my opinion, the wittiest Paragraf in Monsieur Voitures Letters, which are
all written with a great deal of Spirit, and Humor, is the Apology he makes
for a long Letter, it is to this sense: Pray Sir excuse the length of this, for
I had not sufficient time to write a shorter: Than which, nothing can be better
and more agreeable. The same Rule is good in Books, as well as Letters; a
little time is enouf to write a great Book, as they go now, and a great deal,
not too much, to write a little one as it should be: Tho I am sensible this
Chapter is too long, yet the next will be longer.

CHAP. XXI. A Digression containing some Criticisms.
THIS Chapter is guilty of great Crimes, which it would be no small folly in me
to conceal: First, it is too long, and secondly, which is worse, it is a
Digression upon a Digression. I esteem my self obligd to declare this to the
Reader, at the Threshold, before he enters into the Chapter, to the intent,
that if he pleases, he may pass it over, as a long Parenthesis, and proceed to
the next. But, if notwithstanding this Caution, he will be so hardy, or curious
to read it, and afterward shall not like it, let him blame himself, not me,
for I honestly set up a Beacon to prevent his splitting upon this Rock. I
presume, it will be objected, Since you knew its faults, why did you publish
it? I answer, Not so much to trouble others, as to ease my self, and rid my
hands of it. For I am not now in circumstances to get it Companions, or
Play-fellows, as I once intended, being become impotent by the loss of my
Tools, my Books they being all burnt by that sudden Fire, which broke out with
irresistible violence, after Midnight, in Lombard Street, Nov. 18. A. D. 1693.
Neither can I endure to keep it at home alone, and hear it eternally bawling
for Liberty, like a Cat pent up in a close Room; and besides, I am not without
hopes, there may be found some few, to whom this will not appear so very much
disagreeable. Mr. Hill, to whose account of Dr. Barrows Life I have so frequent
recourse, says, he was addicted to Poetry, and well skilld therein, but that he
never wrote any Satyrs; to which I add, that the greatest part of his Poems
were written in Hexameter and Pentameter Verses, after the manner of Ovid, whom
he had in great esteem, preferring him even before the Divine Virgil: I have
heard him say, that he believed Virgil could not have made the Metamorfosis so
well as Ovid has. Concerning which, there have been often betwixt us several
sharp, but not bitter Disputes; for herein I confess, I differd from him, tho
we were, as to all other things, generally speaking of the same mind, as Horace
says of his Friend Fuscus Aristius, and himself. -- Hac in re, scilicet una,
Mutum dissimiles, ad caetera, pene Gemelli,
Fraternis animis, quicquid negat, alter, and alter,
Annuimus pariter, veteres notique Columbi.


That is, In all things else, we two, the same course steerd,
Like Doves, whom long acquaintance had endeard
Only, in this, we disagreed.


It is next to an impossibility, to write either good Sense, or Latin, in that
sort of Meter, wherein so many hobling Dactyls knock one against another. How
often has Martial Pontice, Pontiliane, creed mihi, and innumerable such
botches, forcd to the use of them by writing thus in Shackles. Well fare
Horace, who amongst all his variety of Verse, never split upon this Rock. It
cannot be denied, but that Ovid had Wit, and a fluent negligent Style, an easy
way of making Verses, which, as he says, dropped from his Pen, when he thought
not of them. Quicquid conabar dicere, Carmen erat. That is, Whatever I
endeavor to speak, falls into a Verse without my designing it. He could make a
hundred Verses, Stans pede in uno, while he stood upon one Foot, but either he
wanted Judgment or Patience to File and Correct them. It is recorded of him,
that his Judgment was good, that he knew his Faults, but he was enamourd of
them, and would not part with them: I have read this Passage, but I cannot tell
where, wanting Books to have recourse to. The Story, as well as I remember it,
is this: Ovid showed a Copy of his Verses to some of his learned Friends,
desiring their impartial Censure of them. Upon perusal they approvd them all,
except one, which they desird him to alter. He replied, he would be ruld by
them, and mend any Verse they should except against, but one, which he had such
a kindness for, that he could by no means part with it; which was this.
Semivirumque Bovem, Semibovemque Virum.
This was the Verse which his Friends had unanimously pitchd upon, to be erasd
or reformd. Add to this, Ovid generally stumbles at the Threshold, which is a
sign of ill Luck, and shuffles like a Jade, before he can get into his right
goings, beginning most of his Books ill. His Metamorfosis begins thus: In nova
fert Animas mutatas dicere formas, Corpora. That is, I intend to discourse of
new Bodies, in changd forms, instead of Bodies changd into new forms. This is
not at all mended, by the Grammarians making it a Figure; if it is a Figure,
it is such a one that a Schoolboy would deserve whipping for imitating. His
Book De Tristibus begins thus: Parve, nec invideo, sine me liber ibis in Urbem,
Hei mihi quod Domino non licet ire tuo.
Here I demand, if he had envied his little Books Voyage to Rome, and sed had
been the second word in the first Verse, in the place of nec, would not the
short Verse been as much, or more to the purpose then, than it is now. Which of
these two Sentences is most agreeable to Reason? Little Book, thou art going to
Rome without me, I envy thee not, yet I account my self the most miserable Man
in the World, because my Circumstances will not permit me to accompany thee. Or
this: Little Book, thou will shortly see Rome, and the Court of Augustus, from
which I am for ever banished; I envy this happiness, and cannot sufficiently
lament my Condition, which makes it impossible for me to bear thee Company.
Ovids Art of Love begins thus: Si quis, in hoc, Artem, populo non novit Amandi
Me legate, and lecto Carmine, doctus erit.
What heinous Crime has Artem committed, that deservd clapping into
Little-Ease, betwixt hoc and populo the Bark and the Tree. Could he have
considerd but half a minute, he might have placed it more conveniently thus: Si
quis in hoc populo est, qui Artem non novit Amandi. Or in lieu of Artem, he
could have contented himself with an equivalent, as Leges, or Methodum, he
might have shunnd that inconvenience, and the Verse would have run thus: Si
quis in hoc populo Leges, Methodum non novit Amandi.
I am also much offended at that frivolous definition, or description of the
fluctus decumanus, or the tenth Wave, in these words: Posterior nono est,
undecimoque prior. That is, That Wave which is after the ninth, and before the
eleventh. Nothing can be more ridiculous, for this Character, mutatis mutandis,
will fit indifferently all the Waves in the Ocean, except the first; for the
second is, after the first, and before the third; the third is, after the
second, and before the fourth and so on for ever. This Problem of Ovid, What
number is betwixt Nine and Eleven, is much easier, than that wherewith young
Arithmeticians usd to be confounded. If a Herring and a half cost three
Halfpence, how many are there for a Penny? I shall mention but two Distichs
more, and then, having made a short visit to the Metamorfosis, conclude this
Digression. The Verses are these: Temporibus medicina juvat, data, tempore
prosunt,
Et data non apto tempore, vina nocent.
Utendum est aetate, cito pede praeterit aetas,
Nec bona tam sequitur, quam bona prima fuit.
Who can endure temporibus signifying aliquando, and the nauseous repetition of
the same word thrice in two Verses. The second long Verse is subject to the
same Objection, but the short one is intolerable; yet methinks I am so well
acquainted with Ovids Humor, that he would not have been prevaild with to
alter it, if he had made it thus: Nec sequitur bona tam, prima fuit bona quam.
Horace will not allow those Verses to be good, whose words being rendered in
Prose, do not sound well: Whoever therefore takes the pains to bring these to
that touch, and compare them with these, or almost any other of Horace, will
find them to differ as much as Chalk and Cheese.

-- Aventem qui rodit Amicum,
Qui non defendit, alio culpante, solutos,
Qui captat risus hominum, famamque dicacis,
Fingere qui non visa potest, commissa tacere,
Qui nequit, hic niger est.
Ovids Metamorfosis has fewer Faults than the rest of his Works, but is not
wholly exempt; I shall at present take notice but of three or four. In his
description of the Chaos, that Hemystich, Sine pondere, habentia pondus, is
improper, and absurd, and to be understood, must be thus filld up: Corpora
habentia pondus, pugnabant cum iis quae erant sine pondere: Or thus; Corpora
quae erant sine pondere pugnabant cum iis quae erant habentia pondus. It Is
evident that every Body, considerd absolutely and by it self, is heavy, that
is, in Ovids Frase, pondus habet; and being compard with another Body that is
more heavy, it is comparatively light, but not sine pondere, that it weighs
nothing. This Sentence then thus sifted, amounts to this: Every body fought
with no Body: Impar congressus, a very unequal Battle.

The next place I shall take notice of, is in the description of the
Conflagration of the Earth, causd by Faetons ill management of the Horses of
the Sun. It Is palpable that therein the Suns Diurnal and Annual Motion are
confounded: For Faeton desird to drive the Chariot but for one day, as it
appears by this Testimony of Ovid himself. Currus petit ille paternos,
Inque diem Alipedum jus and moderamen equorum.
And yet he is told by Febus, who ought to know his Trade better, that he must
pass by all the Signs, and so make the Sun finish his annual Course, and
produce the four Seasons of the Year in twenty four hours, which requires three
hundred sixty five days, and some hours, minutes, and seconds more; and
consequently, taking one day with another, the Sun does not move one degree in
twenty four hours. But some may reply, This is a Fault against Astronomy, not
Poetry. I answer, That does not mend the matter, for a Poet ought to be a
thorow-pacd Scholar, or at least have so much discretion, as not to meddle with
Sciences he understands not. He should have been mindful of that Rule, or
Axiom of Horace: Scribende recte, sapere est, and Principium, and Fons. That
is, No Fool, or ignorant Persons, can Write well. Now I reason thus; Either
Ovid knew this Fault, or not; if he did not, then he is to be blamd for his
Ignorance: If he did, and presumd that his fine descriptions of the terrible
Beasts in the Zodiac would cast a mist before the Readers Eyes, and hinder them
from taking notice of it, then is he guilty of Vanity and Presumption. I shall
not insist upon his description of the Galaxy, or Milky Way, which is in these
words: Est via sublimis, Caelo manifesto sereno,
Lactea nomen habet, splendore notabilis ipso.
It Is evident that Lactea ought to be in the same Cafe with Nomen; but I believe
the Chain of his Thoughts, if he did think, was this, he would have said
Dicitur, or Vocatur, but it would not serve in the Verse: Then it came into his
mind, that nomen habet, and Vocatur were tantamount, and so down it goes,
without minding the Solocism; whereas had he made the Verse thus, he might have
shunnd it. Nomen habens a lacte, and lactis nota color.
I am apt to believe, that Iuvenal usd the same way of Hunting, when he caught
the word Septem and made use of it, when almost any other Number would have
served as well. Tunc Duas una Saevissima Vipera Caena,
Tunc Duas? Septem si Septem forte fuissent*
That is, Cruel Viper, what, eat two at a meal! yes more: How many? Then he
counts upon his Fingers, three, four, five, six, seven, that will do, go Boy
write it in my Book, then down goes Septem, which if he had chanced to have
skipt, he must have run on to a hundred, before he could find one fit for his
purpose, and a hundred Centum would have done as well as seven Septem. So the
same Poet in another place: -- Digitis a morte remotis,
Quatuor aut Septem, si sit latissima Taeda.
That is, verbatim; If it be a very broad Torch, removd from death four or
seven Inches. Not to mention the harshness of the Metafor, a Torch for a Plank,
or the impropriety, of using breadth for thickness. Men in a Ship, cannot be
properly said to be distant from death, or drowning, by the breadth, but by the
thickness of the Planks; and who ever heard of Boards seven Inches thick? But
if they exceed four, the necessity to make them fit to do service in Verse,
requires they must either be seven, or a hundred. Notwithstanding what is here
said, I would not by any means, have it thought that I despise either of these
Poets, nor that I could make better Verses, than even these upon which I
Criticize, this I have done only to divert my self and the Reader, not to
diminish their Reputation. It cannot be denied they were both great Men,
especially Ovid, his Metamorfosis is a Noble Piece, the Language Lofty and
Elegant, it contains many excellent Descriptions, and pathetical Orations, and
the Connection of the Fables is admirable; yet I would not have him equalizd,
much less preferrd to the Divine Virgil. Ovid, I confess, says, that he
intended to have mended his Metamorfosis, but he deferrd it till it was too
late: It should have been done whilst he was in Rome, and Prosperity; had he
done it then, he might have been a formidable Competitor with Virgil for the
Crown of Bays; but when he went into Exile, he left his Wit behind, as appears
by his Book De Tristibus. This was the difference betwixt these two Poets; Ovid
could never begin, and Virgil make an end of Correcting; as appears by his
ordering his Eneads to be burnt: So that it is evident they did not please him,
tho then brought to the perfection wherein we now have them, and they had been
consumd to Ashes, to the irreparable loss of the Learned World, had not
Augustus opportunely interposd his Sovereign Authority, and dispensed with the
Testamental Laws, as appears by those Verses: Quin percat potius legum
vencranda potestas, etc.
Ovid says he burnt his Metamorfosis when he left Rome, but finding he could
not wholly stifle it, there being many Copies thereof in several hands, he was
willing it should live, and have six Verses, which he mentions, prefixd before
it, they are in the First Book De Tristibus; but hear him speak in his own
words: Hos quoque sex Versus, in prima Front Libelli,
Si proponendos esse putabis, habe.


That is, All you who have my Book, if you think fit,
In The Front cause these six Verses to be writ.


The Verses are these. Orba Parente suo, Quicunque volumina Cernis,
His saltem vestra detur in Urbe locus.
Quoque magis faveas, non sunt haec edita ab ipso,
Sed quasi de domino funcre rapta sui.
Quicquid in his igitur vitii, rude carmen habebit,
Emendaturus* si licuisset, eram*


Which may be thus made English If these poor Orfan Books at Rome appear,
Make them a hearty Welcome, and good Cheer.
They much impatience to get loose, expressed,
And would not stay till they were better dressed;
Till I, at least, their greater faults had m^nded,
Which, had I livd, I faithfully intended.


Or these, out of the Third Book, which will serve as well. Sunt quoque
mutatae, ter quinque volumina formae,
Carmina de Domini funere rapta sui.
Illud opus poluit, si non prius ipse perissem,
Certius a summa nomen habere manu.
Nunc incorrectum Populi pervenit in ora,
In Populi quicquam si tamen ore mei est.


In English thus. Stories of Men and Gods, into strange shapes
Transformd, the better to conceal their Rapes;
Which I, at Rome, in fifteen Books compild,
Whilst Fortune, and Augustus on me smild:
Now uncorrect through many hands they move*
If many yet, poor banished Ovid Love.
Both which Copies are indifferent; so much does Adversity depress the Spirits
of those, who stand not upon the sure basis of Virtue.

To conclude this long, but I hope not tedious Chapter: All Ages, and
Countries, even ours, might produce excellent Poets. -- Si non offenderit unum,
Quemque Poetarum, limae labor, and mora.


That is, If every one of them were not terrified, and discouragd, by the
prospect of the great labor which they must undergo, and the length of time,
which must be employed in filing and polishing.

CHAP. XXII. Of Doctor Barrow.
ANno Domini 1672, Doctor Wilkins Bishop of Chester, departed this Life, and
that eminently Learned Divine Doctor Pearson succeeded him, by which Promotion
the Mastership of Trinity-College in Cambridge became vacant; this King Charles
conferrd upon Dr: Barrow; and speaking of it afterward, he said, he had given
it to the best Scholar in England. Dr. Barrow was then the Kings Chaplain in
Ordinary, and much in favor with the Duke of Buckingham, then Chancellor of
the University of Cambridge, as also of Gilbert Lord Archbishop of Canterbury;
both which were ready, if there had been any need, to have given him their
assistance to obtain this Place. When the Patent for the Mastership was brought
him, wherein there was a clause permitting him to Marry, as it had been made
before for some of his Predecessors, he causd the Grant to be alterd, judging
it not agreeable to the Statutes, from which he neither desird, nor would
accept any Dispensation: Nay, he chose rather to be at the expense of double
Fees, and procure a new Patent, without the Marrying Clause, than perpetually
to stand upon his Guard against the Sieges, Batteries, and Importunities, which
he foresaw that honorable and profitable Preferment would expose him to.
Imitatus Castora, qui se Eunuchum ipse facit, etc. in this wisely imitating the
Beaver, who knows for what he is hunted. Thus making Matrimony a forfeiture of
his Preferment it was as effectual a way to secure him from all dangers of that
kind, as Castration it self could have been; for Women in this Age, like Hens,
desire only to Lay where they see Nest-Eggs.

To show his Humility and care of the College Revenue, he remitted to them the
charge of keeping a Coach for his time, which they had done a long while before
for other Masters. This Preferment so well bestowd, gladded the hearts, not
only of the Members of that College, but of the University, and all lovers of
Learning. Upon this, he left the Bishop of Salisbury, and was then so kind to
me, that he earnestly invited me to spend one Winter with him at Cambridge; few
Arguments were sufficient to make me yield my consent. The last time he was in
London, whither he came as it is customary, to the Election of Westminster, he
went to Knightsbridge to give the Bishop of Salisbury a visit, and then made me
engage my word, to come to him at Trinity-College immediately after the
Michaelmas ensuing: I cannot express the rapture of the joy I was in, having,
as I thought, so near a prospect of his charming and instructive Conversation;
I fancied it would be a Heaven upon Earth, for he was immensly rich in
Learning, and very liberal and communicative of it, delighting in nothing more,
than to impart to others, if they desired it, whatever he had attaind by much
time and study: but of a sudden all my hopes vanished, and were melted like Snow
before the Sun. Some few days after he came again to Knightsbridge, and sat
down to Dinner, but I observed he did not eat: Whereupon I askd him, how it was
with him: He answered, that he had a slight Indisposition hanging upon him, with
which he had struggled two or three days, and that he hopd by Fasting and Opium
to get it off, as he had removd another, and more dangerous Sickness, at
Constantinople some Years before. But these Remedies availd him not, his Malady
proud in the event, an inward, malignant, and insuperable Fever, of which he
died, May 4. Anno Dom. 1677, in the 47 th Year of his Age, in mean Lodgings, at
a Sadlers near Charing Cross, an old, low, ill-built House, which he had usd
for several Years: For tho his Condition was much betterd by his obtaining the
Mastership of Trinity-College, yet that had no bad influence upon his Morals,
he still continued the same humble Person, and could not be prevaild upon to
take more reputable Lodgings: I may truly say, Multis ille bonis flebilis
occidit, Nulli flebilior quam mihi. It was a great loss to all good Men, but
greatest to me. He left his Manuscripts, I mean his written Works, to Dr.
Tillotson, and Mr. Abraham Hill, committing it to their discretion to publish
which of them they should think fit. My Lord Keeper sent a Message of
Condolence to his Father, who had then some Place under him, importing, that he
had but too great reason to grieve, for never Father lost so good a Son, and
also that he should mitigate his sorrow upon that consideration. For want of
sufficient instruction, I shall pass over in silence his Government of the
University, when Vice Chancellor, of the College, whilst he was Master, his
public Exercises, his writing numerous and various Letters to procure Money for
the building of the magnificent Library, etc. contenting my self to have set
down some of the particulars which happened during my acquaintance with him,
and now I shall here put a period to this Discourse, which for his, and mine
own sake, I wish had been better performd. He was Buried in Westminster-Abby,
where his Friends erected a Monument for him; the Bust, or half his Body in
white Marble, placed upon a Pedestal of the same matter, whereon this Epitaf,
composd by Doctor Mapletoft, is engravd. ISAACUS BARROW.

S. T. P. Carolo Secundo a Sacris.

Fir prope divinus, and vere magnus, si quid magni habent Pietas, Probitas,
Fides, summa Eruditio, par modestia, Mores Sanctissimi undequaque and
suavissimi, Goemetriae Professor Londini Greshamensis, Graecae linguae, and
Matheseous apud Cantabrigienses suos. Cathedras omnes, Ecclesiam, Gentem
Ornavit. Collegium S. S. Trinitatis Praeses illustravit, Iactis Bibliothecae,
vere Regiae, Fundamentis, auxit Opes, honores, and universum vitae ambitum. Ad
majora natus, non contempsit, sed reliquit saeculo. Deum, quem a teneris
coluit, cum primis imitatus est, Paucissimis egendo, benefaciendo quam
plurimis, Etiam posteris, quibus, vel mortuus concionari non desinit Caetera,
and pene majora, ex scriptis peti possunt.

Abi Lector, and aemulare.

Obiit iv. Die Maii, Anno Dom. MDCLXXVII.

AEtatis suae XLVII.

Monumentum hoc Amici posuere.



In English thus. This Monument was erected by his Friends, To perpetuate the
Memory of

ISAAC BARROW,

Dr. of Divinity, and Chaplain in Ordinary To King Charles the Second.

He was a Godlike, and truly great Man, if Probity, Piety, Learning in the
highest degree, and equal Modesty, most holy and sweet Manners, can confer that
Title. He was Professor of Geometry in Gresham-College, in London, and
afterward of the Greek Tongue, and Mathematics, amongst his Cantabrigians. An
honor to all his Professions, the Church and Nation. He Illustrated
Trinity-College, as Master, and augmented it, by laying the Foundation of a
truly Loyal Library. Riches, Honor, and all things desirable by most other
Men, he did not contemn, but neglect. He imitated God, whom he had servd from
his Youth, in wanting few things, and doing good to all, even to Posterity, to
whom, tho dead, he yet Preaches. The rest, and if it is possible, greater
things than these, may be found in his Writings, Go Reader, and imitate him. He
died the 4 th. of May, in the 47 th. Year of his Age, and of our Lord 1677.



CHAP. XXIII. Of the Bishops Enemies.
THO they who have many Friends, have usually also many Enemies; yet this was
not the Bishops lot, for never any Person in his station was more universally
belovd. Amongst his Enemies, I shall not reckon the Dissenters, for their
Enmity was rather against his Function than his Person; and long before his
Death, as all Prosecution against them ceasd, so did their Animosities also.
The Dean of Salisbury stirrd up a Faction against him, taking the advantage of
a great, and almost total decay of his Reason; with him some of the Prebends
took part, of whom the Bishop deservd a better Treatment; these flock of Hares
had the boldness to insult, and pull by the Beard the dying, or rather dead
Lion. But this Storm was soon laid, and the Bishop vindicated in hs Rights, by
an Arch-Episcopal Visitation, as we shall show hereafter.

After the Bishops death, one Anthony A. Wood of Merton-College in Oxford, took
the liberty in his Athenae Oxonienses, to use him very irreverently, as he had
done many other worthy Persons, whom it is needless for me to particularize.
It Is an easy thing for a melancholy Monkish Scholar, to sit in his Study, to
invent and write Calumnies against whom he pleases; but the best of it is, the
Dirt which he has thrown against the Bishop, is easily washed off, and that
without leaving any stain. But supposing all that he says there against him to
be true, it amounts but to very little, so little, that I should not have
thought it worthy of my taking notice, had I not been desird by some of the
Bishops surviving Friends. The sum of what he objects against him is, in
short, this; That he was a Complyer during the Kings Exile; That he put in, and
put out; That after the Kings return, he boasted of his Loyalty. As to the
first; It Is true, from his coming to Oxford he livd peaceably, as Mr. Wood
himself did, and the rest of the Scholars of the University, but he was far
removd from any base compliance; he never was admitted a Member of the
Presbyterians, Independents, or any separated Congregation; he never frequented
their Meetings, never pretended to be, or desird to be reputed against Monarchy
in the Right Line, or Episcopacy, as it was notorious to all, and as we have
made appear in the former parts of this Book.

The second Accusation is, that he put in and put out: What he means by putting
in, I confess I know not, neither have I ever heard of any Person in that time,
he put in to any Place: As to the other Clause of putting out, I suppose he
means Mr. Greaves and Dr. Potter. To which take this answer: The Bishop of
Salisbury never had but two Places in Oxford, in which he succeeded the Persons
above written: How he obtaind the Savilian Astronomy Professorship, or rather,
how it was forced upon him, we have truly and amply deliverd in the third
Chapter; where it appears, he did not turn out Mr. Greaves, as it is here
maliciously insinuated. As to his being President of Trinity-College, after Mr.
Hawes had resignd, he was chosen by the Suffrages of the Fellows, who had a
legal Authority to Elect, neither can he, by accepting of this Place, be truly
accounted to put Dr. Potter, who was Ejected by the Visitors many Years before,
as we have declard in the seventh Chapter, or so much, as to keep him out; for
he was, as the Times went then, incapable of being Elected, and of enjoying it,
if he had been chosen. As to the last part of his Accusation; His boasting of
his Loyalty to the King and Church, after his Majestys Restoration. Why might
he not glory in a laudable Action, and a Matter of Truth? For, as we have made
it appear in the second Chapter, he was an Actor, and great Sufferer in that
Good Cause.

Mr. Wood had for a long time usd the liberty to revile and speak
disrespectfully of several Eminent Persons, movd thereunto, either by a private
pique, or to please some others, who lookd upon their Promotion with an Evil
Eye; this I say he had done for a long time, with Impunity, but Vengeance, or
Punishment, at last, tho late, overtook him: It cannot be said of him, Distulit
in seram, commissa piacula mortem; that is, He went to his Grave unpunisht; for
he livd to see his Book censurd and burnt, himself expelld the University,
obligd to Recant, and give security not to offend any more in that kind; and
this he underwent for writing too lavishly concerning a Great Man, dead long
since, upon the complaints of some of his Relations; whereof take this
Authentic Proof, as it is Registered in the Chancellors Court at Oxford, and
Printed by Authority, in the Gazette, Numb. 2893, from Monday the 31. of July,
to Thursday August 3. 1693, in these words. Oxford, July 31. 1693.
ON the 29 th. Instant, Anthony A. Wood, was Condemnd in the Chancellors Court
of the University of Oxford, for having Written and Printed in the Second
Volume of his Athenae Oxonienses, diverse infamous Libels against the Right
Honorable Edward, late Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of England, and
Chancellor of the said University, and was therefore banished the said
University, until such time as he shall subscribe such a public Recantation, as
the Judge of the Court shall approve of, and give Security not to offend in the
like nature for the future. And the said Book was therefore also decreed to be
burnt before the public Theater, and on this Day it was burnt accordingly; and
public Programmas of his Expulsion, are already affixd on the three usual
places.



This Punishment was severe enouf, and may warn little ones, not to provoke the
Powerful. But as to what he has written against the Bishop of Salisbury, I
freely forgive him, for this reason; but before I declare it, give me leave to
tell a short Story, which I heard at Rome. There was heretofore in that City a
famous Confessor, who finding that Age and Infirmity had impaird his Memory,
fearing this might render him unfit for his Profession, made use of this
Invention to remedy that defect: He had always in readiness, when any Penitent
repaird to him to Confess a Board, and a piece of Chalk, with which he scord
their Sins, using several Marks, according to their degrees. It happened, that
one confessd he had killed a Man. That Is a great Sin, said the Father, and made a
long Chalk upon the Trencher: After that he confessd he had got a Bastard. Was
it, said the Ghostly Father, very gravely, a Male, or Female? The Penitent
answered, it was a Man-Child. Say you so, replied the Priest; A Man is Killed, and
another got in his stead, set one against the other, then spitting upon his
Fingers, rubs out the Chalk. To apply this, the reason I promised to give for
my Absolving Mr. Wood is this; He had written much good of the Bishop of
Salisbury, and truly, and but a little bad, and that falsely: Set one against
the other, and let it be, as if he had never done either the one, or other. And
here I should dismiss Mr. Wood, and close this Chapter, had I not a just cause
of quarrelling with him upon mine own account, for having endeavored to rob me
of my deserved Praise, and to obscure the most glorious Action of my Life. --
Diripere Ausus
Haerentem Capiti, multa cum laud, Coronam.
In not mentioning that famous Contestation concerning Formalities, which I
have describd at large in the fifth Chapter, or my being Proctor, but out of
Ignorance or Design, either of which is sufficient to ruin the Credit of an
Historian, he has falsified the History; having made the Proctors Bifield and
Conant, serve for the Years 1657, and 1658, which is not only notoriously
untrue, but also, it thrusts my College and my self out of the Fasti, or the
University Chronicles; which is an intolerable grievance to Persons thirsty of
Fame, and ambitious of Honor: But for our comfort, whoever consults the
University Register, or the Convocation Books, will be easily and clearly
convincd of the truth of what I have here asserted.

Hence I conclude, if he may not be credited in a Matter so notoriously known,
and of such importance to his History, we may, with good reason, suspect the
Character he gives of a Person, with whom, I firmly believe, he never had any
Conversation.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Bishops Sickness and Death.
THE Bishop of Salisbury dated his indisposition of Health, from a Fever he had
in London, in the Year 1660, which was not well cured, as we have mentioned
before; he was very ill when he was to be consecrated Bishop of Exeter, and not
without apprehension that he should not survive that Solemnity. It was a cold
rainy morning when I waited on him to Lambeth when he was to be consecrated,
and he had not been out of his Chamber for some Weeks before. He went Sick to
Exeter, and was confind to his Chamber a long while, yet he remitted nothing of
his Study; during that time he made the Notitiae of his Diocese mentioned in
the ninth Chapter. But his often traveling betwixt Exeter and London, conduced
much to the meliorating of his Health, and enabled him to endure his Malady,
tho not wholly to subdue it. I have heard him say, that Colds, to which he was
very subject, never accompanied him the whole Journey, but always left him
before he reachd Salisbury, either in his going to London, or returning to
Exeter. After he was Bishop of Salisbury, he was seizd by a dangerous
scorbutical Atrofy and Looseness, as we have said in the ninth Chapter, which
was cured by riding; it is a very good Recipe, but a dear one, caballum, that is,
Up and ride. After he left off this Exercise, by which he receivd so much good,
he complaind of a pain in his Toe, tho, I believd then, that the Malady was in
his Head, but I found he was displeasd at my telling him so. I went upon this
reason, upon Inspection no Artist could tell, which Toe was faulty; nay, I have
seen the Surgeons handle and squeeze it without causing him to complain. This
Malady cost him many hundred pounds in Spirit of Wine, totus ardens, as the
Chemists call it, in dry and wet Baths, Apothecaries and Surgeons, who took his
Money and laughed at him in their sleeves. I have often wished him a smart fit of
the Gout, having known by the experience of others, that it clears the Head,
and I doubt not, but if he had arrivd to it, it might have prolongd his Life.
They who are usd to this Distemper, so frequent in the Western parts of
England, esteem every new access a renewing the Lease of their Lives. I know a
Gentleman who lived in the Close in Salisbury, who told me, I am not well, nor
ever shall be, till I have a fit of the Gout, and for want of it, he in a
little time died. I have heard some of those Arthritic Persons say, that the
Gout it self is more tolerable than the distraction in their Thoughts, and
hypochondriacal Imaginations, which succeed a Fit, if the Gout does not return
in a convenient time. I have also heard, that the Archbishop of Canterbury, I
mean Shelden, did not only wish for the Gout, but profferd a thousand pound to
any Person who would help him to it; looking upon it as the only remedy for the
distemper in the Head, which he feared, might in time, prove an Apoplexy, as in
fine it did, and killed him. In what I come from saying, by the word Gout, which
is sometimes desirable, I mean the acute Pain, collected and fixd, during the
Fit, in parts remote from the Head, and Heart, as in the Fingers, Hands, Legs,
and Toes.

The Bishop had an ill Memory, even when he was in his best Health, which he
empaird, by committing all things to writing, and so found by experience the
Italian Saying true. Chi Scrive, non ha Memoria.


That is, Writing destroys the Memory. If you would make a Servant good, you
must trust and employ him

He having left off all Exercises, as I said before, his melancholy Distemper,
and decay of Memory gaind upon him sensibly, of which I shall give you a few
Instances. At the Visitation of the Church, of which I shall speak presently,
he askd several times for one of the Commissioners, who sat next to him at
Dinner, which was taken notice of by all the Company. When he took the Air in
his Coach, which he usd to do, almost to the day of his death, he has several
times said to me, Come bear me company once more, for twill be the last time of
my going abroad; and perceiving me to smile, what, said he, do you rejoice to
see me so Ill? No, my Lord, I replied, I should be very sorry, if I had the
same opinion of your Health, as I perceive you have; but I have heard these
words so frequently, and doubt not but I shall again, that they put me not in
fear. When he has been upon the Plains, he has imagind himself so weak, that he
could neither walk, or stand upon his Legs; then I have said, my Lord, you know
not your strength, pray be pleased to light out of the Coach and try; I have
prevaild with him, and he has walkd near half a mile. He usd to be carried from
one part of his Chamber to another in a Chair; I once went down and left him
reading, and at my return, observd several Books had been removd from one Table
to another; whereupon I askd him, whether any body had been there since my
departure: He answered no; but why ask you that question? Then I replied, I
congratulate your Strength, for either you can go, or these Folio's fly, I left
them percht upon that Table, from whence they are removd. But to draw to a
Conclusion. Some unkind usage, which he thought he received from the Court,
which we have related in the thirteenth Chapter, together with the bad prospect
of the public Affairs, all things tending to Popery and Confusion, concurring
with the unjust Faction in his Church, raisd by the Dean, and fomented by some
of the Prebendaries, joynd with his natural Distemper, took away his Memory,
almost entirely; so that for some Years before his death, he was so alterd,
that he seemd only the shadow of himself. I style this Faction Unjust, for it
was judgd so by the Visitors, who condemned the Dean to beg the Bishops pardon,
which I saw him do. These Visitors were, the Right Reverend Fathers in God,
Thomas Lord Bishop of Rochester, my ancient Acquaintance Fellow Collegian, and
ever-honoured Friend; and Dr. Lake, then Lord Bishop of Chichester, empowerd by
a Commission from his Grace Dr. Sandcroft, then Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
to inspect and compose the Differences in that Church, as I have mentioned in
the additions to the Salisbury Canto, Stanza 4. While the Bishop was in this
declining condition, I gave him a visit at Knightsbridge; he being informd I
was below, sent for me, and after saying he was glad to see me, he askd me, How
does your Brother? I replied, whom does your Lordship mean? He answered, Bishop
Wilkins, who had been dead near then fourteen Years. He attempted to speak to
me again, beginning thus; Were not you surprizd to hear, to hear, to hear; but
he could proceed no further, having* in that short time, irrecoverably forgot
what he intended to have spoke. Thenceforward he continued, for it cannot be
properly said he livd, almost void of Reason. I have known, at his return from
taking the Air, in a very hot Summers day, the Nurse used this Argument to
prevail with him to come out of the Coach; My Lord, there is a very good Fire in
your Chamber: He did not then know his House, or his Servants; in a word, he
knew nothing. I had him in my eye, when I made the fifteenth Stanza of the
WISH, which begins thus: To outlive my Senses may it not be my Fate.
He had also strange imaginations of things which never were, and firmly
believd them, One Example whereof, is too much, that one of his Servants had
got so much under him, that he built a whole Street in London, and married a
rich Lady.

Poor Gentleman, the Evil that he most feared, and I may say, even foresaw, fell
upon him. He has often discoursd with me concerning some Persons, whom we both
knew, and who were thus decayed, and became the Properties of those who first
seizd on them, who kept them to their selves, made their Wills, and disposd of
their Estates as they thought fit. If you ever see me in such dangers, said he,
pray give me warning; but his decay was so precipitous, that it was impossible to
relieve him. This sad Story would afford many useful Corollaries, which I leave
to the Reader to find out, and apply.

To conclude, he died January 6. Anno Dom. 168^, knowing nothing of the
Revolution that had happened. He was carried from Knightsbridge to Salisbury,
and buried in the place, which, he and I, had long before concerted, and agreed
on, as I have deliverd in the ninth Chapter. His Nevew Mr. Seth Ward, has
erected a Monument for him, with a Latin Inscription, which I once resolved to
have omitted, for it is long, and erroneous; but upon second considerations, I
thought my self obligd to Copy and Translate it, that there might be nothing
wantin this Account.

CHAP. XXV. The Bishops Epitaf in Latin. H. S. E.
REverendus in Christo Pater, Sethus Ward, Ecclesiae Sarisburiensis Episcopus,
and Nobilissimi Ordinis, a Periscelide dicti, Cancellarius, Ab Ecclesia
Exoniensi (in qua etiam Praecentor primum, deinde Decanus fuerat) in hanc sed^m
translatus, in utraque aeternum colendus.

Buntingfordiae, in Agro Hertfordiensi natus, Cantabrigiae in Collegio
Sidneiensi educatus, ejusdemque (dum per temporum iniquitatem licuit) socius.
In tam privata sortis umbra, tot optimarum Artium, virtutumque dotibus
effulsit, ut frustra latere cupientem, prodiderint, inque lecem simul, and
utilitatem publicam protaxerint.

Quippe ab ista Academia, ad alteram Oxoniens^m evocatus, Astronomiae primum.
Professor Savilianus, Collegii deinde Sacro Sanctae Trinitatis Praeses electus,
ambo, licet dispavis ingenii munia, sapientia administravit and prudentia pari,
Siderum, simul and animarum, Indagator perspicax, and in amborum motibus
regendis, vigilans, peritas, foelix. Praelectionum suarum famam qua claruerit
foris, testatur Bullialdus. Adversus, insaniam and impiam Filosofiam, quid
meruerit domi, abunde sensit, primipilus Hobbius, contra ingruentem Fanaticorum
barbariem quid literis ubique praestiterit, vindicatae agnoscunt Academiae. Hae
res per inquissima tempora, tam praeclare gestae, probatum satis, and been
praeparatum, meliore jam rerum vice, hominum and ingeniorum peritissimo judici
Carolo Secundo, commendarunt, ut secum restaurandis Ecclesiae Anglicanae
ruinis, non Erubescendus opifex allaborarit, ut prudentia, pietate, usu rerum,
and praecipue moderato animo spectabilis, Civium aestus, nondum been sedatos,
componeret, inveterata ulcera leniret, concionator facundus, and potens,
inculpabile gregis Exemplar, mox and Pastorum futurus, siquidem per hos laborum
and meritorum gradus, ad Episcopale culmen provectus Ecclesiae suae
Candelabrum, ipsamque domum Dei, non impari lumine implevit, and illustravit.
In officiis erga omnes, cujus cunque sortis and Ordinis homines exequendis,
aequi and decori observantissimus, cum confratribus, and Dominis suis
Episcopis, inviolata concordia, absque omni, (nisi mutuo benefaciendi)
certamine semper vixit. Apud Clerum suum, tanquam fratres, and filios
dilectissimos, autoritate and reverentia, non metu, aut fastu dignitatam
Praelati illibatam conservavit. Nobiles, and Cives, munificentia, domesticos
liberali tractatione, devinxit. In asserendis Ecclesiae juribus, ut vindex
acerrimus, ita nec deses in suis, Cancellariatum Periscelidis, sedis suoe
antiquum decus, postquam per CL. circiter annos, penes Laicos subsedisset,
secundum vindicias sibi postulavit, and recepit. Palatii Episcopalis, largus,
and Sedulus Instaurator, nec minus erga Templum munificus, sed praecipua, and
palmaria illi fuit Pauperum cura, in hac, neque metas, neque terminos, aut
vivens, aut moriens pietati suae praescripsit. Subsidum sine fine parans.

Buntingfordiae, Caenobium quatuor Viris totidemque feminis copioso, and
honesto, apparatu instructum fundavit. Cantabrigiae, in Collegio Christi, sex
Scholarium numero, aequo jure, and Privilegio cum caeteris gaudentium,
pristinam fundationem adauxit.

In hac Urbe, Collegium December Presbyterorum viduis, Apostolico ritu instituit,
primitiva munificentia donavit. Haec omnia agentem, and peragentem, Senectus
primum deinde mors, utraque pariter tranquilla, pariter matura, praemunitum,
and praeparatum, occuparunt.

Anno AEtatis suae LXXII. Anno Translationis XXII. Anno AErae Christianae
MDCLXXXIII.
I, Lector, and plures illi similes operarios, huic Vineae apprecare.

CHAP. XXVI. The Epitaf in English.
THis good Bishop deservd a better Epitaf, this is heavy, long, and tedious,
but being sifted, and garbled, it may be thus rendered into English, viz. Here
lies the Reverend Father in God, Seth Ward, Bishop of Salisbury, and Chancellor
of the most Noble Order of the Garter. He had been successively, Chanter, Dean,
and Bishop of Exeter, from whence he was translated unto this Diocese*

He was Born at Buntingford in Hertfordshire, Educated at Cambridge, and Fellow
of Sidney College, till thence ejected, for refusing the Covenant. Afterward
he removd to Oxford, whence he was, first Savilian Professor of Astronomy, and
afterward President of Trinity College. In the execution of both those Places,
he gave ample testimony of his Learning and Prudence, and gaind great
Reputation. During his abode at Oxford, he wrote against Bullialdus, and Mr.
Hobbs, as also a Vindication of the Universities, in reply to one Webster of
Cletherow, who had writ a Pamflet to prove them useless. The Fame of his
Learning, his Eloquent and powerful Preaching, his experience, and ability for
Business, causd King Charles the Second to take notice of him, and make him a
Bishop, and to use his assistance in repairing the ruins of the Church, to
which he was an Ornament and Support. With his Brethren the Bishops, he had no
other Contention, but striving which of them should do most good. With the
Clergy of his Diocese, he livd as a prudent and affectionate Father amongst his
Children, and with his Paternal Authority, not by his Pride and Haughtiness,
conservd the Episcopal Dignity inviolable. He drew to himself the love of all,
by his Liberality, Hospitality, affable, humble, cheerful, and obliging
Conversation.

He was at vast Expense in rebuilding his Palace, in repairing and beautifying
the Cathedral.

He was a zealous and successful Assertor of the Rights of the Church, as
appears by his recovering the Chancellorship of the Garter, and getting it
annexed to the Bishops of Salisbury for ever, after it had been in Lay hands
about a hundred and fifty Years.

His greatest care was for the Poor, whom he not only liberally fed in his
Life, but provided for also after his Death.

At Christ's College in Cambridge, he Instituted six Scholarships, enjoying the
same Privileges with those of the old Foundation.

At Buntingford he built an Hospital for four poor Men, and as many Women, and
endowd it with a competent Maintenance.

In this City he erected the College of Matrons, and generously endowd it with
a comfortable subsistence for Ten Widows of Orthodox Clergymen. Old Age and
Death seizd on him, thus doing, and found him forewarnd, and prepared: He died
in the Seventy second Year of his Age, the Twenty second of his Translation,
and in the Year of our Lord, 1688.

Go, Reader, pray that more such Laborers may be sent into the Vineyard.



CHAP. XXVII. The Conclusion.
IF you tell an Italian, such a one is vastly Rich, his usual reply is, Dam mi
lo morto: that is, It will appear at his death whether he be or not. Ovid, not
without reason, enlarges the time, in these words: -- Dicique beatus,
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.
That is, No Man ought to be accounted happy, before he is dead and buried. So
Petrarch, Il Giorno, la sera, la vita, loda il Fine.
That is, Call not the day fair, wherein it rains before Sunset; Nor that life
happy, which does not end well.

I should have accounted this Bishop of Salisbury invidiously happy, had his
Exit been answerable to his glorious Acting upon the Stage of the World: Had he
either died sooner, or lived longer, I mean, had he died before that great, I
may say, Total decay of his Senses and Reason befell him, or livd with them
entire, Integra cum mente, to have born his share, and added one more to the
number of those Faithful Bishops, whose Imprisonment, Trial, and Deliverance,
ought never to be forgotten, had he livd to have seen those Clouds blown over,
the Church and Civil Rights of England restord and securd. Iamque Opus exegi --
Although I do not pretend to what follows: -- quod nec Iovis Ira, nec Ignis,
Nec poterit ferrum, nec Edax abolere vetustas.
Yet, I believe, this Book will be longer livd than the Author, and that I
shall be consumd by Worms, before the Moths shall have devoured it. I have, I
say, finished the Task I imposd upon my Self, as to the Performance, the Readers
will be Judges, according to their Capacities and Inclinations; but if they
pronounce Sentence against me, I have this to hold up my Spirits, that I am
certain, No Man could have written this Life better, or so well, without my
assistance.

Now one word to thee, my little Book, if the Fanatics rise up in Arms and
assault thee; Tu ne cede malis, sed contra Audentior ito.
That is, Let not thy noble Courage be cast down. Fight it out to the last drop
of Blood, never yield, never beg Quarter, for they will give thee none, for
having spoken well of a Bishop. Let this be thy comfort, the more they rail
against thee, the more despitefully they use thee; thou shall be so much the
more in my favor, and I shall think it a sufficient reason to believe, that
there is something good in thee, whereat they are so much offended.

And now I have no more to say of the Bishop of Salisbury, and only this
concerning my Self. I thank God for prolonging my days, till I have given the
World this public Testimony of my Gratitude; and here, without begging the
Reader to be Courteous, or making Apologies for my Style, for my long frequent,
and, as they will be thought by some, impertinent Digressions, I shall conclude
with those Verses of Imperiale. -- Meglio Amo,
Al mondo tutto Dicitor mal saggio,
E scarso d' Art, e d' alto Still mendico,
Che, a te solo parer, non grato Amico.


Which may be thus Translated, I had rather the whole World should say of me,
My Style is flat and trivial, there is no Wit,
Nor one grain of good Sense in all I have writ,
Then seem ungrateful, blessed Saint, to thee.
Liberavi Animam meam Domine nunc dimittis.


I have disingaged my Soul, I have paid my Debt to my deceased Friend, I am, I
thank God, arrivd to a good Old Age, without Gout or Stone, with my External
Senses, but little decayed, and my Intellectuals, tho none of the best, yet as
good as ever they were. Lord, now dismiss thy Servant in Peace, according to
thy Word.

FINIS.
Books Printed for W. Keblewhite, at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard.
FIght Chirurgical Treatises on these following Heads: 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of
Ulcers. 3. Of Diseases of the Anus. 4. Of the King's Evil. 5. Of Wounds. 6. Of
Gunshot Wounds. 7. Of Fractures and Luxations. 8. Of the Lues Venerea. By
Richard Wiseman, Serjeant-Chirurgeon to King Charles the Second. The Third
Edition. Folio. The Condemnation of Mons. Du Pin's History of Ecclesiastical
Authors, by the Archbishop of Paris: Also his own Retractation, from the
French. Quarto. A Letter of Advice to a Friend, upon the Modern Argument of the
Lawfulness of Simple Fornication, half Adultery, and Poligamy, Quarto An
Enquiry into the Nature, Necessity, and Evidence of Christian Faith, in several
Essays. Part I. Of Faith in General, and of the belief of a Deity. Part II. Of
Faith, with respect to Divine Providence. By John Cockburn, D. D. Octavo.
Nomenclator Classicus sire Dictionariolum Trilingue. By I. Ray, Fellow of the
Royal Society. For the use of Schools. Octavo. A Discourse concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. By the Right Reverend Dr. William
King, Lord Bishop of Londonderry. Octavo. -- his Admonition to the Dissenters
of his Diocese. Octavo. Mr. Clutterbuck's Vindication of the Liturgy of the
Church of England; explaining the Terms, Order, and Usefulness of it. Octavo.
Fifteen Sermons, preached upon several Occasions, and on various Subjects, by
John Cockburn, D. D. Octavo.

