THE LIFE OF Mr. John Hieron.

WITH THE Characters and Memorials Of Ten other Worthy Ministers OF JESUS
CHRIST.

Written by Mr. Robert Porter, late Minister of the Gospel in Nottinghamshire.

Published by D. BURGESS.

Exempla movent. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns in (...) near Mercers-Chappel. MDCXCI.

To the READER.
IN compliance with the desire of Reverend Mr. John Barret of Nottinghamshire,
I send abroad this Treatise and prefix* my Thoughts (quales, quales) thereof.

I conceive it well worthy of its very Eminent* A^thor, Mr. Robert Porter; who
also now sleeps in Christ. The Matter, Language and Method are* worthy of him.
Who has herein, like himself, joined brevity with sweetness; given the Memoirs
of many worthy Men in a narrow room: And laudably performed the Historians part
in Relations, and the Divines* part in Reflections.

To me it seems no small Duty, (as I hope* fa^ther to express in due time,)
to publish the Lives and Praises of Holy Men. It is the Will of Him, whose Will
ought to be ours, that the Memory of the Just should be blessed: And the praise
of such, is more Gods praise then theirs. As for themselves, Saints need no
Monuments* And no one* of them desires a richer Encomium than Lazarus had; The
poor man dyed, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. But the
Church and World do need their Memorials: For exemplifie^ Sanctity, is the most
Noble, Beautiful and Persuasive. The Holiness that is in Gods Children, is of
(...) more excellent kind, than that which is in his Holy Bibl^ It is a livi^^
image of God; and that which is the transcendent End, of which the Scripture it
self is but a Means.

Such Narratives as this, do shame and wipe away the Calumnies which Ignorant
Men drivel, and Malicious ones do foam out against the Excellent of the Earth.
They do convincingly prove, what many will not think: That there are really
very Illustrious Gifts and Graces, where no such things are seen as Copes and
Miters. And that it is not among such as the Protestant United-Brethren, that a
godly, painful Minister is a rare thing: Whatever be suggested to the contrary,
by those that still judge us fitter for Prisons than Pulpits.

Great Hugo Grotius, when Dying, would have given all that ever he had, to be
plain, godly John Urick. They whose hearts are cleansed by the Inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, do surely expect the day, wherein the most Dignified Drones
will wish they had been (what they do now malignantly name) Drudging Divines.

The Lord make us all more Pure and Holy; and followers of them who are now
inheriting the Promises. That our Burning Bush may not be consumed; but our
Jerusalem be yet made the Praise of the whole Earth!

So Prays, Daniel Burgess.

THE LIFE OF Mr. Hieron, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Mr. Hieron's Parentage, Birth, and Childhood.
MR. John Hieron was a Prophet, and the Son of a Prophet. His Father was
Minister at Stapenhil near Burton upon Trent, a Vicaridge it was, and in that
Vicaridge-House he was born in August, 1608, and baptized the 28th day of that
Month. His Father being puritanically inclined, had no great things in the
World; but he was a good Man. I have heard his Son John say of him, that he was
well esteemed of by Mr. Hildersam and his Hearers: And that he did believe that
he was found in the way of Righteousness. It has been the sin, and the shame
of this Nation, Oh when shall we be cleansed! that the least scandalous
Ministers have been forced to take up with most scandalous maintenance. They
then made sure to make Old Nonconformists poor, and to keep them so: But
through frugality, and Gods Blessing they lived, and brought up their Children
well. Since the Year 1662 they have used a Method quite to starve
Nonconformists. Not a poor Vicaridge, not a blind Chapel, not a School, nor
any visible way of maintenance for them, and yet they have lived. Providence is
kind and tender! handfuls of Meal are growing, and we almost think we may some
of us live to see Puritanism better thought of, and provided for in England. I
know many Nonconformists pinched, but none starved. Though neither Purse nor
Scrip, yet no insupportable tempting wants: When Bladders are pricked, yet they
cannot sink whom God will hold up by the chin, and teach the hand of Faith, the
true swimming stroke.

In his minority he went over Trent, both going to, and coming from School, and
was once or twice endangered thereby. In a Note found under his own hand, it is
thus said:

Deliverances to me vouchsafed, a teneris annis.
1. From a Cow in his Fathers yard, that took him on her horns, and threw him a
great way, yet without any harm. 2. Falling out of a Chamber into a dry Fat in
the lower room, yet no harm. 3. Fell out of a Boat into Trent, yet not hurt. 4.
Once ventring into the Trent-boat himself, and not being able to manage it, and
the wind high, he was carried down the River toward some deep place, and at
least one whirlepit, where he had been in danger to have been lost: But one
seeing it, took a private Boat, and stopped him, and his drowning was
prevented.
These he recounts, and adds a good note, The Lord expects we keep a chronology
of remarkable things done by him for us. Greenhil on Ezekiel. 24. 2. In these
things we may note, That these preservations were presages of something more
than ordinary, that God had for him to do. Where such notable things occur,
they signify some eminent Evil the Persons are reserved for, or some eminent
good preserved for. Moses drawn out of the Water was a deliverer. There is a
passage in the minority of Ambrose, That there was a swarm of Bees settled on
his Face in his Cradle, and flew away without any hurt to him: Whereupon his
Father uttered this saying, Si vixerit infantulus iste, aliquid magni erit, If
this Child live, he will be some great Man. Again, since you see he laid these
in his Records, kept them as the Pot of Manna, let us rehearse and record Gods
goodness. It Is a real wonder any Child lives to be a Man, or if they do, they
are not all Mephibosheths, through folly. It must be ascribed to God and his
Providence, without which all our Watchers and Keepers would be in vain. There
are many places that give us occasion to call them as Hagar, Genesis 16. 13, 14.
did the Well Beer-la-hai-roi, places where we have found God seeing for us, and
looking after us, where we have not looked at him, nor for him.

CHAP. II. Of his Country Education.
MR. Hierons father removing to Chelaston, he was with several Masters, but at
length he placed him at Repton-School, after Mr. Whitehead was come thither,
with whom he continued Five years. Mr. Whitehead's Abilities, and Method of
Teaching, and Diligence were so great, and his Conversation so good, that the
School obtained a great Name, and bred many worthy Men. It was an excellent
Seminary; and here Mr. John Hieron got that true foundation of School-Learning,
that bore a very great Superstructure of Divinity, History, and Philosophy. He
was a very great Critic. Oh! the mercy of a good School, and Schoolmaster
where the first Elements are well learnt; they give great capacity, and are an
happy introduction to all kind of Learning. Let the World speak as contemptibly
as they please, a good Schoolmaster is one of the fundamentals of the Learned.
World* A good Schoolmaster makes all his Scholars his Debtors; and I do not
know who can be thankful enough for them.

CHAP. III. Of his going to the University, and continuance there.
HE went to Cambridge, and was admitted into Christ's College, May 2. 1625.
under the Tuition of Mr. William Chapel, afterward Bishop of Cork and Ross in
the Kingdom of Ireland; for whom he had an high veneration to the day of his
death, and never mentioned him without honor, as being a Learned, Painful,
Careful Tutor, and very faithful to his Trust, and constant Expounder of
Scripture in his Chamber at Night when his Pupils came to Prayer, showing them
the Logic of their Bibles; which Mr. Hieron always accounted very
advantageous and beneficial. On the Lords-days Sermons were repeated, and an
account taken of his Pupils, how they spent that day. And if any of them walked
disorderly, and persisted under Admonitions, he would acquaint their Friends,
and send them home; resolving to keep none, who answered not the ends of their
being sent thither. In this College he was chosen Scholar of the House, and
in the College he continued, without ever absenting himself (except once three
Weeks) until Jan. 1628, when he commenced Bachelour of Arts. About March 25th.
following he went to Dis in Norfolk, to teach School. The profits of the place
he found might have been considerable, but some other things not so well
suiting: At the Commencement he returned to Cambridge, and continued in the
College until September, when he went into Yorkshire to an Acquaintance of
his Tutors Mr. Thurscrosse, a Prebendary of York. At which place, called
Kirkby-Moor-side, he had his Table in Mr. Thurscross's House, and some other
small matters, Reading Prayers for him, and teaching School in the Town.

Thus that College, famous for Worthy Men of old, and of late Mr. Mede, and
Dr. Hen. More, received no small honor from Mr. John Hieron, an honourer of
his College and Tutor, and an honor to them. He brought from thence Gold and
Ivory; but no Apes and Peacocks; solid, no useless Learning.

CHAP. IV. Of his entrance into the Ministry at the Door of Ordination.
BEing devoted by his Parents to God, and Educated for the Ministry, and God
having given him an heart to improve the Advantages of his Education into a
preparation for that great tremendous work; he was willing to consecrate and
dedicate himself, and desiring that good work, he (a lover of Order and
sensible that no advised Man dare take that honor to himself) did address
himself to Dr. Morton, a Learned Man, then Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
who upon Examination found his worth; which he readily did, about Baptismal
Regeneration, which he so strongly argued out of the passages in the
Service Book, that the Bishop was put to his distinctions, showed himself much
pleased with him, and wished he had known him sooner, that so he might have
bestowed on him something that he had lately disposed to another. His
Ordination proceeded, and on Trinity-Sunday 1630, he was ordained both Deacon
and Presbyter. Thus this good Man entered regularly, put his hand to the Plough,
and never looked back. This his Ordination he was well satisfied in, and so
well, that when some (run into Errors) would speak of renouncing it, he did
with much abhorrency reject such a motion. And yet on the other hand, he was
far from thinking Ordination by Presbyters invalid, or a nullity either in the
Reformed Churches, or in England. His Acquaintance were most of them
Presbyterians, and he ever embraced them as the Ministers of Christ: He needed
no Reordination because he had Episcopal. He never opened his mouth to
encourage any of his Brethren to seek Reordination, which Laws (made as hard as
uncharitableness could make them) required of the Presbyterians.

CHAP. V. Of the places where he exercised his Ministry, and some few
Occurrences mentioned that betided him in those places.
MR. Thurscrosse was very desirous of his stay, and gave him some prospect of
preferment by or from him, yet that place being at so great a distance from his
Father, he would not bear his stay there, but after he had continued about a
year and half, called him home to him.

Sect. 1. His next place was Eggington, where he was Household Chaplain to Sir
H. Leigh, and did preach at Newton-Sulney, which was very near him, where Sir
Henry was to procure a Minister, for which he had his Table, and the keeping of
an Horse, and Ten pounds per Annum. Sir Henry was a discursive Man, and
sometimes detained this studious Man too long at Dinner, who yet a little
against his temper concealed his uneasiness, and wrote thus in his Almanac
against the day of his coming to Eggington, Accessus ad Prosopopaeiam, Apr.
29th. 1631. By which he meant he must now personate another Man, and not act
like himself, nor follow his own Genius. He was not for meals to be devourers
of time, nor converse to swallow up study. His Study was his Paradise, and the
swallowing of Books his most delightful Meat and Drink. Sometimes when long
sitting at Table was wearysom to him, he took the liberty to leave them, and to
walk into the Garden, or to go into his Chamber. Sir Henry valued him much, and
was ready to testify it; and now 1632, his time of Commencing Master in Arts
being come, he went to take his Degree, and Sir Henry by Interest procured him
a Buck, to be sent to him to entertain his Friends, which the Lord ^^^tague did
out of a Park of his near Cambridge, and sent it by his own Servant to prevent
further charge. And Sir Simon Every (who married Sir Henry's Daughter) gave him
something toward his Charges. Upon his return he was sought to by the good
Lady Heyrick, to whom he went and paid his respects, but would not leave Sir
Henry (though he had the offer of a double Salary) who was a noble generous
spirited Gentleman, and had obliged Mr. Hieron by manifold Conveniences, giving
him much liberty, and all the respect that might be. About this time Catharine
Countess of Chesterfield, a Religious Lady of Noble Extraction sent to him to
preach her a Friday Lecture (though I think the Countess kept it as a Fast upon
account of the Death of her Eldest Son the Lord Stanhope) every Week, which was
preached either in the Hall, or in the Chapel at Bratby, which he accepted.
She gave him great respect, allowed him to use Ministerial freedom, which he
took, being no flatterer, and she bore, being a good Christian. One instance
may be worth noting here. A difference arose about precedence, the Countess
judged her Gentlewoman ought in right to take place of a Baronets Daughters,
and expected they should acknowledge it, and then said, She would put her Maid
in her Pocket rather than she should give them any offense. But they not
willing to yield it, the Countess sent to the Earl Marshal to decide it, who
said the Countess was in the right. Mr. Hieron being to preach at Repton
Exercise (famous not only for a Sermon, but also for the work of Prophesying,
by one Minister after another opening Scripture) the Countess being there, he
preached on that Text, Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it.
And in an use of Instruction he commanded them that were there present to hear
Gods words, striving for the good of their Souls, whilst others were striving
for precedence on Earth, etc. This the Countess was so quick as to observe, and
speak of it to Sir Henry Leigh, who had taken no notice of it, but so humbled
her self before the word, that Reader, No^e, Great Persons did not think it
below them to frequent ^^ctur^s in th^se dars.
she never spoke of it to Mr. Hieron. Their Memory is precious that did so,
their names and memory will rot, that are above, against, neglect, and contemn
such practices. If great people be good, they will heed what they hear and bear
reproof. And let all Christians and Ministers believe that faithful dealing is
the true way to respect, and that of the wise Man will be verified, Prove. 28.
23. He that rebukes a man shall find more favor afterward than he that
slattereth with the tongue. A wound that is friendly is better than a deceitful
kiss. Prove. 27. 6.

Here again he had some calls a way by persons of Great Note, but he continued
at Eggington, until Michaelmas, 1633.

Sect. 2. From Eggington he removed to the Town of Ashborne. Mr. Joseph Tailor
Lecturer and Schoolmaster there, falling into weakness, was disabled from his
Service, and being a weighty honest Man, much desired to have the School and
Lecturers place well supplied. Pursuant to this design Mr. Lees of Ashborne
(every way a substantial man) took a journey to enquire after one Mr. Patrick,
then, I suppose, Schoolmaster at Leicester, motioned to Ashberne School. And in
the Crown-Inn-gate at Derby Meeting Mr. Hieron, and one Mr. Wheeldon, who had
been enquiring for the Cambridge Carrier, asked them, Whether they were
Leichestershire Men? They answered no. Inquired, Why he asked that question? He
replied that one Mr. Patrick was motioned to Ashborne as a Sbhool-Master, and
he knew not but that one of them might possibly have been the Man. Mr. Hieron
went on, but Mr. Wheeldon stepped back to him, and told him, if they wanted a
Schoolmaster, they could not have a fitter than his Friend there, meaning Mr.
Hieron. And gave a character of him, which so well pleased Mr. Lees, that at
his return home, he acquainted Mr. Pegge (an Attorney of great note and
business, and inclined to good men, an Inhabitant in Ashborne) and Mr. Tailor
with what he had heard, They took notice of it, and Mr. Pegge wrote to Mr.
Gilbert Ward of Tickenhal (an Ingenious man, a man of Wit, Worth, and Business)
who knowing Mr. Hieron well, gave an account of him to satisfaction. Which
being received, Mr. Tailor wrote to Mr. Jackson then Minister of Sutton, (a
learned, sober, grave, and weighty man, of whom Mr. Hieron used to say, He was
Logical in every thing) to desire him to bring Mr. Hieron to Ashborne, which he
did, and there they offered him the Schoolmasters place at Ashborne. He
promised to accept it, if they could and would fairly procure it for him. Thus
by a passage, which to us is accidental, and a mere contingency, was this
worthy man brought into their thoughts at Ashborne, but an higher Hand, and a
wiser Purpose directed it.

Mr. Tailor (then grown unable for the School and Lecture both) set himself to
work, and improved his Interest in the Company (consisting of Three Governors,
and Twelve Assistants) in whom the Right of Election lay, and engaged Ten of
them for Mr. Hieron. But now it beginning to be noised abroad that the School
would be vacant, one Mr. Cox put in for it, who, though he could not gain the
Majority of the Governors and Assistants, yet having got some of them, and
some Interest made by some great Neighbors who influenced upon the Heirs of
the Founders of the School (who had a kind of a Negative Voice) Three whereof
were then remaining, two whereof were gotten for Mr. Cox, and the third for Mr.
Hieron. The Major part of them had power to stop the Election, and so it
occasioned a great contest. When Mr. Tailor saw what opposition they were like
to meet with, he would not have resigned until the Coast were cleared, and
therefore procured Mr. Whiting to teach School for him. But he perceiving there
was no hope that he should be the man chosen, withdrew his hand, and left Mr.
Tailor (by reason of his weakness) under a necessity of resigning. Which he
did, and two more of the Governors and Assistants being brought over, Twelve
of the Fifteen chose Mr. Hieron. But the Heirs of the Founders not consenting,
the Election was not ratified, and so it fell to the Bishop of the Diocese to
choose. Mr. Hieron by the Bishops Order was examined by Mr. Basier the Bishops
Chaplain, who commended him much for his skill in the Tongues. The Bishop
readily gave him his Title. But then a question arose, whether Bishop Morton
being now Elect of Durham, could act as Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield:
Hereupon Applications were made to Archbishop Abbot, who in the vacancy of the
Bishopric was Bishop of it. And the Archbishop gave him his Title. But then
it came to a new Dispute, that it must be the Bishop of the Diocese that only
could give a Title, and therefore it could not be done until the Bishopprick
were filled. By and by it was, Bishop Wright was installed, then each side
applied to him, and neither side appeared empty; for so was the manner then. He
deferred the decision until he should in his Visitation come to Ashborne; which
he did, and when there moved that they should wave Mr. Cox and Mr. Hieron, and
by a great Neighbor one Mr. Mountney was propounded, and both sides sat down.
Mr. Hieron was content, he was at ease where he was, and having the Lecture at
the truly Honorable the Countess of Chesterfield, for which she promised him
but Ten pounds per annum, but gave him Twelve; he judged his Salary competent,
and so was satisfied. But the Lord had higher business at Ashborne for Mr.
Hieron, than a Free School Tho* when the Election of the Governors and
Assistants was made void for want of Confirmation by the Heirs of the Founders,
when Bishop Mortons* Title was questioned, and the Bishops would not satisfy
neither, Mr. Hieron could have been content to have declined all further
prosecution of the business. But he was desired still to stand for it, and his
Friends promised that if he went without it, they would choose him Lecturer,
and they proved as good as their words. Men wise and unbiassed pitched upon
him, in whom worth was, and after the Lecturers place was void by Mr. Tailors
death, the Trustees for the Lecture chose Mr. Hieron Lecturer. Mountney proved
bad and immoral, a great dishonor to the School, and a vexation to the Town,
who sought to the Bishop to remove him, who alleged he could not. Then the
Governors of the School stopped his Sallary* and after articled against him in
the High Commission, but that way giving them no Relief, they were at last
forced to sue him at Common Law, and it came to a Trial before Judge Hutton (or
his Colleague) and they cast him and ejected him.

But while Mountney proved so ill, and such a vexation, Mr. Hieron proved like
himself, and an honor to his place, and satisfaction to the Town. He built
upon Mr. Tailors foundations, and both preached and lived as that Worthy
Predecessor did. And though Mr. Tailor was dead, yet he lived, and the work was
carried on by his Successor. Here Mr. Hieron continued, laboring in Word and
Doctrine, and procured from Bishop Wright a License for a weekly Lecture to be
preached at Ashborne, which was upheld by many very able men, that so by the
mouths of many Witnesses what was preached on the Lords day might be confirmed,
and that by mutual converse Ministers might be edified and comforted, as well
as people advantaged.

I suppose it was about October in the year 1635, that he married the Relict of
Mr. Tailor, who had then, by her former Husband two Children, a Son, and a
Daughter. An happy Choice he made, and very happily they lived together. She
was an holy Soul, understanding and prudent, loved her former Husbands good
Acquaintance, and brought them to be Mr. Hieron's Acquaintance. Those of them
that I knew honored her indeed, and so did all that knew her. She was the
Daughter of Parents* that were considerable, and of very good reputation in
Ashborne. She had many Brethren and Sisters, (some of whom I knew) and I think
I may truly say, that few Families produced more persons of good brains, and
excellent behavior. I knew none of them mean in the World, and some of them
made a considerable Figure in it.

Here Mr. Hieron pitched, and staid till the Civil Wars came on in England, and
then, though a quiet Man, and fain would have continued at his work, yet could
not, but was forced to make many withdrawments for security, which did much
disturb and tire him, and his Family were put into many ^^^ghts by searches for
him; ill Neighbors informing them of T^^bury, and soliciting them to take him
(who had no other provocation for him, but only the faithful discharge of his
duty) He loath to live a Prisoner in a place so like Hell, where his Righteous
Soul must have been upon a pepetual rack, resolved to remove himself and his
Family, with some part of his Goods to Derby. And no sooner was he and his
Family gone, but his House was plundered, and his Books (hidden securely as he
thought) discovered by some ill Neighbors taken likewise. This was in the year
1643.

Sect. 3. About two Months after his coming to Derby, the Inhabitants of
Breadsall, a Town two little Miles distant from Derby, being destitute of the
Exercise of the Ministry among them made their complaints to Sir John Gell,
then Governor of Derby, who answered them, Find out any sit man, and I will
put him in. They applied themselves to Mr. Hieron, he answered, He was out of
employment, but would not move a foot toward getting the place. They returned
to Sir John, who offered the place to Mr. Hieron's Father occasionally there;
but he desired Sir John rather to bestow it on his Son, which he immediately
did, and caused an Order of the Committee to be drawn for that End; and sent a
Command to the Constable of Breadsal to come on the Sabbath morning, and convey
him to the place, and secure him. They went back to him to acquaint him with
what was done, he told them he would not go, unless the Order was sealed to
take with him. The Order was perfected, and the Constable came on the Lords
day, and took him with him to Breadsall, where he performed the work of the
day, and returned to Derby at night. Thus he continued about ten months going
to Breadsall on the Sabbath days, officiating there all the day, returned to
his Family at Derby at night. But after that time, having some more probable
prospect of Safety at Bradsall, he removed his Family thither, November 1.
1644. And there continued quietly during the War, and afterward till the 24th.
of August, 1662* that settled Uniformity by so many breaches, and rendings of
Ministers and People, as the Protestant part of the World never saw before.
Amongst the rest this conscientious Minister of Jesus Christ was catched in the
Noose; for no better are such Impositions than snares to the truly
conscientious, who are not for leaping from one mode of profession to another,
are not for wrig^ing out themselves by distinctions and evasions, but would do
all in simplicity and godly sincerity, without any equivocations, endeavoring
to maintain a principle of honesty in the World.

I shall close this Section and Chapter with a few remarks. Here may you see
how Gods Providence finds work for them that have a mind to work, willing minds
do not ordinarily want opportunities long, but God opens a door for them. See
again how God disposes the forced flights of his Ministers to spread the
Gospel into other places. He that must not preach at Ashborne shall preach at
Bradsall; when his seed-time was over at Ashborne, God ^^^^d this Spiritual
seeds-man another field. God distinguishes between flying Hirelings, and
Shepherds that are forced away. God seemed by this Providence to approve his
flight. And you lastly see how seekers after the word do find it, here was a
people that could not live without the Ordinances, and God cast upon them not a
bare Doer, but a Workman, not only a man in a Ministerial habit, but a man of a
Ministerial Spirit. The greatest mercy that ever befell Bradsall, if they did
know in his day the things of their peace. It was his day of Service, their day
of advantages: a price indeed was in their hands, happy they that had hearts to
it, as some of them I hope had.

CHAP. VI. Of his Ministerial Endowments, and of the discharge of his Ministry.
THE qualifications of this Worthy Man I shall give Sect. 1.
you summarily. He was a good Man, as it is said of Barnabas, he was a Learned
Man, he had much of Egypts Gold and Treasure, and brought it all to Gods
Tabernacle. He was well read in Books and good Authors, a very studious man: He
was well seen in History, and very frequently in converse made an excellent use
thereof. He had a sharp judgment, he was a great Master of Method, had digested
his Tutors Method of preaching thoroughly: He had a very strong memory, which
continued to the last; so that if there were any doubt about the quantity of
any Syllable, he had a Verse ready to show what it was. He had searched into
Chronology of Scripture, knew much about it, and was ready in it. But he was
almost a Non-such in his Bible; you could not name a difficulty, but he was
ready to give the unfolding of it, or what was said to it. He was most ready in
the references of one Scripture to another, and could readily turn to them. He
had an excellent faculty in expounding Scripture, in opening a Chapter, he
opened his Text with great clearness. He had a gravity in Countenance and
Carriage, and in his Delivery. He was a Mall of unsound Opinions, though he did
not delight in preaching Controversies, yet when it fell in his way, his matter
naturally leading to it, he would so distinctly state Controverted points, and
leave them so clear, that there would scarce seem to be any thing of
controversy in them. He was a close and wise reprover. He was a powerful
presser to duty; he was excellent in Instruction, skilful to direct to means,
very compassionate in dealing with tender, troubled Souls, able to give strong
Cordials, and very discerning to know to whom to give them. In a word, he was a
Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of God, had Treasures, and could bring forth
things new and old. He was a good and faithful Steward of the Mysteries of God;
he was able and apt to teach, furnished both with an Heart well headed, and an
Head well hearted; he was skilful, and faithful, a sound Believer of what he
preached, zealous for God, no body that heard him could suspect him of being in
jest, all must conclude he was in earnest, and that his words were in his
heart, and that they came out thence. His breath was warm, which testified Life
within, and heartiness for God.

Sect. 2. As to the discharge of his Ministry I must be a little more
particular. He did show his qualifications, his sincere ends in entering into
the Ministry by his conscionable fulfilling his Ministry received of the Lord,
doing the work of a Minister, making full proof of his Ministry, he* was a
Workman, and a working man, a dextrous labourer in Gods Vineyard, a painful and
skilful Husbandman whom God had instructed to discretion, and had taught him.
He dispensed Holy Mysteries, the Word and Sacrament as a Minister of Christ;
and a faithful Steward of the Mysteries of God.

1. He was well satisfied about the Doctrine of the Lords day, as a Christian
Sabbath; and accordingly he did earnestly contend with the Profaners of the
Lords day, zealously pressed its sanctification, and in his own practice was a
practical Sabbatarian. This would appear both from what he did at Ashborne, and
also after at Breadsall. But take for proof what follows. Some time after his
settling at Ashborne, the Book for Sports on the Lords day came forth; and
presently was the fear of Gods Commandment cast off (the applications of the
Sabbath to the ends of it is institution being one of those bands and cords,
that corrupt nature would fain break, and is glad of any pretense to cast away)
Unbridled youth presently took the liberty granted; and Tidings being brought
to Mr. Hieron, he got to Mr. Pegge, a Man of Authority in Ashborne to accompany
him* and coming to them, they found Boys and Youths shooting at the Butts, and
only one man with them; and being demanded why they did so? The man answered
that the Bishop gave them leave. How does that appear said Mr. Hieron? The man
answered; on such a Sabbath day I came through Eccleshall (where then the
Bishops seat was) and saw there a Bear baiting* Mr. Hieron rejoyns, that is no
proof, for the Castle is at some distance from the Town, and the Bishop might
be said, If it offended them he would forbear, and so the Company parted.

But a while after he went to another Company, got together on the like
occasion, where he met with a man who argued the King allowed it, and those
would not part.

Mr. Tailor in his Life having preached about the Observation of the Lord's Day,
and therein reproved that bad Custom which the Butchers of that Town used of
selling Meat on the Lords-days in the Morning. When Bishop Wright afterward
came to visit there, some, who were loath to for go that bad Custom, dealt with
him in private about it, and so far gained on him, that in his Charge or Speech
he mentioned it, and used this instance, Suppose a Laboring Man receives his
Wages so late on the Saturday night, that before he can get home, the Shops are
shut up, and no Meat then to be bought, shall not the poor Man therefore have a
chop of Meat to his Dinner the next day (with great noise the Bishop added) God
forbid. Mr. Hieron, well understood this reflection, and others took so much
notice of it, as to take encouragement from it. Yet notwithstanding Mr. Hieron
preaching upon the Commandments, when he came in course to the Fourth
Commandment, returned upon the reproof of this sin; and raising an Objection,
but some may say my Lord Bishop gives us leave. He answered, Suppose that were
so, Whether is it reasnable to regard what one Bishop might say in a private
place, more than what that Bishop, and all the Bishops in England had said in
Parliament And having the Statute of 3. Caroli with him in the Pulpit, he read
it to them, and told them, there were but so many years passed, since this was
enacted by Kings, Lords, and Commons; and that this Bishop on whose Authority
they so much relied, was one of the Number, being then Bishop of Bristol. This
put them a little to a stand, yet one of them said, he would notwithstanding
hear what such a Gentleman, not far distant, would say to it. Whether they
reformed or not, I cannot well say, but Mr. Hieron did his duty with Zeal and
Courage These instances may suffice to illustrate and prove this head.

2. He was a Man that filled the Sabbath with its proper Exercises. It was a
painful day to him, yet not* grievous, because the day was his delight, and
holy employment was his refreshment. He prayed, he read the Scripture, and
expounded it; he sung Psalms, he catechized and expounded the Catechism, he
preached twice a day, and this he did with that holy zeal and earnestness, that
sometimes (especially in the spring of the year) he has been so sore upon the
Mondays, that he could not endure to sit; but was forced to walk about in his
Room, whilst he was able, and then to try if he could find out any other
postures which might be more easy to him than sitting was. He stuck close to
his people, gave them their full provision, and when the necessitics of some
Neighboring places called for a supply, he has sometimes preached thrice a day
rather than his own people should be shortened. He very rarely exchanged with
any body on the Sabbath, kept his own Vineyard, and kept to it. Breadsall
wanted preaching when they sought for him, but never wanted after they found
him. He administered both the Sacraments in their Seasons, and for the
instructing and admonishing part of discipline he was abundant in it. He taught
publicly, and from house to house, warning every one, and teaching every one.
The younger he catechized in the Congregation, the elder at home went to their
Houses, called them to his. The Sermons preached at Church were repeated in his
house, all his willing Neighbors were welcome, and for some time considerable
numbers did frequent those repetitions. And for their encouragement so to do,
he would sometimes in the weekday invite to Supper such as came to Repetition
and Prayer on the Lord's Day, and after Supper let them play and use some fit
Recreations, and be innocently as merry as they would, being no enemy to
harmless mirth in its own proper season. He took all occasions to do them good.
I have cast some sorrowful looks at that place since he was thrust out of it,
as fearing that Vineyard was like to become as the Sluggards field, having loft
his cultivation of it.

3. He confined not his labors within his own charge and precincts, but was
ready and frequent in weekday work abroad. His Fountain was dispersed abroad,
and Rivers of Waters in the Country Villages. He assisted in upholding most
Lectures, and then there were many, by putting his hand to them. He set up a
Monthly Lecture at Dale-Abby, which for some time he only preached at himself,
but afterward a Congregation being there gathered by him, other Ministers came
in to his assistance, and made that single Lecture a double one. This Exercise
was kindly embraced by the people at Dale, and was well frequented, till the
anti-religious Spirit arose in 1662. and then the Ministers who were to preach
hearing of an armed Rabble coming from Derby to break them up; after they had
advised with the people, resolved to desist and desperse themselves, and so
gave way to those furious Bigots. Let a Bear robbed of her whelps meet a man
rather than a Fool in his folly, Prove. 17. 12. This glorious Victory they
obtained, to scatter a Meeting whose only crime was serving God, and to put an
end to a Meeting there, where Vision was very rare, and Preaching much needed.
So ended this, and most of the Meetings in the Country. This was about July, I
think, and in August following, the Ministers now disturbed were silenced, not
by a rude self-calling, and self-raising Rabble, but by a formality of Law,
which in Gods time I hope will appear to be according to that phrase, Psalm. 58.
2. a weighing of the violence of Men's hands in the earth, an holding balances
in hands, the emblem of Justice, as if they would proportion punishments to
faults, but tilled and turned the Scale by revengeful malice, and to curry
favor with the Enemies of all Righteousness, sentenced an Innocent, useful
Seed of Men, whom God would never cast off, though they cast them out. And I am
not without hopes that some of them may live to have a Paphnutius's kiss from a
Constantine's mouth, Amen, if God see that good.

4. Where ever he preached at home, or abroad, he preached the Word, he was a
Scriptural Preacher, not Chaff, but Wheat was sown by him; not Niceties and
Subtilties, but sound Doctrine, well digested truth in significant words was
delivered by him. Gingling, tickling the Ear, patching and painting the Face of
Truth, daubing with intempered Mortar, were things he practiced not, yea, he
abhorred them. His Sermons were no flattering glasses, but true clear Mirrours
to show Men the true Complexion of their Souls.

He had Art enough, but he concealed it, he had much Learning, but it all
served Divinity; he had Logic and Philosophy enough, but he planted no
Aristotle's Grove by the side of Gods Altar. He had method enough to divide a
Text, but he never crumbled a Text; he divided the Word into fit Portions, he
never strained a Text, but would be sure to give you the proper fruit from such
a branch of Scripture. I never knew him impertinent. Indeed if ever Man
prophesied according to the proportion of Faith, if ever Man compared Spiritual
things with spiritual, if ever man spoke as the Lords Messenger, in the Lords
Message, as is said of the Prophet Haggaii; Hag. 13. if ever man filled his
Vessel at the Holy Fountains, if ever man took his Words from one Shepherd, if
ever man brought light to Scripture from Scripture, and made it to interpret it
self, he did. Blessed be God there are many such, and he must be ranked amongst
such men. His Sermons on heads of Divinity, his Discourse of Spiritual joy,
prove what I say.

5. He managed the Holy Sacraments with a great deal of care, fear, pains, and
circumspection, according to the weight and worth of those high and Holy
Mysteries.

As for Baptism he very rarely administered it in private, and never but where
necessity and charity required it. His constant way was this, The second Lords
day after the birth, he appointed the Children to be brought to the Church, and
there after Evening Sermon made all the Congregation Witnesses; and if any had
offered to go out, he would call to them, and tell them there was great need
they should all understand the Baptismal Covenant. He never opened the
Service Book after the Ordinance of Parliament required to shut it, and
appointed the Directory to take place; yet I doubt not, but he gave as clear
instructions, as powerful exhortations and charges, and put up as pertinent
Prayers, as that Book or any other Form for that Office, does or can afford.

As for the Supper of the Lord he administered it quarterly; had always a
preparation Sermon, and many times two, when he could procure help; he took
great pains in taking an account of, and instructing his Communicants: If any
had miscarried, he failed not to admonish them: He made great Observations how
he found them: He had his searching Questions about Conversion, about Title to
Eternal Life, about Repentance, Do not all acknowledge it necessary? Have you
repented? If not, why not now? Are we not frail? Time short and uncertain. He
had his excitations to the cure of Souls, and indeed he was no way wanting to
help his People to sanctify God in their near approach to him.

6. He was very exact in performing his duty to his People, but very moderate
in requiring his legal dues from his People: He took little of the Poor, and
gave them much: And for others in lesser things he took what they brought, and
made no strict inquiry: He forbore some smaller things till some took occasion
to deny them to be due, and then being obliged to maintain the Rights of the
place, he ordered his Clark to demand them: He was forbearing; After his
ejection he found many had not reckoned with him of several years, he sued only
one, (not of his Parish that denied any Tithe to be due to him, and led away as
much at one time as was of a considerable value. This he might not bear, so
applied to the Justices, who upon the hearing adjudged him his own with the
penalty upon the unjust with-holder, but he only took his own and what he had
spent, and a Shilling to his Servant, and returned the rest. If it might not
have been a detriment to the place for the future, I am apt to think he would
have sitten down with loss, for his design was the Peoples benefit; he sought
not theirs but them, and that he might gain upon them, he ws content to be a
Looser. He was a good Towns-man as well as a good Minister. There are two clear
Instances.

(1.) He procured a Relaxation and Mitigation of their Assessments by clearing
it to them then in power, that there was reason for it, and improving his
interest in them, procured ease. (2.) There was a Town-Stock in Breadsall,
which being sent out among them in small sums, was frequently endangered to
come lame home: Mr. Hieron often advised, it might be laid out in Land, which
they never would yield to, but when there was a prospect of his going out (he
having promised them Ten ^ounds if they would buy Land) they accepted, and he
as good as his word gave them his Ten Pounds, and so there is Land that yields
Three Pounds per Annum, settled on Trustees for the use of the poor of
Br^adsall.
7. His Heart was much set upon Success and Fruit among his own People, that in
that place he might be able to say that there was Fruits, yea, all manner of
pleasant Fruits, new and old, laid up for thee, O beloved. Cant. 7. last. This
appeared sundry ways.

(1.) He was pleased that God had given him a People that were frameable to an
outward conformity; but Oh! where is the Jew inwardly? The power of Godliness?
He was no Formalist himself, and he could not take up with shapes of
Christians; but longed to see real Heart-Christians. (2.) He was full of
thoughts of heart when he found not his desired success attend his work, and
would break out thus; How shall I do more? How shall I do better? How shall I
pray more? How shall I preach better? (3.) The Fruit he had in Breadsall, (as
blessed be God he had some.) Oh! it was as the first ripe Fruits: Oh! a
Breadsall-Christian was as a Joseph, as a Benjamin to Old Jacob: They were in
his Bowels; his Soul cleaved to them; they were his Joy and Crown.
8. He was a man of Hospitality and Charity* Strangers and Friends found him so
in courteous entertainments: No good man needed to seek a public House in
Breadsall to lodge in, nor strain to reach Derby. The Church had a Gains at
Breadsall. And for his Charity; his lending and his giving was considerable: It
extended it self to all the Poor in Breadsall, in Bread, in Coats, in Corn, in
Money; yea it extended to poor Christians distant from him. After he had left
Breadsall-Living he sent Money thither to be disposed as he directed: He
devised liberal things, forecasted in hard years to reserve Corn for the poor;
though it sometimes proved to his outward loss. Thus was he full of the good
Word of God, and of good Works. His Acquaintances, Neighbors, Kindred, will
testify these things. I could on this head be more large and particular, but
this taste may suffice; they that knew him can enlarge upon these hints; they
that knew him not may take their measures from these short touches. To
conclude, he was a good man, and that his Religion was not barren, but had the
most undeniable Evidences, even those that Jesus Christ will go upon in the day
of Judgment.

9. He was a bold, sharp, close reprover of sin, and yet very tender and
compassionate in dealing with tender Consciences, afflicted, wounded Spirits.
Some of his great Neighbors while at Ashborn did profane the Sabbath, and
openly drunk healths in the Market place; he as boldly reproved it, as they did
impudently commit it; and this when the War came on, made him to be represented
as a Roundhead, and by the instigation of those Neighbors, he was one of the
first in Ashborn that had his House broken in upon by Sir Francis Wortleys
Party, he taken, and impriso^ed by them; and as by the words they let fall, he
understood, it was in revenge of his Reproofs. He was an hearty enemy to sin,
struck at it with his spiritual weapons with all the strength of his arm: He
launced festered sores: He attacked sturdy resolved sinners with resolute
charges: He beat down sin so, that some touched with Antinomianism, thought him
too legal, and a^ked him, by what warrant Ministers under the Gospel preached
the Law so much; he readily answered; The words of their Commission were a
sufficient warrant, citing that Scripture, Mark 16. 15, 16. and added, Is not
that as terrible a preaching of the Law as any Minister now does, or can
practice. To which the Objecter made no reply. But on the other hand, though he
lifted up his voice against sin, like a trumpet, yet he neither cried nor lift
up his voice, when he had to deal with bruised reeds, then he bound up their
Wounds charily, and had the Oil of Joy for them that were in the Spirit of
H^aviness: He feared to make the heart of the righteous sad: Here he preached
the Gospel, he beat down profaneness, but lent an hand to them that were cast
down for sin, to lift them up. Many disquieted hearts would make to him, and he
would couns^l and comfort them, and show them where the Rest for their Souls
was.

10. He backed his Doctrine with a good Life: He was the same man out of the
Pulpit, that he was in it: He was a Preacher, and a Pattern; what People heard
from him, they saw in him: He was all Voice, Mouth, and Life, his Conversation
was a visible Sermon: He was a follower of Christ, mighty in word and deed. He
manifested a spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. We may say of
him, as the Woman of her dead Husband, Thou know that thy Servant did fear
the Lord. No profaneness went from him into any place where he taught: His
Doctrine was a pure lip, and his Life exemplary; his Doctrine was pure and
savoury, his Breath sweet, and his Life tinctured with holiness in every turn
of it. He came, as John Baptist, in the way of Righteousness; he lived in all
good Conscience; his walking was in simplicity and godly sincerity, not in
fleshly wisdom. He condemned not, confuted not, his Doctrine by contrary
practice; but he confirmed it, established it, and justified the Wisdom he
taught. He wrought with both hands earnestly, as some are said to sin. He
pulled not down with one hand, what he built up with the other; he spoke with
his feet, and taught with his fingers. He spoke convincingly sound Doctrine,
stopping Gainsayers mouths, and he lived convincingly: They could not retort,
nor reflect, nor say, Physician, heal thy self. His blameless Life stopped the
mouth of iniquity.

11. He was a man of much Prayer, and so a man of much Grace. He pressed Prayer
much, he practiced it more. He gave himself to Prayer. His Grace exceeded his
gift, though in the gift of Prayer he was very great. He prayed with all
Prayer, Public, Family, secret Prayer. He went through the parts of Prayer,
was large in Confession of Sin, was very particular in thankful acknowledgment
of Mercies, and an earnest Petitioner for Grace and Mercy, for all Spiritual
Blessings; a pleading Intercessour for all that he was bound to pray for. He
not only prayed, but made a Collection of Prayers, called sober People
together, and went to them where Prayer was made. He called People frequently
to days of Prayer. He carried the Churches abroad, and our Kingdoms and
Churches upon his heart, and spread their case before the Lord. He was an
hearty Protestant, and a true enemy to Antichristianism. He was a Prophet in
Sackcloth; because of the great Apostasy. He was very sensible of Romish
Idolatry. Oh! how much of his heart might one feel, when he prayed, Down with
Babylon. Oh, how have I heard him lay his praying hand upon Babylon, and cry,
as if he would not take off his hand, till he had pulled it down, pleading from
their Heresy, Tyranny and Idolatry, as if he would have no denial. He was very
serious in Prayer, and a great admirer and acknowledger of Grace, when he
mentioned any good in himself, or them that joined with him, it was with much
humility, and always spoke thus, or to this purpose: And if there be any good
in us, not unto us, not unto us, but to thy Grace be the Glory. From a thread
to a shooe-latchet he would not take from Grace.

12. He magnified and dignified his Office by humility, by great moderation in
things that are Problems amongst good men, by a great steadiness. When any body
mentioned any good done by him, he would say, Give Glory to God, this man is a
sinner. I never knew that he estranged himself from his Conforming Brethren,
that were before his Intimates; but he kept up his honor of them, and love to
them. He kept his post, was no bending Osier; he deliberated much, and then
fixed. He had been conformable; but I believe, not with any great liking, and
was not willing to choose that way again, and condemn his laying it aside, and
therefore would do neither less nor more, but put himself into Gods hands; and
chose to keep his peace, though he lost his place; and for any thing that ever
appeared, never repented; nay, he had great satisfaction. One once asked him,
Do you not repent? What do you mean, says he, the leaving of my place? No; I am
far from that, for I have done nothing therein, but what I have taught you to
be your Duty. Rather lose all, than sin against ^od; and if* Breadsall
Parsonage was the best Bishopric in England, I must do again what I have done.
And thus he said more than once; for my part I never knew him staggered.

13. In the works of his Ministry, which are not to me so clearly Ministerial
works, he went further than most other Ministers. -- I shall instance in
Marrying people; he stood upon it in very great strictness to have a full
assurance of Parents consent, and a due publication of the Marriage intended.
And in Burials his way was, if he preached a Funeral Sermon, for which he had
Money, he would (sometimes at the least) give it to the Poor. If no Sermon were
bespoken, he would take the People into the Church, and give them an
Exhortation of the length of some ordinary Sermons; and this he did, because
People at such times are more serious and impressible, and he was for catching
hold of all opportunities, as impotent People were at the troubling of
Bethesda's waters.

14. In the places of his Ministry he had great respect, and ever bore great
affection to those places; the care of them lay upon him. He had a great regard
to Ashborn all his time, and a mighty concern for Breadsall. The Cures passed
into other hands, but the Care was upon him. He would go to Breadsall, while he
was near it, though called a Wolf for his pains by his successor. He put
himself to many inconveniences by his first remove, that he might be near them;
he took up with a strait house, that he might be at hand for his Peoples
service, and that he might live among a People that were his Hearers, though
not his Parishioners, namely at Little-Eaton.

CHAP. VII. Of the Occurrences of this Good Man's Life, his Trials, Afflictions,
Oppositions, and the Mercies mixed with them all.
Sect. 1. THE grudge about Mountney the Schoolmaster before mentioned, and the
cancered Spirit of his partakers, occasioned Mr. Hieron his first trouble.
About December the 13th, 1637. Mr. Hieron and Mr. George Lees of Ashborn
abovementioned, were summoned to appear at the Manor of Lambeth, on the first
of February, between the Hours of One and Three in the Afternoon, to answer to
such Articles as were or should be exhibited against them. A Pursivant was
sent, who had his Fees: Mr. Hierons part, as my Author remembers, was Four
Pounds paid down; Mr. Lees not being at home, some other paid his part, and got
a Noble abated. -- To London they went at an ill time of year, made more
dangerous by reason of Floods, they made some way to Holt, who was Apparitor
Apparitorum. He treated with Sack, and feed with Gold, showed them the
Articles, which contained no Capital Crimes deserving a Pursivant, but trivial
things and incapable of proof; against Mr. Lees was objected, that when he was
Churchwarden, he had brewed Ale in the Church, which had no other color then,
that the Workman that pointed the Steeple, advised the Mortar should be
tempered with Liquor made of Malt. -- Against Mr. Hieron that preaching on that
Text, [ Fear God, Honor the King,] he had said, there were some that neither
feared God, nor honored the King; but walked the streets with impudent faces,
whereby he meant, (as they suggested) my Lord Bishop and Andrew Kniveton. And
that he had used the expression of removing Mountains; whereby he reflected on
Mr. Mountney and reflected on him, the Governors of the School having removed
him, as is abovesaid. -- This they looked on as Mercy, that having seen the
Articles of their charge, they might safely take the Oath ex Officio, the
refusal whereof would have sent them to Prison. --. No Prosecutor appeared,
they feed a Proctor to make a motion, that since no Prosecutor appeared, the
Court would please to dismiss them; he like a Proctor of such a Court, moved
that the Court would appoint a Prosecutor; so they were not dismissed. -- They
therefore applied themselves to Dr. Bak^r, the Bishops Chaplin; but he did
decline them, but Mr. Hieron procured a Letter from Mr. Jackson before
mentioned to Dr. Bray the Archbishops Chaplin, who courteously received them,
and went with them to Sir John Lamb, and obtained their discharge. Oh how good
was God, when he took away the High Commission! And again, how good is God,
when it was rising again in the Ecclesiastical Commissioners, threw it down,
never (I hope) to rise more. Amen. The Lord say so.

Sect. 2. The next disturbance of this Worthy Man was in the beginning of the
War. Sir Francis Wortleys party coming to Ashborn, one Captain Bard and Dennis
in the dead time of the night, broke into his House, took him out of his Bed;
Captain Dennis said, Gentlemen cannot drink the Kings health, but you must
reprove them for it: Oh, said Mr. Hieron, Sir John Fitz-Herberts hand is in
this. They carried him to their Court of Guard, and kept him there till
morning, where urging him to speak of many things, lay at catch for matter to
accuse him: Sir Francis Wortley charged him for preaching against Episcopacy;
he answered, never; but against the exorbitances of it. -- His Wives Father
passed his word for him, which was at present satisfying; the next day he
appeared, Sir Francis inclined to release him; but would have him call the
Parliament a company of dissemblers, but he would not. In the upshot they
discharged him; he desired his Horse and Saddle to be restored: Nay, says Sir
Francis, you may be glad you are at liberty your self. -- During this
Imprisonment, one of the Captains, ( viz) Captain Bard had been with an
Honorable Person, then living in Ashborn, Mrs. Cock^in, half Sister to Philip
Earl of Chesterfield, a Royalist of highest elevation, yet a Woman of Sense,
that knew Mr. Hierons worth, bare a fair respect to Mr. Hieron, and represents
him in his true Character to the Captain, which he credited, and was so
convinced, that he came to excuse himself, and told him, they did not meddle
with him, until they had received some scores of Complaints against him;
through which looking at him, they thought him to be one that had no fellow;
but now he perceived his mistake, was sorry for what he had done, promised, if
he came thither in peace, he would see him; did all he could to restore his
Horse; but not able to effect it without payment of Twenty Shillings for him.
Captain Bard was so ingenuous, as that after his marching thence, wrote to Mr.
Hieron, begging pardon of him and of his Wife. Thus God brought forth this good
Man's Righteousness, to the shame of all his false Accusers.

Sect. 3. After this Storm he had some quiet, till Tutbury became a Garrison
for the King. Whether some ill Neighbors going to create him trouble, mistook
the Party, and told the errand to a very Friend of Mr. Hieron's, who sent him
Prisoner to Derby, but the ill success of this first attempt did not deterr
others: But still others arose, and a Party beset the House, entered and
searched, but by Gods good providence he was not at home, and so they returned
without him, affrighting his dear Wife, and pilfering some few things. This
bred great uneasiness in Mr. Hieron, and at length forced him to Derby, which
at present was a place of Retreat, a Zoar to him, secured him and his from
fears in the Night, and in a very little time after his coming thither, God
provided a Laboratory, a Workhouse for him.

Sect. 4. After this he had a serene time at Breadsall. No alarm but once, and
then no danger followed. Peaceable Sabbaths, here he met with no War, but did
himself war against the Devils Kingdom. Lusts of Men, and Wickedness of Times,
contentfully seated and settled working hard, had great measures of health,
though mixed with some Feavors, which were mostly the effects of his
extraordinary pains, and went off without any very long deteinures from his
Work. Here he enjoyed a good Living, conversed with a very precious Wife, lived
among his Children. Here he and she showed themselves Lovers of Hospitality,
Lovers of good Men, Sober, Just, Holy, Temperate, wone much upon some that had
prejudice against him; Thus the Lords Candle shone upon his Head for many years
-- But in the year 1657, his sprightly, his lively Wife fell ill of an Ague,
and a perverse one, which being a double Tertian, and mixed with an high degree
of the Scurvy. No Physical Applications, no Change of Air would prevail for
(whither she went for Air, viz. to Sir John Gells of Hopton, then John Gell,
Esquire;) who with his Wife loved and honored all good people, and had a special
Respect to this Matron and to her Husband, there she expired, and by her
desire, or her Friends, was interred at Ashburne with a due Solemnity,
chargeable to her Husband, but not begrudged, for great was his Love to her,
and estimation of her, which appears by his own record of her death, July 10th
1657. Mortem obiit Vxor mihi carissima Nunquam satis dilecta qua ego non fui
dignus* -- And adds that Scripture passage, Many Daughters have done
virtuously, but thou excellest them all: This Death of hers was something
surprising because her Distemper being an Ague, most thought her bailable: but
it proved otherwise. And it was very deeply resented by her Husband. She
brought him Two Children, Samuel and Anne Tailor, Samuel dyed young, but Anne
outlived her Father, of whom I shall speak hereafter. She bore him Two
Children, Joseph, who is alive, the genuine Son of a Worthy Father, He was
alive when this was written: is now translated to a better Life before this
comes to be published: And Rachell who dyed before her Father, one that was
glorious within, of excellent Understanding, Wit, and Memory, a Lover of every
thing that was good. Now though this affliction was very grievous, yet was it
to my observation wonderfully sanctified, greatly sweetened and alienated. In my
thoughts that Rod blossomed, it was a growing time with him in Grace from that
time, he was always above his Fellows, but then above himself, made sensibly a
partaker of Gods Holiness, and received the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness
by that his Exercise -- And it was greatly sweetened and alienated by his
Daughter in Law, Mrs. Anne Tailor, the true Daughter of her Mother, who was a
Mary in her choice of the better part, and bore that Affection to her Father in
Law, which few Natural Children equal, and scarce any exceed; she was as a Wife
to him, as a Mother to his Children, a Governess to his House. She took all the
Family Burdens on her self; that he might be void of care, and serve God in his
own business without distraction. She lived single, she cumbred herself, would
put her hand to every thing, she was frugal, but not sordid; she was a Restorer
of his Life, and nourisher of his Age: So that two great and Singular things
may be said of her, that never Man had so great a loss in a Wife made up in a
tender, prudeut, provident Daughter in Law; she did the Duties of a Wife, a
Mother, and yet lived and dyed a Virgin: Oh this many a time warmed this good
Man's heart, and he would mention as a great and good Act of Providence -- Again
all this she did for his Works sake, for Gods sake, for the Gospels sake, in my
apprehension what she did is a good gloss upon that Text, Philip. 4. 3. Where
Paul mentions Women, that labored with him in the Gospel, not in preaching,
which is forbidden: but in good Offices in ministrations and services proper
for that Sex. Such an one was Mrs. Anne Tailor, a Phebe, a Priscilla, a Mary.
She outlived her Father; but I am apt to think a great part of her Life dyed
with him; because it was so much bound up in his.

Sect. 5. His next Trial was his divorce from his beloved People, Place and
Work in public, August 24. 1662. Bartholomew-day was black by the destruction
of the Temple by the Chaldeans, about that time of the year -- It was black by
the Massacre in Paris, commencing that day called Clades Bartholomaea -- It is
further black, by the expulsion of Ministers, stopping their Mouths, stripping
them of their Livelyhoods, turning them into the wide world without any thirds
or visible way of subsistence -- This day Mercy forsook the Earth; sure, when
so many of liberal Education must be put to dig, beg, or Starve -- Hear O
Heaven, be astonished O Earth, Matthew. 23. 37.

CHAP. VIII. Of his Behavior when and while an outed Minister which he was to
the day of his Death, of his Removes, of his Way and Work, and of the various
Providence, that betided him in that part of his Life.
Sect. 1. HE supplicated Bishop Hacket (whose visitation was not long after)
that he might have liberty to preach gratis, at Dale Abbey. He pressed him to
conform, he answered his place was disposed off, and could I have been
satisfied to conform, I should not have left my own People; but the place I
mention having no Maintenance, is like to have no Minister; unless some body be
suffered, whose Charity will send him out at his own Charge, the care of that,
says the Bishop, must lie upon me, which if it did, he has given account of
it, for of any Minister sent thither, I can give none account.

Sect. 2. At Michaelmas after August 24th, he removed to Little Eaton, a Town
contiguous to Breadsall: Being loath to go far away, he took up in a place
where he conflicted with some difficulties; but bare them, and (under some
offers of greater Conveniences) pitched his Tent there, and enjoying peace and
quietness abode there three Years and an half, doing good according to his
opportunities; till a new public storm arose, even a rough Wind in a day of
the East Wind; wherein man did not imitate God, who stays his rough Wind in
the day of the East Wind. Isa. 27. 8.

Sect. 3. And now comes the hurricane of the Oxford Act, to scatter them, whom
the Uniformity Act had removed, violently to toss and turn them like a ball, to
make them like Chaff before the Wind, and as a rolling thing before the
Whirlwind. Thus did Revenge pursue, without any new crime, or provocation,
smiting with a rage that reached Heaven: And thus they that were quiet in the
Land, must have no quiet in it; but must be made as Vagabonds in the Earth, and
be like Dogs that have a twitch set upon their Tails, that c^n rest no where,
but must to their sorrow, be put to find out the perpetual motion. Under this
Act Mr. Hieron fell; was not like to swear what he could not, durst not say: So
upon March 24. 166^ he withdrew, leaving his desirable Neighborhood, and his
beloved Family, and sojourned at Ashby-de-la-Zouch, and in other places amongst
his Friends, till Midsummer: Then removed his Family, and with them went to
Newthorp in Nottinghamshire, June 29. 1666. that House had inconveniences, but
the opportunities of Service overballanced, and there had some Souls (its
hoped) cause to bless God for his coming thither -- But the House not being
Healthful, he made another remove back again into Derbyshire, taking an House
at Losco; after which remove he made none till carried to his long home. --.

Sect. 4. April 29. 1668. He came to Losco, and there sat down, and fell to his
work -- He had some substantial, sound good men in this Neighborhood, who did
prize him, and whom he prized --. Now upon this Section I must dwell a little;
and here

1 I find him at Little-Eaton, Newthorp, Losco, etc. preaching the Gospel as he
had opportunity, yet often joining in public Worship. He could be satisfied to
be present at that Mode of Worship, wherein he could not officiate. He made his
Moderation known; his Sufferings did not exasperate him.

2. When May 10. 1670. was come, which made Conventicles a great crime, and any
number above Five, besides the Family, a Conventicle, he Preached twice a day
in the bigest Families, and Four Persons, with as many under Sixteen Years of
Age, as would come, and then Repeated at home at night.

3. In the Year 1671/2. the Declaration for the short lived Indulgence came
out, he was then set free, and had full Meetings.

4. When that Declaration was recalled, he held on doing; but with the Caution
which the Times forced him to, and his Prudence directed in apparent danger;
forbearing, but yet never desisting, nor giving out; and by this means he kept
work on wheels, and exposed not his Hearers.

5. About those times he Printed his first Book, or Sermons, being urged to
Print something -- And his latter Book he Printed, because many Christians
acquainted him with their troubles, whom he always comforted, and wrote that
Book to cheer the Hearts, and lighten the Countenances of them that walked
droopingly -- He himself would be cheerful in Company, to wipe off the slander
cast upon Religion, that it makes men sour, morose, and spoils good Company.

6. Here he did many good Offices, and was ready to do Civil, and much more
Spiritual Kindnesses; though to his own trouble.

7. He was Temperate in all things, in Meat, Drink, Sleep, Eat competently at
Noon, sparingly at Night -- Used not to Drink betwixt Meals, nor after Supper
-- A very close Student; a great observer of what he read, and a careful
collector of most material passages which he could readily repair to, and would
upon occasion of Speech impart to his Friends -- He abridged Mr. Pools
Critics, and added his own Excellent Collections, and under his hand are there
two Volumns upon the whole Scripture, in which I doubt not but there are things
that entered not into the heads of Critics; Rare things out of our best
practical Divines, Spiritual Glosses, and most pertinent ^^ferences; for they
that knew him, did know that he had an excellency this way --. I have sometimes
mentioned my own thoughts about some Scriptures, and he would read me out of
his Books what his sense was to very good purpose.

8. He was Gray by that time he was Forty or before, but though the Almond-Tree
flourished, they that looked out of the Windows were not darkened. His Sight
was something short; but it held long, exceeding good to the last; he never
used Spectacles, could read a little Print without difficulty, wrote by an
indifferent Light, readily and well.

9. He was swift to hear his Brethren, took heed how he heard. He would tell
his very friends, that never any could take any thing ill from him, where they
missed it in any passages in a Sermon; and some that now live, acknowledge
themselves much beholden to him; for they knew he was accurate, though not
nice; truly critical, though not censorious; exactly methodical, though not
limiting others; but left them to their own method and way. In one of his new
Books he sets down thus, Graces eminent in Mr. Martin Topham, mentioned by Mr.
John Oldfield, in his Sermon at his Funeral, November 3. 1658. which I desire
to imitate, the particulars follow in the close, -- Go thou and do likewise:
Subscribing J. H. A like extract there is out of Mr. Ashes Funeral Sermon.

10. He was zealous for God, and his motion like natural motion, was quickest
in its end. In many of his Books where he writ his Name, he adds to it, (...),
be zealous; which considering the man, and his course, showed the temper of his
heart.

11. At Losco he saw his Son disposed to a Branch of a Religious Family, and
she her self truly so, the Daughter of an old Puritan, the Sister of the very
searching Mr. Joseph Truman. A Woman of Virtue, considerably endowed as to
Worldly things; and very happy they were in each other -- God has made her
fruitful. Her Father in Law had great content in her, and was very sensible of
this good Providence - He saw a Child Born, that bears his Name.

12. This Losco remove was a very happy one to Mr. Hieron, and was a matter of
Song to him in the house of his Pilgrimage -- Here was a great gathering to him
from many quarters. To the Carcass the Eagles gathered. He was next to a
public place here, had great numbers, and preached as in his former days.
Here in a little time he had a choice Society of serious Souls; amongst whom he
administered the Sacrament in its stated times, with its wonted preparations;
amongst these he had constant days of Prayer, which upon emergent occasions
were multiplied, and very frequent -- Here God gave him much success, the
Gospel got much ground; some brought in, and others brought on; many that were
bad made good, and the good much better; some were planted, and others watered;
some got root, and others better rooted. He was as Joseph, fruitful in a
strange Land; and because of this forgot his sorrow; he saw God had directed
his removes for the furtherance of the Gospel; led him not amongst heaps of
stones, as it is said, Beda's Lad led him, but was sent into several places to
help them. God led him into places, where were well affected people, willing to
hear, and were glad at heart of him -- They flocked in as Doves to the windows,
and many were the Children of this desolate Man, he labored not in vain, he
sacrilegiously deserted not his Ministry, and the Lord forsook not him. It may
be said of him in a proportion, as was Prophetically said of John Baptist, Luke
1. 15, 16, 17. and actually of Barnabas, Acts 11. 24. he turned many to the
Lord, much people was added to the Lord by him. Acts 11. 21. The hand of the
Lord was with this scattered Servant of God, and some numbers believed, and
turned to the Lord.

13. From hence he wrote many Letters, upon diverse occasions, to several
persons to very good purpose; they are of the same make with his Sermons as he
Printed; so his constant Preaching was; he went abroad in the same Clothes he
wore at home. As he Preached, so he Wrote; such as his Sermons, such his
Letters; proving himself, as was said of Ezra, a ready scribe Ezra 7. 6. in the
word which the Lord had given. A great wisdom he had in bringing down general
Rules to particular Cases; he manifested in them great concern for Souls, and
faithfulness to them. Some of those shall be inserted in the last Chapter of
this Treatise

14. Here God much appeared to him in many shines upon his Heart -- The inward
movements of his Soul I have showed in the outward Indications of them; but
there are some short hints of Gods dealings with him, left under his own hand,
which spoke him to be a Man of Communion with God, that there were exchanges of
Love betwixt God and him. Some of them were before his coming hither; but most
of them at Losco -- Some of them the actings of Grace in his own Heart, and
some of them Gods gracious dealings with him in ways of quickenings and
comforts.

A Catalogue of Deliverances, since 1642.
1. From my Imprisonment by Sir Francis Wortley, from Plundering my House by
Sir Rich. Fitz-Herbert, when his men Plundered some in Ashborn 2. From being
taken at Chillington, it being taken, when I was with Captain Jackson on our
way thither. 3. From Wingfield Manor, which stood nine Months after my coming
to Breadsall; from Ashby, Tutbury, and all Enemies; I being settled at Breadsall
a Year and a half before those Garrisons were taken, yet all the time never
affrighted. Laus Deo: i. e. Thanks to God. 4. From Mr. H. who often pushed at me;
yet the Lord upheld me. 5. My Hay was preserved, when others had theirs carried
away, 1648. 6. My Sheep narrowly escaped in a Flood. 7. The Hovel fell, my
Carts under and Corn above all saved. 8. The Outhouses fell, May 1. 1655. many
Cattle and some Horses in them, yet none killed, nor had any considerable hurt;
a small matter keeping the fallen Timber off them. 9. My House and Goods
preserved from Thieves all along for several years. 10. Rachel, i. e. his
Daughter in eminent danger of Death, rescued by Prayer. 11. My Wife filled with
Joy at her departure. Laus Deo. 12. My Mares feet shot from under her upon an
Ice, suddenly she fell one way, I another: No harm. Laus Deo. 13. Mare fell
with me coming from Wicksworth. No harm. Laus Deo. 14. Feb. last, 1670. as I
went to Nottingham, Mare fell on me, lay on my Leg long, it swelled, no Bone
broken. Laus Deo.
Thus much of Deliverances Noted and Recorded: And then come Mercies which he
ranks thus: Mercies Public; Peace, the Gospel. Domestical; What Parents
Education, Wife, Children, Servants, God has blessed me with -- Personal
Privative Dangers, Sickness delivered from -- Positive Health -- External
Wealth -- Repute -- Of Mind -- Commonly my Eyesight is good. Laus Deo.

Saving Conversion, increased Grace, Victory, what gain Glory to God --
Edification to others, what Alms -- What shall I render?

Further in his Private Notes.
A Catalogue of Sins -- Sins in Youth- In another place Sins to be reformed by
Grace, walk humbly, thankfully watch, return not to folly after peace spoken --
May 16. 1658. If overtaken with Anger after a Sacrament. A note thereon, and
once followed with a Miserere mei, Deus.

These are things that discovered Grace, and were exercises of it. I now come
to Experiences mentioned in his secret Record.

October. 27. 1658. I was not well, had a pain in my Belly from side to side in
the beginning of the Night, I feared falling into Sickness -- Communed with my
heart upon my Bed, had thoughts of Death, my Conscience spoke peace to me, the
light of Gods Countenance shone into me, I was fully assured of Gods Mercy to
me, if I had dyed at that time. I had no doubt of my eternal happiness for
which Mercy I give God praise, and desire to record it, with much thankfulness.

But I slept well that night, was well next day, continued well, for which
Mercy, double Mercy, the Lord be magnified.

January, 1650. By night on my Bed I awaked, had sweet comfort, the King led me
into the Wine-cellar. Bless the Lord, O my Soul. April 10. A Communion in
nostro Thalamo; i. e. in our Bedchamber. April 8. We fasted, I was in a
reasonable good frame; but had some disturbance: April 9. I was very dull, no
quickening, no comfort; I read, I reviewed the Catalogue of my Sins, but was
still dull. After five a Clock I went to secret Prayer for less than half an
hour; after which I was cheerful, full of comfort, so continued that night and
next day, much enlarged in comfort, God spoke peace to my heart. I was lively
in Prayer, in Administration, in the whole Service. Bless the Lord O my Soul!
August 2. 1664. I went to Bed with some pain, slept not, had no ease, walked in
the House all night, dull at first, but after cheerful, had some good thoughts,
the light of Gods Countenance shone on my Soul all night, I was willing to dye,
not questioning my estate; but if I dyed I should be happy. About four a Clock
in the Morning I had ease, was well presently after, fell to work all day, at
Night voided a Stone, slept all Night very well, so continue to this day,
August 10. Immortal Praise be to God that heals me; but I render not to God
according to his benefits.

December. 2. 4. 8. 1664. We sought God, received Sacrament, returned Praise, I
was dull before; was graciously enlarged in Prayer, in Administration, had
Comfort in Receiving, I was dull again before Thanksgiving, Read a while in
Baxter and Harris, and much enlarged in Duty, had sweet Peace at Sacrament, and
after Praise, the Lord sealed to me Jesus Christ, Covenant of Grace, and Pardon
of Sin. O bless the Lord, O my Soul.

March 1. 1664. We spent some time in Humiliation at our House by Night, was in
some good measure enabled; in the Morning in a good frame, poured out my Heart
in secret, had much Comfort and Peace, bless the Lord, O my Soul, and so have
had ever since.: Also at Sacrament, April 2. 1665. What shall I render? So
January 16. 1665. At Sacrament much enlarged in Administration and Comfort.
Praise to God.

June 6. 1666. Early at five I awaked, had sweet Meditations of Gods Love and
great Comfort, after some clouds and scruples, God enlarged my Heart, and put
gladness, more then when Corn and Wine increased. Lord grant I may abide in his
Love.

April 2. 1667. An Ague siezed me after four fits, sent for Mr. Cranwell, he
gave me a bitter Draught, which sweat me an hour before the Fit: I had no more
Fits, nor Relapse, I bless God. In the beginning dull and dark, but after a
Night or two sweet Comfort, and so continues to this day, blessed be God; --
May 2. 1667. I returned thanks among Christians on this Text, Psalm. 103. 3. Who
heals all thy diseases.

July 5. 1668. A Sacrament at our House, I was much enlarged in Administration,
in Receiving, in Meditation, Examination a day or two before, had sweet peace
and full assurance. Praise be to God.

March 3. 1668. I awoke at four in the Morning, had sweet Meditations and
Communion with God, Peace and full assurance. Blessed be God.

Feb. 11. 69. I awoke at six in the Morning, had Peace, full Assurance, Joy in
the Holy Ghost, that God was mine, all his Attributes, Christ, his Blood --
Holy Ghost, Word, Promises, Providence, Comfort in all, in Death it self, and
Christ's coming to Judgment. What shall I render to the Lord.

Feb. 8. 12. 1671. I prepared according to my wonted manner, was assisted,
enlarged, had a good day. Praise to God.

May 12. 1672. I meditated on Gods Presence, was Cheerful and Heavenly,
enlarged in Heart all day; it was Lords day. Praise to God.

June 30. A Sacrament enlarged much, had a good day. Praise to God.

August 31. At Morning Prayer in the Parlour I was much enlarged, with
broken-heartedness; had Joy and Peace of Conscience graciously. Ever bless the
Lord, O my Soul.

Aug. 3. 1673. Sacrament, as also April 13. in both I was much enlarged, had
sweet peace, a good day. Ever blessed be God: Praise the Lord. And watch (O my
Soul!) against passion, idle words, vain thoughts in Prayer.

November. 2. God graciously enlarged me in Administration, Sealed me, etc. What
shall I render to the Lord? O bless the Lord, my Soul: See, walk worthy of God.
So in Feb. 8. 1673. and May 24. 1674. and August 16. God was gracious to me
then. December. 6. 1674. How excellent is thy loving kindness! A good day.
Praised be God. Jan. 11. 1676. A blessed day. Praise to God. June 13. 1680. A
joyful day. Praise to God.

These are some hints: But Oh that I had his enlargements upon them to impart!
Surely these things are like small Points and Marks in Maps that stand for
Towns and Countries: But Spiritual Eyes can in these discern what Spirit Mr.
John Hieron was off. A Man that lived near himself by Observation, and near God
by Communion: A great receiver from God, and yet never so much as fingering any
part of the Honor due to God.

CHAP. IX. Of his drawing to his end, of the Sickness of which he dyed, of his
Death and Burial.
DEath threw not this good Man down the stairs, but he was led down by many
declining steps. He had little Deaths, that were forerunners of great Death;
decays before dissolution.

The foundation of his Distempers began in that sore Fever, which he had in
Winter, 1661. which followed an ill Fit, which he brought upon himself by
overdoing in Jan. 1655. The Fever did in the thoughts of some endanger him;
but he broke through that brunt. He had a second fit of the Stone 1664, and a
third 1665. In April, 1667. some fits of an Ague. In March, 67, 68. Not well
after his pains, had two fits of an Ague; yet in a Fortnights time returned to
his work, and Preached twice, on 15 March and the 22th. he spent himself, that
he quite lost his Voice. In Feb. 68. 69. Humors stirred, as the year before,
his pains made his Throat sore, and the Ague was feared; but by Gods Blessing
on some means used, prevented It was observed about this time of the year, he
could worse bear his pains, than at other times. Jan. 77. Want of Health forced
him to take up, and to Preach but once a day. March 78. He swooned once, or
twice, was sick after, had two Ague fits, was for some time disabled wholly.
April, 81. An Ague, though not many fits. July 27. A sore Ague fit; but it was
but an Ephemeris, (as the Physician called it) but had no more fits. August 7.
He returned to Preaching once a day, and so continued (though under an
Epidemical Distemper which was in October) till the 26th of February when he
preached his last Sermon: For March 2. he was forced to rise to get breath: The
humors, that stirred in former years at Spring in Agues, now appeared in a
worse form, differing from former Distempers: Some thought it a Dropsy, some a
Tympanites; but Judicious Mr. Cranwell said from the beginning, it was a decay
of Nature, whereby his Blood was stagnated; and so it proved. All Winter before
his death he came down stairs puffing and blowing; and said one Morning, (when
disturbances in Religious Exercises were much expected) If they will let me
alone a while, I shall not trouble them long.

His greatly concerned Society came to his House, and spent a day in Prayer,
his weakness would not admit him to be in the room with them; yet would he come
to crave a Blessing; and did so; and then said to them, If you put up any
Petition for me, Pray that God would give me Patience; we are apt to faint
under long weakness: And then left them, and returned to pronounce the
Blessing, and gave them this farewell Speech; I thought to speak to you, it
gri^ves me for your sakes: But if God have any more work for me to do, he is
able to raise me up again; if not, as David said, here I am, let him do with me
what seems him best: I desire to submit to his will whether for Life or
Death; but I would have you still be earnest after the Word; and if you cannot
enjoy it powerfully Preached at home, you must be content to take pains for it;
as an hungry man will do, if he want bread; travel for it, and do not think
your labor ill bestowed. Remember you have enjoyed the Word along time. Now
twice seven years and upwards I have been continued with you, and for the most
part with great liberty, and I hope not without some good effect. Oh bless God
that you have enjoyed the Gospel so long. It has been your privilege to have
the Word nigh you, when others have traveled for it; and now if it be your lot
to take pains, be not weary of well-doing, knowing, that in due time you shall
reap, if you faint not. Go on as you have begun. The Promise is to them that
continue in well doing; Be faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life. This was June 21. 82.

June 22. He had an ill fit of the Stone which he never recovered; but declined
fast after it; much faster than any time before. June 25. He had a touch of the
Apoplexy or Palsy, for his Speech faltered. He spoke not right, 26.: He was
dull and sleepy, 27: On 30. an ill fit of the Stone. Beginning of July, grows
restless, weary of all postures, Sleep went away, Hands swelled, looked
blackish, his Pulse so low that it was not perceived, weary of bed, weary up. A
Neighbor bidding him farewell, and wishing him a good night; he added himself,
and an happy dissolution, when the Lord pleases. Thus it was, 1. 2. 3. 4. of
July, the 5th they expected, that watched, he would have dyed, went not to Bed;
the 6th he blew short, asked how he did, he said, weak: Asked his dear Mrs.
Anne Tailor? will you go to Prayer? which they did; and returning, found him in
appearance as we left him; but he changed his Color suddenly, and dyed in his
Chair, something before Nine in the Morning, being within Two Months of
Seventy Four Years of Age. He dyed in the Commencment Week, when he had been
Master of Arts just Fifty Yea^s; and an Ordained Minister above Fifty Two
Years; in which time he has Preached at Sixty Six Churches and Chapels in
Derbyshire; and at Thirty out of Derbyshire: And at little Sanctuaries, since
his exclusion from the public exercise of his Ministry, who knows how many. He
lies Interred in the Chancel at Heanor, where Jesus Christ is the guardian of
his Dust, till the Resurrection of the Just, to consummate Happiness of his
whole Person.

Thus is his course fulfilled, his good fight is fought; he so run that he has
obtained; he i^ gone into that Heaven which came down into him here: He lived
not to be restored to Breadsall Parsonage; but he is preferred to a Dignity far
exceeding all Ecclesiastical Dignities here He has a City instead of a Country
Town. He has a Rectory over many Cities, Lu^e 19. 17, 19. For he was a good
and faithful Servant; he had Talents and improved them for his Master. He did
win Souls, and now wears a Crown. He was disseaised of a good Ministerial
encouragement, but preached on, labored on, and now he has a Prophets Reward.
Matthew. 10. 41. He abounded in the work of the Lord; and now God has his Medals
for such, Dan. 12. 3. high degrees of Glory. He was a Vessel of big size and
bore. He had a great measure of Grace, and labored much in the Lord, and for
the Lord; and therefore his measures of Glory, his Reward is accordingly: 1
Cor. 3. 8. Every man shall receive his own reward, according to his own labor,
not only in kind, but degree. He was a plentiful Seedsman, and his reaping is
accordingly. He has passed the pikes, served the will of God in his
Generation; he is fallen asleep; he is gathered to his Fathers. He was not
found naked, but in the Ornaments of Christ's Righteousness and Grace; and
therefore we may express a confidence concerning him, that he is clothed upon
in his Soul with his House from Heaven, and that his Dust rests, his Flesh
rests in hope, etc. Nonconformity cast him out of the Public Service of the
National Church; but is no bar to his admission into Heaven; for he did assent
thoroughly, and consent cordially to the Covenant of Grace. He did depend on
Christ entirely, did obey sincerely, and the Covenant of Grace (like the Ark
standing in Jordan, till all the Israelites were passed over) has landed him
safe in Heaven.

The sure Mercies of David have not failed him, nor will fail us, if we follow
his Faith, his Practice: Which I hasten to.

CHAP. X. Of the Uses to be made of the Life of this Man of God, in certain
Reflections and Corollaries.
Sect. 1. MEthinks, I should be greatly wanting to my Duty in writing this
Life, if I should not add something by way of Improvement of it. I have
endeavored to make this good Man known to them, that knew him not; and to make
him better and more fully known to them that knew him; but what is all this to
the main purpose, if I should not say something to make him known for good,
that we may be something bettered by this knowledge? I have ever judged a
Sermon lame, let the Doctrinal part be never so well handled, if it wanted its
Application. I know this Narrative, that speaks of him, speaks to us; but alas
who is not wanting to himself in Applicative knowledge! What a vast distance do
many of us find betwixt our Heads and our Hearts? How little do we carry on of
a practical design, in our reading of dead Ministers, or in our hearing of the
living Ministers?

The Man here mentioned (Reader,) is a part of the Cloud of Witnesses,
wherewith we are encompassed. Suffer me to do what I can to put some Life into
this Life. I know I cannot do it; all quickening comes from God; yet in
Ministerial Excitations God many times shows himself a quickening God: I will
lay my Wood in order, and wait for Heavens Fire: I will prophecy according to
my slender proportion, and will hope for Gods commanding the Wind to blow, that
brings the Breath of Life with it. I know every Letter I have written, or can
write, is dead; but whilst I am stirring up my self and you, God can (if he so
please) make words spirit of Life, make them quick and powerful. I fain would
speak, write nothing, but words of truth and soberness. I am sensible in some
things I must say, I shall not please some; but I must please God, in uttering
the deep thoughts of my heart upon this occasion. Bear with me, suffer my heart
to have a little vent. If you will interpret as charitably as (I hope) I mean
honestly, you will take no offense at any thing that falls from my Pen, who
have followed inoffensiveness, so far as I could do it with faithfulness.

COROLLARY 1.
Sect. 2. Suffer me to prevent prejudice, and anticipate some Objections or
Exceptions that I easily foresee may be made.

Obj. 1. Oh, may some say how do you know these things you write of Mr. John
Hieron?

Answ. Many things I know of mine own knowledge, and for things that I do not
know, I have very credible Information from them, that have reason to know: My
minutes concerning him are from a very knowing friend, one of highest
advantages to know, a Man of great Observation and has a good Memory, but
trusts it not; one of great veracity, that is too well bred a person to use any
impious frauds, and so much an honest man and truly tender, that he dares not
use any of those that are called (though miscalled) Pious Frauds, deceitful
talk for God. He cannot, dare not love, nor make so much as an officious lie.

Obj. 2. Oh, but you Nonconformists lean to your Party, and magnify your own
out of measure.

Answ. 1. We love our Party; but we confine not our love within our Party. We
love all good men, and do them right; own that of God that is in them. We love
the amiable according to the degree of Divine Goodness that is impressed on
them. We should not love God sincerely, nor them aright, if we did not do so.
We never had been a distinguished Party, if you had not forced us to be so, by
imposing terms we cannot bear. We stand to it, we are no Sectaries, nor
Schismatics: In Gods Judgment we shall not be called so.

Answ. 2. We love dear (now blessed) Mr. H^eron; he was a glory to his younger
fellow sufferers, his gray head was a Crown to our green h^ads; but yet we love
the Truth better* We can do nothing against the Truth, ought to say nothing
prejudicial to Truth; we will not break a Commandment of God to set off a man*

Answ. 3. My Heart reproacheth me not about this Life of his, that I have drawn
any Line, but what was in his Face: That I have laid on any false Colors, but
what were agreeable to his Complexion. Look how much I have fallen short, I am
not sensible that I have exceeded; we must have leave to magnify them, that
God has magnified; we must not obscure them, that God has made to shine. I
have only transcribed my own apprehensions of him, without any love of error,
and as far as I could, have kept from errors of love. I must confess my great
affections to him, and veneration of him; but I have watched against my
Affections bribing, or byassing my Judgment.

COROLLARY 2.
Sect. 3. Let me hence plead with men of Antiministerial Principles: If this
Book fall into your hands, read and consider to your Conviction. Oh go not on
to deny and decry the Office, and the Officers. Lay your hands upon your mouth.
Cease to vilify Gods Ministers, and the Ministry. Let your Ignorance drivel no
more. Let your rancorous Minds vomit no more Reproaches. Let your spightful,
envious Minds, full of malignity, belch out no more unsavory, noisome
Language. Lo, here is a man that we offer to you as a proof of the Ministry. We
have many such as he. Our Quiver is full of such, who make us not ashamed to
speak to the enemies of the Ministry in the gate. Will you call Mr. John Hieron
a Wolf, that did so feed the Church of God? Will you call him an Hireling, that
Preached as many Sermons for nothing, as when he had his place; that made the
Gospel without charge? Will you call him a limb of Antichrist, that was a
pleader against Babylon? Will you Blaspheme the Holy Ghost in the Gifts and
Graces bestowed* on him, the apparent fruit of Christ's Ascension? Will you say
he cast out Devils by Beelzebub? Will you question his Call, that Heaven has
put so many Seals to? Shall a Man of God be called a Priest of Baal? Shall a
Priest clothed with Salvation by God, be called by you a Chemarim? Do you seek
a proof of Christ speaking in a man? Lo here it is! Do you not know, he was no
reprobate; however he and others have been reprobated by you? Oh, return to
more sober Minds, and pass a better Judgment on the Ministry* Why will you be
guilty of so great ingratitude, as to account this great gift of Christ as
filth, offscouring, refuse? Why will you strengthen the prejudices of a carnal
corrupt World, against those that would awaken and mend them? Why will you lend
your mouths to Satan, to reproach the Servants of the most high God? For if
your Language be not the hissing of the Serpent, I know not what is. Can wrath,
clamor, bitterness, be from the Holy Spirit, who expressly declares himself
grieved by it? Do you not quench the Spirit, by despising Prophets, and
teaching others to despise Prophesying? Whose Errand are you on? Whose design
do you drive but Papists, who have transformed themselves into various shapes;
but agree in this, to wound the Ministers? Whence do you fetch your Arguments
against the Ministry; but from Socinians, which deny the Deity of Christ? Why
will you credit them against the Ministry, that destroy the Foundation-stone of
Christianity?

COROLLARY 3.
Sect. 4. Give me leave, O you, that had an hand in contriving, in forming, in
establishing the Act of Uniformity, to show you what manner of Men fell by it,
and before it; the Man whose Character I have given you, and many of the same
Spirit and Character, were driven out of their places by the Act of Uniformity,
fled before the Oxford Act, and were all endangered, and many of them were
malled by the Conventicle Act. What evil had they done? Surely, nothing that
God had declared to be Sin; but what those Acts made Crimes. Were the Penalties
proportionate to the Crimes? Did you indeed speak Righteousness, O
Congregation? Did ye indeed judge uprightly, O ye Sons of Men? Do you know what
Spirit you were of, when you raised such a Storm, such a dry Wind, not to fan,
nor to cleanse the floor of Chaff; but to blow away the Wheat? When you threw
this fire into the Sanctuary, where was your Christian Charity? From whence
were your Politics fetched from, to begin so fiercely to lay the foundatons of
restored Monarchy, and restored Prelacy in the civil death of so many, and
disobliging so considerable a number of the stanch men of this Kingdom, that
had these Ministers in their hearts? Was this a winning way? Did this commend
the Government in Church or State? What so dear to the sober part of men in
this Nation, as their good Ministers? When men take them away, they are ready
to say, what have we more? Better the Sun did not shine, then Chrysistome not
Preach. Who can read love to a Nation in ruining of Synagogues? Brown bread
with the Gospel is better to serious Souls, then white bread without it; yea
the bread and water of Affliction, is good fare to them that can see their
Teachers: Oh that you should stretch out your hands to vex certain of the
Church! Such work should be left to such as Herod was. Why would you make so
great a cry in the houses of Israelites? Why would you put the praying seed to
make so many complaints in Heaven to their Father against you? Why would no
petitions for peace (so pathetick) move you? Why would no considerations of the
mutability of Humane affairs, the sight of the turnings of the wheel of
Providence, the sense of your own past sufferings, which possibly might return
again, soften you, moderate you? Why had you no prospect of the evil that might
be upon the Earth, to induce you to show Mercy, and store up Mercy for your
selves against such a time? Did you do as you would that men should do to you?
Oh, if into any of your hands, whom this Corollary concerns, this Book falls, I
entreat you to give my words an impartial Reading, tread your violent steps
back in great indulgence. If there be any thoughts of comprehension, let there
be no snares. Let the Rules of Christianity make it, we that are old, shall
make no strains of our Consciences, we will lie in our Irons still, knowing
Death will ere long release us; rather than have our liberty, by yielding to
say or do things that cannot be done without a great many distinctions. We
desire to be dealt plainly with, and to deal plainly with all the World. We are
resolved against all conditions that are sinful; and we shall not willingly do
any thing that is doubtful, or carries an appearance of evil, or may give any
color of suspicion, that we do depart from our Principles; we would advance in
Reformation, and not be tempted to any retrograde steps. If you will lay the
Bible betwixt us and you, it shall, like an enquiry at Abel, end the matter. If
our Bible lead us to you, we will follow it: We have heard of late days some
spee^hes of tenderness to Dissenters, when our cup seemed to pass over to you:
Now we are waiting to feel it. If any true remorse do touch your hearts, you
will become good Samaritains, and your kindness will exceed your rigours, you
will pour into our wounds Oil and Wine instead of Vinegar. Oh, I beseech you
think, (as I may allude to a Scripture Historical passage) what manner of men
you flew (civilly) at Bartholomew day: Lo, here I have presented you with one,
that resembled the Apostles, the Evangelists, yea imitated the great Shepherd
and Bishop of Souls. This Man, and many such you set aside, the precious Sons
of Zion, comparable to fine Gold, how were they esteemed by you as Earthen
pitchers? Yea, the Nazarites purer than Snow, whiter than Milk, more ruddy than
Rubies, their polishing of Sapphire; their Visage made as black as a Coal by
you, they are not known in the streets; will you not remember the Battle, and
do no more. Again, do not you see who have practiced upon you, whose Agents you
have been, whose hand is in these things? Have they not been services to Rome,
disservices to the Church of England, made her appear as a Stepmother to her
best Children? As if she was become cruel, like the Ostriches in the
Wilderness. Has not this strictness about Ceremonies been managed by Papists
in disguise? Have not the same hands enlarged that strictness? And shall we
still go on? Is it not enough that you have done their jobbs, till they had
like to have served all our turns? (Blessed be that Providence that prevented
it in the nick of time) but must we, will we go on now our eyes are openeed?
Oh, work not with them, but counter-work them. Be not tenacious of what is
theirs, cast out their household stuff. Botch no more in Reformation, purge out
the old leaven and let us be made a new lump: Let us keep the things wherein
the Kingdom of Christ is, and part with those things wherein it is not. Take
not of Babylon a stone for a corner, a stone for foundations, dash her little
ones against the stones. Let the observations go, wherewith the Kingdom of
Christ comes not. Are all the significant Ceremonies so significant, as one
Sermon of Mr. John Hierons? Have they that in them to excite, that energy, that
Ministerial excitation has? Where Is the promise of Gods presence with them,
that the qualified, sent, Ministry have and can plead? Were it not much better
that (like Pollio's glasses) they were broken to pieces, than that one good
man's mouth was stopped, because he cannot swallow them? And further, are we so
full of Ministers, truly so called in England, that we can spare so many of our
Laborers, and turn them off at once? Many thinking men judge a plurality of
Minister's needful in most places, and know not how any Minister of Conscience
can accept plurality of places; but it seems you thought, there is such plenty
of Ministers, as to disband so many good Soldiers was no loss. When in Queen
Elizabeth's time she was instigated by some ill affected to the Ministry, (very
probably the disguised Papists, that the Reverend Dr Burnet suggests) to
abridge the number of Preachers; E. G. then Archbishop of Canterbury was much
troubled at it, and wrote a serious, zealous, learned, strenuous, sinewy Letter
to her, urges the many hands used about Solomon's Temple, and many very
pertinent Scriptures, to prove that the Gospel should be very plentifully
preached, and that plenty of Laborers should be sent into Gods Harvest; so
great and large, as that it requires not few, but many Laborers. Oh cast your
eyes upon that Letter, it may make you mourn for what you have done, and melt
you into great tenderness. Furthermore, perceive you not how unprosperous your
method has been; see you not how you prevail nothing: If you thought to rip up
the womb of Puritanism you have but made it more fruitful. There is ten of the
Puritan persuasion for one formerly, (I wish though, that one of the ten were
the true old Puritan). See you not since this Liberty what flocking there are
to the Ministry? And if People were freely and fully at liberty to act
according to their Judgments and Inclinations, you would soon see a very great
increase of these numbers. See you not how many young men God has raised? How
he has blessed their private Education? And what gifts they are enriched with?
See you not, that Providence has been instead of Livings to those, whom you
cast out of Livings, drove from Corporations, from their kind Neighbors,
entered Cautions against them in all ways of Livelihood that they were capable
off, left many no way, unless they could dig in the Town-ditch? Ye dealt worse
with us, then Josiah did with the Priests of high places: 2 Kings 23. 9. They
did eat of the unleavened bread with their brethren; but for us, we must
neither have Altar, nor Bread. The Priests of the high places had broken a
positive Law of God; yet Josiah moderated their punishment, though he shut them
out from Spiritual Services; yet he allowed them Natural and Necessary
Provisions; I do not know that our crime was so great, but our punishment was
greater. We found no such moderation; yet we have found Mercy from God, we have
turned no stones into bread. View our faces, we are fair liking; Mr. Hieron had
an Estate, and God gave him an heart to live on it, and no need, nor mind to be
burdensome; and for others in meaner circumstances, yet God has abundantly
blessed their provision, and has satisfied his poor with Bread. Nay, let me
close this Corollary with that, which may most convince, and melt you, and make
you smite upon your thigh; has not God been near them? Has not God met with
them, whom you have cast out of the Synagogues? Have not their parts been
increased? Have not their Graces flourished, has not God spoken peace, and
lift up the light of his countenance upon them? See you not in Mr. Hierons Life
an intercourse betwixt God and him? How did his beloved Jesus show himself,
yea, flourish through the lattess.

COROLLARY 4.
Sect. 5. O you, that are the Ministers of God, let me call your eyes to behold
Mr. John Hieron. Mr. Bowls has written an excellent Book for Ministers,
called Pastor Evangelicus; lo, here I present you with a Ministers Life, that
wrote after that Copy, and his Life is a praxis upon the Book. His Preaching
was the praxis upon Bishops Chapels, Methodus concionandi; an accurate Ramist
Mr. Hieron was, and his management of his Ministry was a Transcript of Reverend
Mr. Bowls his Pastor Evangelicus, and those few hints that we have of his
converse with his heart, and God give us some resemblances of great and good
Mr. Corbets Self-imployment. Brethren, I do not ostentare virum, sed ostendere,
I do not make a proud ostentation of Mr. Hieron, but I do show him as a good
pattern to Ministers. I presume not to teach you; but I may be allowed to be
your Remembrancer: I may stir up your minds, and I do beseech you mind his
Qualifications for the Ministry, and labor you to be so qualified; this will
make your inward call clear, and without that your outward call will afford
your minds little satisfaction; nor can you with that confidence expect a
Blessing. You have the same Father of Lights to go to. All his Gifts and Graces
were borrowed. Where he borrowed his, you must borrow yours. If good men, much
more a good God, is ever merciful and lends; he gives Wisdom liberally, and
upbraids not. You may light your candle, fetch fire to warm your heart from
him, whose fire is in Zion, and furnace in Jerusalem. Isa. 31. 9. The better
qualified, the more hopes of success. Qualifications beget us a Reverence in
People. The Sanctuary Weights and Measures were bigger. Ministers should
out-part their People, else they are disdained. Qualifications approve the
Minister a workman in his Services. God ordinarily works according to the
aptness of means; good men full of the Spirit of God, have the presence of God
ordinarily most with them. I further exhort you to have an outward Call, the
People have a right to choice, the Ministry a right to examine, judge and
separate. The Magistrate may claim confirming. And oh that the Spirit of this
Worthy Man was in us, that though he doubted not of his own Episcopal
Ordination; so he questioned not Presbyterial Ordination: I wish moderation in
this point. The Younger Clergy are very intemperate: But I pray you, if you do
read what I write, consider that they that are much Elder than you, are
convinced by their Bibles, that a Bishop and a Presbyter are the same Office.
And let me add, they that have searched into true Antiquity, and have perhaps
read more Books, then either you, or I have ever heard of; dare assert, that
they find no evidence of Diocesan Episcopacy. I should much question Episcopal
Ordination, if Bishops were not Presbyters. But above all, I desire all
Ministers to mind and follow his Exercise of his Ministry; I have laid before
you his Diligence, his Faithfulness, his Laboriousness; I have showed you how
instant he was at home and abroad, Preaching in season and out of season. When
he was fixed, he settled to his work; when tossed, he was fixed for his work;
throw him as men would, he fell upon his square; he run all hazards, endured
hardship as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ: O follow him. You find in his
Life, that when he heard of Grace eminent in a Minister, or read of their
Graces, he bespoke himself to go and do likewise: So let Ministers that read
his Life, charge themselves to Preach, as he did; Converse profitably with your
people, as he did; Admonish, Reprove, Exhort, as he did; endeavor to prepare
People for the Sacrament, as he did. When his Breadsall Neighbors met
frequently at the Smiths Shop, and there, as he feared, spent too much time
unprofitably; he observed it, and would send a good Book amongst them to read.
Oh thus it is, say you to your own Souls, and thus it will be with them that
have a care of Souls. I have represented to you his converse with his own
Heart, his looking to and keeping his own Vineyard. He was for saving himself,
and those that heard him. Oh be not you content to be as Noah's Ship-wrights.
Remember the solicitude of Holy Paul, least by any means when I have Preached
to others, I my self should be a cast away. 1 Cor. 9. 27. He looked after his
Sermons; he listened not who commended his Sermons, but who made good use of
them, bewailing the sins of their hearts and lives. Not who, after his Sermons,
cried, how well has he Preached; but how ill have I lived, what a vile carnal
wretch am I? He longed for success, so do you travail in birth. Pray that your
Sermons may be the Arrows of the Lords deliverance; that as the Row of Jonathan
turned not back, as the Sword of Saul returned not empty; so it may be in your
Spiritual Warfare. What shall I say to excite Ministers? By long and sad
Experience I have found, I need it. I have had some reflecting thoughts upon
that passage Isa 42. 19. Who is blind, but my servant, or deaf as my messenger
that I sent? Who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the Lords
servant? Do you think he did more than his Duty, more than needs? Sure you
cannot think so, when you read Acts 20. 28. that a double [ Take heed] is the
Ministers charge: Can you think it was more than needs, when Jesus Christ spent
his Blood for the flock? Can you think it more than Duty, when a double
dedication is upon you, your Baptismal Devotedness, and your Ministerial
Consecration. Can you think it over-doing, when such a Worthy as Archbishop
Usher breaths out his dying breath, O Lord, forgive my sins of omission? Can
you think it more than needs, when you know the worth of Souls, the terror of
having the Blood of Souls required at your hands? If he did not, the obligation
is the same upon you and him. 2. Would you have Honor and Respect in your
places, follow your work, as this faithful man did, Honor will follow you as
it did him. Herod reverenced John. Honor God, he will honor you. Seek not the
faces of men, fear not the faces of men, do nothing that may make men despise
you, depart not out of the way, cause none to stumble at the Law, corrupt not
the Covenant of Levi, be not partial in the Law; lest God make you contemptible
and base before all the people. Malachi 2. 8, 9. Fawn upon no body, flatter no
body; fidelity commends it self to Men's Consciences. 3. Would you have his
success? He had a Seal in the Consciences of his Hearers, had Letters of
Commendation; would you have so? Use no Leaden Daggers, but wield the Sword of
the Spirit, let not the weapons of your Warfare be carnal; but those that are
mighty through God. He was an able Minister of the New Testament, not of the
Letter only. He was full of might by the Spirit of the Lord, drew the bow with
his full strength, did not do Gods work negligently, served God with his Spirit
in the Gospel of his Son, and he was full of Souls given in; He will appear
with a Lo! I, and the Children thou have given me. Be you traveling in your
Souls, and you shall see of your travel and be satisfied; carry forth your seed
weeping, your bosoms shall be full of joyful sheaves. 4. Would you have his
peace, his visits of God, his shines, his assistances, his comforts in the way,
his serenity, his satisfaction in the end? Follow his Integrity, mark this
upright Man, tread after him in Zeal for substantials, Moderation in doubtfuls,
in Charity, Hospitality, in studying all the holy wiles of winning Souls, in
losing something of your own to gain them, with meekness instructing opposers,
restoring the lapsed, in putting your stronger hands under feeble hands, and c.

COROLLARY 5.
Sect. 6. To you O Men I call, to you O people I address my self, at Newton
Solney, at Ashbourn, at Bredsall, at Little Eaton, at Newthorp, at Losco, you
that enjoyed his younger days labors, his Middle Age pains, and the service of
his mellow years, his last Labors, which were better than his first, though
all was good you that heard how he preached, and saw how he lived. If I did
think any of the Neglecters of him would read this Life of his, I would give
them a Severe Repremand. Were you prejudiced? Why did not you go and see? John
1. 46? Were you frighted? Durst he preach at so great an hazard, and would not
you adventure your smaller penalty? Did you judge your public Ministry
sufficient? Would not his help have done well to have given your Souls a lift?
Had it not been wisdom to have twisted his Cord with your public advantages?
Was it carelessness, Oh, know, that is an ill Sign. It Is well if any Spiritual
good come to you. If God have People in a place, God brings them to the means,
he sends among them: If any of you do read these lines, I entreat you to know,
to your Conviction and Humiliation, that you had a price put into your hands,
lest you know, to your cost and shame, that a Prophet was sent among you, Ezekiel.
33. 33. But I leave these, and come to you, that heard him, but your profiting
by him does not appear. You were the Reproach, not the Credit of his Ministry,
he fain would, but could not cloth himself with you. Let me lay before you a
few awakening things, if God will bless them to you. 1. How can you think to be
wrought upon, when you have been under such a skilful hand not healed? What can
they do that come after him? If you have got no Light, no Zeal under such a
burning and shining light, if from the days of Mr. John Hieron you have not
been violent for the Kingdom of God, if not awakened* under so Rousing a
Ministry, how must the hands of others be weakened, and their hearts
discouraged in their labor amongst you? Where he plowed upon the Rock, What
other of Gods Husbandmen can hope to make any thing of you? If such a
Soul-searching, Heart-ripping Ministry could not get within you, how little can
others hope to give you any light into your hearts?

2. How speechless will you be when the Fruits of his Labors upon some of your
Neighbors will be brought forth to convince you? You had the same mean^, the
same pains* bestowed upon you. You had the same Tillage, the same Rain came
down upon you. Sure your destruction is from your selves. I did more for them,
than for you; but the denial of my Grace is not the Cause of your perishing;
but your own sinful, wilful forsaking of your own Mercies.

3. Do you not believe that he who testified Gods mind to you, must one day
come forth at the Call of God to testify against you? And they that have not
^^^nned to declare unto you all the Counsel of God, will be as full in their
Testimony against you: For they will be so swallowed up with the Glory of God,
that they will speak out even against the dearest Relations they have. And
those, that while they were here, they could have gone upon their knees to, to
beseech them to be reconciled to God, they will then have no such tenderness
for; but utter every whit that God may be justified when he speaks, and clear
when he judges. I pray you accommodate that part of Joseph's Story, Genesis 45. 3.
when Joseph discovered himself, his Brethren could not answer him; for they
were troubled at his presence, how will it be at the great day with all his
People in all places, when you stand at the bar, and this Witness is called
against you? Oh what trouble, what consternation will you be in, when
Conscience within, and such a Witness without appears against you and such a
manifesting light is round about you?

But I do betake my self to you that made a good use of him, that neglected him
not, but attended on nis Ministry, that esteemed him highly in love for his
Warks sake, that gave your own selves to God, and to him by the Will of God, 2
Cor. 8. 5. To you I give a few hearty Advices and Counsels.

Advice the First.
1. Admire that wise Providence of God, that good Providence of God, that
ordered a tempest upon the Church to bring Mr. Hieron (like the Goods of a
shipwrackt Ship) upon your Coasts. The loss of other places was your gain. An
Instance you have which calls your thoughts to it, Acts 8. 4. Acts 11. 19. 21.
Philippi 1. 12. It was in greater Mercy to Greasley Parish, that was first
blessed with him; because precious Mr. Smally outed of that place, A man in
whom a very found Judgment and lively Affections met* finished his course
something sooner than diverse others of his Brethren. Now for God to provide
such a stake, was an admirable Mercy. And though he removed from you; yet to be
still within the reach of many of you, was still more Mercy. And that God found
a resting place for him at Losco, was a very great Mercy to them, and that
Parish, and Neighbor places.

Second Advice.
Remember how you have received, had heard, and hold fash* He gave you sound
Bottoms, continue upon them* It is very grievous to hear of the waverings of
some in Greasly, Parish, so well instructed by Mr. Smally built up by Mr.
Hieron. Let Children be tossed: Let not Men of understanding be so, Beware of
defection. Have you attained no discerning of Spirit? Have you lost your
Palate? Cannot your taste discern, perverse things? Will you bid them God
speed, that teach other Doctrine? Have you not said, when you have heard Mr.
Smally, Mr. Hieron, Oh the Blessedness! Shall any Body have occasion to say to
you, Where is the Blessedness you speak off? Do you think, if such things had
been Truths, that your dear, faithful Ministers would have hidden them from
you? Do you not know they were no ignorant Men? Do you not believe they were
faithful Men? Surely if such things had been bread, they would have broken it
to you. If they had been food, they would have set it before you. Oh, I beseech
you believe, that Doctrine can never edify you, that undermines the Doctrine
taught you. Believe all the Doctrines Strange, that your Teachers did never
acquaint you with. I am well satisfied their Doctrine remembered, believed, and
practiced, will bring you to Heaven. Read and Apply, John 6. 67, 68, 69.

Third Advice.
Remember what of a Christian you saw in Mr. Hieron, and imitate him. Much of a
Minister, much of a Christian was with him. When his heart was dull, he went to
some good lively Book, so do you. He went to Secret Prayer, and found God
answering by Fire, so do you. He kept by him a Catalogue of Sins, to renew his
Repentance for them before Sacraments, so do you. He had a Catalogue of
Mercies, he looked back even to his Childhood, to stir up thankfulness,
particular thankfulness, herein follow him. He communed with his Heart in his
Solitary Hours, he looked up his Evidences, and kept them fair, he entered
protests against special Sins upon special occasions, and took notice how he
kept touch with God; follow him. He never met with any Experience either in a
way of quickening, or comfort, but he made quick returns of Praise. Let every
descent of Mercy return back in the quick ascent of Praise: What shall I
render? Was his question; let that be more familiar with you. Teach your
Tongues to praise, as some teach their Tongues to lie, and blaspheme. He was a
close walker, an unblameable Conversation was with him, turn not you loose
Libertines, now his Eye inspects you not, Gods does. Do not that in Gods Eye
you would not, durst not have done in Mr. Hieron's. If you feared his reproofs,
how should you dread the Reproofs of God? Let that comprehensive Rule be before
you, Phil. 1. 27.

Fourth Advi^.
Follow after all those ways, wherein he led you, and accompanied you. Mere
still in days of Prayer, keep up your Sacraments, your Sabbaths, as far as you
can. And if the Word be not so nigh you, as it has been, make out for it as
health and stength will permit. Forget not the last Exhortation he gave you,
his farewell Speech. Though you may go far and not meet with a Preacher like Mr.
Hieron; yet honor the Ordinances, be thankful for meaner fare. Ordinances
Blessing is from their Institution and not the Excellency of him, that
administreth them. Gods Blessing will be upon honest Endeavors, and honest
Attendances upon God in them. If you were truly fed by him, you will hunger
after the Word. The Thirst of Total Indigence is taken away by the Well of
Water in your springing up, by your first draughts of the Water Christ gives
you; but not the Thirst after sweeter and fuller Enjoyments. David's sights of
God in his Sanctuary set him a longing, to see as he had seen; Spiritual
satisfactions satiate not, glut not Gods people. They rise with most appetite
from their fullest meals.

Fifth Advice.
Pay your respects to his Name and Memory, keep up Communion with him in your
Thoughts and Mind, cast no Reproach upon him by looseness, lenity,
infalibility, give no Body occasion to say with scorn justly, This is a Hearer
of Mr. Hieron's. Loose not the things you have wronght. Be not as Joash, or
Jehoash. 2 Kings 12. 2. 2 Chronicles. 24 2. 16. that did what was right in the sight
of the Lord all the days of Jehojada's Instructing him: But fell off at his
Death, you must expect Temptations as Joash had: But pray that you may resist
and overcome them.

Sixth Advice.
Long for that Blessed day when you, and your Dear Mr. Hieron and your good
Neighbors, and whole Society shall meet again and part no more, have and keep
an Eternal Sabbath, eat Bread, and drink Wine in your Fathers Kingdom, of which
your Sacraments here were but an Antepast; have the Harvest of your first
fruits, the whole sum of which here be but earnests; when all you that received
him as a Prophet of God, shall share with him in his reward, even a Prophets
reward, as I told you upon the occasion of his death. You have not my word for
it, but Christ's word for it, who is the Amen, the true and faithfl witness;
Matthew. 10. 41. and so I come to my closing Corollary.

COROLLARY 6.
Sect. 7. And now my Pen is expressing my sad thoughts about our great loss of
Mr. Hieron, let me lead my Reader a little further on; to weep upon the Graves
of some other Derbyshire Ministers. Oh my Derbyshire Friends, bear with me if I
go on, and give my mind a little vent upon this doleful Subject. Derbyshire is
a beloved Country to me; I am no Native of it, but it being the Country wherein
I began and ended my Public Ministry, I am as it were Naturalized of it. By my
great affections to it, my heart points toward it. And when I can breathe in
that Air, and breathe out my self amongst them, I am refreshed, and in my
Element. I desire my Limbs, that I might get over to them, and help them.
Besides, unworthy I am survivor to diverse of my Brethren there, their memory is
precious to me. I cannot but build some little Monuments for them, and set them
about this larger Monument of Mr. John Hieron; they wrought the work of God, as
he did, they were his Companions in labor, his fellow Soldiers: They were
driven into corners, lived in obscurity, dyed in obscurity, so far as men could
cloud them, they were lights put under bushels, but they were lights. These
Candles were not extinguished, when men put them into dark Lanthorns; as the
Blessed Jesus, in his state of Humiliation, his Deity in its Glorious Rays did
dart forth: So these Holy Servants of God did (as they had opportunity)
manifest their graces and gifts, though covered with a cloud by the just anger
of God, (Adored be his Justice!) and by the causeless displeasure of men
(Cursed be their Wrath!) These I think I am bound to give some short account of.

To awaken my Derbyshire Friends to bethink themselves what a Ministry God has
blessed them with, and has bereaved them off, it well becomes you, Oh my
Friends, to reflect, whether you be Vines so flourishing, so fruitful, as
answers such Vine-dressers? Whether you were a Crown to them, that were a Crown
to you? The staple Commodities of your Country are Wool and Lead: You are
Traders in these many of you, and are grown up to great considerableness. Let
me tell you, the Ministry of Derbyshire was a more advantageous price than
them. Your Shepherds were far beyond your Sheep. And those Earthen Vessels,
your Ministers, had such an excellency of treasure, as is of more value, then
your rich Mines. Oh have you traded with them? You have cause to suspect it,
because these Shepherds are smitten, these Vessels are broken, these Mines
fail, these Crowns are fallen from your heads. Again, I do it to enlarge those
short hints in Mr. Hierons Life, wherein I have said that we have not only him,
a single Minister to produce; but we have many like him in Parts, like him in
Fidelity, like him in Laboriousness, like him (though few equals to him) to
shame the contemners, and to silence the silencers of them. And lastly, to
preserve their Names and Memories, and to provoke the Ministers, that yet are
in the Vineyard* to quit themselves like Ministers, to play the men for the
Congregations of God, to emulate their gifts and graces; that so people may not
be straitened in their Ministers, that the loss of such Worthies may be
lessened, that the decay of the bearers of burdens may not wholly discourage,
nor make the work to cease.

Let no offense be taken if I do not mention all. It is not disrespect to any
good man; but only forgetfulness, and the want of some good Remembrancer at my
Elbow: For I am in the stocks, shut up, cannot go out to others, and few have
the kindness to come at me.

1. After the killing Uniformity Act had disseized Mr. Thomas Shelmerdine,
Death followed; he was Lancashire: born, bred in Christ's College, Cambridge,
served God in the Gospel of his Son* was a diligent Preacher at Criche diverse
yea^s, where he was encompassed with many good old Puritans, that lived in that
Parish and about it, who did strengthen his hands much in his work; he was a
man very cheerful in converse. He was a kind Husband to an holy, but very
melancholy Wife. From Crich he removed to Matlock, where he did the work of
his place, lived peaceably with his Neighbors, and found more benefit by his
peace, than his successor found by his contention. From Matlock, after Aug. 24.
1662. he removed to a dwelling in Wic^sworth, where he lived not long; but fell
sick of the sickness of which he dyed* In his sickness he would say to his very
Friends, that he was going to his Preferment, and some few days before his
death, he said to an Honest Soul that informed me, that next to my hopes of
Heaven, I rejoice that I turned out of Matlock. He lived not to have any more
removes by renewed violence; but was housed and laid in his bed of rest at*
Wicksworth, a place that he had labored much in, being one of them that kept a
Weekly Lecture there; and lives in his Son Mr. Daniel Shelmerdine, who is an
active spirited man in the Ministry, and goes about doing good.

2. After him went Mr. Stanley of Eyam: A man of worth, and had been long a
painful Minister in the ^eake. After he was outed, the Plague siezed that
place* and there (if I do not mistake) he continued, and (though not then a
Minister of that place,) yet he showed himself both a Minister, and did many
good offices to that place, during that ^ore and very mortal Visitation. My
acquaintance was slender with him; but they that knew him spoke very well of
his Praying and Preaching. I am not certain what year he dyed.

3. Mr. John Oldfield or O^efield, born near Chesterfield, brought up at
Dronfield School, at that time famous. He was outed from Carsington. A general
Scholar; a great Master in the Tongues and Mathematics. He had a Mechanical
Head and Hand, capable of any thing, he had opportnity to get insight into. I
mention not his University Education: For what some would reflect upon him, as
a disparagement, was really his great honor; that he was a man of so great
Learning and worth, and yet beholden to no University for it. It is manifest to
all that knew him, that he was a Judicious Divine, a good Casuist, a workman in
Preaching that needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, he
was pertinent, methodical, a man that was clear in opening his Text, and spoke
very close to Conscience from it. He knew well the inside of Religion. Few that
heard him, but they did discern his understanding of the mystery of Godliness,
that he spoke from his Heart, and they felt his words come to theirs. He was of
few words and reserved, not at all talkative; but give him but occasion by
starting Discourse, get him but upon his Knees, or put him upon Writing or
Preaching work, and then you would soon find he wanted neither Words nor Sense.
Oh, he was a Man of Prayer; some dear ones that are left behind, and have had
no small burdens of Affliction since they lost him, do feel the want of his
Prayers, to lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees. He was of a
very quiet Spirit; a people amongst whom he labored very ticcle, very
capricious, very hard to be pleased in Ministers, yet centered in him; and I am
sure his Name is precious amongst them: And well he may; for I am sure amongst
them, and some Neighboring Meetings to them, he spent himself, and was spent
by his great labors, in dispencing Holy Mysteries, Word and Sacraments amongst
them. This good Man had many removes after he was outed, but God told his
wanderings, and he had Songs in the Houses of his Pilgrimage. At length he
pitched at Alfreton, from whence he took many weary steps to serve his Master,
and was very useful in that Neighborhood; but at last was forced by his
Infirmities to cease from his Labors, and now rests from them, and those works
follow him. He has built himself a lasting Monument in his small piece about
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, the substance of some Lectures
at Wicksworth. And in his larger piece about Prayer: Those things are
discoveries of the Man: Yea, God has built him a Monument in such a set of
Children, as God has blessed few with, Mr. John Oldfield lives in three Sons
of the Fathers Principles, actually in the Ministry, whose parts are above the
common rate of most of their years, and their Piety, Zeal, and Industry
answerable to their Parts. He dyed June 5. 1682. in the 55th. year of his Age.

4. Mr. John Billingsley, Kentish Man, born at Chatham, educated in both
Universities, outed from Chesterfield, an ingenuous Man, strict to his own well
understood Principles, an accurate savoury Preacher, an exemplary walker, a Man
elegant in every thing, a diligent Reader, and observer of what he Read, ready
with his Pen. Few men have left more excellent Collections behind them than he,
which are happily fallen into his Sons hand, that knows well how to use them.
His outward Bodily appearance was small and mean, but he had a great Soul, rich
in Grace and Gifts He left his place at Chesterfield, because he could not keep
his Place and his Peace, but he kept his Affections and Care over them;
hazarded his Health and Liberty to serve them. If Chesterfield People would
reflect upon his Labors amongst them, and his warm Letters written to some of
them, they must needs know that a Prophet was amongst them, both able and
faithful. The Pin of the Uniformity Act, driven by hands that were fit tools
for such mischievous work, pushed him out of his Pulpit and House, and the
hurricane of the Oxford Act drove him from his hired House and Town to
Mansfield; in which he passed the residue of his sojourning time in fear,
wrought for the Salvation of others, and wrought out his own, was ever serious
and laborious: But toward his latter end his Motion was very quick, made
actual preparation for Death, desired his poor outed Brethren, cast into
Mansfield, (as he was* to come together a little before his Death, to put him
into the hands of God by Prayer, made a short Confession of his Faith in, and
sole dependence on the alone Righteousness of Christ; and not long after went
full sail into the Kingdom of God: He dyed May 30. 1683. He writ something
against Quakers, and Printed a Sermon with it, which gives the World a taste of
his Abilities. He lives in his Son, who bears his Fathers Name, and has his
Fathers Spirit, the true Son of such a Father, filling up the vacancy by his
Fathers death in Ministerial Labors; in which (in my Judgment) he gives no
just occasion to any to despise his Youth.

5. Mr. Luke Cranwell, born at Loughborough, in the County of Leicester,
Educated in Christ's College, outed from Peter's Parish in Derby, a knowing, a
courageous, zealous, and a very upright Man. Some now alive knew how deeply he
engaged to restore Monarchy, but when restored it engaged not for him. He fell
by the Decree of Uniformity, that spared not Age nor Parts, nor considered any
Service done, but levelled all that lay in its way, and spoke no other
Language, than bow or break. He was not very ready in Elocution; but very
Scriptural, solid, and substantial in all his Discourses; his Sermons when
looked over by Writers, or thought over by understanding Hearers, were found to
be full of Divinity; weighty and rational good matter filled them. He had some
competent Skill in Physic before he was outed; and when he perceived, he must
no longer trade his Ministerial Talents publicly, he resolved to try what he
could do in his other faculty. Since he was cut off from the public service of
Souls, he betook himself to serve Bodies, (though not deserting his Ministry,
neither in his Affection, nor as to its Exercise). In this Employment he grew
presently very Judicious, Skilful, Useful, and by Gods Blessing very
Successful. By this he maintained himself and his Family very comfortably, kept
good Hospitality, did as readily help his Brethren, and the poor among his
Neighbors, without any desire or expectation of Fees, as he did the rich and
greatest. He had a working head. He understood well what he read, and did find
out some Magistrals of his own; many happy and effectual Medicines. He was a
cheerful Man, and to appearance very strong; but after he began to decline, he
run down speedily. His loss was, and is much lamented: He was indeed a beloved
Physician. That he might be out of the reach of the Oxford Act, he went to
Kegworth in Leicestershire, and there lived and dyed Nov. 11. 1683. on the
Lords day.

6. Mr. Joseph Moore, Nottingham born, Educated in St. John's College in
Cambridge, in the best days of that College, when the truly Reverend,
singularly Learned, and eminently Holy Dr. Tuckney presided there, a Man fitted
for wise and holy Government. He was sober minded from his Youth. He entered
young into the Ministry; but his Youth was not despicable; being grave,
serious, and savoury. He was forced from his public Ministry, which he
exercised at Sandiacre; by the Act of Uniformity, spent the residue of his time
in diverse private Families, in Praying, Preaching, Catechizing, all which he
performed far beyond what might be expected from his years. He was an hard
Student, a searching Man, a pertinent profitable Preacher, lived well, and dyed
happily, November. 27. 1684 Interred in Carsington Church.

7. 8. The two Stanyforths, Mr. Jonathan and Mr. Timothy, one served Jesus
Christ in the Gospel at Allestrey, the other at Hogneston; both their mouths
stopped by the Act of Uniformity. They were the Children of an Ancient Godly
Minister, and an eminently pious and found Mother. They were two good Men, gave
much attendance to Reading, had a good Library. After their outing, and the
entrance of the Oxford Act, they were driven from pillar to post, yet I find
that in all places they were at work, and the Lord gave them success. I hope
there are diverse about Heage will bless God for their Night-labours. There are
some that look white for the Harvest, and several Families long, and follow
after the Word. These two Brothers lived some years together, and dyed very
near one to another. They made their last remove to an honest, but an obscure
Family: And from thence they took their flight one after another, from that
obscure corner to a lightsome and large place. They dyed both of them with much
inward satisfaction, that they were going to that Heaven they had chosen and
long labored for. They had lively hopes in their dying Moments.

9. Mr. Samuel Hieron, Brother to Mr. John Hieron, made no great figure in the
World, but was an honest man, and an useful Preacher; he had a room in the
hearts of Gods people amongst whom he labored. Few men's outward circumstances
more pressed their Conformity, than his did; yet he followed his Conscience,
and left a pretty Living at Shirley, upon August 24. 1662. and threw himself
and all his, into the hands of Gods Providence. And though he removed from
place to place, and every where met with hard pennyworths; yet he found God
pityful, and of tender compassion; had enough to carry him to his Journeys end;
and (through the workings of Gods good Providence) his, that he has left
behind him, I hope will not be exposed to poverty, or coutempt. He dyed March
24. 1687.

10. Mr. Samuel Wright, outed at Heanor, a good Man, a very able Preacher:
Lived in much weakness for diverse years after his outing. He could not preach,
as the rest of his more healthful Brethren; but when he did, he preached to
very good purpose.

11. Mr. John Bingham, outed from Marston upon Dove. A Man of much Integrity,
Zeal, and Faith; hearty for God, and in worst of times and things kept up his
heart, waiting for, and confidently expecting the Salvation of God. Thus he
hoped to the end, and lived to see some dawnings of light, which he hoped would
grow to a more perfect day; and so departed in peace.

12. Mr. Joseph Sweinam was not formally put out by the Act of Uniformity, but
really he was, for foreseeing that Acts commencement at Bartholomew day, he
thought good to make a mixtly voluntary secession sometime before its taking
place, and so was not, and yet was expelled by it. He was a Man very well
qualified to fill so august a place as Allhallows in Derby, a very able
Preacher, a great Master of Language, and lives in his Son Mr. Thomas Swetnam,
whose abilities are well known by some few Sermons he has Published, and by
his frequent labors.

13. I mention not diverse driven out of the Country, men very valuable; viz.
Mr. S. B. Mr. R. M. Mr. S. C. who (though they be alive) yet are dead as to the
Country and Places of their usefulness.

Thus have I done something to do my dear Brethren right, and pay my respects
to them. And this I have done, partly to provoke others to do the like in other
Countries, and especially to stir up those that are able to decypher the
Brethren I have mentioned, or any of them; to write their Lives more fully than
I have done. Partly to stir up Derbyshire Christians, to dear remembrances of
their dead Ministers; to reflect upon their Doctrine and Life, and to stir them
up to a Duty (which I fear is much neglected) of visiting their Fatherless and
Widows in their distress. Read the History, 2 Kings 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
They were offered upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith; in some sense
you ought, (as David once did) Ask whether there be any of theirs who need your
kindness, and show the kindness of the Lord unto them, for their worthy
Husbands, and Fathers sake. Their love to you (like Jonathans to David) passed
the love of Women. And furthermore to call upon you to adore and admire Gods
goodness, that has raised you up many young Men that preach, pray, and live at
a great rate; that hold fast, and hold forth the form of sound words, which
they have heard of Gods Servants in Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus.
Oh when you consider this, Sing, because so many are the Children of the
desolate Ministry. Their Rod has blossomed, and brought forth Almonds: Say in
your hearts, who has begotten me these? Who has brought up these, seeing I am
desolate, a captive, removing to and fro, left alone? Isa. 49. 21. Oh you are
not straitened in Ministers: Cry to God that you may not be straitened in your
own Bowels.

Yea lastly, (If it were possible) to bring the rigid Men for Uniformity to
repent of their great sin in composing and imposing such things, as stopped the
mouths of such Servants of God. I have showed you what mouths it stopped in
Derbyshire; and if you ask what it has done in other Provinces, Cities, Towns,
and Counties* you will find alike, if not a sadder account. So that as one
opening the mischiefs of War, concludes his paragraph, h^c sunt Belli Decora;
so I may say, when I have mentioned the outed Ministry, these are the
Decencies, the Graces, the Triumphs, and Spoils of Uniformity. What has cast
away vilely the shields of the mighty? Uniformity. What has slain the Beauty
of England, and made the mighty fall? Uniformity. What has despoiled the neck
of the Church like the Tower of David, builded for an Armoury, whereon their
hangs a thousand Bucklers, all shields of mighty men? Uniformity. When the very
ingenious Esquire Evelin, in his Book of Forrest-Trees, mentions the goodly
Oaks of England, he cannot forbear to pronounce his Dirae upon Iron Masters,
and Iron works in England, that have made such wastes. I am for no imprecations,
but expostulations with Men for rigid Uniformity. And give me leave to close
this Discourse, by laying before you some sober thoughts by way of Question.

Quest. 1. Where do you find in Scripture a power given to man to make
additions to Religious Worship? Do you not find the contrary in those
Scriptures; Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Prove. 30. 6. Who gave Man power to adopt
unnecessaries into Religion? What bottom stands Magisterial Authority upon?
Ministerial Power is of God, but for this Magisterial, it wants Commission.
Matthew. 23. 8, 9, 10.

Quest. 2. Is not the power of imposing, as dark to thinking men, as the power
of inventing? Whence did you learn to make burdens? Whence to lay them on, and
bind them on? We are tempted to think your Masters are, Matthew. 23. 4. Has God
given you power over the Consciences of men, to ransack their Judgments, and
wrack their Consciences, to ruin all that cannot agree to your Sentiments, to
undo all that cannot do what you will have them? Do you not in this strike down
the pin, upon which the Law and the Prophets hang? Would you that others should
do so to you? What stricture, or beam of right Reason leads you to make your
Judgment the public standard.

Quest. 3. What branch of Justice or Equity is there in so grievous Penalties
for not conforming to such Impositions. The fault is small, if it be a fault.
Should men's brains be knocked out, to kill a Fly on their forehead? But the
Dissenters judge it a Duty to witness against usurpations of Men. They think
they are bound by Gods Law to preserve the purity of Christ's Worship. They
think that a yielding in some things was as a stirrup, by which Antichrist got
into the saddle. Are not these things judged by you indifferent? And must men
be punished, as if they had denied and razed the Fundamental Articles of Faith?
Should you make men spectacles, the filth, and offscouring of all things, upon
these accounts? Who can read either Christianity or Humanity in such severities?

Quest. 4. What awe can be impressed, or obligation fastened on a well informed
Conscience, from Humane Laws establishing, backing, and enforcing such
Impositions? Have not Magistrates supreme and subordinate, their Lines and
Limits, Provinces and Bounds set them by the God of Heaven? Are they makers or
only keepers of Gods Tables? Did the People of England trust their
Representatives to make snares for their Ministers and yokes for the People?
Were they empowered by them to prescribe, and write the grievousness they had
prescribed? They were entrusted to be shields, not swords; healers, not
wounders; they said to them, Let our ruins be under your hands; they never put
themselves into their hands to ruin them.

Quest. 5. What Spirit are you of, when you make all Assemblies but your own,
Seditious Conventicles, Schismatical Meetings, Routs* Riots? Know you not, that
they which acknowledge God, are bound to assemble to worship him? Do you, can
you think it is better not to worship God at all, then not to worship him in
your way and mode? Dare you undertake that this shall hold in the day of
Judgment? Are not you told by some great men of your own, That he that gives
the cause of the Schism is the Schismatic? Do you think, those you displaced
took themselves to be disofficed? Did their People desert them, when you
ejected them? Was the Word of Truth utterly taken out of the mouths you
stopped? Was not Gods word in their hearts, as a burning fire shut up in their
bones, so that they were weary of forbearing and could not stay? Did their
Breasts ache, and must they not draw them out to the Babes, that desire the
sincere milk of the Word? You have some of you called Conventicles, the crying
sin of England: Oh! How crying a sin is it in you that have occasioned them;
yea, necessitated them? A Natural Mother turned out of her own House, will
suckle her Child in the Field, or in the meanest coat, or shed she can set her
foot into. Corners are not our choice, but your force.

Quest. 6. Have not you cause to fear, that the blood of some of these dead
Ministers will be upon you? You judged them unworthy of the World, and God has
thereby been provoked to judge the World not worthy of them. You made their
work much harder to them, and by their journeyings and fastings, and watchings,
in all likelihood you did hurry and hasten them out of the World. Oh that some
of us might live to see a relenting Spirit in you! It would be a joy to me, and
a token for good to you, for otherwise I am greatly persuaded Judgment is
toward you, because Mercy is the promised portion of the Merciful; and
Judgment without Mercy hangs over the heads of them that show* no Mercy.

And so I have finished my Historical and Practical part of this Book: And
shall conclude it with only adding one Chapter more in communicating to you
some Letters written by this Eminent Servant of God Mr. John Hieron, which are
as a Mirror, wherein you may see the Ability and Fidelity of the Holy Man of
God.

CHAP. XI. His Letters.
OF his Letters I promised to give some taste, and make them the Coronis of
this Work: In publishing of which I conceal Names, that I may not reflect upon
the dead, nor justly offend the living.

Again, Let not the living be disturbed; for though the Letters be published,
their Names are not exposed: It will do them no hurt to read those Letters in
Print which they have in Writing. It may do others good to read Letters that
were written to others, possibly they may reach, teach, meet with others,
Hearts being much alike, and the same Corruptions, Temptations in one and
another.

First Letter.
Christian Friend,
YOU desire that I would write to you about your Spiritual Estate, which I take
to be safe and comfortable, so far as one is able to pass Judgment of another;
But no man knows certainly the things of another, save the spirit of a man,
which is in him. 1 Cor. 2. 11. You are then to commune with your own heart, to
search and try your ways, whether you walk after the Spirit, be led by the
Spirit Rom* 8. 14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons
of God. If you ask, How shall I know whether I am led by the Spirit? I Answer,
If you bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, if you follow after Holiness,
sincere Obedience to all Gods Commandments, patience in Affliction, love to
God, Christ, all Saints, love to the Word, fear to offend God, a care to please
God, and keep Conscience pure and void of offense toward God and Man, Godly
sorrow for sin, forsaking every evil way; and above all, believe in the Lord
Jesus Christ, rest upon him, trust in his all-sufficient satisfaction for
pardon of Sin and Eternal Life. And all this I doubt not but you do in some
measure, so that you may conclude, as the Apostle does, Rom* 8. 1. There is
therefore no condemuation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit. May you not comfort your self with these
words? Do not hearken to Satan's suggestions to the contrary, he is an
Adversary. If he cannot hinder your Salvation, he will do what he can to damp
your joy and peace in believing. You ought not to give heed to him; but to
repel him as our Savior did, Get thee behind me, Satan. Your own unbelieving
Heart (for Faith is mixed with unbelief even in Gods Children) also will raise
Objections against you thus: I have many Corruptions in me, unruly Passions, I
am hasty to Anger, Ignorant, have little Knowledge, considering the time and
means I have enjoyed; I am dull in Duty, I Pray without any life or heat, I am
cold in love to God and Jesus Christ, I grow not in Grace, I am blockish, and
remember nothing I hear: And many such things you have to say against your
self. To which I Answer, Grant all this to be true; These are Sins of
Infirmity, which may consist with true Grace: Psalm. 40 12. David says, My sins
are more then the hairs upon my head. Psalm. 73. 22. So foolish was I, and
ignorant, even as a beast before thee. Read Heb. 5. 11, 12. Ye are dull of
hearing, etc. whom yet he highly commends; Heb. 3. 1. and 6. 10. So long as sin
reigns not, has no dominion over you, you need not question your interest in
Christ; and you may know, that sin reigns not when you are grieved for it,
confess and bewa^l it, and pray for grace and help against it; strive and watch
against it, and do what you can to keep your self from your iniquity. Psalm. 18.
23. Consider that none are justified or saved, because they are sinless, pure
and perfect; but blessed are they whose sins are forgiven. Psalm. 32. 1, 2. And
to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
Faith is counted for Righteousness. Romans 4. 5. What was the end of Christ's
coming but to take away sin? Mat. 1. 21. Joh. 1. 29. Also a chief branch of the
Covenant of Grace in Heb. 8. 12. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness.
And therefore be not faithless but believing, as Christ said to Thomas, John
20. 27, 28* And let your heart make the same Answer, that he did, My Lord and
my God. It may be, that your present condition is a grief to you, that you
cannot worship God as you desire, or as in your Health; you can do God no
service. Let not your heart be troubled at this; for God requires no more than
he gives. And it may be no small comfort to you, that you were diligent to
attend upon God in your Health, and when you had Legs, you used them to Gods
glory. And now you are serving God in another way, in the way of Passive
Obedience, in which if you submit to Gods will with Meekness and Patience, you
may do God as good service, as they that preach* or hear* or travel far to the
Word ^ will conclude with those sweet words of Christ: John 14. 1. Let not your
heart be troubled: Believe that God is yours, Christ is yours, the Covenant of
Grace is yours, your Sins are forgiven, the Promises are yours, even the great
Promise: 2 Cor. 6. 18. I will be a Father to you. And that also, Romans 8. 28. We
know that all things shall work together for good to them that love God; Even
all the exceeding great and precious promises in Christ; 2 Pet. 1. 4. which are
yea and Amen, true and faithful. O bless God that ever you were born
Spiritually, that you were born again. Say and sing with David, Psalm. 103. 1.
2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my Soul! And Psalm. 32. at the latter end, Rejoice in
the Lord ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.
Psalm. 48. 14. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide unto
death. And with the Church: Isa. 25. 9. Lo this is our God, we have waited for
him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be
glad, and rejoice in his Salvation. But I may save further labor, and indeed
might have spared this pains; for you have a Book by you, which contains all
that I now write, and much more to the same purpose. The scope and substance of
it is to cheer up and comfort poor Souls, that walk sad and sorrowful; when
they have no other cause but to rejoice and serve the Lord with gladness; in
which kind of service the Lord is well pleased. I pray you peruse it, and read
it through, till you have got your Heart into a joyful frame. Now I pray, (and
let it be your Daily Prayer) That the God of Love fill you with Joy and Peace
in believing, to whose Grace I commend you.

Yours Unfeignedly.

IT grieves me much for your sake, that the hand of the Lord is gone out
against you in so dreadful a ^rovidence; that it puts me hard to it, how to
minister a word of Consolation to you in this your sad condition. A wise Son
makes a glad Father, but a foolish Son is the heavy^ess of his Mother. I have
no greater joy, than to hear that my Children walk in the Truth: So I know no
greater affliction that can befall Parents, then to have Children walking
contrary to the Truth, and dying in their Sins. Yet is not your Case in this
respect singular. No Temptation has befallen you, but what is common to men,
to good men; witness Aaron, Ely, David, with many others, whom I could name,
known both to you and me. You are to acquiess in Gods Providential
Administrations, and not to disquiet your Soul with the doubtfulness of his
Eternal Estate. But to ascribe Righteousness to your Maker; and say with the
Psalmist, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments. How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ^a^es past finding out? Take the
Example of the Prophets, and other Holy Men in Scripture, for an example of
suffering Affliction, and of Patience. Set before you the Patience of Job, who
besides the loss of so great an Estate, lost all his Children, seven in number,
cut off by untimely death; yet how Religiously does he demean himself, how
Patiently to admiration? Two of Aarons Sons in the flower of their Age, and in
the beginning and very first entrance upon that Sacred Function, perish by fire
from Heaven; a heavy stroke, arguing great indignation; yet mark the Fathers
pious behavior under such a mark of Gods displeasure, [ Aaron held his Pea^e.]
As for David's lamentation over Absalom, it is not to be drawn into imitation:
For the bottom of his grief was not purely, nor chiefly (as far as appears)
sorrow for his sin, and the eternal condition of his Soul; but rather proceeded
from Natural Affection, and over much fondness and indulgence, because of his
exquisite Beauty, which the Scripture does highly extol: For he takes not one
sigh at the death of Ammon, who also dyed in his sin, and also by a violent
death by the hand of his Brother. At other times, and in other cases his
Carriage was commendable. Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth;
because thou did it. If you say, this is not to the purpose, this comes not
home to the point, what comfort can you afford me touching my Sons Salvation,
or what ground of hope? Here I confess I am at a loss, and must say, as the
King of Israel to the poor Woman, crying, Help, O King. If the Lord do not help
thee, whence shall I help thee? If the Word yield thee no hope, or solid ground
of Comfort, I should but proffer flattery, and visions of my own heart; if I
should offer to give Topics of Comfort out of my own Invention. You are not
without hope, that God might give him Repentance, to recover himself out of the
snare of the Devil, if your intelligence be not to the contrary. There is place
left for hope. Adversity often opens the eye that sin had shut; as we see in
Joseph's Brethren, who had lain in their sin above twenty years, without
remorse, till Affliction awakened them: The like we see in Manasses; when he
was in affliction, he humbled himself, and besought God, who was entreated of
him, though he had been a prodigious sinner. So the prodigal Son by straits,
and other awakening afflictions, came to himself, and returned to his Fathers
house. And the example of Rochesters Repentance is remarkable. You cannot say
you were sure his Repentance was true; neither are you sure of the contrary. So
you are between hope and fear; let that keep you from despair. But suppose the
worst* to use the words of Bildad to Job, If thy Children have sinned against
him, and he have cast them away for their transgressions; (by the way this was
a harsh censure) if it should be thus, yet here is this Comfort* that he dyed
in his Youth, not a sinner of an hundred years old, but ^ young, vain,
ignorant, seduced person, to use your own words: An^ so his punishment will be
less, than if he had lived to gray hairs, and a^l his life had walked in the
way of his own heart, and so had served diverse lusts and pleasures. You have
parted with some Children before now; these you make no question, but are* in
Heaven; you have others living, (I know not how many) they will strive to be a
Comfort to you, (I hope) by walking in the fear of God. And it is a rare thing,
and not often seen, that a^l a Man's Children, where they be numerous, do make
good proof; but one, or more of them go astray: I mean, where Parents are Godly
and careful. Corruptions too often prevails above Education. Imitate David, not
in his immoderate mourning for Absalom; but in his moderation touching Ammon,
he was comforted concerning Ammon, seeing he was dead. And at the death of the
Infant, Now he is dead (says he) wherefore should I fast? Can I bring him back
again? I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. Which of you by taking
thought can add to his stature on cubit? Put away excessive grief from your
heart, and rejoice in hope of Glory to come. Be thankful for the work of Grace
in your own heart, that God is yours, Christ is yours, all things are yours,
Life and Death, things present, and things to come. Now the God of Peace fill
you with all Joy and Peace in believing; to whose Grace I commend you, and rest

Your unfeigned Lover.

SIR,
OUT of a deep sense of your Affliction, and tender commiseration of your great
loss, in parting with your dearest Daughter, I write these Lines, to testify
our compassion and fellow* feeling of your sorrow; which to do is every
Christians Duty; much more the Duty of near Relations: The same which Job calls
for from his Friends: Job 19. 21. Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my
Friends; ^or the hand of God has touched me. That you are full of heaviness,
and have great sorrow of heart for the loss of so sweet a Child, I make ^o
doubt, nor do I at all blame you for it; so that you mourn mode^ately, and
after a right manner. 1 Cor. 7. 30. Let them that weep, be ^s though they wept
not; but I desire you may sorrow after a Godly sort, ^ith Godly sorrow, which
works Repentance to Salvation not to be re^ented off; but the sorrow of the
world works death. 2 Cor. 7. 10. That you may mourn aright, you are to look
up to God, and see his and in this stroke. Ezekiel. 24. 16. Son of man, behold I
take away ^he desire of thine eyes with a stroke. And remember God is wise, the
^nly wise God. And wise Agents act for some end, some wise and ^reat end. God
does nothing in vain; but the skill is to find out the and of Gods
chastisement. He is a wise man, that can do that, can know the meaning, and
understand the Errand of Gods Rod, and see his Name written upon it* Mich. 6.
9. for this let us search the Scriptures, which make known to us Gods mind, and
our Duty in such cases. Let us consult the Word, make it the men of our
counsel, as David did, Psalm. 119. 24. and pray with Job, Job 10. 2. Show me
wherefore thou contendest with me. To understand Gods meaning in his correcting
us, and the chief end he aims at, (though some other ends God may have, which
for brevity sake I omit) read Job 33. 17. where you may see Gods end is to open
men's ears to instruction, to with hold man from his purpose; namely, of sinning
against God, to hide pride from man. Job 36. 8, 9, 10. If they be holden in
cords of affliction, he shows them their work, their evil works, their
transgressions, that they have exceeded; (i. e.) gone beyond the bounds, which
God sets in his Word: He opens their ear to discipline, and commands
that they turn from iniquity. To the same purpose you find in Isa. 27. 9. By
this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this is all the fruit to take
away his sin. Agreeable hereunto has been the practice of Gods people, to
humble themselves under Gods afflicting hand. Lam. 3. 39, 40. Wherefore does a
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? Let us search, and
try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. Micah 7. 9. I will bear the indignation
of the Lord because I have sinned against him. Psalm. 38. 18. I will declare
mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. Where this Duty is neglected God
complains of them: Isa. 9. 13. This people turns not to him that smites
them; neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Jer. 5. 3. Thou have stricken
them, but they have not grieved; (i. e. for their sins) they have refused to
return. Chapter 44. 10. They are not humbled to this day. To the right performance
of this Duty gracious Promises are made: 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my people shall
humble themselves, (under Judgments) and pray, and seek my face, and turn from
their evil ways, I will hear from Heaven, I will forgive their sin, I will
heal* their Land. Job 33. 27. If any say I have sinned, and perverted that
which is right, and it profits me not, he will deliver his Soul from going
into the pit. And this is the use you, and every one in your circumstances,
should make of Gods Correction, to humble your self under his mighty hand: To
say as Job 34. 31. I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more: Ver.
32. That which I see not, teach me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.
Commune with your own heart. Psalm. 4. 4. Ask your Soul how it does, Am I in
Christ? Am I born again? Is there a work of Grace wrought upon my heart? That
will appear by your walking: Do you walk as becomes the Gospel? Phil. 1. 27.
Do you live soberly, righteously, godly? Is this your constant walking? Do you
pray continually in your Family? In your Closet? Do you sanctify the Lords day
duly? Do you teach your Children the knowledge and fear of God? Do you
Catechize them? Do you set them a good Example? Do you fill up every Relation
with Duty? Have you not sat with vain persons? Psalm. 26. 4. Are you a companion
to all that fear God? Psalm. 119. 63. Do you honor such above others? Psalm. 15.
4. Do you delight in their company? Psalm. 16. 3. This is that we are commanded
to do, to bethink our selves: 2 Chronicles. 6. 37. To consider our ways: Hag. 5. 7.
To judge our selves: 1 Cor. 11. 31. To examine our selves whether we be in the
Faith, or no. 2 Cor. 13 5. Now let Conscience speak, deal faithfully and truly
with your self; and where you find Duty neglected, Sin committed, confess your
faults to God freely; bewail them with a broken and contrite heart; pray
earnestly for Grace, and a new heart; for power over your corruptions; resolve
on a new course of life, to become a new man by the assistance of Gods Grace.
Abandon ill Company, and all occasions of sin for the time to come; run not
into temptation, but watch and pray, and keep your self from your own iniquity.
Psalm. 18. 23. If I regard iniquity in my heart, (i. e. allow my self in any one
sin) God will not hear my prayer. Psalm. 66. 18. Whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, and offend in one point, (i. e. wittingly, knowingly,) he is guilty of
all; is obnoxious to condemnation, as if he had broken the whole Law. Jam. 2.
10. Let your future practice and reformation speak the truth of your
Repentance. And if you thus turn to God with your whole heart, make application
to Christ by Faith, and his Blood shall cleanse you from all sin: So God will
receive you to Mercy, as the Father received the Prodigal Son with all
expression of Love. He that covers his sin shall not prosper; but he that
confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy. Prove. 22. 13. If you dare not
set up a Judgment Seat in your own Heart, and keep a privy Sessions in your own
Conscience, how will you appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and give an
account of all your Thoughts, Words and Actions at the great day? For then must
every one of us give account of himself to God. Then blessed are they whose
sins are forgiven: They may lift up their faces at that day with boldness, when
impenitent sinners shall be confounded, and call to the Rocks and Mountains to
fall on them. They who live in sin, are in danger to dye in sin, and to be
damned eternally for sin. Sin will be sure to find them out to punishment, who
will not now search and find, and cast it out by Repentance and amendment of
Life. Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions; so iniquity
shall not be your ruin. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Thus I have showed you the good and
right way to improve this present cross, and to prevent worse things. Joh. 5.
14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come to you. If God give you an heart to
embrace and hearken to this advice, you will have cause to say with David,
Psalm. 119. 67, 71. Before I was afflicted I went astray; but now I have kept
thy word: And it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn
thy statutes. And I beseech you, do not reject the Counsel of God against your
own Soul. Put it in practice without delay. Break off your sins by
Righteousness, forthwith to day, while it is called to day; lest your heart ^e
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3. 13. All flesh is grass: And no
man knows the day of his death. But it may be said to any of us; This night
shall thy Soul be required of thee. You seem to have a crazy Body. You have had
diverse warnings of late to mind you of your frailty: And it is an high point of
wisdom to consider of a Man's latter end* Deuteronomy. 32. 29. What if Death should
come like a Thief suddenly, and give no warning? Then happy are all they, who
with the wise Virgins have got Oil in their Lamps; saving Grace and Sincerity.
If a Flood come, happy are they who (with Noah) have prepared an Ark for the
saving of their Souls. Make sure of Christ; keep Conscience pure, so it will be
peaceable; keep integrity and uprightness, so you may look Death in the face
without fear. I will conclude with the words of Solomon; Prove. 19. 20. Hear
counsel, receive instruction; that thou may be wise in thy latter end.
Tender Love and Compassion to your Soul was the only motive, which set my Pen
on writing these Lines. Take them in good part, and pass a favorable
construction on them, peruse them, ponder them; for they are of weight, of
worth, the very Word of God, useful, and necessary to be followed; nearly
conducing to the Salvation of your Immortal Soul. Consider what I say, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things. 2 Timothy 2. 7. To his Grace I commend
you, being

Your Servant for the salvation of your Soul.

BEcause my former Letter found so good acceptance with you, I am encouraged
once again to write to you; to let you know how welcome, and joyful a thing it
is to your Friends, to understand, that you are become a new man; that you have
put off your former Conversation, and abandoned all vain Company; that you keep
much at home, and take delight in your Wife and Children, (as you have just
cause, for they are sweet Children, Dutiful and Obedient) also that you pray
constantly with them, and frequent the most lively, and powerful, and
Soul-saving Preaching of Gods Word on the Lords days. Oh, how good and how
pleasant a thing it is to all that love you, (that love your Soul) to hear
these things of you! Now I pray you suffer a word of further Exhortation, and
give me leave to beseech you, as Barnabas did those newly converted Christians;
Acts 11. 23. That with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord.
Resolve by the help of Grace, that you will never cast off your hopeful
beginnings, nor turn aside to crooked ways; but continue steadfast in the good
way you have taken up unto the end. The end is that which crowns all good
actions; and to perseverance in well-doing are all the promises made. Romans 2.
7. Mat. 10. 22. Rev. 21. 7. And our Baptismal Vow binds us to keep Gods Holy
Will and Commandments all the days of our lives. Now that you have begun to
forsake the broad way, that leads to destruction, and to enter into the
strait way that leads unto life; (O think what a Mercy it is, that God has
awakened you (with Mary) to choose the good part, that shall not be taken from
you) you see the thing is feizable, and Godliness is not a thing impossible, if
there be but a willing mind. If you should now, or at any time hereafter fall
away, it would not be a sin of infirmity, because you cannot help it; but of
perverseness, because you will not be at the pains which a Godly life
requires: For use and acquaintance with a Christian life makes it much more
easy to you afterward, then at the beginning. For the greatest difficulty
that is in a Godly life, is from custom to the contrary; so that if after some
acquaintance with it, when you have overcome much of the hardness of it you
should give it over, that would be utterly destructive. But I hope better
things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, though I thus speak. By all
means be careful to set such a watch over your self, and so to avoid all
occasions and temptations, as may preserve you from all wilful breaches, and
danger of Apostasy. And because by our own strength we are not able to stand,
see that you be much in secret Prayer. Mat. 6. 6. Beg of God a new heart, a
clean heart, an upright heart. Psalm. 51. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 1. Grace is of absolute
necessity to Salvation, if we believe our Savior. John 3. 3. 5. and 7. A work
of Grace renewing the heart will make Christ's yoke of Obedience easy, and his
burden light, so his Commandments will not be grievous. 1 John 5. 3. It is by
the help of the Spirit changing and sanctifying the heart, that we mortify the
deeds of the flesh. Romans 8. 13. There may be an outward Reformation, where
there is no inward work of Regeneration. So a man may be in the condition of
the Scribes, Mark 12. 34. not far from the Kingdom of Heaven; yet never enter
into it O wrestle with God in Prayer, as for Mercy to pardon sin past; so for
Grace, and the Spirit of Sanctification to renew your heart, and to reform your
life; that so you may walk before God to all well-pleasing. If you would do so,
continue instant in Prayer: Col. 4. 2. God will give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask it. Luke 11. 13. Christ assures us, That whatsoever we ask in his
name, the Father will grant. Thus you shall become a good Tree, bringing forth
the good Fruits of Righteousness, Holiness, and Sobriety, to the Praise and
Glory of God, the Credit of the Gospel, good Example of others, to the
rejoicing of all good Christians, and the overlasting Salvation of your own
Soul. Yea, there will be joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one
sinner that repents. Luke 15. 10. So whether you live or dye, you shall be
the Lords: And this is considerable at such a time as this, when Sickness is so
Epidemical, and many dye every where, and you your self seem to be of no strong
Constitution, as it appears by your often Infirmities. I say it again,
Regeneration is the one thing necessary, without which, outside Reformation is
but like painting a rotten Post, or making clean the outside of the Cup and
Platter, when the inside is full of excess and extortion. Mat. 23. Though you
know these things, yet I thought it not unuseful to put you in remembrance of
them; that you may be settled and established in the present Truth, and so may
continue to the end: Which is the earnest desire, and shall be the Prayer of

Your very Friend for the Salvation of your Soul.

SIR,
I Fully purposed to have given you a Visit; but hearing your Wife was so near
her Travail I forbore till a fitter opportunity. And since I understand to my
grief, that she is delivered of two Children, both dead; and for which I am
informed, you are much troubled; for which I cannot blame you, for the
Providence is sad: And a Christian should be a Man of Wisdom, to see Gods Name
written upon the Rod. So was the Name of Aaron, for the Tribe of Levi, written
upon his. Numb. 17. 3. And as his brought forth Buds and Blossoms, and ripe
Fruits; so should Gods Rod of Correction yield good Fruit, in them that are
exercised therewith, even the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness and Repentance.
Hear the Rod and who has appointed it. Micah 6. 9. The Rod has a voice: It
comes upon some Errand, or other, if we were wise enough to understand its
meaning. Which that we may do, the best way is to Commune with your own hearts:
Psalm. 4. 4. To search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord. Lam. 3. 40. And
be earnest with God in Prayer, that he would open our ears to discipline. Job
10. 2. Show me why thou contendest with me. Job 34. 31, 32. Surely it is meet
to be said to God, I have born chastisement. And I would not have you or your
Wife give way to excessive sorrow in this case; but follow the Counsel of the
Word (which ought to be the Rule of our Passions, as well as our Actions); Let
your moderation be known to all men. Phil. 4. 6. And they that weep (for
outward Crosses) be, as though they wept not. 1 Cor. 7. 30. Learn we must to
exercise the grace of Self-denial; which our Savior has taught us by his own
Example: John 18. 11. The cup which my Heavenly Father has given me, shall I
not drink it? And it was a very bitter one. Again, Now what I will, but what
thou will. God is wiser than Man, he is God only wise. We see but a little way,
Gods understanding is infinite. Times are ill at present, they may be worse;
yea, so bad, that people may have cause to say, Luke 23. 29. Blessed are the
barren, and the Womb that never bear, and the Paps which never gave suck. Yet
if Children be a Blessing, as I grant they be in themselves, and desirable,
there is no time over-passed; but you may have your Quiver full of such Arrows,
if God see it good for you: And if not, I hope you are more a Christian, than
to desire them. Beware I beseech you both, of the least impatience in this
case; and if any such bitter root should spring up in your hearts, check it,
and chide it away, as Job did his Wives perverse motion; saying, Shall we
receive good at the hands of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil; But this
I advise you, as soon as your Wife is strengthened, appoint a solemn day of
Humiliation, to entreat the favor of God, that this affliction may be
sanctified, and the anger of God (if you conceive he be displeased) may be
turned away from you, and from your Family: Which having done, acquiess in the
good pleasure of God; Let him do to you as to him seems best: So said David
in the like case, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the
Lord, he will, etc. If he thus say, I have no delight in thee: Behold, here I
am, etc. This course a Kinsman of yours and ours, was advised to take after the
death of all his first Children, and it pleased God to give issue, perfect
Children; three at least, that are all alive, Men and Women at this day. One
may be too impetuous in his desire of this, or the other Earthly Blessing,
which desire God may grant in Anger. So we see in Rachel, who was faulty in
this kind, and had a Son whom she named Bennoni, Son of my sorrow, which cost
her her Life. Be you very thankful to God, that has spared the Tree; though
the Fruit perish. Resign your Wills entirely to the Will of God, which is a
wise, just, rational, gracious Will, who does all things for the best to them
that love him: Whereas our Wills are crooked, unjust, foolish, and often
unreasonable. Also God is our Sovereign Lord, to whom we must all subscribe, as
to his commanding, so to his disposing Will. These Lines I desire you to impart
to your second self also, who may be therein concerned equally with your self.
Thus with my Prayers to God (who teaches his People to profit, both by his
Word, and Rod) that his hand may be sanctified to you (and sanctified
Afflictions are better then unsanctified Prosperity, says Mr. Dod) so as you
may be able to say by good Experience, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. I commend you to the grace of God.

Yours, etc. J. H.
Sept. 30. 1680.
I Beseech you suffer a word of friendly plainness and freedom in a matter of
deep concernment. I shall not play the Orator to make you a learned Speech, nor
dress my words with Eloquence, wherewith to tickle and please you; but I shall
write words of Truth and Soberness, and that upon a weighty errand, to which I
request your attention. How much better are the wounds of a friend, than the
kisses of an enemy. The business of these lines is to desire you to reflect
with seriousness upon your late piece of Justice in the conviction of those
good Christians, who now by your means are sentenced to suffer, as evil doers;
when yet you can find no Occasion against them, but what Daniel's Accusers (who
were Heathens) found against him, concerning the Law of his God. Dan. 6. 5.
Pray weigh this your act in the balance of the Sanctuary, and try if it will
hold weight there. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ. 2
Cor. 5. 10. Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God. Romans 14.
12. So then, if in this action you have dealt truly and sincerely with God and
his House, you may rejoice and take comfort in it. If as a Magistrate you have
spoken righteousness, judged uprightly, as Psalm. 58. 1. If you have judged Gods
People with righteousness, if you have defended the poor and fatherless, if you
have done justice to the afflicted and needy, if you have rid them out of the
hand of the wicked, as Psalm. 82. 3, 4. then shall you have peace in your own
conscience, and a good reward at the resurrection of the just, when God will
reward every man according to his works. But if you have judged unjustly, and
accepted the persons of the wicked, if you have broken in pieces Gods people,
and afflicted his heritage, if you have persecuted Christ in his members, if
you have hindered the progress of the Gospel, and forbidden Ministers to preach
to people whereby they may be saved: then know that God stands in the
Congregation of the mighty, he is Judge among the Gods, Psalm. 82. 1. He is
among them to approve, protect, and reward them, if they judge righteous
judgments; he is among them, as a curious observer of their judgments; if they
corrupt justice and turn righteousness into gall, he will bring every of their
works into judgment, and acquit such as they condemn, and pass a righteous
Sentence upon their crooked and unjust censures. Magistrates are styled Gods,
Psalm. 82. 6. because invested with Gods image above others, receive authority
from God, and should act for God, judge as God himself would judge. But
seriously Sir, do you think, that when God the Son, the Lord Jesus Christ shall
come to judge the quick and dead, that he (I say) will approve those Judges, or
Justices that pass Sentences and give out warrants to spoil Ministers, and
Christians of their goods for preaching, praying, or hearing Sermons? Is
preaching and praying now become an iniquity to be punished by the judge? By a
Christian Mgiestrate? The Apostle says, woe be to me if I preach not the
Gospel; but by such manner of acting it should seem to be quite contrary; woe to
me if I do preach the gospel. And as I have hitherto considered you as a
Magistrate, so give me leave to look on you a little as a Christian, and see
how agreeable to the truth of Christianity this act will appear, how well it
becomes a Christian Magistrate. Every Christian ought to promote Christ's
Kingdom, according to the Lords prayer, Thy Kingdom come. But suppressing of
preaching is the direct means to overthrow Christ's Kingdom, and to build up
Satan's. By these late actings, in which you lead the way, how many preachers
have been silenced, how many hundreds of Sermons suppressed? by which who knows
how many lost Sheep might have been found, how many sinners converted, Saints
edified, the eyes of many blind opened, dead Souls quickened and eternally
said? If it be so blessed a work to convert one sinner, Jam. 5. 20. whose work
is it to hinder sinners conversion? What titles does St. Paul give Elymas for
an act of like nature, for endeavoring to hinder the preaching but of one
Sermon, see Acts 13. 10. He that withholds corn, people shall curse him,
Prove. 11. 26. much worse do they who withold the bread of life from people. I
was hungry and ye gave me no meat, Mat. 25. 42. Will Christ say to the wicked
at the last day; but what will he say to oppressers, Spoilers, Sons of
violence; may he not say to them, I had a little meat, clothes, money, and ye
took them from me? sure, that is worse; and worst of all is taking away
spiritual food. As the Soul is more excellent than the Body so much worse is it
to take away the bread of life, far worse, than to take away corporal food.
Pray consider how in consistent this is with love to God and Christ, which all
Christians profess. Joh. 21. 15, 17. Peter, love thou me? feed my lambs, feed
my sheep. A Minister can no way better testify his love to Christ, than by
diligent and faithful feeding the flock with sincere milk of the word, nor a
Magistrate, than by encouraging the faithful dispensers of the word; whom to
discourage and punish for doing their duty, how highly displeasing and
provoking to the Lord is such an act? who rebuked even Kings for their sakes,
saying do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105 14* Nor can you allege justly, that
you punish them not for preaching and hearing, but for transgressing the law,
when you know, they have authority both to preach and hear by his Majesty's
Declaration and License under his hand and Seal; yea and a Bill of ease is
under consideration of this present Parliment to justify their proceedings. And
does it become inferior Magistrates to interpose, or rather to oppose that
Indulgence; which both King and Parliament have thought meet to grant? Nor need
you to fear the loss of an hundred pounds, in case you had refused to act. For
men of judgment are of Opinion, that the forfeiture is not at all reoverable in
Law. And if it were, what Informer dare contend with you for it? But suppose
the worst, read 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. What shall we do for the hundred Talents? The
Lord is able to give thee much more than this. Oh how vile a thing is the love
of money, 1. Tim. 6. 9. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is
not in him, 1 John 2. 15. I will not be so uncharitable toward you, as not to
hope and believe, that you love Jesus Christ really; yet if you love the world,
i. e. money, esteem credit or any thing in the world above Christ, you love him
not sincerely; Mat. 10. 37. He that loves Father, or Mother etc. more than me,
is not worthy of me, is no good Christian. Give me leave to cite one passage
out of Mr. Baxter -- In Q. Mary's days, when Martyrs were condemned to the
fire, there were many great men, who really loved them, and wished them well,
and their hearts grieved in pity for them, as knowing them to be in the right.
But they loved their honor, wealth, and safety so much better, that they would
sit on the Bench, yea, and give Sentence for their burning, for fear of
hazarding their worldly happiness, was this sincere love, etc. Mr. Baxter
Saints rest. p. 3. page 238.

Say not these men under conviction are Dissenters, Phanaticks, etc. I will not
hazard my reputation to be esteemed a favourer of such. You know Christianity
has ever been reproached, and has suffered under black names. Christ himself
was blasted with the odious name of Samaritane. His Apostles and the first
Christians were termed the sect of the Nazarenes, of which Paul himself was
counted the Ringleader, Acts. 24. 5. an Heretic, v. 14. The Christians of
former ages in England were called Lollards Heretics etc. and in our age
Puritans, Phanaticks. But what if Christ own them for his people and members,
whom the world prosecutes with odious titles? What a case are they in then,
that vex and spoil them of their goods? What if you had been ill thought of by
some vile persons (for wicked men are vile, Psalm. 15. 4. Dan. 11. 21.) you
should the more be had in reputation of wise and good men. To be dispraised and
disparaged by lewd men, is no disgrace, but a commendation; yea, God himself
will honor them that honor him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. But Christ will be ashamed of
them that are ashamed of him, Mark 8. 38. Oh! how fearful is their case, who
fear men more then God, who will rather deny the truth, or act against a good
cause, or a good conscience, than they will displease an Informer? Rev. 21. 8.
The fearful are set in the forefront of the damned crew. Now, good Sir,
consider your ways, look them in the glass of the word, not in the glass of
this world; say what have I done? It had been better wisdom to have done so
before the act, to have viewed the obliquity of it, the consequences with all
the circumstances of it, and to have resolved with Joseph, how shall I do this?
etc. Genesis 39. 9. to have said with Nehemiah, shall such a man as I do this? I
whom God has blessed with so great an Estate, invested with authority to sit
in the Seat of Justice, should not I honor God with my substance, with my
authority? Should I be instrumental in vexing good people for righteousness
sake? Should I hinder the enlarging of Christ's kingdom by surppressing the
Gospel? What evil has the Gospel of Christ done? That the preacher of it, the
professors of it should be thus despightfully used by the world, by professing
Christians; What account can I render to the Lord of this, when it shall be
said, give account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward?
Should I, that was looked upon with much respect by all sober Christians be the
first of all those of my rank, and the leading Man in that action, which tends
directly to the pulling down the walls of Gods Jerusalem, and make the builders
thereof to cease by force and power, which was the work of Heathens and enemies
to Religion? Ezra 4. 23. 24. Then ceased the work of the house of God. Think
how many sighs and tears you wring from the mourners in Sion, how many prayers
and cries are sent up to Heaven for the enlargment of the Gospel and Gospel
Ministers, by your means silenced, Acts 12. 5. And will not God avenge his own
Elect, Luke 18. 7. which cried day and night, though he bear long? Is it good
that you do, to encourage the Vipers and Caterpillars of the land, who thirst
after the spoil and prey, that they may enrich themselves with the labors of
innocent men? For which cause, even for filthy lucre, they act the Devils part,
the grand enemy of man's salvation: They, as he, go about seeking to devour. To
draw a conclusion, wherefore, O Sir, (to use Daniels words, Chap. 4. 27.) Let
my counsel be acceptable, break off your sin by righteousness, and your
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthening of your
Tranquillity. Do what lies in you to deliver the oppressed from violence and
spoill; let the Informers be checked and discouraged, by Missing their expected
pray. Let reparation be made to the Sufferers, by causing that every man have
his goods taken from him, restored again In cases of wrong and offenses done to
our Neigbours, repentance to God is not sufficient, without satisfaction to
man, if there be ability, as I am certain there is in this case. You know
August. saying, which is good divinity, The sin is not forgiven except
restitution be made of that which is taken away. And now I have done, only let
me give you an account, why I take on me this boldness to be thus plain with
you. Surely it is because I honor you, as not only a Gentleman but a
Christian; one who have good things in you, and a Conscience bearing witness to
the truth, and will not rebel against the light, when it shines out, but will
yield an obedient ear, as David speaks, Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite
me, etc. Prove. 28. 23. He that rebukes, etc. Levit. 19. 17. Thou shall not
hate thy Brother, etc. By warrant of these and other Scriptures, I have
adventured to deal plainly with you in this matter, assuring you that my hearts
desire and Prayer to God for you is, that you may be saved. And if it please
God to open your eyes, and touch your heart, then it will never repent you,
that you hearkened to the counsel of a poor Minister, but you will bless God
for it (as David did for Abigails advice, 1 Samuel 25. 32.) that you may make
reparation for what is past, and be kept for the future from work of this sort.
Let the Devils Servants do their Masters drudgery, (for such it is, Rev. 2.
10.) but keep you your self pure. To conclude in the words of a wise Man, but
no Christian; i. e. of Gamaliel, Acts 5. 38, 39. I say refrain from these men,
and let them alone: for if this counsel, or this work be of men, it will come
to naught: But if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it, lest happily you be
found even to fight against God. Now craving pardon for this tediousness and
prolixity, and your candid interpretation, I take leave, and commend you to
God, resting

Your Worships to be commanded John Hieron.
Losco.
Cozen,
IT is now a long time since I saw you: But to me no little grief; I hear an
evil report of your lewd and ungodly course of life, that you lead, to the
great dishonor of God, the grief of your Friends, the danger of your Immortal
Soul, and the ruin of your Family, whom by wasting, and your unthrifty
courses, you must needs bring to Poverty here, and hazard their Eternal
Salvation hereafter, by your ill example, and neglect of honoring and
worshipping of God in your Family, as every Christian is bound to do. Now I pray
you consider your ways; whether is Alehouse haunting, keeping company with
Drunkards, casting off Prayer and all Family Duties, the way to Heaven or Hell?
Is this to walk as the Gospel teaches, Soberly, Righteously, Godly in this
present evil World? Is this to follow the Example, and Godly Education of your
pious Friends, who brought you up in the fear of God? Is this to walk according
to the Vow of your Baptism, in which you were dedicated to the service of God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and in which you promised to forsake the Devil
and all his works, the vanities of the World, and the lusts of the Flesh? Pray,
think how great a sin Perjury is, to be forsworn by breaking a solemn Vow made
to God in the face of a Congregation, which God will require at your hands? And
how fearful a sin is Apostasy, to fall away from your holy profession, which
sometime you made. Read, and tremble at those Scriptures, Prove. 14. 14. 2 Pet.
2. 20. 21. Heb. 10. 29. Will the pleasure of sin for a season make you amends
for the loss of Heaven and Eternal Happiness? Can your good fellows and
companions in wickedness save you from the wrath of God, and the vengeance of
eternal fire? Will they, or can they comfort you in Sickness, at the hour of
Death or day of Judgment? Did the rich man Luke 16. 28. think that his
Brethrens company would be any solace to him in Hell? Why then does he request
so earnestly, that a Preacher might be sent to warn them, that they might turn
and escape the place of torment? Lay these things to heart, and remember your
self in time, before it be too late. And as with the prodigal Son you have run
away from your Fathers house, and from your Duty; so return with him to your
Obedience. Confess and bewail your sins to God, as he did, and forsake them and
you shall find mercy, as he did. But do it betime without delay, defer it not;
lest your heart be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, or least death
come upon you unawares. And if you dye in your sins, Hell follows after.
Abandon the Alehouse and all wicked company, set up Religion in your Family,
pray not only once on a Sabbath day, (I marvel where you learnt that) but every
day morning and night; and break off all your sins by Repentance, and pray for
a new heart; for why will ye dye? Ezekiel. 18. 31. Despise not this Counsel, but
receive it as sent from God, least it witness against you in the great day,
when every one must give an account of himself to God. And it may very well be
the last, which you may ever receive from

Your Uncle, which pityeth your poor Soul, and all yours.
October. 20. 1680.
BEcause I pity your Conditions, I thought good to give you some directions in
Writing, which you may read, and consider, and have them ready by you, and your
Son may ponder them, as Mary kept the sayings of Christ, and pondered them in
her Heart; because words of Advice, only spoken in the Ear, are soon forgotten,
and become as water spilt on the ground. And what I write shall be words of
Truth and Soberness, taken out of the Scripture of Truth, or agreeable
thereunto. And therefore you ought to give the more diligent heed to them. In
the first place, I shall direct my words to you and your Wife, and pray you to
consider your waves, and search and try your Hearts, and see whether God has
not laid this affliction on your Child for the Parents sin^; for though it
become not others to judge uncharitably of them, who suffer such things
according to our Saviors caution, Suppose ye that those Galileans were greater
sinners, than all the Galileans; I tell you, Nay: Luke 13. 3, 5. Yet it is our
Duty to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God; to judge our selves; to
commune with our own hearts; to see Gods name written upon his Rod: Micah 6. 9.
To hear the Rod, and who has appointed it. Gods Rod has a voice; it calls
to us; if we were wise enough to know the meaning of it, to understand its
errand. Job 3^. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born
chastisement, I will not offend any more* That which I see not, teach thou me;
if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Imitate Rebekah, Why am I thus? And
she went to enquire of the Lord. Genesis 25. 22. Show me wherefore thou contendest
with me. Job 10. 2. If your Heart do not condemn you for any particular sin;
yet renew your Repentance for all sin; labor to excite and stir up the Grace
of God within you. Be more fervent in Prayer, diligent in hearing, more
watchful over your hearts, and all your ways, mortify corruptions, and walk
more closely with God, and pray that this Affliction may be sanctified to you,
that you may come forth as gold, after God has tried you: Job 23. 10. That you
may be able to say as David, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been
afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. This is what I thought good to say
to you Parents.

Now I speak to your Son: Though God does sometimes visit the iniquity of
Parents upon Children; yet there is none upon Earth so just, or innocent, as to
be Naturally pure, and free from sin. All are born in sin. The imagination of
the Heart of Man is evil from his youth. You are therefore to be humbled for
Original Sin, the Corruption of your Nature, the Mother of all abominations.
And pray, that you may be born again with a new birth from Heaven. David
confesses, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
Mother conceive me. Every one therefore must be renewed; taken off the stock of
old Adam, and ingrassed into Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he
is a new creature. Make sure of this, that you be in Christ. In him God is well
pleased, and with all that are in Christ. If you may say with David, Psalm. 118.
6, 7. The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what men, or Devils, can do unto
me: The Lord takes my part with them that help me. Again, Psalm. 56. 11. In God
I put my trust, I will not fear what man can do unto me. Psalm. 27. 1. The Lord
is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is my strength, of
whom shall I be afraid? Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us? He
that spared not his own Son, etc. Make sure of Gods love, and then you need not
fear the Devils malice. For first, the Devil is a conquered Foe. He is a
Dragon, or Lion in chains. Rev. 20. 1. Christ that owns the Cross has overcome
and subdued him. Heb. 2. 14. Through his death he has destroyed him that had
power of death, that is the Devil. He cannot go one link beyond his Chain. He
could not touch one Lamb of all Jobs flock, till God gave him leave He could
not enter into the Herd of Swine till Christ permitted him. He cannot appear to
you, nor hurt you, except God suffer him. The very hairs of your head are all
numbered. Matthew. 10. 30. By fearing him, you do him too much pleasure and
honor: And will you pleasure a cruel enemy? An enemy to God and your Soul By
so doing you dishonor God and Christ, who is your strength and Redeemer. You
do in effect say, I doubt the Devil is too hard for God. I fear God cannot
deliver me out of his hands. Whereas it is promised, Romans 16. 20. The God of
peace shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. 1 John 4. 4. Greater is he
that is in you, than he that is in the world. How foolish a thing is it to fear
that which never did befall you, nor any man, not one of ten thousand? What, did
you see the Devil, or have you known one man or woman, that ever did see him;
except Witches who call him in to their assistance? His suggestions, or
temptations cannot harm you; but molest and trouble you. They are not your
sins, you may still keep your integrity for all them, as Job and Christ did.
And if God should suffer him to appear to you; yea, and carry your Body from
place to place, as he did our Savior; yet it is not in his power to hurt you.
I have read of a Godly Minister, that for want of a better, was forced to dwell
in a House that was haunted, and one night when he was in Bed the Devil
appeared to him, standing like a Man at his Beds feet: The Minister saw him,
but was not affrighted; only said to him, If thou have naught else to do, thou
may stand there still, I will betake my self to my rest; and so he did, and
heard no more of his guest. The Devil is a proud Spirit, and loves to
domineer, and have men stand in awe of him, to fear him instead of God, and
this he triumphs in. But the best way is to slight and contemn him, as the
Minister did; so shall you be sooner rid of him.

Leave thinking of him, and have God more in your mind; his Mercy, Love, and
Care to all that fear him; his Promises, Providence: These call to mind Gods
Attributes, his Allsufficiency, his Almighty Power. I am the almighty God; Genesis
17. 1. and Genesis 15. 1. F^ar not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding
great reward. Josh. ^. 5, 6. I will be with thee: I will never fail thee nor
forsake thee. Be strong and of a good courage. These Promises, though made to
Abraham, and to Joshua, belong to every believer. Believers are Heirs of the
Promises. Heb. 6. 17. And Paul applies them to all believers; Heb. 13. 5. And
so does Peter; 2 Pet. 1. 4. Do you act faith in the promises, and reason thus;
Is God my God, my Heavenly Father in Jesus Christ? Does he love me? Psalm. 146.
8. Does he care for me? 1 Pet. 5. 7. Watch over me, is he my shield and
buckler? Psalm. 121. 3, 4, 5. Prove. 2. 7. My strength, rock, fortress, high
tower, my deliverer. Psalm. 18. 1, 2. Shall I then be so cowardly, as to fear a
creature, the Devil, all the Devils in Hell, when God is for me? God keeps,
cares for me, watches over me night and day. Isa. 27. 3. Where is my faith?
Check your self for unbelief, as Christ did Peter, Matthew. 14. 31. O thou of
little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? And as David did his own Soul: Psalm.
42 Why art thou cast down O my Soul, etc. Lastly, If you are in Christ, then
are you dear to God; though you be never so poor, you are a member of Christ,
of the family of Heaven, of the Household of Faith, a Lamb of Christ's flock, a
Child of God, an Heir of Heaven. Will God suffer the Devil to harm any, so dear
to him. Joh. 10. 28. My sheep shall never perish, nor shall any man, or devils,
be able to pluck them out of my fathers hand. Christ is a good Shepherd, Isa.
40. 11. He will gather the lambs in his arms, and carry them in his bosom. He
will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed. As a Father
pityeth his Children, so the Lord pityeth them that fear him. He may suffer men
to ride over their heads, Satan to buffit them, 2 Cor. 12. 7. but still his eye
of Fatherly care is on them; Psalm. 34. 15. and all things shall work together
for their good. Now lay all these things together.

1. Satan is a Conquered, a Chained Enemy. 2. By slavish fear you do him too
much honor. 3. You wrong God and Christ, as if they were not able to save you.
4. Call to mind Gods gracious Attributes, Providence, Promises. 5. Your
relatian to God and Christ, to whom in Baptism you were devoted; and so are a
Member of Christ, one of Gods Children, whom he loves, pityeth and cares for.
Say now, as Nehemiah, Should such a one as I flee, should I fear the Devil? No,
fear God, fear to displease him by sin, by this immoderate fear. Resist the
Devil by Faith and fervent Prayer Lay hold on Gods promises. Apply them to your
self by Faith, as if they had been made to you by Name. Hold no dispute with
Satan; he will be too hard for you. But take the Sword of the Spirit, the Word
of God. Answer his Cavils with that, as our Savior did. Avoid solitariness, as
much as you may. When you are alone, yet remember you are not alone. Believers
have fellowship with the Father, and the Son, by the Holy Ghost. And always
remember, that the Holy Angels encamp round about them that fear God. Turn to
those Scriptures; Psalm. 34. 7. and 91. 11. Get acquainted with Gods people,
hear their advice, and beg their Prayers: Wait on God, be sure to keep in his
way, and the issue will be good. Psalm. 40. 1. So the God of Peace grant you
Peace by all means; and the Peace of God which passes understanding keep your
hearts through Jesus Christ. To his Blessing and Grace I commend you.
Yours.
Mar. 30. 1680.
I Must desire to see you: but it is thought not advisable for me to take such
a journey at first, not having been on horse back since my late sickness. I am
sorry to hear you are ill again, being but lately recovered from an ill fit.
Man that is born of a woman, is of few days, and is full of trouble. And
because it is unknown to us, which sickness is, or may prove our last, it is
wisdom to improve the present, as a warning to us, So to number our days, that
we may apply our hearts to wisdom, to consider our latter end, and Eternity
that follows after. Set thy house in order: for thou shall dye, and not live,
says the Prophet from God to Hezekiah, much more should we set our Souls in
order, and see that we be on good terms with God, ere we appear before his
judgment seat. Which we must do the first moment after the departing of the
Soul out of the body. Heb. 9. 27. This is a work so necessary to be done in
time, that it is not, ought not to be put off, till a sick bed; yet it must
then be revived, and renewed, and then done in the best manner, as being the
last time of doing it, and what is then done is like to stand for ever. In
order thereunto reflect, and look back into the former part of your life. Begin
at your birth sin, and corruption of nature. Bewail that, and lament over it,
so go on to the sins of youth* and be humbled for them, and so come a long to
the sins of age, and riper years, confess and bewail them with their agravating
circumstances, as being committed against light, knowledge, and checks of
Conscience, and done with deliberation. By this means you will find ease and
rest to your Soul, according to that promise, Mat. 11. 29. If you cast your
weary burden upon the Lord Jesus Christ, he will stand between you and his
fathers wrath, he will take all your debts upon him, and say as Rebeckah to
Jacob, upon me be thy curse, my Son. Fresh sorrow for old sins, Repentance
renewed will make Christ sweet, and sin bitter to you, and affect you more in
his love in dying for you. This will be a good evidence to you, that your sins
are forgiven. Namely if you confess them with a broken and penitent heart, and
forsake them with detestation. And now is a fit time for you to look up your
evidences for Heaven, that so you may not be afraid to dye, but may look Death
in the face with comfort. If you say how may I be assured, that my sins are
forgiven, and that Christ is mine. To the first, I have answered already; He
that confesses, and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy, Prove. 28. 13. If we
confess our sins, (by faith resting on Christ for pardon) he is faithful, and
just to forgive us. To the second, How may I know that Christ is mine? Thus,
Are you you his? Are you willing? Do you consent to have him on his own terms,
for your Lord? and do you obey him as your Lord? Do you take his yoke upon you?
have you respect to all his commandments? Do you hate every evil way, John 15.
14. You are my friends, if you do whatsoever I command you. Do you choose the
Lord for your portion, Christ for your bliss and happiness? Do you more highly
prize him, and desire to enjoy him more, than all riches? Do you account all
things but loss and dung in comparison of him? Had you rather be the most holy
person upon Earth, than the greatest, or richest, that ever was? And do you use
diligence in the means of grace, to attain to more holiness? If so you may
without doubt, be well assured, your Estate is good and safe. For you could not
have chosen God, and loved Christ, unless he had chosen and loved you first.
Dwell therefore in the thoughts, and tastes of Gods love to you. Say, how
wonderful is Gods love to a poor worm and silly dust! That the contrivance of
infinite wisdom should be taken up about me! That the eternal Deity should
consult about my salvation, ere the world began! That God should pass by many
wise men after the flesh, many mighty, and noble, (who if they had been
converted, might have done God better service an hundred times then I) and make
choice of me, a dispicable sinner, to be an Heir of salvation. Lord what is man
etc. Thus raise up your heart in thankful admiration of Gods wonderful love to
your Soul. And Thirdly the assurance of Gods love will encourage your heart
against the fear of death, and give you confidence against the King of terrors.
I shall be glad to hear of your recovery; though I thus write, I commend you to
God, and if I never see you in this world, I hope to meet you with other dear
friends, who are gone before, in those mansions, which Christ has purchased,
and prepared for all those that love him, to whose grace I refer you,

Yours J. H.
May 31. 81.
They are blessed that do hunger and thirst after Righteousness, after Christ
for justification, and sanctification: Do not you so? Are not you empty, naked,
barren of grace in your self, a dry tree? Are not you sensible of your your
wants, and of your beggarly condition? Do not you not say with David, I am poor
and needy Psalm. 70 5. And with Paul, Romans 7. 18. in me dwells no good thing? Is
not your appetite and thirst after grace, as strong as Sampsons was for water,
or Rachels for Children, give me Children or else I dye? Do you not thirst
after more grace, and covet earnestly farther degrees of holiness, and wish you
were the holiest, rather than the richest, or greatest, Lady, or Princess in
the world? If so, then I question it not, but you are one of the blessed ones,
in the judgment of Christ, who is infallible, and cannot mistake. What have you
to say against this? I hope you rest satisfied about vile and vain thoughts,
which do not lodge in you, but you repel them and reject them. These may be
your grief and affliction, but are not your sin, cannot prejudice your good
estate; nor ought your imperfections, passions, corruptions (from which the
best on earth are not free) to cause you to question your justification, or
your being in Christ; So long as you bewail them, strive against them, and are
humbled for them: your desire is to reach after perfection, and further
Measures of holiness. These desires are of and from the Spirit of God. And he
accepts the will for the deed, as was showed in diverse instances. Nay this to
me makes it clear, if God account impious desires, vicious, ungodly, inordinate
lusts for the sin it self, or deed done; as Hatred with him is imputed Murder:
1 John 3. 15. Lusting after a woman, though she remain chaste, is Adultery (in
Gods account) in the man. So much more longing and thirsting desires after
grace, are beginnings of grace; and such desires God accepts, and will fulfill
them; Psalm. 145. 19. provided they be gracious and holy desires, humble desires
springing from a broken heart, from one that is poor in Spirit, if they be
constant, unsatisfied, vehement in the use of means; and that a man so prize
Christ and his grace, that he be ready to sell all to buy the Pearl. Now this
being your condition, what cause have you to leave your doubting, and spend
your days in rejoicing, and praising God for his singular Mercy in conferring
on you so excellent a gift, as is saving grace; which is so rare a gift, like
gold to be found with few persons; but more excellent than millions of gold and
silver. Let your meditation of God be sweet, and admire his wonderful love to
you in Christ, and how great things he has done for you.

Yours.

I Am sorry that the Sun and Stars are darkened with you, and that the Clouds
return after the Rain: But be not discouraged; this is a case common to many
good Christians, and no other than befalls the best of Gods people. Do not fear
but the light will break forth again; though you be under a cloud at present.
The Son of Righteousness will arise upon you with healing in his wings. Be sure
you regard no iniquity in your heart. Keep you from every accursed thing. Wash
you, make you clean, cease to do evil, learn to do well; and mark what follows,
If your sins were as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; if they be as
crimson, they shall be as wool. If we confess our sins he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin.
Again, If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous: He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but for
the sins of the whole World. Now reach out the hand of Faith, and lay hold on
the promises, and apply them, for they are exceeding great and precious
promises; and they are all in Christ, yea, and Amen, true and faithful: And
they are your promises, yea, directed to you in particular, as if your name was
put to them. O, be not faithless, but believing: And if you do believe with all
your heart, then are your sins forgiven, according to the tenor of these
promises. Now are you justified and at peace with God through Jesus Christ: O
thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Doubts in Gods people may
arise from one of these causes: The heinonsness of Sin, the imperfection of
Duties, or the weakness of Faith. For the first of these know, that the Lord
thinks never the worse of any for what they have been, for any sins they have
lived in, when once they have truly repented of them Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. You may
observe in the Church, that Christ never showed greater kindness to any, than
to such as had been most notorious: As the woman of Samaria, Zacheus the
Publican, Mary Magdelen. And whereas there is but four women mentioned in the
Genealogy of Christ, Mat. 1. not one of them but the Scripture sets a mark of
infamy upon them, for some notorious sins. Ruth was a Heathen, an Idolater;
Tamar, Rahab, Bathsheba, you know what they were; yet these only have the
honor to be upon record, when Sarah, and women though more spotless, are
passed by in silence. What may be the reason thereof. Take it from Mr.
Hildersam. To teach us that penitent sinners shall have never the less honor
with God, shall be never the less esteemed for that they have done, after they
have once truly repented, and turned to the Lord: So you see there is no cause,
why you should be dismayed at the hainousness of your sins, having repented of
them For the next: True it is, that after Conversion we are but in part
regenerate; and so our best Duties are imperfect, and stained with many
corruptions; Isa. 64. 6. yet God does not reject them nor us for these defects;
but accepts them, 1 Pet. 2. 5. delights in them, Cant. 2. 14. will reward
them; Col. 3. 24. Heb. 11. 5. and not so much as take notice of the blemishes,
that are in our best services, Mic. 7. 18. Cant. 4. 7. Thon art all fair, my
love, there is no spot in thee. Let not the poorness of your Duties discourage
you: but remember, Christ sits at the right hand of God, to make intercession
for you: By whose merits Saints Prayers are perfumed, as it were, with incense;
and so are made a sweet savor to God. Rev. 8. 3. And for the third, know, that
it is not the strength, but the truth of Faith, that gives us acceptance with
God, through Faiths acceptance of Christ* Joh. 1. 12. As many as received him,
etc* Now a weak hand may receive a gift, as truly as a strong. A single penny
may be as good and clear Silver, as a bigger piece. Among Believers, Heb. 11
some whose sincerity we should have doubted of, (so weak was their Faith) if
the Holy Ghost had not put them in the Catalogue of the Faithful: As Gideon,
Barak, Sampson, Jeptha, Rahab. Him that is weak in Faith we are bidden to
receive: Romans 14. 1. Sure God will not reject such. And now what place is there
left for your doubting? If God do not shine upon you, by the light of his
Countenance, yet is he your loving Father reconciled to you in his Son. A
Father is a Father still, though he do not always smile on his Son. Go you on
in your Christian course of Godliness, serve the Lord with cheerfulness, and
believe that your poor services shall, and do find acceptance with Christ.
Observe that in Lev. 1. 7. So much as is said of the offering of the poor Man's
Sacrifice, which was but two young Pigeons.

Another to the same Person.
IAm distressed for you. What shall I do for you? Oh thou afflicted, tossed
with tempest, and not comforted! How shall a man comfort a Soul, that refuses
to be comforted? Your case is like Hagars, in the Wilderness, who was ready to
perish through drought, when there was a Well of Water by her; but she saw it
not, till God opened her eyes; Genesis 21. 9. like Mary, Joh. 20. 15. who stood
weeping for Christ, who stood by her; but she knew not that it was Jesus. You
have the Well of Water in you springing up to Eternal Life; you have Christ in
you, the hope of Glory; but your eyes are held, that you perceive him not. Like
those two Disciples, that went to Emanus, Luke 24. 16. You are in Christ, there
is no curse, condemnation, or wrath to come belonging to you, you are washed,
you are sanctified, you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. All things are yours, Christ with all his benefits, the
Covenant of Grace with all its privileges, all the great and precious promises
of the Gospel, which are yea, and Amen in Christ, sealed in his Blood,
confirmed to you in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. God is your God, your
loving Father in Christ. Heaven and Eternal Life is yours. Fear not poor Soul;
it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. What shall I say
more? What can you desire more; except you would have your name put into the
Scripture promises? You believe you shall dye, because it is appointed for all
men once to dye; your Name is not there. You believe the Resurrection of the
Body; because it is written, There shall be a resurrection of the just and
unjust; yet your Name is not there. The Scripture says, Whosoever believes in
Jesus Christ, shall be saved: i. e. Whosoever being truly humbled for sin,
disclaims all opinion of his own Righteousness, and with Paul, desires to be
found in his Righteousness only, he truly believes: And so do you; therefore
you shall certainly be saved. The Scripture says, Whosoever confesses and
forsakes his sin shall find mercy. Whosoever loves God, the same is beloved of
God. Prove. 8. 17. He that loves the Brethren is translated from death to life.
If you say these are general Promises; How shall I gather assurance from them
concerning my personal estate? I Answer, By looking into your own heart, where
if you find you are so qualified, and have these Graces of the Spirit wrought
in you; viz. Faith, Repentance, Love to God, and all Saints, you may be assured
of your Salvation, as certainly as if Christ had said to you by name, as he did
to the Man that had the Palsy; Matthew. 9. 2. Son, be of good comfort, thy sins
are forgiven; or to Mary Magdalen, her sins, which are many, are forgiven. Mar.
7. 47.

As to your vain Thoughts, I can say no more, but what I have said; that
neither they, nor any other sin of infirmity, which is your burden and trouble,
shall hurt or endanger your Salvation. It Is the common lot of all Christians to
suffer Afflictions outward or inward, and sometimes both: 2 Cor. 7. 5. We were
troubled on every side, without were fightings, within were fears. God is only
wise, knows how to order all for the good of his people. Wait on him with
patience, until he shine on your Soul with the light of his Countenance, and
fill you with Joy and Comfort, according to the promise; Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted. Beware of unbelief, which makes God a
liar. 1 John 5. 10. Believe his Promises, believe his Prophets; so shall ye be
established: 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. Beware of entertaining hard thoughts of God, dark
misgiving thoughts, as you seem to do, when you fear lest God swear in his
wrath against you; he did so against murmuring, rebellious Israel, who despised
the pleasant Land, and would appoint a Captain to lead them back into Egypt.
What is this to your case? God is good and does good, is Love, Light, Life,
Grace to all that trust in him. Read Dr. Mantons first Sermon on Psalm. 119. 68.
where he gives a check to such as yours: Page 473. You say true, I have not
prayed for you of late more carnestly, because I hoped you had been more
settled and at peace, hearing nothing from you to the contrary. Now I shall
tender your condition. I cannot as yet promise you a solemn day. I have been
very ill since I wrote to you, and am yet far from well. I pray you have
patience; and when God makes me able, I hope to see you. I am hasting apace to
the Grave; my Legs swell, which together with old Age, tell me the Grave is
ready for me; God grant I may be ready for it. I pray read these Lines, peruse
them, and ponder them in your heart, and pray that the Holy Spirit may let you
know the things that are freely given you of God.

Yours, J. H.
Mar. 9. 81.
IAm not without hope to fall to work again shortly; I pray therefore in your
next let me understand whether you continue in the same mind, to have a day
kept on your account; or whether you have found him whom your Soul loves;
whether the Son of Righteousness be risen in your heart with healing in his
wings; or the Day Star from on high has visited your Soul. I pray you, let me
ask you one Question; Have you not received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and that worthily? ( i. e.) In a due manner, becoming that Holy Ordinance with
Gospel preparation, and communing with your own heart in secret? I know you
have many times. Now what is a Sacrament, a Seal of the Covenant of Grace is it
not? Well, then there must be mutual Sealing on both parts. You put to your
Seal, that you will receive Christ, with his yoke of Obedience, with his Cross,
Persecution. Did you not mean thus sincerely, with a good and honest heart?
This is your Covenanting for your part, which you will endeavor to perform
faithfully all the days of your life; though in many things you fail; as in
vain thoughts and diverse other things. And God Seals to you for his part,
that he will be to you a God allsufficient; will give you his Son, with
forgiveness of Sins, and all things pertaining to Life and Godliness. Now is
not here strong Consolation for a Believer, an Heir of the Promises, one of
Gods Covenant people? Away then with all doubtiug and unbelief. God is a
faithful God; he keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love him, and keep
his Commandments. Can you desire better assurance, that God is your God, Christ
is your Savior, that your Sins are forgiven. That is one branch of the
Covenant. Heb. 8. 12. This Covenant is an everlasting Covenant, ratified and
confirmed by the Blood of Christ; and the Seal of the Sacrament. Think you that
vain thoughts, for which you are grieved, and count them your great burden,
that they can disannul, or make void the Covenant so established? Come, Come,
take hold of Gods Covenant, which God that cannot lie has made with you in
Christ; who though you be never so unworthy in your own apprehension; in all
your slips and failings have recourse to the Covenant; in all your wants and
defects of Grace apply your self to this Covenant, and it will afford you
relief. Be not faithless, but believe, consider and meditate well on this: I
say, though you know it already, yea, ruminate on it again; it is of great
concernment Now the God of Peace and Consolation, grant you Peace and Joy in
believing, to whose Grace I commend you.

J. H.

MY hearts desire, and prayer to God for you is that you may be saved. And that
is the very end of these lines to contribute my best endeavor to the salvation
of your immortal Soul. And if you will but join with me to lend an e^r, and the
Lord please to open your heart, as he did ^ydia's, to attend to wholesome
advice, I hope by Gods blessing the issue may be comfortable. So as I shall
have no cause to repent of my labor in writing, nor you in reading according
to words of truth and soberness -- You have been known to me these many years,
at least thirty years last past. You have requested a share in my Prayers, that
was your own expression in a letter from you above twenty years ago. You have
been a great promoter of Religion by your pains, and purse, and constant
endeavor to get a good Minister settled at the place where you live. You have
been reputed a sober man, and a godly Christian by all that knew you. Thus you
did run well. You were in a right course, you were fair for the Kingdom of
Heaven. But how is it with you now? It is no good report that I hear of you;
you are I hear become an Ale house hanter a company keeper; Can sit and tipple
with drunkards; Seem to take delight in bad fellowship; Else you would not
visit the Alehouse several times in a day, and neglect your business at home;
you decline in goodness, and decay in your outward estate. If this witness be
true, as I am credibly informed, then are you to be sharply rebuked, that you
may be sound in the faith. O foolish man, who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the truth; you did run well; who did hinder you; having begun
in the spirit, are you now made perfect in the flesh; Have you done and
suffered so many things in vain; if it be yet in vain? Thus you lose the things
you have wrought, and fall short of the reward of godliness for want of
perseverance, and holding out to the end. Remember, I pray you, whence you are
fallen, and repent, and do the first works. You had better not to have known
the way of righteouss, then after you have known it, to turn aside from the
holy Commandment delivered to you; better not to have been washed, then return
to the wallowing in the mire, and lick up your vomit again. Apostasy is so
fearful a sin, that I tremble to think of the heinousness of it; how many woes
and threatenings are upon record in scripture. Read and tremble: Prove 14. 14
Psalm. 101. 3. 125. 5. Ezekiel. 16. 24 33. 13. Heb. 6. 6. 10. 26. 39. 2 Pet. 2. 20
21. Mat. 2. 45. What iniquity have you found in the ways of God, that you have
forsaken the good path, the holy Brethren for the pleasures of sin, which are
but for a season: for you cannot serve two Masters. You cannot keep integrity,
and take pleasure in sinful courses, which are as contrary as light and
darkness, fire and water. By your present practice, you proclaim to world, that
you upon long experience, and having made trial of Religious courses find no
profit, no comfort in them. And so renounce your part in God and Christ, heaven
and happiness, and resolve to take your lot and portion with drunkards, and
ungodly siners, both in this world, and that which is to come. Do you tremble
at such a thought? This is the language of your Alehouse hanting. O what
dishonor is this to God, that one that has been his Servant so many years,
should now at last revolt from him, and turn on the Devils side, and to
profess to like the Devil better then God; his work, better then Gods; his
wages, better then God; hell, better then heaven; the company of Drunkards,
better then the society of Saints! For a Christian to turn Drunkard is the
worst turn that can be. If you conceive this charge be to heavy, consider,
that God makes no difference between drunkards, and the companions of
drunkards. Compare, Mat. 24. 44. and Luke 12. 41. To sit, to eat and drink with
the drunkard, is all one with to eat and drink and to be drunken; And the
punishment of both is alike; The Lord of that Servant will come in an hour when
he looks not for him, and shall cut him asunder and appoint him his portion
with hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: So in Prove. 23.
20. 21. Be not among wine bibbers, etc. for the drunkard shall come to poverty.
By which it is plain that it is all one to be among wine bibbers, and to be a
drunkard; keeping company with wicked men is forbiden as well as wickedness it
self. Psalm. 1. 1. A godly man, who is the only blessed man, is one that has no
fellowship with the ungodly, Psalm. 26. 4. 5. I have not sat with vain persons,
neither will I go in with desemblers, I have hated the Congregation of evil
doers, and will not sit with the wicked. Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with the
wise, shall be wise: but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. Psalm. 119.
63. I am a compainon to them that fear thee. I need not multiply texts in so
plain a case: And do I need to add, how offensive Alehouse hanting is to
others? It brings reproach upon profession, it verifies the profane proverb, a
young Saint, an old devil; it gives occasion to the adversary to blaspheme; it
rejoices the ungodly and hardens their hearts, and strengthens their
hands, that they should not return from their lewd ways. It grieveth the good
spirit of God, it makes sad the hearts of those that fear God, it is a sore
affliction to your Wise, family, and relations, it impoverisheth your Estate,
causes a neglect of your business and calling, it unfits you for holy duties,
though you do not altogether lay them aside. If you regard iniquity in your
hearts? God will not hear your prayer, he hears not sinners, that is not such
as live in sin; for in prayer we are commanded to lift up holy hands: 1 Timothy 2.
8. Lay all these together in the balance of the Sanctuary. Weigh your Actions.
Do I well to turn from my Righteousness, and commit Iniquity? Do I well to
forsake God the fountain of living water, and to dig to my self broken
Cisterns, that can hold no water? Do I well to grieve the holy spirit, to bring
an evil report on the holy ways of God? Do I well to run the hazard of damning
my Soul? To encourage sinners in sin, to harden the wicked and offend the
godly, to undo Wife, and Children, and make sad the hearts of my friends, will
it not be bitterness in the end? I conceive you to be under a sore temptation.
The hand of Joa^, of Satan is in all this you are discontented and pressed with
heavy burdens of debt, and some outward concerments; and the Devil draws you
to the Alehouse, as a diversion; and to drive away sorrow. But this a sinister
course, a remedy worse then the disease; as to be sure all remedies are of that
enemies prescribing. Will any wise man hearken to the counsel of an enemy?
consult but your own reason. Is spending your money, and wasting your time
laying aside care of business, the way to lesson or increase your debts? If
there were no sin in it, it might divert your mind a little for the present.
Just like impenitent sinners who are convinced of the necessity of Repentance;
but because Repentance and Godly Sorrow is bitter to the Flesh, they defer and
delay from time to time, and singer as Lot did in Sodom, till a shower of Fire
and Brimstone overtook them, to their eternal undoing. Be not so unwise as to
make light of Eternal Happiness, by giving way to Alehouse mirth and merryment;
which is a poor remedy, and to be sorrowed for with bitter tears: Prove. 14. 13.
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is
heaviness. Now if you will hearken, I will give you advice, and the Lord shall
be with you. Repent, and be converted, and return to God, from whom you are
deeply revolted; bewail your backsliding, forsake your evil courses; Enter not
into the path of the wicked: Prove. 4. 14, 15. Pray, lie at the Throne of Grace,
beseech God with importunity, beg pardon for what is past, and Grace to keep
you from the path of the destroyer for the time to come. Break off from all ill
company. Say as Psalm. 119. 15. Depart from me, ye wicked: I will keep the
Commandments of my God. It may be said, he that has drawn you into the snare,
will discourage you from recovering your self by Repentance, by telling you, it
is too late, your sins are too many and too heinous to be forgiven; but believe
him not, he is a liar, he is a murderer of Souls: Believe the Word of God, the
God of Truth, which assures to repenting sinners, that there is hope in Israel;
If we confess and forsake our sins we shall find mercy. Prove. 28. 13. Isa. 1.
16, 18. 1 John 1. 7. Psalm. 130. 4, 6. I will heal their backsliding. Hos. 14.
4. Jer. 12. This course if you will follow, to set about it without delay, then
shall you obtain forgiveness, through the rich mercy of God in Christ. Read and
consider well the parable of the prodigal Son, Luke 15. and doubt not of Gods
favor and reconciliation; and so the worst and most dangerous of your debts
are discharged: And for your Money-debts, you may find a better way of cure for
them, than the company of good fellows in an Alehouse. You have secret Prayer,
a sweet solace for a Soul in trouble, Psalm. 119. 4. you have good Books to
read, you have Godly Ministers of the Word; you have Christian Neighbors,
whose Society and Counsel you may make use of; you have Wife and Children, to
delight and recreate your self in their company; you have Friends and Relations
not far distant, who are able to give you advice, if you will make known your
case unto them, and not smother your grief by reserving and locking it up in
your own breast, which is not a good way. This is to keep the Devils Counsel,
till you sink under your burden with despair. Take need of it. I know your
Brother loves you dearly, and is not so far off, but you may have his help at
hand, and assistance. to manage your Estate, so as to clear all your Debts in a
(...) time; make him of your Counsel, and take his Advice, I am no Counselor
in Worldly affairs: I pray you regard what I say from God concerning your Soul;
and let your Brother be of your Counsel, touching your outward Estate. And so I
commend you to God, praying that you may duly weigh what I have said, that my
Counsels and Reproofs be not as Water spilt on the ground; but rather as good
seed falling on good ground, that by Gods Blessing it may bring forth good
fruit, even true Repentance in you, and amendment of Life, etc.

Your Loving Friend for the Salvation of your Soul; J. H.

BEcause I have no Worldly good thing to present you with, I now and then let a
word of Spiritual Counsel drop from my Pen. I desire to commend to you one
Scripture, which I pray you to meditate on frequently: Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Only take
heed to thy self, and keep thy Soul diligently. Is there any thing in this
World of equal concernment? If the Soul be safe, all is safe. It shall go well
with the Body, if the Soul be saved. If the ^oul miscarry, we are undone for
ever. Shall we be careful of the Health of the Body, and careless of the
Immortal Soul? Shall we keep our Money safe, our Lands and Evidences of
Estates, and not keep our Hearts diligently? Prove. 4. 23. Let us preserve our
Money, our Estates as charily as we can, Death will strip us of all; we must
carry nothing away with us; no more than we brought with us into the World
Naked we came, and naked we must return, as to the Body: But Spiritual
treasure, Soul riches will accompany us beyond the Grave to Eternity; Our works
shall follow us: i. e. The reward of them. O let us labor to be found in
Christ, to be made new* creatures, to be rich in good works; for as we sow, so
shall we reap. I was hungry, and ye fea me; or, I was hungry, and ye fed me
not* etc. According to one of these will the doom pass at the great day.
Blessed is the servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. At
that day an upright heart, a Conscience sprinkled with Christ's Blood, a Life
full of good Works and Almsdeeds will be more comfortable in the review, than
Lands and Lordships, and bags full of Money. ^et us be wise in time. Let us
make to our selves friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when these things
fail, we may be received into everlasting habitations

There be dead at London, within twelve Months, twelve worthy Ministers of the
Gospel; and Judge Hales, that upright Judge, that scorned to take a bribe, the
Honor and oracle of the law, is dead also pray that these deaths of righteous
men ^resage not evil to come. Thus with due respects to you both* I commend you
to God resting

Yours J. H.
Losco February 15. 1676.
Because I have nothing to write to you about worldly matters, I would give you
a word of spiritual advice; which as it is not to me any trouble; so I would
hope, it is neither unprofitable, nor unaceptable to you. That which I have
thought fit at this time to impart to you is the sinfulness of sin, the danger,
and damnation that accompanies every sin; every disobedience; which without
true and sincere repentance, and amendment of life, will be the eternal ruin of
the Soul. One actual sin is enough to destroy a man as is apparent in Adam,
Lots Wife, Ananias and Saphir a, And many others in scripture; and how much
more then will a course of sin, a way of wickedness, as the love of the world,
a form of godliness, hypocrisy, an unregenerate estate, if continued in, undo
a man everlastingly? Yet how little is this laid to heart? What favorable
thoughts do most people entertain of sin? As if it were at light matter, not to
be so much dreaded; since Christ died for sin, what need we so much fear to
live in it? Seeing God is merciful, why may not we take liberty to live as we
list? As if the Son of God came down from Heaven not destroy the works of the
Devil; but to establish the Empire of sin, as if God were not as just, as
merciful; whose most pure and holy nature can never be reconciled to sin. Sin
is the transgression of law. And the great Lawgiver, who is able to save, or
destroy, will never suffer sinners to trample on his authority, and cast his
Commandments at their heels, and hold them guiltless. Sin provokes God, the
God of patience to anger. And the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against
sin in all ages. What strange confusion, and horrid destruction has sin
introduced into the world, it cast thousands of lapsed Angels out of Heaven
into the dreadful Tophet, where they are reserved in everlasting chains under
darkness to the judgment of the great day. This viper stung our sirst Parents,
outed them of Paradise, brought in sorrow, sickness, a thousand diseases, and
death into the world, drowned all the Earth with a flood, turned Sodom to
ashes, brought on Jerusalem such calamities, as were not inflicted on any
Nation under heaven. And which is more, what is it but sin, that kindles the
flames of Hell fire and (which yet further declares the hatefulness of sin) it
crucified the Lord Jesus Christ; without shedding whose blood no remission. How
much then is every one concerned to get out of a state of sin* to commune with
our hearts and try, if we be converted? And to see, that no iniquity have
Dominion over us? Let us Judge our selves, that we be not ^udged. Make sure our
eternal estate, live we not in sin, lest we dye in sin, and be damned for sin;
let us follow holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. We are all in
good health, blessed be God, to whom I commit you, and with all due repescts to
you both rest

Yours etc. J. H.
Losco July 24. 1677.
WE are all well praised be God, I have nothing of outward matters to present
you with, which makes me fill my paper with better things. The going out of the
old year should mind us of putting off the old man; and the coming in of the
new year, that we put on the new man, that we purge out the old leaven of
corruption, that we may be renewed in sincerity and true holiness. We are one
year nearer to our grave, and eternity, then we are the fast year at this time;
have we got one years growth in grace? What progress have we made in
sanctification, in mortification this year? What corruptions have we subdued?
Have we put off our worldly mindness, lukewarmness, formality in worship? Are
we become more holy, humble, heavenly, have we added one Cubit to our spiritual
stature? It is not unlikely, but we can tell whether we decline and go
backward; or whether we go forward and increase in riches and our outward
estate. And the Soul is more excellent, then the body, and grace then gold. Let
us take a view of the state of our Souls, and observe what mercies we have
received this year; from how many evils and calamities we have been preserved;
and sad breaches which have been made upon other families which we and ours
have been freed from, that so we may be thankful, and give to God his praise.
Let us review our sins of the year past, how many ways we have miscarried and
offended God, that so we may be humbled and renew our repentance. How often have
we received the sacrament of the Lords supper? So many obligations we lie
under; the vows of God are upon us, and ties to better obedience. Thus often
reflecting on our selves is a good way to know our spiritual estates. A
Christian should be no stranger to his own heart and state in reference to
eternity, self-judging discovers our selves to our selves, increases grace,
inlargeth comfort, weakeneth corruption, keeps peace with God and our own
consciences, casts out sin, prevents mistakes which are dangerous in
soul-affairs, prepares to every good work. If we were, as the Apostle says.
Gal. 6. 14. Crucified (...) of the earth would affect and afflict us less, and
our hearts would be more above, where our treasure is, or should be. So wishing
you a good new year; especially that your souls may prosper, I commit you to
God, and with all due respects to you both remembered, I am

Yours Truly J. Hieron.
December. 28. 1676.
My very good friend,
I Understand that you and your whole family are in great sorrow and heaviness
through your Wises miscarriage of a child, and truly I, and our family do
grieve with you: for so we are commanded, to weep with them that weep, and be
kindly affectioned one to another with brotherly love. But I pray, be wise and
take heed lest you over-grieve, and so offend God by immoderate sorrow, which
you may easily do, and so provoke his wrath against you; and bring a heavier
cross upon you. Let them that weep be as if they wept not, 1 Cor. 7. 30. If it
should please God to make a greater breach among us by taking from any of us a
dear friend, we ought to submit to Gods will with patience and silence. As we
see in Job, who beside the loss of all his cattle, had all his Children at man's
estate taken from him by a violent stroke, yet how religiously he behaved
himself, under the hand of God you may read in his story. So let us humble our
selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt us in due time: 1 Pet.
5. 6. What said the prophet to the King of Judah, asking how shall we do for
the hundred Talents? The Lord is able to give the much more then this. 2 Chronicles.
2. 25. 9. Gods hand is not shortened. He can abundantly recompense a greater
loss, then this. But I would not have you too earnestly set your hearts upon
any outward blessing, nor too eagerly desire issue; but with submission to Gods
will, so far as may be for his glory, and your good and comfort. For though
Children are an heritage from the Lord, as it is Psalm. 127. 3. that is, when
God gives them in love, and blesses them; not when he gives them in anger,
as he gave Israel quails Psalm. 78. 30, 31* and gave to Ephraim Children Hos. 9
13. for the murderer: Better it is to be barren, then fruitful in Children,
that may be crosses to fathers, and heart breakings to Mothers by their
wickedness Prove. 17. 25. or by the evil of the times. If Popery should come in,
or the sword of war should rage in the land, we know not what evil may be in
the earth. But such times have been, and we know not what may be, when it shall
be said, Blessed are the barren, that never bare, and the paps which never gave
suck, Luke 23. 29. Let me give you wholesome counsel which if God give you
hearts to embrace it, will be to your comfort. And it is that which you find,
Lam 3. ^9^ 40. Wherefore does a living man complaint, a man for the punishment
of his sins? Let us search, and try our ways* and turn again to the Lord.
Leave off grieving for the affliction, and inquire into the cause of it; as
Rebekah did being with child, she inquired of the Lord why am I thus? Genesis 25.
22. Go you and do likewise, pray to God as Job. 10. 2. Show me wherefore thou
contendest with me. Search your hearts and ways. Have you wrastled with God, in
prayer for the fruit of the womb and for a blessing on it? Have you set up
prayer in your family, or neglected it? If not; then have you robbed God of his
due; and no marvel, if he deceive you of your expected comfort. You know, or
may know, that family prayer is a duty commanded of God, and put in practice by
all Gods people. And those are no Christian families, that do not call upon
God; nay, the wrath of God hangs over them Jer. 10. 25. pray turn to all these
scriptures, and weigh them well Ephesians. 6. 18. Luke 18. 1. Jos. 24. 15. Job 1. 5.
Act. 10. 2. Genesis 18. 19. And mark this one Instance, Jsaac had a promise, that
his seed should be as the Stars of Heaven for multitude: yet his wife was
barren, and without issue Twenty years until he prayed more earnestly, and then
Rebekah conceived, and bare twins Genesis 25. 22* As blessings are obtained by
prayer so are they sanctified, to become blessings indeed by prayer, 1 Timothy 4.
5. It is sanctified by the word and prayer. Every creature is so, our meat, our
labors, our enjoyments, our relations, are sanctified to us by prayer.
Otherwise the curse abides on them Prove. 3. 33. The curse of the Lord is in the
house of the wicked; Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure: but to them,
that are defiled, and unbelieving is nothing pure. These things I pray lay to
heart, and resolve to reform and amend whatsoever is amiss; as you would have
Gods blessing and favor both here and hereafter. And consider whether this
neglect of family prayer he not the thing, which troubles M. and the grief of
it be not the cause of her miscarriage. For I really believe she has in all
other things as much content as her heart can wish a loving Husband, a loving
relation, and fullness of all things that the earth affords; but she cannot be
satisfied to live in a family, where God is not worshipped, she with Mary in the
gospel, having chosen the good part, which shall not be taken from her.
Therefore I earnestly desire, she may be gratified in this one request; if you
think I speak reason, resolve to put this advise in practice and begin
presently, and continue to the end. They that call on the name of the Lord,
shall be saved. pray, let this Letter be read to, or by your whole family. So
praying God to open* your ears, and hea^ts to hearken to the counsel of the
word, I leave it and you all, to the blessing of God, and with my love to you
all, I rest

Your faithful friend I. Hieron.
Losco Feb. 21. 1679.
THis is to let you know that your Aunt W. dyed yesterday, after about ten
days lying sick. Thus we part with our loving Neighbors and Friends, one
after another; till Death at length knocks at our door. And what better use
can we make of every such occasion, than to consider our selves, and seriously
to mind our own latter end? Let us put this question to our Souls: Soul, art
thou ready to depart? Art thou in such a posture as thou would be, to appear
before the Tribunal of the great Judge? Have thou on the Wedding garment? Take
heed thou be not found naked to thy shame. O, put on the Lord Jesus Christ* his
Righteousness by Faith to Justification, his Holiness to Sanctification. Every
one would have comfort and hope in Death; but then we must lay up a good
foundation of it in Life. No man is like to find that treasure at, or after
Death, which he never laid up* in his Life time: For what a man sows that
shall he certainly reap. He that sows to the flesh, or to the world, shall
reap corruption, damnation eternal. O that we were wise! O that we would
consider the end of our ways! Whither are we going? Heaven or Hell is before
us: To which of these does my present way lead? Resolve this Question ere you
sleep; because Time tarries for no Man, Life is uncertain, and upon this moment
depends Eternity. Time is irrevocable: When once it is past, it cannot be
recalled; not if you would give thousands of Gold and Silver for one day or
hour longer. Let every passing peal you hear ring, every* Grave you see opened,
preach to you this Doctrine; Be ye also ready. Those to whom those Skulls and
Bones you see turned up belong, were in their time, as good Men as you perhaps.
What we see them to be now, others will see us to be shortly. The fashion of
this World passes away; but Godliness, Grace, Holiness, endures for ever.
Choose with Mary that good part which shall never be taken from you. I know no
business of greater weight than this is, therefore I beseech you do not slight
it, but lay it to heart. Thus with due respects to you, I rest*

Yours truly John Hieron.
Losco. June 14. 77.
THE only intent of this Paper is to give you a word of Spiritual Advice and
Direction to carry your self so in this World, that you may be happy for ever
in the World to come. You know every one has a Soul, an Immortal Soul, which
must live ^ternally either in bliss or misery. And every one of us must be
careful to save his own Soul. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep
thy Soul diligently. The more precious any thing is, the more careful we are to
preserve it, and more fearful to lose it. In this respect the Soul deserves
more care, than all the things in the World besides; for it is infinitely more
worth. What will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and loose his own
soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Says our blessed
Savior, Matthew. 16. 26. Wherefore let my Counsel be acceptable to you, and I
will show you the right way, how you may save your Soul, and be for ever happy;
which I shall do in two words. First, Be careful to shun and avoid whatsoever
is destructive, and dangerous to the Soul; and that is sin, and sinful lusts. 1
Pet. 2. 11. Abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the soul. Dent. 23. 9.
Keep thee from every wicked thing. Jer. 44. 4. Oh do not this a^ominab^^ thing
that my soul hates* faith the Lord God: For the soul that sins shall dye.
Ezekiel. 18. 4 And as you must watch against all sin, so must you flee all
occasions and temptations to sin. Beware of ill example: Follow not a multitude
to do evil; Exodus 23. 2. for the way to Hell is broad, the gate that leads to
destruction is wide, and many there be that go in thereat. Take heed of bad
company, which are infectio^s. Shun them as you would shun the Plague: For a
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. He that walks with the wife, (that is
the Godly) shall be wise: But a companion of fools (that is, of wicked men)
shall be destroyed. Prove. 13. 20. Be not among wine-bibbers. Prove. 23. 20. Come
not near the door of an Harlot, or Harlots house. Prove. 5. 8. Blessed is the
man, etc. Psalm. 1. 1. This is the first part of my Advice, which is the same
you are engaged to by the Vow of your Baptism, wherein you renounced the World,
the Flesh and the Devil, and are under a solemn obligation to maintain a
continual War against them, as being enemies to your Soul. And if you shall
neglect to do it, you would be a forsworn creature. This is a consideration
well worthy your laying to heart. In the next place, you must carefully use
those means that God has appointed to work grace and holiness in your heart;
for by this we are saved. And without holiness no man shall see the Lord* or be
happy. Heb. 12. 14. Let sin be the grief and burden of your heart; yea* sin
original chiefly, as well as actual sins; for we are all born in sin, and
Children of wrath by Nature; and must be born again; that so Natural
Corruption, the plague of our heart, may be healed in us by a new birth from
Heaven. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. For this you must pray
to God earnestly, and with importunity; that he will create in you a new heart;
Psalm. 51. 10. and work in you a lively Faith, that you may kiss the Son,
believe in Jesus. Christ for pardon of Sin and Salvation. For this end you must
diligently and constantly attend on the Word, which is the ordinary means which
God has appointed to beget and increase Faith. Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by
hearing. Have a care to keep holy the Sabbath day constantly; and no day
neglect reading the Scripture: And let fervent Prayer be your Morning and
Evening Sacrifice continually; and pray God to put his fear in your heart, that
you may never depart from him. Blessed is the man t^a^ fe^reth alwaye^. Prove.
28. 14. Daily be faithful and diligent in your Calling; he courteous to all
men; do evil to none; speak evil of no man live soberly, be temperate in all
things. Let the chief care of your heart, and endeavor of your life be to
serve and please God; that he may bless you here, and save you hereafter. So
God shall have Honor, your Friends Comfort in you, and your Soul be eternally
^^ved; which is the desire of

Your true Friend and Lover, John Hieron.
Losco June 19. 1680.
Thus this Holy Man was taking and making opportunities of doing good to Souls.
The conversion, quickening and saving of Souls, was the desire of his Heart,
what he earnestly prayed for, and the design of his Sermons, and of his
Letters, and of his private Discourse too, and that to the last. As a Ki^swoman
coming to visit him, (not long before he dyed) and staying all night; when she
came into his Chamber to take her leave, after much good Counsel given her,
(says he,) Are you going? But who came along with you? (She answered,) Her
Man. And (Pays he) where is he? I have something to say to him. Then he was
told, that the Man was on Horseback, waiting for his Mistress. He replied,
Call him up. Shall any one come, and lodge a might in my House, and I say
nothing to him concerning his Soul? Bid him alight and come to me; for I must
speak to him. Thus he showed his Care for the Soul of a Servant, as well as of
the Mistress; his Love to the Soul of a Stranger, as well as to any of his own
Kindred.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside near Mercers-Chapel.
A Second Volume of lives of sundry (eminent) persons in this latter agae, in
two parts, I. of Divines II. of Nobilicy and Gentry of both Sexes. By Samuel
Clark M. A. sometime Pastor of Bennetsink in London.

The life and Death of Edmond Staunton D. D. to which is added I. his Treatise
of Christain conference II. His Dialogue between a Minister, and a stranger,
Octavo.

The true Dignity of St. Paul's elder exemplefied in the life of that Reverend,
Holy. zealous and faithful Servant, and Minister of Jesus Christ. Mr. Owen
Stockton M. A. sometimes follower of Gonvile, and C^j^s College in Cambridge,
and afterward Preacher of Gods Word ^t Colchester in Essex. With a Collection
of his observations, Experiences and Evidences, recorded by his own hand; to
which is added his Funeral Sermon by John F^^rfax, M. A. sometime Fellow of C.
College in Cambridge, and afterward Rector of ^^rking in S^ffolk.

Invisible Realities demonstrated, in the Holy Life and Triumphant Death of Mr.
John Janeway, Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge. By James Janeway Minister
of the Gospel.

A Narraitive of the Holy Life and happy death of that Reverend faithful, and
zealous man of God Minster of the Gospel of JesusChrist, Mr. John Angier many
years Pastor of the Church of Christ at Dunton near Manchester, in Lancashire:
Wherein are related many Passaged that concern his Birth Education his entrance
into the Ministry, discharge of his trust therein, and his Death, Octavo*

A Believers Triumph over Death, exemplified in a relation of the last hours of
Dr. Andrews River, and an account of diverse other remarkable Instances, being
an History of the Comfortable end and dying words of several eminent Men. With
other occasional Passages attending to comfort Christians to the fear of
Death, and prepare them for a like happy Change.

The Life and death of Mr. T^o. Wilson Minister of Maidstone in the County of
Kent M. A.

A True History of the Cap^ivity and Restoration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson a
Ministers Wife in New England, wherein is set forth the cruel and Inhumane
usage she under went amongst the Heathens for cleven Weeks time, and her
delieverance from them. Written by her own hand for her private use, and now
made public at the earnest desire of some friends for the benefit of the
Afflicted; whereunto is anexed a Sermon of the possibility of Gods forsaking a
People that have been near and dear to him preached by Mr. Josph Rowlandson
Husband to the said Mrs. Rowlandson, so it being his last Sermon.

Carracters of a Godly Man both as more and less grown in grace, By Daniel
Burgess Minister of the Gospel, Octavo.

Of National Churches their description Institution, use, preservation, danger,
Malides and cure partly applied to England, quarto.

Again the Revolt to a Foreign Jurisdiction which would be to England, its
Perjury Church R ^un and slavery in two parts, I. the History of Man's
endeavors to Introduce it: II. the Confutation of all pretenses for it.

Church Concord containing I. A Diswasive from unnecessary Division and
Separation, and the real concord of the moderate Independants with the
Presbyterians, instanced in ten seeming Differences. II. the Terms necessary
for concord among all true Churches and Christians. These three By Richard
Baxter Minister of the Gospel.

FINIS.

