THE Popes Warehouse, Laid Open to the World: Or, A True Account how many
TRADES The Pope is on, VIZ. Goldsmiths, a Jeweller, a Linnen-Draper, a
Silk-Man, a Turner, a Brazier, an Iron-monger, a Stone-Cutter, a Tinker, a
Vintner,a Corn-Chandler, a Drover, a Coach maker, a Body-Seller, and a Soul
Seller.

To which is added Sir William Wallers new Discovery of the Popes Sham-Plot.

Entered According to Order.

LONDON, Printed for T. Mills and are to be Sold by a Running Bookseller, 1683.

The Popes Warehouse laid open to the World, or a true Account how many Trades
the Pope is on.
Reader,
YOU may read in Rev. 18. 12, 13. What a stately Shop of Ware the Antichrist
has, where you may have for ready Money, the Merchandise of Goods and Silver,
precious Stones and Pearls, fine Linen and Purple, all Silk and Scarlet, all
Thyme or Sweet-wood, all manner of Ivory, all manner of Vessels of precious
Wood, of Brass, of Iron, and of Marble, yet more, yea, Cinnamon, Odours, and
Ointments, yea, Frankincense, Wine and Oil, yea, fine Flower and Wheat, yet
more, there be Beasts, and Sheep, and Horses, I wonder Asses are left out, and
Chariots, and Slaves no doubt on it, but the greatest Ware is behind, the Souls
of Men.

But I wonder he exposes his Scarlet to Sale having so much use for it to
array the Scarlet Whore, as also that the Beast should be a Seller of Beasts,
and above all, I wonder what a price he sets upon the Souls of Men, seeing our
Lord Christ (who best knew the worth of Souls, because he only went to the
Price of Souls) valued one Soul worth the whole World, Matthew. 16. 26. Surely he
must be the Antichrist who sells Souls for Trifles. In a word, surely this
Pope is Jack of all Trades, here he is a Goldsmith, with his Gold and Silver,
and it may be a Bancker, I wish him to become a Banckrupt; here he is a
Jeweller with his Pearls and precious Stones; here he is a Linnen-Draper with
his fine Linen and Purple; I doubt he wants the Scotch-Cloth; here you have
him a Silkman with his Silks of all sorts, and fears not but he has Satin (or
Satan) enough, here he is a Turner, that sells all sorts of Vessels, wherewith
he turns the World up-side down, this he effects by Vessels of wrath, but he
sells for Slaves the Vessels of Mercy, here you may have him one while a
Brazier, with his Brass, another while an Ironmonger with his Iron, yea,
sometimes a Stone-Cutter, with his Marble, and why not a Tinker too, being a
kin to him, that instead of mending some holes, made a many more, yet was well
paid for his pains; here he is a Druggist with his Cinnamon, Odours and
Ointment; here he is a Vintner, with his Bottles of Wine to comfort the Heart,
and his Cruises of Oil to cheer and clear the Countenance, it is well if there
be not a Tincture of the Wine of Sodom among hands, yea, rather then fail he
becomes a Corn-Chandler, affording you Wheat, either broken into Flower, (with
Bran enough in it,) or in the whole Grain, but a little musty by laying in a
bad Granary or Garner, the Apostolical Chamber, nay rather than sit Idle, he
will come as a Rustic Drover to sell Beasts, and Sheep, and Horses, (well
mouthed and manned all, and made as Tame as Asses) then a Coach-maker, who has
his Chariots to Sell, but have a care they carry you not to Purgatory instead
of Abraham's Bosom, and lastly he becomes a Body-seller, and a Soul-seller also,
but let us turn a side to see this great wonder, but hold, it is dangerous
venturing into his Antic Chamber, least this Grand Cheat pick your Pocket,
viz. Here are some of the Popes Wares, that are exposed to Sale by Inch of
Candle, take as follows.

Imprimus, a Pardon for the third part of your Sins, for 7 l. 10 s. and if you
would buy the other two parts, 'twill cost you 22 l. 10 s. and a very rich
pennyworth.

Imprimus, a Pardon for 48 years sin, as you can agree with his unholiness, he
is as good as the Devil can make him, you may po^sibly wheedle him to your own
terms with Nuts and Apples.

Imprimus, a Pardon for 2800 years, may be had Dog cheap, only for saying a
few prayers, they will keep you out of Purgatory for a long time upon easy
Terms.

Imprimus, a Pardon for 33000 years, at a very low Rate, only for once going up
a pair of Stairs.

Imprimus, for Perjury 9 s. for Murder 2 d. you may Kill your Father, Mother,
Wife and Sister, and shall pay but 10 s. 6 d. for Adultery 7 s. 6 d. for
Burning a Neighbors house Dog cheap at 12 s.

Item, if you be a Priest, you may keep a Whore, paying 12 s. and 6 d. and if a
Layman it will cost you no more, that the one may not deride the other, viz. A
License to be Lazy at 4 d.

A License to Eat Flesh in Lent, will cost you 12 s. here you may have Holy
Water, to drive away the Devil, at 8 l. a quart very dear, but very real, it is
able to Conjure away the strongest Devil in Hell, you may have Holy Oil at 2 d.
farthing a quart, here is Holy Salt at one penny a peck.

Item, here is exposed to sale the Holy Milk of the Virgin-Mary, which some of
the Popes cursed Doctors affirm, is as Sovereign and Salvifical as the Blood of
Her Son our Savior, however it is commended most highly for never-Failing to
cure Consumptions, far exceeding the Milk of an Ass, or that of the Red-Cow;
what a Fool is the Consumptive Pope or Antichrist himself, who does not by this
trusty trick disappoint the Divine doom passed upon him, what need he fear
(that the Lord shall Consume him with the Spirit of his mouth,) 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
Seeing an hearty draught of this Holy Milk will care the Consumptions, this
Pope then said, I will have my will in despite of God, viz. Who durst put such
an affronting cheat upon so Holy a Father as Barnard the Priest did, which for
brevity sake I omit, viz. It Is true 500 years ago since they cried in Rome,
will ye buy any Holy Milk, whereby they did put the greatest dishonor upon the
Holy. Mother of our Lord, (whom they pretended to adore) in making her such a
Milk Beast, as Ten of the best Cows in Holland cannot give the like quantity in
Ten years.

Yea, here is Holy Bread to be had, (the Pope good man) takes good care for
your Table, and to furnish it so far as Holy Water, Holy Oil, Holy Salt, Holy
Milk, and Holy Bread will go, but surely all these do but look like a Lent
dinner, I hope his unholiness keeps a better Table for himself; if you be a
Water drinker, here is the best of the kind, Holy Water for you, of the Popes
own making, I should have said Consecrating, if you be a Milk-sop, here is the
best of the kind, Holy Milk, the self same your Savior sucked out of the self
same Breasts, when he was a Child, and who will not be content with the same
fare that bred the Blessed Babe of Bethlehem, the Holy Child Jesus, and because
the Master of this Lent Feast will not under-value you as a sort of Sucklings,
he is so kind hearted as to allow you Bread to your Milk, that you may sup it
and not suck it, is not biting and supping good fair, especially of Holy Bread
and Holy Milk, you must not expect a glass of Wine in the Popes Ware-Shop, but
you must suck Wine out of the Bread if you will have it, and can catch it,
neither must you grudge that you have only Bread, (though it be but course
Barley Bread, such as you were never brought up with,) it is however Holy Bread,
and the holier, and so more satisfactory, because (as this Master tells you)
it is a Fragment of those five Loaves wherewith (Christ) sed the Multitude, and
picked out of the twelve Baskets (that were taken away) by some of the Popes
nimble Snips, but I wonder how they have kept it from Moulding ever since, the
Moldy Bread wherewith the Gibeonites cheated Joshua, was not so many hours
Old, as this Holy Bread is years, at this day, if it be sound Bread that is
shown you, take heed you be not cheated with it, as Joshua was with the Moldy,
but you will say, why is Holy Salt prepared for the Table, when the
forementioned fair needs it not, answer, you must know it is not set there for
fashion-sake only.

Here you may have Holy Fish too, and of the self same two Fishes wherewith
Christ fed the Multitude also, the Bread and the Fish were taken out of the
same Baskets, and if you suppose it fresh Fish, then there is use for your
Salt, but to prevent your second objection about the use of your Oil, you must
rather suppose it Holy Fish salted with that Holy Salt, (it could never
otherwise been kept so long sweet for these sixteen Centuaries) and then your
Holy Oil will make your Holy Fish, (so called) slip down the better, and be
Modish enough, and what would you have more, is not here enough for a four
penny Ordinary.

Item, besides this Belly-Timber, here you are treated with a numberless number
of Rarities, as first, the Asses tail upon which Christ Rod on, but not a word
of his Ears, secondly, Joseph's Breeches both Threadbare and out of Fashion,
they will do you neither Credit nor Service. Thirdly, a Feather from the Cock
that Crew, and awakened Peter's Conscience, yet this startles not Peter's
successor for his Apostasy; as also a Feather from Gabriels wing, taken up at
such a time when as Angels cast their Feathers. Fourthly, choice Hair-Cloath,
the same that Elijah and John-Baptist wore, good enough for the Pope to do
Penance in, for forcing the witnesses into Sackcloth. Fifthly, whole
Cart-Loads of Apostles Bones, sometimes those of a Thief (as once) drops in
among them, good for I know not what.

Item, Sold at a very Reasonable Rate,

First, an Holy Rag Clipped off from Christ's Seamless Coat, it is a wonder how
the Pope got it from the Soldiers, to whom it fell by casting Lots, and it is a
wonder they have not Clipped it all away by this time.

Secondly, the very Slippers Christ wore, when he being weary with walking
about doing good, put off his Shoos for the ease of his Feet, surely they were
made of well Tand-Leather that lasts still, and are not Rotted to dirt e're
this day; and I wonder the Pope does expose them and not keep them himself, for
they cannot want virtue to Cure his Gouty Golls, it is strange we here nothing
of his Shoos, (in the Popes Warehouse) the Latchets were off, John Baptist
(though the greatest Born of Woman) thought himself unworthy to unloose, Matthew.
11. 11. Luke 5. 16.

Thirdly, the very Linen Cloth with which Christ was Wrapped in the Sepulcher,
as likewise that wherewith Christ wiped his Disciples feet, I am thinking the
Man that Cries in our Streets, (here is your strong lasting Linen Cloth,)
might do good service in this Romish Market.

Fourthly, the very Needles, Thread, Work-Baskets and Sizzers of the Virgin
Mary, are to be Sold.

Fifthly and Lastly, here you may have whatever your heart wishes, or need does
require, is it any of those many things mentioned in Rev. 18. 12. 13. Rich all,
here they are to be had, want your Holy Bells, (Baptized with Godfathers and
Godmothers,) God Bless our empty new erected Steeples, or want your Holy Beads
made of Glass, Wood, Stone, Coral or Amber, Holy Wax for your Candles, Holy
Knives for Cutting Heretics Throats, of Holy Roses, an Christmas time, a rare
Present for Princes, or what else soever, all is Holy that comes from his
unholiness, and all have a Power to drive away the Devil, yet the Devil takes
most of those that are taken with these, (Pejafrauds) Holy Cheats, none of
their Names are in the Lambs Book, Rev. 13. 8. God Bless every good Englishman
from the Beast and his Cheating Tricks.

Here follows the Sham-Plot Discovered by Sir William Waller; the late Earl of
Shaftsbury, was the Papists great Stumbling Block, because his Sagality had so
often countermined their Devilish designs, hereupon Plots were laid against his
Life, both by Men and Women, in City and Country.

The Duke of Buckingham was an Eyesore to them for saying (I suppose) he would
never turn Papist, till they can eat up the Devil, as they say, they do God in
their Host.

There was a Hellish Sham-Plot at Last contrived by the Bloody Papists, to Blow
up all the Protestant Lords, (the Duke of Monmouth) and all the Protestant
Gentry in City and Country at one Blast, by fixing high Treason upon them all
Universally, and when the Knife was at our Throats, God sent Sir William Waller
to turn up the bottom of Maddam Celliers Meal-Tub, where all the Bran of this
Brutish Intreague was Discovered.

Cum Multis aliis quae nunc perscribere longum est.
FINIS.

