THE Popish HUNT AFTER THE Protestant Plot. OR, The Bloodhounds at Full Cry.
TOGETHER WITH A Dialogue between Not. Implement and one of the Jesuits in
Newgate, about broaching more Shams; especially that of Young Tong's pretended
Recantation, and his charging the Contrivance of his Subornation upon the
Presbyterians.

With some Animadversions upon the Adventure of the Turkey.

SCENE, the Press-Yard. Enter Jesuit. Jesuit. SO Ho, So Ho: Stop there, the
Protestant Plot has got the Start on us; Haloo Towzer, Run Turkey-Stealer;
There, there Tantive, turn her on that side, for if once she gets clear of us,
we shall have the Popish Plot brought the second time to the Stake, and Baited
worse than ever; now it is no time to dally, my Masters, for if we cool upon it,
we shall loose the Scent, and never have the like Opportunity; The Popes Credit
must be re-gained, and the Popish Plot obliterated, if possible; the Murder of
that Shadow of a Knight, Sir E.B.G. that makes such a noise in the World, must
be Cancelled, either by turning it upon the Whigs, or laying it at his own
Door, nay, any thing must be done to rub off the Dirt that has bespattered true
Popish Catholics. -- There there, Towzer follows her close at the Heels, So
ho, So ho, Haloo Joler, Loose Loose I say the Irish Bloodhounds, they have her
already in the Wind, and there is a fair Course for it; There, there, so, now
they are after her at Full-Cry, O what a pleasing Harmony they make: Now Whigs,
where are you now? the Game's our own, if our Hounds don't baulk it; Haloo
King-tail, Haloo Bob-tail, There, -- There, -- There, now, past doubt, they
have her, and we shall bath our hands in the Quarry: O, the Whigs, the Whigs, D
-- me, the Whigs are all in suspense already; O, it makes me Laugh to see how
simply they look, -- but stay, I hear a noise, some one is entering, and I must
be silent, lest I break the Cockatrice Egg e're the Serpent is Hat^ht.


Enters Not. Implement. Jesuit. Ha, my Sight deceives me, or it is our Sworn
Drudge, at his Holinesses Cross Keys.


Not. You are in the right on it Father, it is he, the very same you mentioned,
the man, That to advance the Catholic Cause, and regain the Credit of his
Holiness, would pawn his Soul to the Devil at any rate, Nay, rather than the
Whigs should domineer, or by bringing me into a second Boyish Plot to make me
lie Wind-bound in the Gate House another couple of Months, to lessen their
Credits, I Will thrice a Week so bemaul them with egregious Lies, so bespatter them
with Scandals and Reproaches of your Coining, That not one of them shall dare
peep out of his Hutch, for fear of being hooted at.


Jes. O let me embrace thee, now I am confirmed thou art one of the Popes
trusty Janissaries, a fellow so fit for our purpose, as if thou had been made
to no other end; but Prithee what business brought thee hither so soon this
morning?


Not. D -- me Sir, Can you be Ignorant of my business? By St. Coleman, I was in
good hopes you had been provided for me; why, I want two or three Paragraphs of
Shams or Railery, to fill up my Intelligence, for by St. Whitebread News grows
so scant that I shall not be otherwise able to Publish it above once a Week,
unless you would have me stuff it with rediculous stories of enchanted Crows,
for the Whiggs to snicker at.


Jes. Well Not. By the Popes Toe, thou art a lucky Dog; for, as to the business
you now mention, you could never have come in a better time, nay, thou art a
fortunate Cur, for thou have nicked the critical Moment; for I and my Ignatian
Companions have been laying our Heads together these two days, for a
mischievous Invention, and at last, by the assistance of your old Friend the
Midwife, we have given it Birth; the which we had scarce effected, e're some of
us were of the Opinion that Towzer was the fittest fellow to Father it; but
upon recollecting our Memories, we found he had a By-blow, much of the same
nature, laid at his Door about a twelve Month since, which caused his
Just-ass-ship to take a Progress into Scotland, whereupon we resolved, least it
should be thought to be his, by its being so like him, we then did not think it
amiss, to send it our Son Heraclitus; but when we considered what a drunken Dog
he is, we concluded, that the wiser sort would imagine it proceeded from the
stupifying fumes of a drunken Debauchee; therefore Not. since thou art so
luckily arrived, no man but your self shall have the honor of sending it
abroad into the World.


Not. By his Holiness, I shall ever think my self obliged to thank you for your
good Opinion of me, but pray Father, what may it import? for, by St. Ignatius,
my Ears Itch to hear it.


Jes. O it is the subtillest Invention that ever we contrived, could you
insinuate it into the easy Multitude, you would do the Pope far better service than
when you Printed his Catechisms, and Mother Celliers Narrative, though I must
confess they were both advantageous to the Catholic Cause.


Not. Well, By the Cross Keys that hang up at my Door, I am impatient to hear
it, for be it what it will, unsight or unseen I Will print and publish it, though
it cost me another jaunt hither, to take up my Lodging for good and all, for I
have been so seasoned in Goals, that I dread nothing on this side Treason, no
nor that neither, since (if it should be my Fate to be hanged tomorrow, as I
know not how soon it may happen) I am assured of his Holiness's free Pardon.


Jes. Thou art a brave fellow Not. O that we had a hundred such Implements, how
we would make Jack Presbyter look about him; well, as sure as Coleman is
sainted (which I think none but Heretics dare question) thou shall have the
honor of Printing all the Libels our Invention can give life to, to asperse
the Government, and turn the Plot upon the Protestants, for that has been our
aim ever since we came hither, and our study has been bent upon nothing else.


Not. Thanks ghostly Father; by Father Evans's Soul, your promises over-load me
with kindness; but pray, as to the present business, for I shall think every
moment an hour till I have perused it.


Jes. Here take it, it is already put into a Method, and such a one as nothing
but the production of Jesuitical Brains can parallel.


[Nat. Reads.] Not. How Is this? young Tongue Recant and be sorry for what he so
sollemnly Swore before the King and Council, in relation to his being subborned
by Towzer, to cast the contrivance of the Popish Plot upon his Father and Dr.
O. By the Barkshire Crow that sits prating in the Holly-bush, over the Butter
Firkins of Gold and Silver, this is mischief's Masterpiece; I marry Sir, this
will do or the Devils in it!


Jes. Well, and don't you see how we have made the Whiggs the Contrivers of his
Impeaching his Father? and how, when they saw he bogled at it, and could not
carry it through stich, they left him in a stone Dublet, and would not so much
as regard him? and farther, how we have insinuated, how advantageous it would
have been to the good Old Cause had it succeeded.


Not. Aye, and that he has confessed their Roguery, and is become a great
Penitent.


Jes. Yes, yes, and farther, that he expects no Favor nor Reward; that will
make it slip down the easier, for it is time to do something to persuade people
there is a Protestant Plot.


Not. And is this true?


Jes. True, A Pox upon Truth, she has spoiled a Plot that was 17 years a
contriving, why can you imagine to enter into pay on our side, and have a
Guinny a week Pension money, if your Conscience is so straight, that you cannot
swallow a dozen Lies for Breakfast, nay Oaths, if you were put to it.


Not. My Conscience straight? why, I have not been troubled with any such thing
as Conscience these 9 years, therefore you need not fear that, but to put you
out of doubt, true or false I Will print it.


Jes. Why man, it is the second part of the Protestant Plot, and as I remember,
you were a main Instrument in promoting the first, by herding your self among
the Boys, that were to have made the Insurrection; under pretense of burning
the Rump, for which your little acquaintance made you cool your Heels in the
Gate House a considerable season.


Not. Right Sir, but I think I was pretty even with him, if Railery could do it.


Jes. We lost a brave hit on it, that bout.


Not. Faith so we did, I am sure I should have been a Captain at least had it
succeeded, but what is past cannot be recalled.


Jes. Well, as it was, you were no loser by the bargain, for I doubt not but
the overplus of the Guinnys that were sent you to Treat the Youngsters at the
Tavern and Alehouse, defrayed your Gate House and Newgate Charges, and brought
you off a winner.


Not. No more of that, Sir, as you love me, for the remembrance of it terrifies
me worse than the thoughts of a Pillory, or having a cast of Esquire Catches
Office bestowed upon me: harp no more on that string, good Father, but when you
shall understand how pollitickly I Will manage this new Sham, I hope you will both
forget and forgive that fatal Oversight.


Jes. Dear Son, we have done that already, and all that we now can wish is,
That we could stay to see the Effects this works in the over-credulous.


Not. Stay, -- By Coleman's Ghost, I hope you don't intend to leave me in the
Lurch.


Jes. We would not willingly, but it cannot be helped, for we have it
confirmed by some of our old Friends (that lurk about the Town to inform us
which way the VVind blows,) that we must shortly pack up our Awls for the
Scilly Islands.


Not. Nay, then I am undone; O, what shall I do for Sham-Inventions to furnish
my Intelligence; nay, I must e'n lay it down and cry p^ccavi, or the Whigs,
being Ten to One too hard for me, will by their continual Discovery of my
little Rogueries, render me more ridiculous than ever: Indeed, I heard
something of this yesterday, but could not believe a word of it.


Jes. It Is too true, but be of good Comfort Not. for we have been so Provident,
as to provide enough before hand to serve you for a Month at least, and by that
time we shall be settled in our new Quarters, and then expect to hear from us
every Post.


Not. This revives me, but pray does Madam Cellier bear you Company?


Jes. No, no, she must not as yet leave her Old Landlord.


Not. That Is well.


Jes. It Is so, for we have given her Order to assist you in your weekly
business, as much as in her lies, and to let you Father all the Shams she can
invent.


Not. Nay, then I doubt not but I shall be able to make some Shot against my
Enemies, for I know she is a Plaguey Jade at Invention.


Jes. Hold, nor a word more, I see a Whig about to enter, and if he should
over-hear us, all our Sport is spoiled, farewell at this time, and remember
what you have to do, and let me see you next Friday at Confession, and then
we will Discourse about other matter.


Not. I shall be all Obedience, and now I think on it. I could not have staid
much longer, if no interruption had happened* lest our Turkey should be over
roasted.


Jes. What Turkey?


Not. One that we found Straying from an Inn, near Charter House (...) and out
of a Provident Care, lest she should be lost, took her up, and clapping her
under my Cloak, stifled her, and brought her into Smithfield to be dressed, where
two of your Sons expect my Return, and will grow impatient at my stay: Farewell
Father.


Jes. Farewell, Son, the Popes and my Blessing attend you; be active impromoting
the Cause, and as that prospe^s expect your Advancement.


Not. Doubt not my Diligence, but now time calls away. -- Once more, dear Sir,
farewell.


[Exit Not.] Printed for Charles Leigh* 1682.


