Popish Treaties not to be relied on: In a Letter from a Gentleman at York, to
his Friend in the Prince of ORANGE's Camp. Addressed to all Members of the next
Parliament.
THE Credulity and Superstition of Mankind has given great Opportunities and
Advantages to cunning Knaves to spread their Nets, and lay their Traps in order
to catch easy and unwary Creatures; these being led on by Ignorance, or
Stupidity, they by Pride or Ambition, or else a Vile and Mercenary Principle;
Therefore seeing we are in this State of Corruption, bred up to believe
Contradictions and Impossibilities, led by the Nose with every State
Mountebank, and Monkish Iugler, moved like Puppets by Strings and Wires; it
seems high time to vindicate Humane Nature, and to free her from these
Shackles, laid upon her in the very Cradle; for Man (who ought to be a Free and
Rational Animal) in his present State is only an Engine and Machine, contrived
for the Vanity and Luxury of Priests and Tyrants, who claim to themselves, and
seem to Monopolize the Divine Stamp, though we are all made of the same
Materials, by the same Tools, and in the same Mould, equal by Nature, met
together and linked in Societies by mutual Contracts, placed by turns one above
another, and entrusted for some time with the Power of executing our own Laws,
and all by general consent for the Public Good of the whole Community; this is
the genuine Shape and Figure of Primitive and Sound Government, not distempered
and fatally infected with the monstrous Excrescencies of Arbitrary Power in
one single Member above all the Laws of the whole; Infallibility, Divine Right,
etc. started by Knaves and Sycophants, believed by Fools, who scarce ever heard
of the Greek and Roman Histories, and never read their own. I shall therefore
give some Examples (out of an infinite number) of People ruined and utterly
destroyed by their easy Credulity, and good Nature, matter of Fact being a
stronger Proof, and better Rule to steer Mankind, than the empty Notions of the
Schools, invented only to perplex and confound our Ratiocination, lest it
should discover the naked Truth of things. The present Letter will confine it
self only to Public Promises, Oaths, and Solemn Contracts, scandalously
violated by the Roman Catholics* not with Heathens and Heretics only, but
amongst themselves: We will begin with the more remote Countries.

The Spaniards and Portugueses have acted so treacherously with the Africans,
and the Natives of both Indies, that the Cruelty of the History would be
incredible, if it was not related by their own Historians; their Leagues and
Treaties (the most sacred Bonds under Heaven) were soon neglected, and the
Spirit of their Religion broke all before it; how many Millions of those
innocent Creatures were murdered in cold Blood, and for Pastime sake, with all
the variety of Torments that the Devil could inspire into them; how soon were
the vast Regions of Mexico, New Spain, Peru, Hispaniola, Brasel, etc.
depopulated, above twenty Millions of the poor harmless Inhabitants being put
to death in full Peace, and they the best natured People in the World, and very
Ingenious; though they may seem Savages to a sort of Men, who think all
Barbarians that differ from them in Habits, Manners, Customs, Diet, Religion,
Language, etc. not considering that all-wise Nature has contrived a different
Scene of things for various Climates; Nay, such is the Inhumanity of these
Catholic Nations here at home, that they will frequently bring Strangers
(settled amongst them by the Laws of Commerce) and their own fellow Subjects
into the Inquisition* especially if they are Rich, upon a pretense of some
Heretical opinion, though they themselves at first protect and license the
Opinion; as in the case of Molino, whose Book had received an Imprimatur from
most of the Inquisitors of Spain and Italy, and even from the Infallible Head
of the Church, yet afterward it was burnt, and he himself together with many
of his Followers miserably tortured; the Pope scarce escaping the Punishment.
The Generous Marshal Schomberg (driven out of France for his great Services)
who had won many Battles for the Portugueses, and saved their Country, could
not be suffered to end his Old Age amongst them, but was forced in the midst of
Winter to commit himself to the Sea, and fly to an inhospitable Shore.

The present French King renounced all his Pretenses on Flanders, concluded the
Pyrenean Treaty, and swore at the Altar, not to meddle with that Country, but
how well he observed that Sacred Covenant, Baron D' Isola will best inform you
in his Bouclier d'Etat, for which he was thought to be poisoned; neither has
the French Monarch been contented to break all Faith and Measures with the
Spaniard, but he has gone about to deceive and ruin the Pope, Emperor, all
the Princes and Electours of the Empire, the Prince of Orange, Duke of Lorrain
the Swizzes, the Dutch, and the English, and not only these his Neighbors and
Allies, but his own Protestant Subjects, who had all the Security that Solemn
Edicts, Oaths, and Promises could afford them, besides many other obligations
upon the Crown for bringing the King to the Throne; yet all of a sudden they
found themselves oppressed and destroyed by his Apostolical Dragoons* their
Temples razed, their Wives and Children taken away, their Goods and Estates
confiscated, themselves cast into Prisons, sent to the Galleys, and often shot
at like Birds: His seizing of Lorrain, Franch Compte, Alsace, Strasburgh,
Luxemburgh, the Principality of Orange, the County of Avignon, Philipsbourg,
the whole Palatinate, the Electorates of Mentz, Treves, and Cologn, his
building of Cittadels in the Empire and in Italy, etc. are so contradictory to
National Agreements, and Public Treaties, that scarce a Jesuit or a Frenchman
can have Impudence enough to defend them; a Banditto, a Pyrate, or a
Pick-pocket would be ashamed of such Actions; and an ordinary Man would be
hanged for a Crime a Million times less. His seizing upon Hudson's Bay, and
leading the English into Slavery; the French Treachery in the Engagement at Sea
between us and the Dutch, their frequent seizing of our Ships, are light
things, not worthy our Resentment, being under the Conduct of a Monsieur whom
the World so justly vilifies and despises.

The Emperor can have no good Pretense to condemn the King of France, or any
other Catholic Prince for breach of Common Faith and Honesty, since he himself
has played the same Game with his Protestant Subjects, inviting some of the
Chief of the Hungarian Nobility to Vienna, under the color of Treaty and
Friendship, and then cutting off their Heads, seizing their Estates and
Properties, destroying their Pastors and Churches, and extirpating the whole
Reformed Religion, after he had promised and stipulated to protect and give
them the liberty of their Consciences. The Parisian Masacres were carried on
and executed under a Mask of Friendship, all the Principal Protestants of
France being invited to the healing Marriage, to Revel and Caress, were
Barbarously Butchered at the Toll of a Bell in their Beds, when they dreamed
they slept securely. The Irish Massacre of above 200000 Protestants was no less
Treacherous, it was a Copy of the Spanish Cruelty in the West Indies, to whom
the Irish are compared by Historians for their Idleness and Inhumanity, though
not for their Wit.

The Persecutions of the Protestants in the Valleys of Piedmont, are another
instance of Popish Immanity and baseness; they were under the common shelter of
public Pactions and Treaties, and had been solemnly owned by the Dukes of
Savoy, to be the most Loyal and the most Courageous of their Subjects. The
present Duke, who undertook this last Persecution, was not content to destroy
them with his own Troops, but called in the French to assist at the Comedy, to
shoot them off the Rocks* to hunt them over the Alps, and to sell the strongest
of them to the Galleys, that the very Turkish Slaves themselves might deride
and insult over them* Catholics, who have not Power or Opportunity to execute
the same things* seem to condemn the Conduct in Public, but sing te Deum in
Private, and as soon as ever they have got a sufficient Force, commit the like
Barbarities, so essential to their Religion, that all the instinct of Nature
cannot separate them. The Holy Father at Rome (though he sets up for a moderate
and merciful Pontificate) ordered te Deum to be Sung up and down, for the
extirpation of Heresy out of France and Piedmont; and our English Catholics
have given us (as their Army and Interest increased) several proofs, how well
they can juggle and disguise themselves; setting up Courts of Inquisition,
turning Protestants out of all Employs* and even out of their Freeholds,
dispensing with Laws, Ravishing Charters, packing Corporations, etc. and all
under a notion of Liberty or a Divine Right; they with their Accomplices
defended illegal Declarations, and set up an Authority above all our Laws,
under the Cloak of a sham Liberty of Conscience* racking at the very same time
the Consciences of the Church of England Men, and undermining the Foundation of
our State: If Mr. Pen and his Disciples, had condemned the unlawfulness of the
Declarations and the Dispensing Power, when they wrote so fast for Liberty of
Conscience, they had then showed a generous zeal for a just Freedom in Matters
of Religion, and at the same time a due veneration to the Legislative Power*
(Kings, Lords, and Commons) but the secret of the Machine, was to Maintain and
Erect a Prerogative above all Acts of Parliament, and consequently to introduce
upon that bottom Tyranny and Popery; yet, notwithstanding all this
uncontrollable Power, and show of Grandeur, an Easterly Wind, and a Fleet of
Fly-Boats, would cancel and undo all again. Our Monkish Historians relate of
King John, that being in some distress, he sent Sir Tho. Hardington, and Sir
Ralph Fitz-Nichols, Ambassadors to Mirammumalim the great Emperor of Morocco,
with offers of his Kingdom to him, upon Condition he would come and aid him,
and that if he prevailed, he would himself turn Mohammedan and renounce Popery.

I will not insist upon the violations of Laws and Treaties in the Low
Countries, or the Spanish Tyranny over them* because the Spaniards have got so
much by that Persecution and Cruelty, that they might be tempted to practice
the like again; for by forcing the Netherlanders to take up Arms for their
defense, and by necessitating Queen Elizabeth to assist and preserve them, they
have set up a Free and Glorious State (as they themselves have called them in
some Treaties) that has preserved the languishing Monarchy of Spain, and the
Liberty of Christendom.

The Base and Cowardly Massacre of that great Hero William Prince of Orange, of
the Renowned Admiral Coligny, and the Prince of Conde; the many Bloody
Conspiracies for the Extirpation of the whole Race of the House of Orange; the
Murders of Henry the 3 d* and Henry the 4 th, are all Records and everlasting
Monuments of Popish Barbarity* what incredible Effusions of Blood has been
occasioned by the frequent revolts of the Popes against the Emperors* by the
Image Worship, and the Holy Wars? What Treachery in the Bohemian Transactions
and Treaties? What Inhumanity in burning Jerome of Prague, and John Hus? when
they had the Emperors Pass, and all other public securities from the Council
it self, that put to Death those two Good Men.

The Reign of Queen Mary, is another Scene of the Infidelity and Treachery of
the Church of Rome, what Oaths did she take, what Promises and Protestations
did she make to the Suffolk Men who had set the Crown upon her Head, and yet
they were the first that felt the strokes of a Persecution from Her. Read her
History in Fox's Martyrs, and Doctor Burnet's History of the Reformation.

The many Conspiracies to destroy Queen Elizabeth and King James, the
Gunpowder-Plot, the Counsels carried on in Popish Countries to take off King
Charles the First, and the many late Popish Plots are a continued Series and
Thread, carried on by the Church of Rome, to break through all Laws both of God and
Man, to erect an Universal Monarchy of Priestcraft, and to bring the whole
World under their Yoke. The Sweeds have taken an effectual and commendable way,
to keep Popish Priests and Jesuits (those Boutefeus and disturbers of
Societies, the declared Enemies to the Welfare of Mankind) out of their
Countries, by Gelding them, and consequently rendering them incapable of
Sacerdotal Functions, tho the Priests have found out a Salvo, and will say Mass
and Confess, if they can procure their Testicles again, and carry them in their
Pockets either preserved or in Powder: In Aethiopia, China, and Iapan, the
Roman Priests have been so intollerably turbulent, and such extravagant
Incendiaries, that they have been often Banished and put to Death; so that now
they disguise themselves all over the Eastern Nations, under the Names and
Characters of Mathematicians, Mechanics, Physicians, etc. and dare not own
their Mission to propagate a Faith, which is grown ridiculous all over Asia.

The long and dreadful Civil Wars of France, the many Massacres and
Persecutions, and lastly the Siege of Rochel, are living Instances how far we
may rely upon Engagements and Laws, both as to the taking of that Bulwark, and
the promised relief from hence, The Protestant Defenders of it, refusing to
rely any longer upon Paper Edicts, and the word of a Most Christian King, had
this City granted them as a cautionary Town for their Security, for before they
had always been deluded out of their Advantages by fair Promises,
insignificant Treaties, and the word of a King; yet Lewis the 13. following the
vicious Examples of Treacherous Princes, fell upon this Glorious City, which,
upon the account of their Laws and Privileges, made a resistance and brave
defense, (having never heard of Passive Obedience amongst their Pastors)
thinking it more lawful to defend their Rights, than it was for Lewis to invade
them.

As for the late and present Reign here in England, they are too nice and
tender things for me to touch; whether the Transactions of them are consistant
with the Coronation Oaths, the many Declarations, Protestations, public and
solemn Promises, I am no fit Judge; they are more proper for the Gravity of an
Historian, or the Authority of a Parliament to handle, than for a private
Gentleman in a Letter to his Friend: The Bishops Papers, and the P. of Orange's
Declarations are the best Memoirs of them, but they only begin, where the two
parts of the History of the growth of Popery and Arbitrary Government left off,
and how far we may trust to Catholic Stipulations, Oaths and Treaties, the
facts of past and the present Age are the best Criterions and Rules to guide
and determine us; for what happens every day* will in all probability happen to
morrow, the same Causes always produce the same Effects; and the Church of
Rome is still the same Church it was a hundred years ago, that is, a Mass of
Treachery, Barbarity, Perjury, and the highest Superstition; a Machine without
any principle or settled Law of Motion, not to be moved or stopped with the
weights of any private or public Obligations; a Monster that destroys all that
is sacred both in Heaven and Earth* so Ravenous that it is never content,
unless it gets the whole World into its Claws, and tears all to pieces in order
to Salvation; a Proteus that turns it self into all shapes, a Chameleon that
puts on all Colors according to its present circumstances, this day an Angel
of Light, to morrow a Beelzebub. Amongst all the Courts of Christendom where I
have Conversed, that of Holland is the freest from Tricks and Falsehood; and
though I am naturally jealous and suspicious of the Conduct of Princes, yet I
could never discover the least Knavery within those Walls, it appeared to me
another Athens of Philosophers, and the only Seat of Justice and Virtue now
left in the World; as for the Character of the Prince of Orange, it is so
faithfully drawn by Sir Will. Temple, Doctor Burnet, and in a half sheet lately
Printed, that I, who am so averse from Flattery, that I can scarce speak a good
word of any Body, or think one good thought of my self, will not write any
further Panegyric upon his Highness, only that he is a very Honest Man, a
Great Soldier, and a Wise Prince, upon whose Word the World may safely rely. A
late Pamphleteer reviles the Prince with breaking his Oath when he took the
Statholder's Office upon him, not considering that the Oath was imposed upon
his Highness in his Minority by a French Faction, then jealous of the aspiring
and true Grandeur of his Young Soul; that the States themselves (to whom the
Obligation was made) freed his Highness from the Bond; and that the necessity
of Affairs, and the Importunities of the People forced that Dignity upon him,
which his Ancestors had enjoyed, and he so well deserved, that he saved the
sinking Commonwealth (their Provinces being almost all Surpised and Enslaved
by the French) compared to the gasping State of Rome after the loss at Cannae;
His Highness was no more puffed up with this Success, than he had been daunted
with Hardships and Misfortunes; always the same Hero, Just, Serene, and
Unchanged under all Events, an Argument of the vastness of his Mind; whereas on
the contrary, Mutability, (sometimes Tyrant, sometimes Father of a Country,
sometimes Huffing, other times Sneaking) is oftentime a Symptom of a Mean and
Cowardly Soul, vile and dissolute, born for Rapine and Destruction.

As for the Princess, she may without any flattery be styled the Honor and
Glory of her Sex; the most Knowing, the most Virtuous, the Fairest, and yet the
best Natured Princess in the World; Beloved and Admired by her Enemies, never
seen in any Passion, always under a peculiar Sweetness of Temper, extremely
moderate in her Pleasures, taking delight in Working and in Study, Humble and
Affable in her Conversation, very pertinent in all Questions, Charitable to all
Protestants, and frequenting their Churches: The Prince is often seen with her
at the Prayers of the Church of England, and she with the Prince, at the
Devotion of his Church; she dispenses with the use of the Surplice, Bowing to
the Altar, and the Name of Jesus, out of Compliance to a Country that adores
her; being more intent upon the Intrinsic and Substantial Parts of Religion,
Prayer and Good Works: She speaks several Languages even to Perfection, is
entirely Obedient to the Prince, and he extremely dear to her; in a word, She
is a Princess of many extraordinary Virtues and Excellencies, without any
appearance of Vanity, or the least mixture of Vice; and upon whose Promise the
World may safely depend: As for the many Plots and Conspiracies against this
Royal Couple a short time may bring them all to light, and faithful Historians
publish them to the World.

Lastly, We may observe that whereas it has been the Maxim of several Kings,
both at home and abroad of late years, to contend and ourvie each other in
Preying upon, and Destroying not only their Neighbors, but their own
Protestant Subjects, by all methods of Perfidiousness and Cruelty; the only way
to establish Tyranny, and to enslave the natural Freedom of Mankind, being to
introduce a general Ignorance, Superstition, and Idolatry; for if once People
can be persuaded that Statues and Idols are Divinities and adorable, and that a
Wafer is the Infinite God, after two or three Ridiculous Words, uttered by a
vile Impostor and Impudent Cheat, then they may easily be brought to submit
their necks to all the Yokes that a Tyrant and a Priest can invent and put upon
them; for if once they part with their Reason, their Liberty will soon follow;
as we behold every day in the miserable enslaved Countries where Popery
domineers. On the contrary, it has always been the steady and immutable
Principle of the House of Orange to rescue Europe from its Oppressors, and to
resettle Governments upon the Primitive and Immortal Foundation of Liberty and
Property; a Glorious Maxim, taken from the Old Roman Commonwealth, that Fought
and Conquered so many Nations, only to set them Free, to Restore them wholesome
Laws, their Natural and Civil Liberties; a Design so Generous, and every way
Great, that the East groaning under the Fetters and Oppressions of their
Tyrants, flew in to the Roman Eagles for Shelter and Protection, under whose
Wings the several Nations lived Free, Safe and Happy, till Traitors and
Usurpers began to break in upon the Sacred Laws of that virtuous Constitution,
and to keep up Armies to defend that by Blood and Rapine, which Justice would
have thrown in their Face, and Punished them as they deserved; the Preservation
and Welfare of the People being in all Ages called the Supreme Law, to which
all the rest ought to tend.

From the foregoing Relation of matter of Fact, it appears most plain, that the
Roman Catholics are not to be tied by Laws, Treaties, Promises, Oaths, or any
other bonds of Humane Society; the sad experience of this and other Kingdoms,
declares to all Mankind the invalidity and insignificancy of all Contracts and
Agreements with the Papists, who notwithstanding all their Solemn Covenants
with Heretics, do watch for all Advantages and Opportunities to destroy them,
being commanded thereunto by their Councils and the principles of their Church,
and instigated by their Priests.

The History of the several Wars of the Barons of England, in the Reigns of
King John, Henry the Third, Edward the Second, and Richard the Second, in
Defense of their Liberties, and for redressing the many Grievances (under which
the Kingdom groaned) is a full representation of the Infidelity and Treachery
of those Kings, and of the Invalidity of Treaties with them; how many Grants,
Amendments* and fair Promises had they from those Princes* and yet afterward
how many Ambuscades, and Snares were laid to destroy those glorious Patriots of
Liberty; what Violations of Compacts and Agreements, and what havoc was made
upon all Advantages and Opportunities, that those false Kings could take: Read
their Histories in our several Chronicles.

FINIS.

