Licensed and Entered According to Order.

Popish Treachery: OR, A Short and New Account OF THE Horrid Cruelties
Exercised on the PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE. Being a true Prospect of what is to be
expected from the most solemn Promises of Roman Catholic Princes.

In a Letter from a Gentleman of that Nation, to one in England, and by him
made English.

LONDON: Printed and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, in the Old Bailey.
MDCLXXXIX.

POPISH TREACHERY: OR, A Short and New Account OF THE HORRID CRUELTIES
Exercised in France, etc.

The Preface.
IT is not long since this Letter was writ to me by a French Gentleman, at my
Request, and for my particular Satisfaction; who as he is a Person of much
Worth and Integrity, and has been an Eyewitness of most of the things whereof
he speaks, so the readier Faith and greater Credit ought to be given to them.
But his Testimony alone need not to be relied on for the Matters of Fact he
here relates, there are thousands of other French Protestants, now in England,
that confirm the truth of all; and who having felt the smart of a severe
Persecution in France, are fled from thence to avoid the extreme Fury and
insupportable Violence thereof. Now the unquestionable Evidence I have for the
certainty of what is advanced in the following Account, and the desire of many
to see it Published in English, has made me consent so to expose it, hoping it
may give some seasonable Information, and Satisfaction, to our People.

For though most of them may have heard much talk of a Persecution in France,
and have Generously and Bountifully contributed their Charity toward the
Relief of those Miserable Persecuted French Protestants, who are come hither
for Refuge and Succor, yet I have reason to believe that very few of them know
any thing of the Cruel manner wherewith the Barbarous and Inhuman Papists have
pursued that Persecution; this is what they will find set down in short, in the
little Relation here presented to them; and they may there see a Notorious
Example of the base Treachery of Popery, and of the Cruelties which it holds,
as a Point of Religion, to make Protestants suffer; over whom it pretends to
have a Sovereign and Absolute Dominion. So this little History not being
perplexed and embarressed with numerous and tedious Circumstances, all sorts of
people may thereby easily inform themselves of this Persecution, as much as we
ordinarily desire to know of such Events. And besides that Charity of our poor
Persecuted Brethren and Fellow Protestants makes us concerned therein, as being
equally Objects of the Hatred and Oppression of Popery, so it may serve to
prompt us to some Reflections for our own Interest: Nam tua res agitur parces
cum proximus ardet. When our Neighbors House is on Fire, it behooves us to
take Care of our own, and to use all Lawful and Convenient means to Preserve it
from the Rage and Fury of a Merciless Enemy. Such has Popery ever been to
Protestants, and from it, Good Lord still Deliver England.

Ppoish Treachery: OR, A Short and New Account OF THE HORRID CRVELTIES
Exercised on the PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE, etc.
SIR,
I Cannot but wonder, as well as you, that no History of the Persecution of the
French Protestants, has yet appeared in your Language: It Is to be wished it
were well known to all people of the Reformed Religion, that they might there
see Popery in its true Colors, and be taught by that great Example, to
understand, that the promises it makes, are but Lies and Snares, to deceive the
honest Faith and good Nature of other Men. They would there see, likewise, how
by little and little it advances its Affairs, still swearing that it has no
design to proceed any further; and how it, at length, adds Inhumanity to
Perfidiousness, when it has once got to be uppermost: But we had enough to
convince us of the Treacherous and Bloody Spirit of Popery, without the History
of this late Persecution. The Massacre of the Waldenses so often reiterated:
The general Massacre of the Protestants all over Europe, in the beginning of
the Reformation: The Persecution and Massacre of the Low Countries, under
Philip the Second: The Massacre of St. Bartholomew in France: The Gunpowder
Treason in England: The Massacre of Ireland: The last Persecution of Hungary;
and the late one of the Valleys of Piedmont, show sufficiently, how that
Communion thirsts after the Blood of men, and is Ingenious in satiating it self
therewith, from time to time. However, Sir, since you desire it, I will here
draw you a short Scheme of that great Persecution, which ought to be an Eternal
Advertisement to all Protestants in the World, that Popery spares neither Oaths
nor Promises to delude them, and sticks at no Frauds nor Violences to
obliterate them totally, if it were possible, from off the face the Earth. And
this Relation I am now going to make you, will be so much the more faithful, as
that I shall say nothing therein, but what my own Eyes have seen, or what I
other ways know for certain Truth.

The Protestants of France, lived under the Faith of many Edicts, which
promised them Liberty of Conscience, and equal Privileges with the rest of the
French; the most considerable of their Edicts was that of Nantes. Henry the
Fourth, Grandfather of His present Majesty, having by their Assistance and
Fidelity, put an end to the League which the Papists had made, to hinder him
from getting into the Throne, was desirous to recompense the Blood and Lives
which the Hugonots had expended for his Service; and he did it by that famous
Edict which gave them the same Privileges as his other Subjects enjoyed, and
he granted it to them, and to their Posterity, for ever, under the Title of
PERPETVAL and IRREVOCABLE; so it was, as a Law of the State, which was
confirmed by the Kings, at their coming to the Crown, and has been expressly
so, by many Edicts of Lewis the 13th, and of Lewis the 14th, now Reigning.

When this King came to the Crown, he was very Young; the Prince of Conde
stirred up Civil Wars to ravish it from him, and the greatest part of the
Papists sided with him, but the Protestants were all of a constant and
uncorrupted Fidelity to their Sovereign, so that they made all the Prince's
Designs prove Abortive, and preserved the Scepter to him that yet bears it.
After which, he gave them a public Declaration of his acknowledgment, and
assured them of his favor and protection, during his whole Reign; but at the
same time that he gave this public Declaration, and a thousand other private
ones to particulalar persons, he even then began to form a design of ruining
those who had saved him: He made reflection, that since, by their means, he had
been settled in his Throne, they might, in an other occasion, shake him out of
it; and upon this reflection it was that he resolved to ruin them, as he has
in effect done.

At first, he began with retrenching, by degrees, all the Hugonots from his
House, who had any Employment therein, and the which he had given them as a
recompense of their faithful service to him; insomuch, that in a short time,
there was not a Soldier in his whole Guards, but what was of his own Religion:
Merit was no longer considered in their persons; he no more advanced any of
them to the places of Trust in the Kingdom; he put out those he had formerly
preferred thereto; and he set forth diverse Declarations, prohibiting them all
kind of Offices, Arts and Trades, so that none but Papists could exercise, or
profess any; by which means, vast numbers of Protestants were reduced to
inevitable misery.

He took their Colleges and Schools away from them, so that they had no Master
of their Religion, to teach their Children either to Read or Write. When he had
done that, he then sent Troops of Missionaries into all the Towns, to gain, as
many as they could, by cunning Tricks, or price of Money; and 'twas a strange
thing to see the shameful Commerce this people made, of buying those whom
extreme poverty obliged to sell themselves. The misery was so great in some
places, that they were forced to turn Papists; sometimes for ten Crowns,
sometimes for five, sometimes for two, sometimes for a great deal less. These
Missionaries walked about, every where, with Baggs of money in their Hands, and
for the space of two years together, one saw hardly any other Traders stirring
up and down the Kingdom, but these Dealers for the Souls of men, who bought
them according to their Profession, and the number of their Families.

At the same time, Pensions, or Employments were given to those, of any
consideration, who would turn Papists. The King, by a Declaration, gave liberty
to Children, at seven years of Age, to choose a Religion; and the Fathers of
such Children as became Papists, were forced to give them yearly Pensions, and
always more than what they were well able; by which means they seduced
abundance of the younger sort, bringing mourning and desolation into many
Families, which for the most part of the time they utterly ruined.

After this, they forbad their Minister to speak any thing of Controversy, or
of what passed against them; upon which prohibition, and diverse others of the
like nature, they daily made them say things that had never entered into their
thoughts: They hired false Witnesses to depose against them, who were often
reduced to avow their lying Testimonies; and 'twas frequently proved too, the
Priests, and others, had suborned them. But as their ruin was absolutely
sworn, so nothing satisfied them; their Estates were confiscated, their persons
cast into prison, banished, or condemned to some other shameful disgrace. There
was no safety for any, they found ways to bring the most moderate into trouble,
and especially, to destroy those who were capable of giving some good Example
to others.

These are the degrees of the Desolations of this people, and of the tears they
have been made to shed for about twenty five years last past; during which
time, no body possessed in peace what they had, and every one were in perpetual
inquietudes for themselves, and for their Children. But these were only the
beginnings of their Misery, and the Essays of Popish fury and perfidiousness:
Whilst on one hand they persecuted some, they assured others that the King had
no design against their Liberty. In almost all the Edicts which His Majesty set
forth, he inserted some Article to lull them asleep: He said, that not one
Tittle of the Edict of Nantes should be violated: And he insinuated, that his
intention was only to interdict the Religion, and to stop there.

The Elector of Brandenburgh having had the bounty to intercede for them, the
King of France gave him an Answer, that is to be seen in many of the
Protestants Writings; by which he assured His Highness, That so long as he
lived, no wrong should be done to his Subjects of the Reformed Religion; that
he acknowledged them for good ones, and would maintain them in all their
Privileges. In the mean time, he had taken from them many of these
privileges; and what is remarkable at the same time that he wrote this Letter
to his Highness of Brandenburgh, he in the very self same instant caused many
of their Temples to be Demolished, and others to be shut up; put the Ministers
into Prison; oppressed private persons with heavy Injustices; and made those to
mourn bitterly whom he said he would protect. He began a thing too, which had
never been heard of in any Age, not even in the Savagest Nations, or the most
remote from Christianity; that is, He made Children to be taken from their
Fathers and Mothers, and to be put into Convents, with a strict charge not to
let their Parents see them, not excepting even persons of the highest Birth,
and of Families to which he had obligations that ought never to have been
forgotten by him. He took away seven from the Duke de la Force, an Ancient Duke
and Peer of the Kingdom, the Eldest not being then Twelve Years old. He did the
like by all those of the Count de Roy, whom he had some time before permitted
to go and serve the King of Denmark, in Quality of General of his Armies. In a
word, at the same time that he promised to protect the Hugonots, he even then
did all he could to ruin them, and there was nothing but Sighs and Tears
amongst them: One saw every where Souls afflicted to the very Grave; some
bewailing the loss of their Pastors and Temples; others the dispersion and
ruin of their Families; others the carrying away of their Children; and others
trembled for fear of the same, or of greater Misfortunes. In fine, do but mark
now how far their Fraud and Cruelty went; that Edict of Nantes was Revoked
which they had so often promised, and so often sworn should be inviolably
observed; and this Fence being quite broke down, all that great people was
abandoned to the Rage and Fury of the Soldiers. But, what is yet more
notorious, to push on the Cheat as far as the fraudulent Wit of Man could carry
it, in the very Act for Cessation of the forementioned Edict, this King
declared, that he was desirous that all people should live quietly in their
Families; and that the Exercise of the Protestant Religion being interdicted,
every one might live, in his own House, as he pleased. But at the same time
that His Majesty solemnly Swore this promise, he sent his Armies to surprise
the Protestants in their Towns and Houses, with orders, to Plunder, Burn,
Demolish, Beat, and in short, to make them suffer all manner of Evils could be
devised, Death only excepted; which in this circumstance would have been looked
on as a great Happiness. The King Usurped the Throne of God, and took upon him
the Empire over the Conscience; and in his Name whole Towns were summoned, by
puissant Armies, to turn Papists, and upon refusal, they were abandoned to
pillage and ruin, and to the same Fury as Enemy Towns are wont to be when
taken by Storm. They seized on all the Avenues, and brought back those to the
persecutors, who had escaped out of their hands: They beat, ransacked,
violated, and made this people suffer a thousand Evils, without distinction
either of Age, Sex, or Quality, from the oldest to the youngest, Male and
Female, Noble, or Ignoble, all were equally at the discretion of the Soldiers:
Blasphemies, Impieties and Blows, were the Arguments of this Infernal Mission;
and one may say, without exaggeration, that Hell seemed to be let loose, and
that the Devils were come to Preach up Popery on the Earth. Alas! Who can
reckon the Tears were shed in this sad occasion? God alone knows their number,
who doubtless has counted and gathered them all into his Bosom. The Air ecchoed
every where with grievous Lamentations; and I think, nothing more pitiful
could be heard, than the Cries and Groans of this people, whilst they were in
the hands of their tormentors.

They dragged many of these poor Creatures into the Popish Churches by the
Feet, by the hair of the Head, or by Ropes tied about their Necks; they hanged
them up at the tops of Rooms, or out of the Windows, by their Heels, or by
their Hands* they plunged them into deep Wells, and stinking Mires, with Toads
and Serpents, where they left them according to the time of their Constancy;
they lighted great Fires, and Roasted some till they had changed their
Religion; if their patience was longer than the Cruelty of their Persecutors,
then they basted their Naked Legs with scalding Grease, or boiling Oil. Others
they made to hold red hot Coals in their Hands; burnt the soals of their Feet;
tore the Hair from their Beards, and the Nails from their Fingers, and Toes by
the very Roots; larded their flesh all over with Pins, and thrash'd them with
Sticks till they left them for Dead. If they were Sick, they beat Drums, and
sounded Trumpets, Night and Day, in their Ears, for 'twas a general Rule to
hinder them from sleeping, and to set them in different Postures; sometimes
standing upon one Leg, holding up a Hand in the Air; sometimes down on their
Knees, doing the like, etc. If they changed Postures, through weariness, then
they pinched and cudgelled them till they were Black and Blue. Sometimes they
tied all the people of a Family in a Room together, and in sight of one
another, they beat and bruised the Men, and made the Women suffer a thousand
indignities. They would often carry them separately into Chambers, to torment
them, but so as they might hear each others cries; and every one in suffering,
suffered for themselves, and for the rest of their Family, which they either
saw in torments, or heard the cries thereof. In short, let any man but fancy to
himself, what vast numbers of Soulders, brutal, and let loose, are capable to
invent and act in all manner of mischief and cruelty, and he will have an Idea
of the method whereby the Protestants of France have been taught to become
Papists. O Tempora! O Mores!

This great Fury made those that could save themselves, fly into the Woods,
Mountains and Caves; they wandered in the Fields, exposed to all the injuries of
the Air, not having wherewith to live, or to cover themselves; and not daring
to stir but in the Night, for fear of falling into the hands of their Enemies,
Old and Young, Men and Women, all wandered in the Deserts; and all these were
but some Members of sad Families, Fathers without Children, and Children
without Fathers; Wives without their Husbands, and Husbands without their
Wives; a doleful spectacle, no doubt, to the Eyes of Men. But this is not all,
the fury was so excessive that the Seaports were every where shut for to
hinder their flight, and above 100000 Soldiers employed to stop their passage
on the Frontiers, besides all the Peasants whom they had made, and the Priests
enjoined, to take up Arms against them; so that it was by great good
Providence, if any could save themselves amidst so many Obstacles: And I don't
believe there was one in forty but what was taken, after having gone, sometimes
two or three hundred Leagues, with all sort of misery and difficulty. The
Prisons were all full of these poor Fugitives, and if any of them had ever
changed their Religion before, they were sent to the Galleys; a punishment in
France, more Ignominious and Cruel than any Death. One saw every where, in the
Provinces, the Chains of these Confessors, which they dragged along from one
end of the Kingdom to the other: Tantaene Animis coelestibus irae. The Women
were Shaved, and carried away to Convents; nor were they put in there many
times, till they had first been at the mercy of certain people* worse than the
very Dragoons, and who made them suffer things that modesty and civility permit
me not to name: I shall only say that they shut several of them up for many
months together, with Murderers and Highway Men, and such like Cattle. Some
were cast into deep Dungeons where they never saw daylight, and they clothed
them with filthy Rags, taken from the noisome Carkases of Dead persons, which
they stripped before their Faces. But the height of all Evils, and that which
had never entered into the heart of the wickedest of all the men History tells
us of, was the sending whole Vessels full of them to the New World, to be sold
to the Savages there; Men and Women, Young and Old, Noble or others, all were
treated equally alike.

In some places they made Assemblies to pray to God, and there the Dragoons
Massacred all they could light on, burnt the Houses to which the Fugitives
retired, and those poor creatures with them. Some they hanged up on Trees, and
others they precipitated from the tops of high Rocks, and they broke those on
the Wheel, limb after limb, whom they called the heads of these Assemblies. But
it would be endless to particularize all the various Tortures, and unheard of
Cruelties, which the Papists practiced upon the Protestants in France, for to
force them to abjure their Religion: I will only say, that they carried them to
all the excess of Fury and Inhumanity that the Devils themselves were capable
to inspire. So that considering this Persecution in all its circumstances, it
may well be reckoned the greatest and blackest that ever was amongst Christians
in any Age.

After they had in this manner dispersed so many Families, ruined so many
Houses, made so many Tears to be shed, and caused a general Desolation, they at
length made a public Spectacle and Divertisement thereof. The Kings Players
Acted for many months together in Paris, a Comedy, called, Merlin Dragoon; in
which the Persecutors and the Persecuted were the Persons Represented, and the
Court and People went in Crowds to laugh and divert themselves, at the
Oppressions and Torments which the Protestants had suffered; and by this, as
well as the rest, you may judge what share Piety had in that Work.

Now, though all these Frauds, Violencies and Cruelties, and infinite numbers
more have been acted toward the Protestants of France, in the face of the Sun,
before Millions of Eyewitnesses, and are known to the greatest part of Europe;
yet some are so unreasonably incredulous, that they will not be persuaded there
has been any Persecution in that Kingdom; and others have been so
disingeniously confident, as to maintain in their Oral and printed Discourses,
that there has been none. Amongst these latter, is the Bishop of Meaux,
Monsieur Varillas, Father Thomasin, Monsieur Brueis, etc. persons of great
Parts and Learning, though of very little Candor and Integrity. Nor indeed, is
it any wonder to find such Sons and Champions of Popery, deficient in those
laudable and Christian Virtues* since it is very difficult, nay, almost
impossible, for a man to be of the Roman Church, and not have his Principles
Vitiated, and his Morals Depraved by her; so different are the Maxims and
Doctrines she imposes, from those which our Savior teaches us in his Holy
Gospel. But that which the Ingenious Author of the Apolog. Hist. urges, to
prove the truth of the late Persecution against the assertions of Monsieur
Brueis, and the rest, seems sufficient to convince the unprejudiced World of
the reality thereof, and to invalidate those Gentlemen's Arguments, and all
other whatsoever to the contrary.

Above two hundred thousand persons, Apologetick Hist. p 388 p. 399. Tome 2d.
says he, of both Sexes, of all Ages, and of all conditions, the greatest part
of which lived very well, at their ease, in their own Houses, and many of them
possessed rich Inheritances, considerable Imploys, fair Revenues, some to the
value of three and four thousand pounds per Annum. These, says he, have left
all, and are most of them gone out of France, in a manner, quite Naked. They
have not only quitted their Houses and Estates, abandoned their Country, their
Friends, their Parents, Relations of all kinds, those that were nearest and
dearest to them; they have broke all the ties of Nature and Consanguinity, and
of the most tender Affection; they have separated, if I may so say, from a part
of themselves, from their own Bowels. In this cruel separation, they have gone
away from all they had most near and dear to them in the World, at the price of
their Liberties and their Lives. They have done it to go and wander in unknown
Countries, in Climates extremely different from those where they had received
their Births, without having any thing certain, without hoping for any other
subsistence there, than what they could gather from the charity of strangers.
If this be not the effect of a violent Persecution, what is then that madness
which has got into the minds of all, and made them take so unparellell'd a
Resolution? How has this Fury communicated it self to so many people of all
sorts, who lived very far asunder, and who had never known, or seen one
another? How has it gained, in so short a time, all the Provinces of so great a
Kingdom as France is, and in those Provinces, almost all who were, or had been
of the Reformed Religion, Men and Women, Young and Old, Rich and Poor, Noble
and Ignoble? Let Monsieur Brueis now explain to us a little this unheard of
Prodigy, if he will persuade us that there has been no Persecution in France.

But whatsoever men are pleased to say, Apologetick Hist. Tome 2d. p. 388. 389.
and think of it, I may with truth affirm, that above two hundred thousand of
the Kings most faithful Subjects have voluntarily Banished themselves from his
Kingdom to fly the Persecution; not to speak of many thousand others, persons,
some of which have been condemned to the last punishments by the Judges; others
have been Massacred by the Soldiers; others have died in the Galleys, others
have been shut up in Convents; and others been embarked and sent for America.
New Declarations more severe than the former are daily published; fresh Orders
are given for the Guard of the Frontiers; the new Converts are forced, with
greater rigor than ever, to go to Mass, to Confess, and to receive the
Communion. They continue to fill the Convents, Prisons and Galleys with
Confessors; and they empty them from time to time by new Embarkments for
America. There where the Assemblies continue, there they continue to Massacre
them. The Dragoons perform their Mission with the same Zeal still; and the
Judges cease not giving the same sights to the people of Bodies drawn about on
Sledges, and cast Dead upon the common Highways; and of Martyrs conducted to
punishment, and ending their Lives by the hands of Executioners.

Such is now the face of France: Apolog. Hist. p 394. and 395, etc.
Such is the Concord and the Union that reigns at present in this Kingdom: Such
is the calm which the Church enjoys, and that happy Peace which the King has
given it; according to the style of Monsieur Brueis. What Concord, O God! What
Union! What Calm! What Peace! Truly no Patience is proof against the base
dishonesty of this Declaimer. Who can suffer such like impudence? But above
all, who can without indignation read what he says in another place in the same
Spirit? We see now, says he, that the Wise Conduct of this Great Prince has
brought again into the Church, the fairest days of Christianity, etc. Yes,
these are, we know it but too well; these are the fairest days, not of
Christianity, God forbid! But of Popery, of the Roman Church; that cruel
Babylon, which is never so satisfied, as when she can make her self Drunk with
the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; looks on such Days, as her Days
of Festival, as her Days of Triumph. So it was that she heretofore looked on
that sad and dreadful Night of St. Bartholomew, wherein many thousand
Protestants were Massacred by the Papists in times of Peace, and in cold Blood:
One of her Orators made the Encomium thereof, with a thousand Transports of
Admiration and Joy, in a Speech which he pronounced before Pope Gregory the
XIII. Murat. Orat. 22. pro Caro.
O! Memorable Night, said he, and Worthy to be Ingrav'd in large Characters in
History, etc. That same Night, I think the Stars appeared more Bright and
Glorious than ordinary; and the River Seen had swelld its Waters, that it might
hurry away with a greater rapidness, the dead Bodies of those Impure Persons,
viz. of the Reformed, and discharge it self the sooner of them into the Sea. O!
Thrice happy Women, Katharine, Mother of the King! etc. O! Happy Brothers of
the King! etc. O! Day, in fine, full of Joy and Pleasantness, wherein you, Holy
Father, having received this News, you assisted on foot at the Processions you
had ordered, for the rendering thanks for it to God, and to St. Lewis, etc. What
more agreeable News could have been told you? And we, what Happier beginning
could we have wished for of your Popedom?

Let any one judge by these Words, of the Spirit of Popery, and of that of her
Sovereign High Priest; and whether it be not the Spirit of the Impure and Cruel
Babylon, rather than that of the Church of Jesus Christ.

I will now conclude, because I proposed to my self to give you but a little
Abridgment, and an Idea, only of this great Persecution; I doubt not but he, to
whom Vengeance belongs, will sooner or later Revenge so many Evils. Lento
quidem gradu Divina procedit ira, sed tarditatem Supplicii gravitate compensat.

Vengeance does surely, though but slowly tread,
And strikes with Iron, though it walks with Lead.
You see, in this Relation, the Impostures and Treacheries of Popery, as to its
Oaths and Promises; to which no credit ought ever to be given, because it
certainly never Swears and Promises, but to be Perjured, and to break its Word
upon the first occasion. You likewise see here the degrees of its Cruelties,
and how by little and little it advances them, till it at length comes to the
Effusion of Blood, and to open Violence Farewell. I am

SIR, Your very Humble and Obedient Servant.
FINIS.

