THE POPISH PLOT MORE FULLY DISCOVERED: BEING A Full Account of a Damnable and
BLOODY DESIGN of Murdering His Sacred MAJESTY.

In an Information lately taken by a Member of the HONORABLE House of COMMONS.

TOGETHER With a Brief Relation of the Horrid Equivocation of a POPISH PRIEST
lately Executed at Dublin in IRELAND.

Published for the Confirming of Weak and Doubting Protestants.

LONDON, Printed for H. B. 1679.

THE POPISH PLOT MORE FULLY DISCOVERED.
NOtwithstanding the Impudence of the Popish Party both living and dying, in
denying that they know any thing of a Plot, either to Murder His Majesty, or to
bring in Popery and subvert the Protestant Religion; and that their Church
Hectors lately deservedly Executed, have against the clearest Evidence had the
Confidence to venture their Damnation upon a Lie, with that Canting Expression,
That they are as clear as the Child unborn; and who though they are admired by
their Fellows as Saints and Martyrs, do truly deserve Admiration for nothing so
much as that height of Atheism and Villainy they have arrived to, so as to
think to mock the Almighty God only to attain the Praise and Applause of men.

Yet the Divine Providence, which is always watchful for the Safety and
Preservation of all those who really Trust therein, has been pleased
wonderfully to multiply and strengthen the Evidence of this Horrid and Damnable
Conspiracy, as will appear by this following Relation.

A few days since there came a Person to a Member of the Honorable House of
Commons living in London, named Clement Cane, who gave this Account of himself.
That he lived with a Knight in Cumberland, who was a Roman Catholic, and that
this Knight had lately shown him more than ordinary kindness and countenance,
and put him into a handsome Livelihood: having thus obliged him, that the
Knight thought he could not handsomely refuse to do any thing he should propose
to him. He took the opportunity to Discourse with this Person, proposing to him
some ways for his further Advancement in the World, and having before prepared
him (as is supposed) by telling him that what he was to do would be very
necessary and advantageous to the Advancement of the Interest of Holy Church,
and the Design (as St. Whitebread has it) wherein they were all engaged; This
Knight had then the boldness to propose to this Person, The Murder of his
Sacred Majesty, wherein several others (it is said 16 or 17) besides himself
were to be engaged; and than the Reward for their Cursed Service, was to be a
Thousand Pound to each Person, and ways and methods were proposed for
perpetrating this horrid Villainy, which was to have been committed the 30th.
day of May last past.

When this Person heard this Damnable Proposition, he was startled and
astonished at the Motion, and alleged to his Master, That it was a thing
contrary to their Religion as well as all others, to commit such cursed
Actions. The Master persisted by many Arguments to demonstrate the Lawfulness
and Necessity of it, but finding this Person Immovable and Resolved never to
be concerned, upon any unholy plausible pretenses whatsoever; He told him that
by discovering thus much to him, he had put his Life into his hands, and that
this Person, would find it his safest way not to discover or take notice of any
discourse passed betwixt them upon that Subject.

This Person being much concerned at what he had heard, and fearing the Knight
or some other might take the opportunity to accuse him first thereby to excuse
themselves; He took the first occasion that offered to pretend a Journey into
Lancashire, but being got out of the Reach of the Knight, he Immediately hastened
to London, and voluntarily rendered himself to the Honorable Member of
Parliament aforementioned, who having taken his Information upon Oath, we may
suppose both will be suddenly Transmitted to the Consideration of his Majesty,
and his Most Honorable Privy Council.

Thus the Divine Goodness has not left us without witness to Strengthen True
Christians and Protestants in the belief of this Cursed Attempt, which is now
so clear and apparent that none but Papists (whose Religion it is to deny four
of their Senses in their Sacrament as they call it; that is their Seeing,
Smelling, Tasting and feeling;) have not the least Reason to deny it, or doubt
of it.

Therefore let not any weak Protestants be startled at the Confidence of those,
(who as we said before) have lately dared to defy Heaven with a falsehood at
the last gasp; which Dr. Ezrael Tongue (the first discover of the Plot to His
Majesty) has sufficiently exposed in a late Paper: Since we have this
Remarkable Account from Ireland, which is of undoubted Credit, and not to be
denied even by a Papist.

The Relation in Brief is this: That there was a Popish Priest Executed in
Dublin (while the Earl of Essex was Governor there) upon the clearest Evidence
and Conviction imaginable, who yet absolutely denied himself to be in the least
Guilty of the Fact he was Charged with, but the Halter breaking as soon as he
was turned off the Ladder, and he thereupon recovering his Senses, begged a
quarter of an hours respite to Pray, and then Confessed, That he was Absolved
by some Priests of his own Order before he was turned off, and therefore he
could safely say he was not Guilty; but that he now being come to Life again as
it were, he thought that it was absolutely Necessary he should be again
Absolved and Pardoned; but judging it impossible to procure a Priest for that
purpose before he was Hanged again, which he immediately expected, and having
none now to Confess unto but God only: He did then Publicly Confess himself
Guilty of the Fact which he had just before so desperately denied, even to
Death.

This was done in the hearing of many Eminent Lords, Gentlemen, and other
Persons of all Degrees and Qualities; so that it can hardly be imagined what
this sort of Men can Invent to palliate it: And as Dr. Tongue very well
Observes, since one of them had the Impudence to say, That only one of their
Authors ever promoted the Doctrine of Killing of Kings, which is an Absolute
and downright Lie, since it may be Proved (and Gavan being a Jesuit, cannot
with any Reason be supposed to be Ignorant thereof) that several of their
Popes, Councils, and Doctors did both promote and put in practice the same
Damnable Opinions. What cause have we who are Protestants, to be so Foolishly
Charitable, to think that any of the rest of their Harangues have more Truth or
Reality in them, since it is an Eternal Maxim of that Synagogue of Satan, the
Romish Church, That all things are Lawful in order to the promoting the
Interest thereof.

FINIS.

