POOR ROBINS ANSWER TO Mr. Thomas Danson

Author of the Late FRIENDLY DEBATE BETWEEN SATAN and SHERLOCKE: As also of
another Pamphlet since Published; Pretended to be A Defense of that Debate
against POOR ROBIN and others.

Bilem, Saepe Jocum vestri movere Tumultus.

By the Author of POOR ROBIN'S Weekly Intelligence.

This may be Printed, Feb. 6. 1677. To* L'Estrange*

London, Printed in the Year, 1677.

POOR ROBIN'S ANSWER, etc.
Post varias Remoras, post tot Discrimina Praeli, -- Coram quem quaeritis Adsum.

THis Contest between Mr. Danson and my self, will I presume, appear so
surprising and unexpected; that as it happens in sudden Frays, the first Quere
generally started is like to be, How fell you out? To satisfy which, I must
dispense with the Vanity of telling the World; that (whatever Fools thinks, or
Knaves Report) our Weekly Intelligence is not published solely to Get Money,
(though that be an Ingredient which insinuates in most undertakings) nor merely
to Entertain the Idle with Stories, and furnish Coffee-Houses with Chat,
(though for that some ungrateful Dons are not a little obliged, for without
such Innocent Diversions, it is a thousand to one but their Tongues would be
employed to the Hazard of their Ears.) But besides these, another main use of
that Sheet, is for Extravagants to do Penance in: To Expose Vice and Ill
Nature to deserved contempt, and if possible Laugh Foppery out of Countenance
and Practice. Thus the Name of POOR ROBIN becomes more awful than an
Apparitors, keeps the peace no less than the Constable, and makes those tremble
who bid defiance to the Stocks and the Whipping-Post, whilst yet he dispences
his Corrections with so much Mildness, that only the conscious feel the
Lashes; and Bystanders could scarce take notice of their Chast^zements, did
not their own Wincing proclaim their personal Guilt, and summon a crowd to
whoot at their Folly.

In which Predicament we must Rank Mr. Danson's Printed Resentments: For
certainly, as never Man gave more Cause for a Satirical Reflection, so none but
his Discreet self would since have taken the pains so amply to satisfy the
World how well he deserved it. Wise and good Men cannot but abhor that
mischeivous humor of testy Fencers in Divinity, who like Tavern Bullies catch
up whatever stands next, and convert it into a Weapon, or New Medi^^, (as our
Author calls it) for carrying on a Brangle, which too of^ is no less
unnecessary than unseasonable: the one but Milking an He-Goat, whilst the other
holds under a Seive; But for a Person of his pretended Piety and Gravity to
abuse an- Eminent Minister by representing him Dialoguing with, and Preaching
Salvation to the Devil: and by slanderous Imputations, mangling his words, and
putting Innocent Expressions on the Rack of Malice. To Extort an odious Meaning
which it is like his thoughts were never Guilty of, was such a Matchless piece
of Disingenuity, that I co^ld not but think it deserved to be exposed in a
D^vertisement to the Hiss and Laughter of all the world.

As for the Merits of the cause, or Original Controversy I shall not meddle,
for it is dangerous trampling in Holy Ground, unless our Shoes are first plucked
off. I mean, that Lightness Prejudice, Self-conceit and Opiniastry removed;
wherein most Men are too apt to walk. And besides, it is the opinion of Wiser
Men, that Mr. Sherlock has so fully Justified his Principles, that his Book may
serve as a sufficient Answer, not only to his Adversaries first Pamphlet, but
the latter too (which pretends to be a Reply to it.) And even whatever else,
Indefatigable Impertinence shall scribble for the future on this subject; if
people will be but at the pains to consider and compare his Words with the
others wild distorted Inferences only give me leave to say; That I cannot think
Mr. Danson, for all his Clamours to be so much at odds with the foul Fiend as
he pretends, for what can be more favorable and obliging, then when p. 3. of
his Defense, he possitively, and no less Blasphemously calls God, The Devils
Benefactor* and abuses a sacred Text to countenance his madness. Had Mr. S.
been Guilty of such an Obnoxious Expression, 'twould no doubt have afforded
Tragical matter enough for Two or Three more Unfriendly Debates.

But waving the Body of the Pamphlet, I shall take notice only of what he has
been pleased particularly to concern me in, Viz. The Preface; and this forlorn
Hope comes fronted with Two of our Authors Cardinal Virtues, Boasting and
Falsehood; Telling the World that his late friendly Debate between Satan and
Sherlock had a very fair Reception both as to matter and MANNER, from all Ranks
and Orders, Learned, Intelligent and Pious -- Now how well the Illegitimate
Brat was resented by Persons of the best RANK; Those that Mid-Wiv'd it into the
World have some little reason not to forget: and it is notorious that most
modest Men of his own party and Sentiments in the matter of the Controversy
were so far dissatisfi^d with his scandalous manner of managi^g it, as
generally to disown and condemn it.

But he proceeds. It had a very foul R^ception from other^ of Mr. Sherlocks
persuasion, from whom as I will not so much d^^^^^ as to deny them their share
in the two first Characters; So, NOR, AS NOT to deny them any in the last, etc.
You see the Gentleman has so blundered himself of late in Logic, that he has
forgot his Grammar, and now cannot speak without Nonsense and Solecismes. There
is a credible story of a certain Quondam Fellow of M^^dlins, (you know the
Stars name, no body Mr. Danson!) that since the memory of man undertook to
teach some Gentlemen Latin; but having got an encouraging spill (...)
^^^^^^sh'd and never came at them more; I fear our (...) some such slippery
trick by the Learned Ma^ron that (...) have taught him English.

After a very punctual Recital of a Divertisemement in our Intelligence,
beginning -- There is lately published a Dialogue between a Monkey and his
Looking*Glass, etc. This Hero of the Goosequill turns up his Mustacho's, and
says -- He would scorn to take notice of that abus^, if he had not Good Ground
to believe Mr Sherlock as truly the Author of it, as other Men are of the
Weekly Advertisements; sure he imagines Poor Robin to be of Kin to Smectym^^^^.
"Where tucked under each Arm a double Gizzard,
"Five Faces lurk under a single Vizzard.


I confess I have often with much satisfaction overheard grave Coxcombs
relate; that as many Authors Club to an Intelligence as there go Tailors to a
Man; that we tug at the Pen like Slaves at the Oar a whole Bank together, and
write in the posture that the Sweeds give fire in, over one another heads; Nay
some have been so impudent as to pretend intimate acquaintance with half a
dozen of the Fraternity of Robin-Writers. But that any of the Tribe of Levi had
any Finger in the Pie is a slander, that none but the Devils Dialogue-maker
would suggest; for in truth the Ground of his belief (as well in this as
greater matters) is like to prove nothing but Fancy, or rather Malice, which
cares not what it reports, so he may cast an Odium upon Mr. Sherlock; If I
should say I have good ground to believe; Mr. Danson addicted to Gaming, Bowls,
Nine pins, etc. No doubt he would cry out calumny and Slander; and yet I can
show where he was charged therewith in Print some Years since, and which he
never disproved that I know of; A far better ground for believing it, than any
he can produce in this case; For I do Solemnly declare (and know no reason but
my unbias'd Testimony may be Credited before his Envious Surmises) That the
said Divertisement was neither Directly nor Indirectly promoted or procured by
Mr. Sherlocke (whom to my knowledge I never saw, nor never had any
Correspondence with) nor by any from him, or on his behalf; But was i^serted
out of that Natural Antipathy and contempt I bear to such a Ridiculous and
Abusive piece of Foppery as the Title, and Contrivance of that Pamphlet.

But now behold! The Man of Sylogismes comes furiously to Attaque our
Divertisement, and gravely Confound it with a First, Second, Third, and Fourth
-- ly; Beloved; --

First, It was not Well Witted; Though few that know Mr. Danson can admit him
for a Competent Judge; Yet let us hear his reason; The Monkey, (he says) must
needs be Satan: etc. And why must it be so; S^r Positive? May it not serve as
well to Emblematize your Worship? who being like those unlucky Animals, of a
meddling Enterprizing humor, and having made abundance of strange Grimaces,
took them, when represented in your Cracked Imagination for a Picture of Mr.
Sherlock; And so frighted with your own hideous Reflection, Conjured up a
pitiful Devil to debate with Absurdities, that had no body but your self for
their Author.

Secondly, He says, It was not well worded, because there is no reason the
Arguments managed by Satan should be styled the Non-Conformists; Yes Sir! Two
or Three small reasons there are: First, Because what ever looks like an
Argument is generally borrowed (not to say stolen) from the Non Con's Books;
only the railing abusive part is entirely your own. Secondly, Your Satan
declares himself to be a very Precise Devil; A Constant and A^tentive Hearer at
Conventi^les, etc. Thirdly, Because your self seemed very fond, it should be
thought so, making your Devils Common Formula of Ushering in his Arguments to
be thus A Phanatick would press you, p. 7. The Calvinists will object, p. 16.
would J.O.. say, p. 30 Would a Fanatic say, p, 34. Fanatics think, p. 38. etc.

In the next Lines Mr. Danson grows modest, Disclaims his having Improved the
Art of Scolding, yet acknowledges he had found out an unheard of way to abuse
any Antagonist: These are his words; -- The unheard of way to abuse any
Antagonist, discovered in the Friendly Debate, was not the Improvement of the
8th* Liberal Art which the Vulgar call scolding (for that may be heard every
day at Billingsgate) but the choice of a Dialogist -- That was the Novelty; A
Novelty indeed! and since we owe the discovery wholly to Mr. Dansons Ingenuity,
I am content he should have a Patent to Monopolize the Invention to Him and his
Heirs; Nor is the Mystery of Scolding so little beholding to him for its
Improvement, as he bashfully pretends; For as the Common Professors of Railing
have their Figures, and Peculiar Ornaments, though not so learnedly
distinguished by the Names of Sarcasmus, Asteismus, Mict^rismus, Antiphrasis,
Charientismus, or Ironia, yet have they their dry Bobs, their broad flouts,
bitter taunts, their fleering srumps, and their privy Nipps; And at this
Rhetoric Mr. Danson is Excellent, as himself confesses, to make the Devil play
upon Mr. Sherlocke. -- As p. 22. Now we are under the Rose, I will tell you
truly I believe all your talk of a Savior is but a copy of your countenance;
p. 38. I believe all Christ's Revelations, and were I sure none but Friends were
within hearing, I would say that is more than you do; p. 4. None of your Clubb
(which it seems is a very merry Clubb, p. 43.) care much for Paul, etc. But
above all, that figure is Superlatively fine, and wholly Novel in his Preface
to The Defense, where he calls Mr. Sherlock -- Whore.

Thirdly, He taxes the Divertisement as Guilty of calamny, all^adgeing there is
no hint of Bawdry in the words Operam Dare ad Liberos procreandos, they
signifying no more than to have conjugal commerce; I confess Commerce is a very
pretty and apposite term, that is, To Truck Ware for Ware; But why the Latin
must be rendered conjugal, rather than any other private Commerce I am yet to
learn; And indeed who could Imagine but our Author, or (which is all one) his
Devil was not a little Tickled with some conceit, when he draggs in by Head and
Ears such a pitiful shred of Bumbast, where there is not the least occasion
for it, but merely for the L^tchery of Latin, and then cackles over it thus --
You see as old as I am I have not forgot all my Latin.

He takes it ill, That the Divertiser should recommend him to a Scotch
Casemont, which, he, says, Is a Pillory. -- Seriously a Profound found
Commentator! but I warrant you he had never hit on it so luckily, had not
Consciousness of his own merits assisted his guessing: For not to mention their
deserts who not only publish Pamphlets without License, but also abuse the
Ipprimaturs of Authority, as he does Pr. Deb. p. 28, and 49. it is certain that
Forgery is a cr^me generally punishable by the Wooden Ruff, and how far guilty
of that (at least against conscience and honesty, though not within the
Statute) Mr. D. is by Misrepresenting Mr. S^. words and sense, Is obvious to
every considerate Reader.

But I am far from the Malice he charges me with, or wishing the least Ill to
his Person, and would advise him (as a Friend) to calm that fiery, contentious
spirit, which hurries him into these Absurdities; Not to suffer blind furious
Zeal to consume all his Charity; Nor think every man that dissents from his
Sentiments an Atheist, a Mahumetan, or Subverter of the Gospel; and if he needs
must be ^^^ling in Polemicks, to treat his Antagonists hereafter with the
Candor of a Scholar, the Civility of a Gentleman, the Gravity of a Minister,
and the Moderation of a Christian; this I am sure is wholesome Council, but if he
will neglect it, and proceed as he has begun, I would wish him to Imitate his
Brother R. to betake himself to the Study of Physic in the Galenical way, with
particular regard to the nature of Hellebore and its Operation, which may be of
great use this Spring to a person of his complexion, and prevent the dire
effects otherwise threatened in the Dog-daies.

Sed -- Motos praestat Componere Fluctus.

-- FINIS.

