THE Popes Lamentation. Or the Whore of Babylons overthrow,
Being an exact Compendium of his Jesuitick Retinues, promises anb
Supplications to delude the Multitude, and escape the Flames on the 17th
instant, etc. As also, Queen Elizabeth's Congratulation to the City of London.

AFter the Image of the Beast of Rome, dressed in Formallibus, with his Triple
Crown, and Crosiers stuff, with his attendants of Cardinals, Monks, Priests,
and Friars, who with an innumerable; Gaurd, solemnly waited on his Holliness,
to the Fire prepared for him-the Image being set by the side of the Bon-fire,
in his Chair: confronting that of the good and Gracious Queen Elizabeth, who
was placed as a Spectator of the Action, being done in the Honor and Memory of
her Birth day, who cleared this happy Island of all the Romish superstition,
and unyoaked the People for ever there from, and the Image of the Devil placed
on the Right Hand, and another of a Grand and reverend Jesuit, on the Left
Hand, of his Holliness; to support and comfort him: a great silence being made,
his Holliness before his burning made this short Speech, to the People.

THE POPES SPEECH.
You damned and Wicked Heretics, are you not ashamed of this your New and
upstart invention of Burning me the Pope, in Effiges with all this due, clutter
and solemnity at first brought in by the Rage and Malice of a Wicked Phanatical
Physician, to whom I Got my Friend and Crony, Mr. Devil, to give him Water
enough for his Fire, and to drown him since. But to leave the Invention,
methinks it is but silly foppery, thus to show your dear Soars for my
destruction: by Congregateing your selves together solemnly, to behold the
sport of Rascally Boys, and London Prentices, with Butchers, and Tinkers, and
such kind of Scouring, as if they were at one of your Bear baitings; I say that
this should draw you Ladies and Gentlewomen, at this time of the Night, from
your homes, into the Belconies, and Windows, indangering your healths at this
time of the Year, and that all this Concourse of People should thus Run
together, to behold the burning of a poor Image, made of Wax, of me a Pope,
that troubles you not, that am not your Neighbor, but dwell at a great
distance from you, and hardly so much as think of you, unless when put in mind,
by this good Man, on my Left Hand, Father Jesuit; who would recall you from the
Errors. Consider with your selves, is it not a disgrace to Temporal Princes,
that you should thus Publicly burn my Effiges, who am one as well as a
Spiritual Lord, and Father, and have a Large teritory left me, called the
Patrimony of St. Peter, than many Temporal Princes, that you durst not serve
thus: you begin to move my anger, to see your folly, and in Rome, suffer
nothing by it; leave off for shame this Pajent, and maigame, and I will promise
you, if you will spare me from the Fire, and these others the Jesuits and
Devil, which are like to suffer with me, Pardons and Indulgences, not only for
all your sins past, and what you now commit, but for all sins to come, be they
of what nature or kind they will, so that you may have free Liberty of sinning,
without remorse, as you see many of my Sons, and Daughters; daily do, I having
given power to this my Son the Jesuit, of pardoning them for all their Crimes,
and this also will I grant for you, if you will return to me, and leave of this
pernicious Custom of Burning a Pope. This being said, the Jesuit gravely
looking about, spoke thus.

THE JESUITS SPEECH.
Well good People, though you have brought us here to be burnt together fast
Friend, and faithful Counselors, and that you Burn us in Effiges, I assure
you, I yet hope to see some of you to Fry in Flames here, as well as hereafter,
for this your Wicked Fact, and abominable disgrace, you show your good wills,
as how kind you have been to us, we shall also Remember. Do not you think that
all our Plots, and contrivances are at an End. You have discovered some of
them, which indeed makes me a little admire, and made me begin to suspect, that
Brother Devil had been false to us, and had betrayed our Hell-hatch'd designs,
but he has assured me by many Hellish asseverations, as strong as those of our
fraternity, that he is innocent of any such thing. But be it as it will, you
have taken of some of our Heads, and now you burn me, as the Chief Father of
the order, residing at Rome, but now we are like Hydras Heads, the more you cut
off, the more Spring up in their Places, we are indifatigable, and never to be
tired out, we care little what you can do against us, so we can have but a
creeping hole in England! O happy England, that once yielded us such incomes:
but we will still undermine you, till we have entered your Fortress, and
brought you to the Old pass, which if ever we compass, we have prepared Iron
Yoaks for your Necks, and Bolts and Chains for your Arms, and feet: we will
Fetter you, and Remember this Bon-fire, with the Frying of your Flesh, and
Crackling of your Bones I now speak plain to you, and you think I am no Jesuit,
because I seem to confess, mistake me not, I am Inocent as the best, and as the
Child unborne, and if need be, can still affirm it with as much confidence, as
those who have died before me, for the things were as plain, as the Nose in
your Faces, yet their confidence and great Impudence has wrought so on the
minds of many, that they believe them Innocent. After the same example, I say
take notice all you Spectators, that I am Innocent, and no Plotter, or
contriver of any mischief to you, but good to our selves, for it is no hurt to
you to be Burnt, Murdered or Hanged, it is for a good cause, and for the
Salvation of your Souls. What if I did say but now, that we did Plot, and
contrive, I now deny that I ever did say so, you are all mistaken, I aver it,
and Swear to the contrary, tho I must now be Burnt for it: I know my confidence
will weigh much with some, all are not such foolls, as to believe their Senses,
before a Jesuits dying words, or the Oaths and Testimonies of several People,
before our Imprications, and asseverations. Therefore good People take notice
once more, tho I am one of the greatest boutfects in the World, and
Incendaries, one that loves to see Kingdoms together by the Ears, Fighting for
Religion, whilst we laugh, share the Spoil, and have no Religion, I say, tho I
Commit murders and Massacres, and all sorts of Villainies, and contrive Plot,
upon Plot, and all sorts of Plots, I say, and will still say, that you will,
that I and all of us, are still Innocent. The Jesuits having ended, the Devil
showing his Fangs, with a strange pleasing Grin, began thus.

THE DEVILS SPEECH.
My good People a great many of you I know, will fall to my share, I am very
well pleased, that you will make me a Martier, with my dear Son the Pope,
Jesuits; I tell you it is natural for me to be in Flames, and therefore you do
but drown the Ele, and put me into my one Element for I can sleep as well in
Flames, as you in cleen sheets. I shall not therefore make to you any Speeches,
as at my Funeral, nor shall I go about to persuade you of my Innocence, but I
will like an honest Devil (you know the Proverb, give him his due, and
sometimes the Devil speaks Truth) I confess to you, that I am Gulty of all the
mischief that is committed in this World, but since I have not power of my self,
to do any thing without the use of the Instrument Man, who cannot be hurt but
by himself, I have made use of the Pope, and the Jesuits, as my Sword: and my
Poison, with them I have wrought you sufficient mischief; and to tell you the
plain truth of it, do still intend to do the same, look to your selves as well
as you can, therefore I will turn my self from you, and speak a word or two of
comfort, to my fellow sufferers, and so conclude, though I look younger then you,
and that I have no beard, for you must know the Infernal Flames singed it off
continually, yet you know I am Older than you, and Old enough to be your
Father, therefore my dear Sons, both Pope and Jesuits, you I have long
councelled you, and by my Counsel you have chiefly maintained the greatness in
this World; ever since that Ambitious Pope, who first of all laid claim to
that Spiritual Jurisdiction over all other Bishops, and would exercise dominion
and Lord-ship over all the rest. did not I make the Emperor of the East, who
was a murderer and userper, to place St. Peter's Chair, for this Pope, to sit
in, and have not I been ever since faithful to your Conclave, and passed the
Chair that is set amply for another Body, but possessed still by me, and have
not I ever since Inspired most of the predecessors, as I could Name them to
you, but that I love brevity: as Ill crained as others: and among the rest,
Pope Joane, have not I made some of them Conjurers, Blasphemers, open
Buggerers, and Calamites; and most rageing and Bloody persecutors: but I will
not innumerare all my Services, both to you my Son the Pope, and also to my
dear Younger Son the Jesuit: begotten from a Lame Pocky Soldier; Ignatious,
have not I made you greater, and of more power and Riches; than ever the
Templers were: and have not I called a Privy Council in Hell, of all the
Cunning and Sophisticateing Spirits there, to extract a Quintessence, of Subtle
Principles, and Morrals, and for you to walk by, and to maintain; and have I
not brought you into all the Courts of Christendom: and do not you manage the
Affairs of the whole Christian World. By my means and contrivance; let this
then comfort you in this day of Tribulation, that I will not forsake you at the
last Hour: but am willing to enter the Flames with you here, and to accompany
you in those hereafter in my Kingdom, therefore you need not be afraid of
being Burnt, since it is the Element I live in, and which you must also Live in,
and you know we have Sworn never to forsake one another, but to Live and Die
together, therefore these wise People have put us deservedly together: knowing
our Friend-ship, intimacy, and confederacy; grieve not therefore at this
suffering, for it is but a Type and shadow of what is to come, and what you
ought to expect, Consideratis, Considerandis. With this the People gave a great
shout, which being silenced Queen Elzabeth made this short Speech, with great
gravity.

QUEEN ELIZABETH'S SPEECH.
Good Pople all, it rejoices my Soul, and Heart, that still beholds your Pious
love to my Memory, to see this day, that the Image of the Beast, and the
rageing Monster, the Jesuit may be yet so freely burnt in these Streets,
notwithstanding their endeavovrs of in kindling other Fires of Flesh and Blood,
in this place, notwithstanding the pretenses of the Pope, and the asserted
Innocence of the Jesuit, you do not amiss in making this Bon-fire, and burning
their Effiges, for thereby you would show them the affection, to the reformed
Religion, and your dissaffection to all the Trash, Trumpery, and Idolatry, and
Blasphemy, of the Romish; that they might thereby have there hopes dashed, from
attempting to bring in their Religion, into a place so generally dissaffected
to them, neither can any temporal Prince, take acceptions at a thing done by no
other Authority, shall the joint affection of the Common People, who are
sometimes Vox Die, and are not to be restrained in such Cases: you meddle not
with his Temporallity, but his Spiritual usurpation and Tyranny over Souls,
besides I consider the many Provocations of late, more than usual, to exite,
and exasperate the minds of People against them, by their most horrid
imaginations, and contrivances. I know you still remember the many Treacherous
ways these guilty persons had, to take away my Life, for which some few then
suffered: then the Horrid and Devilish Powder Plot, to blow bp my successor,
next the late bloody Wars, and the dessolution of the Glorsous Marrier King
Charles, effected by their Treachery and designs: and now lastly the most
horrid Plot, against the Life of the great Monarch, and merciful Prince; that
now Reigns. over you, nod yet more lately, notwithstanding their suffering for
their so late Crimes, their Hell hatched and neatly contrived Conspiracy, to
throw all their Villainy upon the reformed, both of the Church of England, and
the Bresbyterians, so Wicked as before was never the like Read, or heard of, to
be contrived. I say all this being considered, you have just cause to show the
dissaffection to their evil ways, and they suffer also very justly, for their
Wicked Crimes, in Effiges.

With this the People giving a great shout, the Images were thrown into the
Fire, with general joy, and exclaimation.

FINIS.

