Popish Mercy AND JUSTICE.

Being An Account, not of those (more than an hundred Thousand) massacred in
France by the Papists, formerly, but of some later Persecutions of the French
Protestants.

Set forth in their PETITION to the FRENCH KING.

Translated for the Information of English Protestants.

By Ezreel Tongue, the first Discoverer of this most horrid Plot to His Majesty.

Crimine ab uno disce omnes. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruelties.

-- Behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and
on the side of their oppressors there was power.

Eccles. 4.1. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting
of Judgment and Justice in a Province, marvel not at the matter: for he that
is higher then the highest regards, and there are higher than they,

Eccles. 5.8. London, Printed by Th. Dawks, and are to be sold at the white
Swan by Apothecarys hall in Black friars. 1679.

Licensed,

December. 10. 1678.
ADVERTISEMENT.
There is preparing for the Press A Brief History of PRINTING; Dedicated to the
Kings Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament: Very useful for all in Authority,
and for Scholars. Written, for the good of Posterity, by Thomas Dawks Printer
to the Kings most excellent Majesty in the British Language.

In Hilary Term will be published Horae Mathematicae seu URANIA; The Soul of
Astrology: containing that Art in all its parts; wherein more especially you
will find 1. A New Discourse on the 12 signs. 2. A refutation of the Planetary
hour, Terms of the Planets, deep, pitted and azimene degrees. 3. A new Method
of managing Nativities without trouble of Calculation, by Inspection only. 4. A
new Method of judging Directions. 5. A Compendium of Argol's way. 6. A New
Method of judging Horary Questions: 7. Judgment of Annual Revolutions of the
World. 8. Of Monthly Observations, and Meteorological Predictions. 9. Judgment
of Eclipses, Aspects of the Planets and Comets. 10. How to find the Planets and
stars rising, southing and setting by new Tables never before published. 11. The
Reason and Demonstration of the Aspects of the Planets. 12. The various uses of
the Sexaginary Table: with many other things of excellent use, too tedious here
to be related. And followed with

II. Synopsis Medicinae, (so often mentioned in the New London Dispensatory)
Or, A Compendium of Physic, Chyrurgery and Alchimy; enlarged through all its
Parts (astrologically proposed, and chymically applied:) among which you will
find, 1. The Anatomy of the Body of Man. 2. The Order and Method of the
Chyrurgions Chest. 3. The Art of Embalming both after the Egyptian and
European ways. 4. The 112 Arcanums of Joh. Pet. Faber. 5. The Process of the
Universal Medicine of Paracelsus, as 'twas taken out of the Original
Manuscript. Both which are written by W. Salmon, Professor of Physic, living
at the red Balls in Salisbury Court, Fleetstreet: and Printed by Th. Dawks, in
Blackfriars.

To the KING.
Sir,
LEWIS de Lisle Esquier, Lord of Ollon, Frederick de Vins Esquire Lord of Barveil,
Francis, Henry and Isaac de Blosset Esquiers; Claudius de Maumirey, and James
le Suerre do most humbly remonstrate to your Majesty, That amongst the Places
of the Protestant Religion in the Province of Burgundy, that of Vaujaucourt
near to Avalon, has been well established, and was confirmed by the Lord
Bouchu Intendant of that Province; which the Rector of that Parish could not
endure, nor the Gray Friars of Vezelay, whose Guardian, named du Han, did not
only bring the Process against it to cause it to be forbidden and suppressed, but
did by Libels printed and published, and by his Sermons endeavored to persuade
the People of that Country, That your Majesty was resolved to cause all the
places of that Religion in that Province to be pulled down, and so likewise
throughout all France, and not to tolerate the said Reformed Religion therein
any longer. They conspired to raise a seditious Tumult of the Catholic
Communalty, as well of that place as of the Neighborhood against them of the
said Protestant Religion, and to take occasion by a Synod, which was to be held
at the said Vaujaucourt, on the 13th of June 1667. and the following days,
that thereby they might at once drive away and destroy all the Ministers in
Burgundy: and to draw a Confluence of People to that Place, he caused public
Notice to be given all about every where of the Meeting of that Synod, and that
his Design was to be there, and to dispute against all the Ministers, and to
refute what they preached in their Sermons. And he did indeed appear there
accordingly, followed by multitudes of People: And presently, upon his Arrival,
he set up his Preaching Pulpit directly before the door of the Inn where all
the Protestant Ministers lodged, designing, that when they came either in or
out, they might be exposed to the mutinous people. And having spent the four
first days in Preaching seditiously against the Doctrine of the Protestant
Ministers, and pursuing them with Challenges unto the Place of their Exercise,
where he was attended by three or four thousand Persons, and continually
affronting and insulting over them, because they would not Dispute with them,
on the 19th of the said June, he executed his mischievous Design by ringing the
Allarm-Bell, and by crying HARLAU, HARLAU, which is the Word there used to
raise a Tumult, and which he gave the Mutineers himself: All whose Fury fell
upon your Petitioners, who (whilst the Women, Children and feeble Persons saved
themselves in several places) presented themselves to this enraged Multitude,
endeavored to appease them by sweet passionate Entreaties: and the said Lord
Ollon principally, who being the Lord of that Place, believed that his Vassals
would have had some Respect for him, and have assisted him in putting a stop to
that Disorder; but he, as well as the rest, was first outragiously abused in
words, and then assaulted with Stones, Cudgels, Swords, Halberts, and Spits,
knocked down, wounded, and grievously bruised in all parts of their Bodies,
dragged by their hair to be cast into the River; nor had the Murderers here
desisted, but that 'twas thought they had been dead: One of them designing to
dispatch the Lord of Ollon, took up the heaviest stone he could find, and threw
it at his head with all his force: After they had done this, these seditious
people went and broke open the doors of many Houses, and amongst others, the
house of Zachary and James Courcelles, in which the said Ministers and and
others were lodged, which houses they plundered: Now also some Women and other
Catholics improving their time, took up your Petitioners and carried them into
the Castle of that place, where they lay a great while before they gave any
sign of life, having lost, in a manner, all their Blood by the many wounds that
were given them.

As Violences that were so notorious could not be dissembled, your Petitioners
sent the 21 of the said June, to present their Complaint to the said Lord
Bouchu, who gave Commission to the Lord Guijon, Lieutenant Criminal of Avalon,
to take Information thereof, and to take for his Assistant, of the pretended
Reformed Religion, the Lord Rey de Morand, a Councellor at Law, which was done
the next day, and sixty Witnesses examined, as well of the one as of the other
Religion, which related all the Circumstances of the Sedition of which the said
Gray-fryer du Han having had Advice, and not doubting that he was charged as
the principal Author of all that happened, he went and enticed the Attorney
General of the Parliament of Dijon; who, upon his suit, deputed the Lord
Chaumelis, a Senator of the said Parliament, to take Information of the same
Fact; pretending against all appearance of Reason, That they of the Protestant
Religion, who were not above 70 or or 80 persons (comprising in that number the
Ministers, Elders, Oldmen, Women and Children) had intended to abuse them of
the Catholic Religion, who were in number 6000 and more: and the same du Han,
having caused himself to be examined, produced for witnesses those who were the
most violent in the Assault and Plunder: Your Petitioners, being advised
thereof, had cause to sear that, this Information being delivered into that
Parliament, they should be treated as Criminals, were obliged to make
Application to your Majesty, who having taken Notice that this Proceeding was a
Recrimination, and that the Parliament of Dijon was not competent to take
Cognizance of this Affair, wherein the Religion was so much concerned, remitted
it to the said Lord Bouchu, thereof, after Information taken to Judge with
Sovereign Authority, and joining to them in Commission seven Graduats.

This Power which made the said Lord Bouchu absolute Master of the Affair,
wrought a notable change in the manner of his Proceedings, for whereas before
he had treated them well, and testified to them, That he had all manner of
Inclination to do them Justice for the Abuses and Indignities they had
suffered: They were surprised to find that in stead thereof, he had sent to
seek for the Information taken by the Lord Chaumelis, and having compared it
with that of the Lord de Guijon, he had put one part of your Petitioners under
an Arrest, and obliged others of them, and some Catholics also to a personal
Appearance, and directed a new Commission to the said Lord Guijon, Lieutenant
Criminal of Avalon, with an Assistant of the pretended Protestant Religion to
continue the Inquisition, and to perfect the Process unto Judgment exclusively,
and, which was more strange, he permitted his said Delegate to take Information
more at large of all the Articles and Instructions of your Majesty's Attorney,
and of the said Gray-Fryer du Han, that the Witnesses appointed by the said
Attorney might be examined upon the Contents of the said Articles: which was
very unreasonable, for that the said Gray-Fryer is dead to the World, and
therefore incapable to act and plead in Law: and besides accused and convicted
to have been the Boutefew or Incendiary of this popular Insurrection, and
therefore could not be Plantiff, nor ought those his Articles of Charge to be
received, which were contrived for his own Discharge. This Partiality made way
for another, which was that this Gray-Fryer being thus authorized to give-in
Articles, went on so far as to frame and obtain an injurious and scandalous
Sentence against your Petitioners, whom he accused to have attempted to begin a
Civil WAR in France by this Insurrection, of which, he suggested, they were the
Authors: Which obliged them, when the first Publication thereof was made, to
interpose an Appeal, as against an Abuse, which being signified to your
Majesty's said Attorney of the said place of Avalon, he made a Return on the
foot of the Writ, on the 5 of September, that he had done nothing therein nor
known nothing thereof: and yet nevertheless when they would have stopped them
from proceeding in the said Publications, which tended toward new Seditions,
the aforesaid Delegate, of his own private Authority, ordained, That it should
go on: In pursuance whereof the said Publications being made, there were at
least a Thousand Witnesses offered themselves to be examined, out of which the
said Gray-Fryer chose 206, who were the very same that followed his Orders in
this Insurrection, and caused them to be heard by the said Lord Guijon the
Delegate.

But this Information, which was not finished till the Month of November, was
never yet concluded on, nor any Decretal Judgment made upon the Charges
contained therein, the said Delegate contenting himself with the Judicial
Decrees of Arrest and personal Appearance, which the said Lord Bouchu had made
upon the first Informations, by his Ordinance of the 19th of August: which
obliged your Petitioners, cited by those Decrees, to apply themselves again to
your Majesty, to whom it being represented, that by your first Order of the 6
of July, you had judged the Parliament of Dijon incompetent of that Affair, and
consequently the Information also that was taked by the Lord Chaumelis, an
Assistant or Commissioner of the said Parliament, (who had not called to him
any Assistant of the pretended Protestant Religion) was also null, and ought
not to have been regarded: Your Majesty gave out another Order of the 24 of
October, by which it was ordained, That in the Prosecution and Judgment of the
said Affair, the said Lord Bouchu should have no regard to the Information of
the Lord of Chaumelis, but only to those taken by the said Lord Guijon, and Rey
de Morant, his Assistant; and what the said Lord Bouchu would, should cause to
be made anew, and in the aforesaid form, on which he should further execute the
said Order of the 6 of July, according to its Form and Tenure. In pursuance of
which last Order, it is certain, That not only the said Information of the said
Lord of Chaumelis, but the Decrees of personal Appearance and Arrest of the
said Lord Bouchu, judged by his Determination thereon against your Petitioners,
were vacated, and consequently that the process against them ought to be made
upon new Charges and new Decrees; nevertheless upon them it is that the greater
part of your Petitioners are Condemned as contumacious, and the Lord Bouchu
has given Judgment against them without other Information, and against all
form of Law on the 30 of July last, having first declared by certain particular
Catholics, whom he caused presently to appear in person, and that the said
Charges and Allegations were sufficient to ground the Process.

By this Judgment, (which without doubt will surprise your Majesty) he has
declared the Defaults of six of your Petitioners, and four others to be legally
taken and obtained, and to be effectual, giving Judgment against them, and six
others who appeared and put in their Defense; and for reparation of the Charges
arising from the Process, he has condemned your said Orators alone in 6000
livers solid fine; whereof the said Lords of Ollon, Barveil and Pougues were
each to pay 1000 livers, and the Lords of Seurre, Monmire, Henry and Isaac de
Blosset, each of them 750 livers applicable to the following uses; to wit, 1000
livers to your Majesty's benefit, 2000 to the Hospital of St. Reine, 1000 to
that of Avalon, 600 to the Repairs of the Sessions House of the Bayliwick of
Dijon, 300 livers to the Cloister of the Gray-Fryers of Vezelay, the like sum
of 300 livers to the Cloister of the Minnu Friars of Avalon, and another 300
livers to the Capouchins of the said Avalon, and 150 livers to the Church of
Vaujau-court, 200 livers to Zachary Courcelles for his Concerns, 150 to three
other private persons for their Concerns, and Joshua Prevost and James Mugnier
were condemned, and namely, the first in 20 livers fine, and 60 livers damage
to Lazarus Perin, and the other in ten livers fine, and all these aforesaid
condemned to the whole Cost and Charges of the suit, and as for the said
private Catholics, they were discharged from attending the Court, and quit of
the Process; and it was ordered that John Gravier, Minister of Chastillon,
should be taken, arrested and carried to the Royal Prison of Dijon, to have his
process made and perfected, and to complete this work, there is added that your
Majesty should be very humbly petitioned to forbid the public Exercise of the
Protestant Religion through the whole extent of the said Bayliwich of Avalon;
and that to that intent the Churches wherein they keep that Exercise should be
speedily pulled down and demolished.

This Judgment has supprized and scandalized all the Country, even all the
Catholics that have any little Justice in them, seeing that instead of
punishing exemplarily this popular Fury, which was terrible to all people; the
assaulted, and rather they who were Massacred paid the Fine; the damage and
charges are given to the Murderers; and beyond all this; both they and all the
Inhabitants of the Bayliwick of Avalon were menaced to be deprived of the
Exercise of their Religion. And that very Churches which escaped in the
Sedition, and had undergone the examination made of its Titles by the said Lord
Bouchu beaten down and demolished; the Hospital and Cloisters of the Country
round enriched with their Spoils, and that in particular whereof the said Du
Hau was Warden, who was the Author and Promoter of the Furyes and Plunders
exercised on the Petitioners, their Houses and Goods, and which is very
extraordinary; That this Gray-Fryer, who pretends, and is, according to the
Laws of France, the Statutes and Vows of his Order, civilly Dead; has no right
to bring any Suit or Action, and was both accused and convicted Legally and
Justly, and could be at, nor have no Charges, it being one of the Vows of his
Order; that he touch no money at all; has notwithstanding obtained a Decree
for his Expenses, which he has since caused to be rated at Three Thousand
Three Hundred and Forty two livers, one penny half penny, by an Execution,
where he has served the Petitioners, with a Protestation upon their Refusal,
to cause their Goods to be seized and sold: all which tends to the giving
Licentious Indulgence to such people as are Seditiously inclined against them
of the Protestant Religion; but also to such Preachers who are but too much
inclined to instigate them against such who will give ear to them. Whereupon
neither your Petitioners, nor any other of the Protestant Religion, can be in
any security, whereby your Majesty may perceive of what Importance it is, and
how necessary that some single Sovereign Judge be constituted, and liberty
given him to choose his Assistants; and particularly a supreme Intendant, who
may make choice of such Assistants to him, as are not too much obliged to
compliance and submission; of which the Lord Bouchu without doubt, if any is to
be suspected, who having been forced by evident proofs of the exercise of the
Protestant Religion in the Vaujau-court to confirm it, was not displeased to
have this occasion given him, to declare your Petitioners criminal in this
popular Sedition, that he might thence take an occasion to put to the end of
his Judgment this Petition to your Majesty, to deprive all the Inhabitants of
the said Baylliwick, the liberty of serving God, and to ordain the demolition
of all their Churches. But this Soverainty which was given him did not extend
to dispense with him from observing all forms common and necessary for the
Conviction of the Guilty.

Now that your Majesty may know he has omitted and violated the most essential
Procedures, you are besought to consider, That there have been three Bills of
Complaint. The first taken by the Lord Guyon Lieutenant, Criminal of Avalon,
and upon this there can be no pretense, to say; That your Petitioners could be
condemned, for that it was taken upon their complaint, the Contents whereof was
very well proved by 60 Witnesses, which they produced and caused to be
examined, who named and convicted the Authors and Actors of that Conspiracy.
The second, which was taken at the instigation of the said Gray Friar du Hau,
at the instance of the Attorney General for the Parliament of Dyon, by the Lord
Caumelis was declared Null, by your Majesty's Order, granted the 14. of
October, which without doubt did extend to nullify also the Decrees judged by
the said Lord Bouchu, upon the Complaints contained therein: There remains only
then the third Indictment, by 206 Witnesses, put-in in September, and finished
in November, upon which the Lord Bouchu could find any complaint or charge to
found his Judgment; but first of all that is Null, being made to the prejudice
of an Appeal of Abuse, in the grant of that Indictment, which Abuse consisted
in this: That the grant of that Indictment could not legally be obtained,
without the permission of a royal Judge, which ought always to go before the
Cognizance of the Cause, it being not in the power of parties to publish
Indictments and Complaints, according to their own fancies, nor to have them
granted and published, for otherwise many dangerous Informations, and such as
might have very bad consequences, might be made public, and such indeed in the
present case they were in which the Gray-Fryer instigated by laboring for his
own Discharge, had and made use of that in his Information, whereof he was the
sole Author; as namely, That your Petitioners and others who were Assembled at
Vaujaucourt, had conspired to make an Insurrection, to begin a Civil War in
France; a ridiculous Calumny amongst reasonable persons, which nevertheless was
very apt to put Stones and other Weapons into the hands of the Rabble, very
credulous and easily moved to Insurrections, Slaughter and Plunder, whence it
appears that such a permission was necessary in this case, according to the
constant use of all the Jurisdictions of the Kingdom, but that it ought also to
have been agreed and limited by the discretion of the said Judge, and not left
to the discretion of a passionate Monk; and it is certain that the Lord Bouchu
himself, ought to have reduced it by his discretion, to supportable terms,
because this is a point of highest consequence in the judgment of a Suit, and
and not to have left it to a Sub-delegate, to whom he could have only committed
the simple prosecution and information, and not that which might give the
decisive blow to the chief concern, or issue of the cause. There was also an
Abuse or Error in regard of the person who obtained this S n ence, which was
the Gray Friar alone, notwithstanding he neither was nor could be a party to
the Suit, but your Majesty's Attorney, only who declared when the said Appeal
upon abuse was signified to him, that he had no notice of the Sentence, nor of
the publication made thereof: Add hereto, that by the Ordinance of the said
Lord Bouchu, of the 19. of August no Witnesses ought to have been examined, but
such as should have been appointed by your Majesty's Attorney; whence it
follows, that the 20 Witnesses who were examined to the said last Sentence,
being picked by the said Gray Friar du Han, out of more then 1200, which were
propounded to be examined. This Indictment or Sentence was also Null, being it
must needs be presumed, That this Monk would choose none but his Accomplices in
his Fury, who, for their own and his discharge, would be careful not to fail in
accusing your Petitioners: and this is very considerable, because of another
Nullity observable in the proceedings of the Lord Bouchu, which is omitting the
Re-examination of the Witnesses, and confronting them with the Defendents,
which formalities are for certain absolutely necessary to perfect and put the
last hand to criminal Processes, that are of any consequence. The
Re-examination consists in this, that the witnesses who proves any charge being
summoned a second time for this purpose, and appearing before the Judge, his
Deposition be read unto him, to know whether he persist therein, and whether he
have any thing to add to it, or take from it: and Confronting is the presenting
the Witnesses and the Defendant face to face, that on the one hand the Witness
may declare whether he know the Defendant, and whether he be the person against
whom he deposes; and on the other side, the Defendant may say, whether he know
the Witness, and whether he may be creditable or he have some exception against
him, which he is obliged to make presently, otherwise he will not be allowed;
see here what is observable on the behalf of the Defendant, who appears to make
any Defense by way of cross Interrogatories put into the Judge, and presents
himself to be confronted by the Witnesses, and for them who make default by not
appearing, and contumacy, there is a re-examination of the witnesses only had,
that serves instead of a confrontation, which in this case is termed imaginary.
Now, as for the private Catholics, who were of the number of the Seditions,
there was no need of confrontation nor re-examination for what concerned them,
for there being nothing from the beginning Decreed against them, but that they
should appear personally, they presented themselves, and having made their
Defense, and finding the Lord Bouchu disposed to treat them favorably, they
declared that they would be judged of that which was charged against them, but
as to your Petitioners, who of Plaintiffs were made Defendents, and of Accusers
accused, and perceived very well by the first Decrees that the Lord Bouchu made
against them, as soon as he was declared their Sovereign Judge, that he had a
design to treat them as Criminals, they were very far from declaring that they
would take judgment on the charges deposed against them, by such Witnesses as
were themseves guilty of the Violences and Robberies committed against them; so
that the Lord Bouchu ought, if he would condemn them, to have observed against
them all the ordinary formalities: In doing which, he ought first to have past
Sentence on your Petitioners Appeal of Abuse, against the Indictment granted
against them, the scandalous Publication whereof, had produced that cloud of
1000 Witnesses: after that if he could have convinced the Petitioners, and had
judged the Indictment valid, whereof the Witnesses had been prict, not by the
Attorney Royal, but by the Gray Friar, then he should have consulted with his
Assistant, and made the new decretal Orders against the Petitioners, and have
caused them to be signified unto them, to obliged them to appear, put in their
defense, and abide the confrontation of the Witnesses against them, and
thereupon to re-examine the Witnesses, and confront them effectually against
them that appeared, and by supposition against those who made default: but, for
certain, there was nothing done of all this, but he stuck to his first Decrees,
though they were annulled by your Majesty's Order of the 24. of October, as
well as the Information taken by the Lord Chammelis, upon which his Judgment
was made; and this is the sorry foundation on which he has built and taken
advantage of your Petitioners as contumacious, because they would not appear
upon his first Decrees, and without citing them by Writ according to use, and
without re-examination of Witnesses, he condemned them by his Judgment.

As for what concerns the Lord D'Ollon he appeared before him, made his Defense
as he was required, which was also taken only two days before the said
Judgment, he still declaring that he was ready to abide the confrontation of
the Witnesses, if any of them could give in any charge against him.

It cannot be pretended that he was wanting in any thing, but on the contrary
he would have been well pleased that the said Witnesses had been presented to
him, because he could easily have excepted against them, and have convinced
them to have been themselves guilty of all the Disorder; neither would any
other proof have been needed against them than the Indictment brought against
them at the beginning, at the request of the Petitioner; wherein it was by 60
unreprovable Witnesses, That those who were last examined, who insisted on any
charge, were they who executed the Conspiracy against the Assembly of the
Synod, where your Petitioners were Assaulted, Wounded, Murdered, Massacred,
dragged by the hair, left for dead, the Money they had about them robbed from
them, and their Hats, Swords, Belts and Coats, and the rest of their Clothes
torn in pieces, and many of their Houses broken up and plundered, and all this
at the sound of the Alarm Bell, and with a continual cry of Harlau, Harlau
against the Hugonets, which is the word to raise Sedition. Nor can any
Comparison be made betwixt these two Informations, because the former was made
according to all the forms of Law, and was confirmed and authorized by your
Majesty's Order, of the 24 of October, whereas this latter is a pure
recrimination, and absolutely null, in that it was made contrary to all
Judicial Order: and it is to be considered that the Catholics who were
summoned at first upon the former Information and did personally appear,
knowing that they were convicted of Violence and Robbery, did acknowledge one
part of their Charge, That they had entered into the Houses of the Protestants,
and taken some of their Goods, believing that it was allowed them, and that the
Plunder had been given the Catholics; and this notwithstanding, by the
Judgment of the Lord Bouchu, they were purely and simply dismissed and
discharged from the Court and Suit, without condemning them to the Restitution
of what they had Robbed.

This Judgment wherein he took to him no Assistant of the Protestant Religion,
can therefore neither subsist in form and matter, being it is against all Rules
of Legal Proceedings, and against Justice, which cannot allow that the Guilty,
convicted both by their own confessions and good proofs, whereunto they have
nothing to object, whereon they have joined Issue, should be sent away
absolved, and the Gentlemen who had always lived in Peace, and with all
Sweetness and Moderation in the Country, without being ever accused of the
least Violence, and who, on all occasions when they were called to your
Majesty's Service, have behaved themselves according to their Duty; and
finally, who have by the same Information proved by 60 unreprovable Witnesses,
that they have no hand, nor were any partakers of the Sedition in Question, but
only as they were the sad and unhappy objects thereof, who suffered therein all
imaginable Outrages and Indignities, and yet are condemned in great penalties,
as some great and criminal Offenders, and threatened to be deprived as seditious
persons, of that which is more dear unto them than their Lives, to wit, the
Liberty of their Conscience, and Exercise of their Religion in their Churches.

This Judgment is not at all difinitive, for if it had been given in
Parliament, or in some Sovereign Court, the Petitioners, who are condemned as
contumatious, would always, or for five years at least, have liberty to appear,
make their defense, and submit to Confrontations; and it is certain, That their
appearance only would annul the Sentence of their Condemnation, their defaults
and contumacy. But they most humbly pray your Majesty, that they may not be
constrained to appear before the Lord Bouchu, and to acknowledge him for their
Sovereign Judge, after so irregular and unjust proceeding, as he has used in
the said Indictment and Judgment upon the whole Suit: They require not to be
dismissed and absolved, upon what they report of their Innocence, nor that they
should be condemned upon their simple Affirmation whom they accuse, to have
conspired to Massacre them, and to have exercised against them the cruelties
and robberies, which have been above declared, all this appears in the
consideration of the Cause: There are two Informations, The one taken upon your
Petitioners complaint and request, in which there is no defect, and your
Majesty has judged it good and valid, by your Sentence of the four and
twentieth of October, and, as for the other it is Null by the reasons related
above, which are of much greater force than those whereby your Majesty was
induced to vacate and reject, by the firm Sentence which the Lord Chaumelis had
made, in that besides the recrimination which is common to both the Indictment
in hand, had for its foundation an abusive monitory citation, obtained by a
Criminal Monk, and without making your Majesty's Attorney party thereunto, who
alone had power to prosecute the Information upon the Process and to produce
the Witnesses, and who would not have taken the way of a monitory citation, in
a matter wherein it can never be allowed, in regard it is not possible to have
justice against a Sedition, if means be given to the Seditious to prevent
themselves, and to be Witnesses in their own Cause, and for their own
justification; and for the Lord Bouchu without doubt cannot be disposed to
condemn and reject that which he has already approved, and other Judges will
make great difficulty to do it, your Majesty is most humbly besought, to pass
Sentence, as you have already done of the nullity of the Information of the
Lord Chaumelis, and to give them other Judges, such as are not suspected of
partiality against your Petitioners, both to determine on the first
Information, and to take others if they judge it needful, and to make an end of
sitting this Process, for Re-hearing.

This considered, Great Sir, and the Importance of the affair, whereon there is
question of doing Justice, on a Sedition of this nature and quality, for
securing the repose and tranquillity of the Country: May it please your Majesty,
without insisting on the Ordinance of the Lord Bo chu, of the nineteenth of
August 1667. and all that which is don and ensued thereupon, to send back unto
some Royal Court of the Province of Burgundy, other than that of Avalon, the
Instruction, Issue and Judgment of this Suit; and to Ordain, That to this end
the first information taken by the Lord Guijon and Rey de morande his
Assistant, be brought thither viewed, and determined, and a new one taken
thereon, if it be necessary, by good Witnesses to be produced, by your
Majesty's Attorney of the said Court, on whose information and instance, and not
of any other, the said Judgment may be wholly made, an Assistant of the
Reformed Religion, being Assumed to him therein, according to the Edict at
Nants, and the said Order of the 24 of October, all without prejudice to an
Appeal to one of the Chambers of the Edict, unless your Majejesty will rather
be pleased to assume the cause, and give Judgment therein you self.

And your Petitioners shall continue their Prayers unto God for your Majesty's
Health and Prosperity.
But this Petition availed nothing for redress of these Grievances complained
of by the Protestants.

Finis.
The Publisher to the Reader.
THis Translation and several other Pieces were prepared for the Press some
time before this Plot broke out, and attended till Now, a convenient season for
their Publication.

Ez. Tongue.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published The Universal Dispensatory, Containing (as the
Preface to it shows you) the Choicest things in the Augustan Dispensatory, in
Paracelsus, in Horstius, in Faber, Sala, Quercetan, Hartman, Schroder,
Mynsicht, etc. in short, it is the Sum of all the most excellent Designations
from the greatest Scholars, the profoundest Wits, the most wise, industrious
and experienced Physicians, through all Ages to this day, whether Greek, Latin
or English; thereby rendering this Work the most complete of any thing that is
or can be in that kind: Its Title Page is Pharmacopoeia Londinensis Reformata.
Or, the New London Dispensatory. In six Books. Translated into English for the
public Good, and fitted to the whole Art of Healing. Illustrated with the
Preparations, Virtues and Uses of all Simple Medicaments; Vegitable, Animal and
Mineral: Of all Compounds, both Internal and External: And of all the Chemical
Preparations now in Use. Together with several choice Medicines added by the
Author. As also the Praxis of Chemistry, as it is now Exercised, fitted to the
meanest Capacity. By William Salmon Professor of Physic. To which is added a
Table, showing the Difference betwixt the Text and Comment, necessary to be
known by every Student. Printed for Th. Dawks, Th. Basset, J. Wright and R.
Chiswel. 1679. Price Bound 7 s.


