The Paper which was Seized in the E. of Shaftsbury's Closet by Francis Gwin
Esquire, One of the Clerks of His Majesty's Privy Council, and Read November
24. 1681. at the Old Baily, before His Majesty's Commissioners of Oyer an^
Terminer.
WE the Knights, etc. Finding to the grief of our Hearts, the Popish Priests
and Jesuits with the Papists, and their Adherents and Abetters have for several
years last past pursued a most ^ernicious and hellish Plot, to root the true
Protestant Religion as a pestilent Heresy, to take away the Life of our
Gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liberties, and to set up Arbitrary power
and Popery.

And it being Notorious that they have been highly encouraged by the
Countenance and Protection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and by
their Expectations of his succeeding to the Crown and that through (...) Popish
Councils his Designs have so far prevailed that he has created many and great
Dependents upon him by his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in Church and
State.

It appearing also to us, That by his Influence Mercenary Forces have been
levied and kept on Foot for his secret Designs contrary to our Laws; the
Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the apparent hazard
of His Majesty's Person our Religion and Government, if the danger had not been
timely foreseen by several Parliaments, and part of those Forces with great
difficulty, caused by them to be Disbanded at the Kingdoms great Expense: And
it being Evident, that notwithstanding all the continual endeavors of the
Parliament to deliver his Majesty from the Councils, and out of the Power of
the said D. yet his Interest in the Ministry of State and others have been so
prevalent, That Parliaments have been unreasonably Prorogued, and Dissolved
when they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish Conspiracies, and ill
Ministers of State their Assistants.

And that the said D. in order to reduce all into his own power has procured
the Garrisons, the Army and Ammunition, and all the power of the Seas and
Soldiery, and Lands belonging to these Three Kingdoms to be put into the hands
of his Party and their Adherents, even in opposition to the Advice and Order of
the last Parliament.

And as we considering with heavy Hearts how greatly the Strength, Reputation
and Treasure of the Kingdom both at Sea and Land is Wasted and Consumed, and
lost by the intricate expensive management of these wicked destructive Designs;
and finding the same Councils after exemplary Justice upon some of the
Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost devilish malice, and desire
of Revenge; whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard of being Murdered to
make way for the said D's Advancement to the Crown, and the whole Kingdom in
such case is destitute of all security of their Religion, Laws, Estates, and
Liberty, sad experience in the Case, Queen Mary having proved the wisest Laws
to be of little force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish Prince.

We have therefore endeavored in a Parliamentary way by a Bill for the purpose
to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown, and to
Banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland. But the first
Means of the King and Kingdoms Safety being utterly rejected, and we left
almost in Despair of obtaining any real and effectual security, and knowing our
selves to be entrusted to Advise and Act for the preservation of His Majesty
and the Kingdom, and being persuaded in our Consciences that the dangers
aforesaid are so eminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the
best means that are in our power to secure the Kingdom against them. We have
thought fit to propose to all true Protestants an Union amongst themselves by
solemn and sacred promise of mutual Defense and Assistance in the preservation
of the true Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person and Royal State and our
Laws, Liberties and Properties, and we hold it our bounden Duty to join our
selves for the same intent in a Declaration of our United Affections and
Resolutions in the form ensuing.

I A. B. Do in the presence of God solemnly Promise, Vow, and Protest to
maintain and defend to the utmost of my Power, with my Person and Estate, the
true Protestant Religion against Popery and all Popish Superstition, Idolatry,
or Innovation, and all those who do or shall endeavor to spread or advance it
within this Kingdom.

I will also as far as in me lies maintain and defend His Majesty's Royal
Person and Estate; as also the power and privilege of Parliaments, the lawful
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, against all Encroachments and Usurpation
of Arbitrary power whatsoever, and endeavor entirely to Disband all such
mercenary Forces as, we have reason to believe, were raised to Advance it, and
are still kept up in and about the City of London, to the great Amazement and
Terror of all the good People of the Land.

Moreover I. D. of Y. having publicly professed and owned the Popish Religion,
and notoriously given Life and Birth to the Damnable and Hellish Plots of the
Papists against His Majesty's Person, the Protestant Religion, and the
Government of this Kingdom. I will never consent that the said I. D. of Y. or
any other, who is or has been a Papist, or any ways adhered to the Papists in
their wicked Designs be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England, But
by all lawful means and by force of Arms, if need so require, according to my
Abilities, will oppose him, and endeavor to Subdue, Expel and Destroy him if
he come into England, or the Dominions thereof; and seek by force to set up his
pretended Title, and all such as shall Adhere unto him, or raise any War,
Tumult, or Sedition for him, or by his Command, as public Enemies of our Laws,
Religion and Country,

To this end we and every one of us whose hands are here underwritten, do most
willingly bind our selves and every one of us unto the other jointly and
severally, in the Bond of one firm and loyal Society or Association, and do
promise and vow before God, That with our joint and particular Forces we will
oppose and pursue unto Destruction all such as upon any Title whatsoever shall
oppose the Just and Righteous ends of this Association, and Maintain, Protect
and Defend all such as shall enter into it in the just performance of the true
intent and meaning of it. And lest this just and pious work should be any ways
obstructed or hindered for want of Discipline and Conduct, or any evil minded
prrsons under pretense of raising Forces for the service of this Association,
should attempt or commit Disorders, we will follow such Orders as we shall from
time to time receive from this present Parliament, whilst it shall be sitting,
or the Major part of the Members of both Houses subscribing this Association:
when it shall be Prorogued or Dissolved, and obey such Officers as shall by
them be set over us in the several Countries, Cities, and Buroughs until the
next meeting of this or another Parliament, and will then show the same
Obedience and Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it.

Neither will we for any respect of Persons or Causes, or for Fear, or Reward
separate our selves from this Association, or fail in the Prosecution thereof
during our Lives upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted, and
suppressed as Perjured persons, and public Enemies to God, the King, and our
Native Country.

To which Pains and Punishments we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every
one of us without benefit of any Color or Pretense to excuse us.

In Witness of all which Premises to be inviolably kept, we do to this present
Writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and admit
any others hereafter into this Society and Association.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Mearne, and Jo. Baker, 1681.


