A Christian Caveat TO ALL Loyal Subjects: OR, A Looking-Glass Displaying the
foul Face of PHANATICISM; IN

I. The wicked Principles,

II. Horrid Treasons, Cruelties, and bloody Practices,

III. Intolerable Pride,

IV. Absurd Prayers and Devotions,

V. Lying Miracles,

VI. Filthy Impurities

OF Phanatical Sectarists.

Dedicated to the YOUTH of Great Britain, for an Antidote against the Poison of
Phanaticism.

Obstructum est Os loquentium iniqua.

LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor, near Sationers Hall, 1684.

To all Loyal Protestants and Subjects, especially the Youth of Great Britain,
Philanax wishes Grace, Understanding, and Perseverance in the Truths of God,
and a Just Hatred of Phanaticism.
ABove a Year since came forth a Book, called, A Looking-Glass to Display the
fair Face of Popery; which is so pitiful a thing, so stuff't with prodigious
Lies and Absurdities, that all understanding Men must needs rather think it to
be Contemned, than Answered; yet because in the Circumstances we are at
present, it tends to create Fears and Jealousies in Vulgar Apprehensions of I
know not what, to raise Disturbances in the Nation against King and Government,
and it may make some impression on weaker Minds, for whom it is chiefly
intended, I thought it not amiss, to prepare this Antidote against that Poison.

For I cannot apprehend any thing more advantageous to both your Temporal and
Eternal Concerns, than to present you with a True Draught of Phanaticism,
stripped of its Disguises; which at present not only threatens us, but has the
confidence to paint and varnish over it self in such pleasing colors, as to
delude unwary Heads, into a fond opinion of its Innocence and fair Proceedings;
when in truth there is nothing in the World that so infallibly tends to your
Eternal Destruction hereafter, and in the mean time to make you perfect Slaves
and Vassals to the Cheats and Lusts of a few base and self-designing People
here on Earth.

Though the Author in a Jocose Humor makes his Readers merry with Popish
Tricks, as he relates them; yet Christian Charity invites me not to laugh at,
but pity Phanaticks poor Souls! so misled by Satan's subtilties, that under
pretense of Piety, they ruin Religion, and for the good of the Kingdom, destroy
the Government.

Here you shall find the Ways of Phanaticks in some sort displayed, their
Principles detected, their Cruelties laid open; how they play the Devil for
God's sake, by murdering Kings, enslaving Subjects, breaking Oaths, combining
in rebellious Associations, overturning Governments, violating the Laws of God
and Nature, and the Rights of Kingdoms, to advance what they call, The good Old
Cause, and that by a godly Usurpation, as the days of Cromwell, they might lord
it over Prince and People.

You may here (generous Youths and Virgins) observe the chief Lineaments of
Phanaticism. A small Picture of the greatest Monster that ever plagued the
World. Whom to have drawn at full length would have required Volumes; but he is
a sorry Mathematician that by the length of Hercules's Foot, cannot guess at
the dimensions of his Body.

The chief Policy of Satan is by Phanaticism, to undermine our Holy Faith, the
groundwork of our Salvation, to extirpate Charity, the Bond of Perfection, the
very Life and Soul of Religion; it is a very Plot upon Christianity it self. For
where the enthusiastical extravagant Fancies of these Zealots prevail, all
Order is ruined; where their canting way of Prayer and Preaching is practiced,
Christian Religion, so full of Gravity and Majesty in her proper Dress, is made
ridiculous; the power of Godliness is destroyed by their empty Forms and
shadows of Piety; and for the Fruits of the Spirit, which are Love, Joy, Peace,
Gal. 5. 22:
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, we have
nothing but the Works of the Flesh, as Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath,
Contentions, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, etc. as we find too true
by sad Experience.

This is the true Draught of Phanaticism, which the numerous Broods of
Sectarists strive to advance among us, though by never so wicked Means, as
horrid Lies, Sham-Plots, Subordinations, Perjuries, Murders, Seditions,
Insurrections, Conspiracies, Rebellions, Massacres, to the utter ruin of King
and Kingdom; and had taken effect, if God of his infinite goodness to this
Nation had not discovered their Hellish Policies. We need not have recourse to
Foreign Histories, the days of Charles the First, of famous Memory, and of our
present most gracious Sovereign, are sufficient to teach us what is
Phanaticism, and what we are to expect from Phanaticks, when once they get into
the Saddle.

God of his infinite mercy in his good time make us of one Heart and Mind, as
St. Luke describes the Primitive Christians, That we may not be like Children,
tossed to and fro with the wind of every Doctrine, but being grounded in Faith,
and rooted in Charity, we may live in Peace and Concord, and bring forth the
Fruits of Everlasting Life: Which is the cordial Prayer of,

Your Servant, in Christ Jesus, A. P.

A Looking-Glass FOR PHANATICISM, By way of DIALOGUE, BETWEEN TIMOTHY, a
Phanatick; and PHILANAX, a True Lover of his King and Country.
The First Lesson, Of Phanatick Principles.
Timothy. HAve you, Philanax, seen a little Book, called, A Looking-Glass for
Popery, not long since Printed?


Philanax. Yes, Tim, I have, and read it also; but in my poor Judgment it
contains for the most part such pitiful, railing, lying stuff, that it rather
advances, than beats down Popery. And I clearly discover the Author to be a
seditious Sectarist.


Tim. How, Phil? You shall hardly make me believe that; for we hate Popery
perfectly, and all stand for the good of our Country, and shall make our King a
glorious King, if he will be ruled by us.


Phil. Yes, yes, as ye made Charles the First, the best of Princes It Is well
known how Phanaticks make Kings glorious; neither can it be otherwise by their
Principles. I assure you, Tim, if you know the Principles of Presbyterians, and
other Phanaticks, in relation to Government, you must needs confess, That it is
impossible to be a Phanatick and a Loyal Subject both together. Have you never
seen a Book, written by a Doctor of the Church of England, called, A Cav^^t for
all Kings, Princes, and Prelates? The Author there demonstrates, to all
unbiased judgments, that according to the Principles of the first Fathers of
Presbyterian Fury and Phanaticism, it is impossible to be Presbyterians, who are
the Main-Guard and Principal Leaders of the Phanatick Army, and at the same
time not to be Rebels against their Sovereign. And this he does evidence, not
only from their prodigious Doctrins in their own Books made public to the
World, but also by their bloody Practices and Rebellions in all places where
they could make head against their Governors.


Tim. I am not so good an Historian as to know that. But tell me, Phil, Is it
not lawful for Subjects, by a Godly Association, to raise an Army, and fight
against their Sovereign for their Religion and Liberty, when he becomes a
Tyrant, and opposes the Truths of Jesus Christ?


Phil. How, Tim, lawful? Then farwell Peace, and Truth, and Liberty, and
Property, and Order, and Government, and all goodness, to make way for
Rebellion, War and Bloodshed, Anarchy and Confusion to Reign among us. For
those who say this is lawful, make themselves likewise Judges to give Sentence
when their Sovereign turns Tyrant and persecutes the true Professors of the
Gospel. But how comes it to pass, Tim, that you lay such Positions to the
Jesuits charge, to make them odious as Devils, and teach the same horrid
Doctrins among your selves, and notwithstanding must be reputed Saints?


Tim. I see; Phil, you live in ignorance, and are not acquainted with the
Privilege of the Saints. Know you not, that there is no Law to them that are in
Christ Jesus? But let that pass. Though I asked you the Question about the
lawfulness of such Risings, to hear what you would say; I will not believe the
Presbyterians, and the rest of the Godly Party, maintain such Principles and
Doctrins against Kingly Government. However, let the Jesuits say what they will
to clear themselves, believe them we will not; it is not for our interest.


Phil. Neither is it for your interest to own such rebellious Doctrins, though
undeniably evident from the printed Books of those you call the Godly Party,
that they maintain such Principles, and put them in practice when armed with
power.


Tim. I Will not take your word, let me see the Authors.


Phil. I question not but you have heard of Zuinglius, that martial Phanatick,
hot and furious as well in his Writings, as in the Camp. Kings, says he, may be
Deposed by the Votes and Suffrages of the Multitude, when they Rule not
according to the Law of Christ; and it is a Work well pleasing to God, Tom. 1.
Art. 42, and 43. And l. 4. p. 868. tells Caesar plainly, That they will obey
him, if he will be Directed by them; otherwise they will take a course with him
to the purpose. Which is the same course should have been taken with our
gracious Sovereign by the godly Associates, if God had not prevented their
Designs.

Calvin, that furious Zealot in his Commentaries upon Daniel, Cap. 6. V. 22.
tells Kings boldly, That they lose all Authority, when they rise against God,
and that men had better spit in their Faces, than yield obedience to their
Commands, when they grow so insolent, as to rob God of his right. And all this
depends upon Calvin's magisterial word; he no sooner says so, but they cease to
be Kings, and every proud Presbyterian may spit in their Face. And I am sure
when once they begin to spit in their Sovereigns Face, 'twill not be long
before they cut off his Head. Thus taught Calvin, and thus our Phanaticks dealt
with Charles the First of pious Memory, to make good his Doctrine by their
Practice.

Beza treads in the same steps, animating Subjects to rise in Arms against
their Sovereign, in his Vind. cont: Tyran. by surprising his Towns and Castles,
opposing his Forces; yea, to kill their Kings, if they oppose the Truths of
Jesus Christ: That is, if they profess and maintain any Religion, but what
these Men fancy to be Gospel truths.

Paraeus, a great Zealot in his Comm. upon the 13th of the Romans, teaches the
same seditious, rebellious Doctrine, with Gracerus, Aretius, and Geskenius, who
were the fatal Firebrands to put the World in Flames about Religion.


Tim. Hold, Phil, enough of these. But I must tell you, these are Foreigners,
and therefore nothing to us. Do the godly Party of our Kingdoms maintain these
Principles?


Phil. Yes, doubtless, they are something to you, if you follow their Doctrins;
but your Masters in our Kingdoms are as guilty of such horrid Principles as any
Foreigners.

Knox, that furious Zealot, all Fire and Quicksilver, who first began to
inflame all Scotland, teaches magisteriously, That Princes may be Deposed by
the People, if they prove Tyrants, and act against God and his Truth; and in
such cases, all Subjects are free from their Oaths of Allegiance and Obedience,
l. ad Nob. and pop. Scotiae. And to encourage any desperate Phanatick to murder
his Prince in a furious zeal, he is not ashamed to say, That it were very good,
that Rewards were publicly appointed by the People for such as kill Tyrants,
as well as for those who kill ravenous Beasts; In Hist. Scot. p. 372. No Jesuit
is comparable to this Fury.

Yet Goodman is as bad as he, who in his Book of Obedience, in Exodus 17.
excepts neither King, nor Queen, nor Emperor, but tells the People, They must
seize upon Princes, who would seduce them from God, that is, their Phanatical
Novelties, and tarry them away to the Gallows, and hang them up.

Buchanan's zeal is no less fiery and furious; for p. 61. de jure Reg. Scot. he
tells the People, That they are above the King, for the good of the Kirk and
holy Cause, may Arraign him, Depose him, Execute him, and Dispose of the Crown
as they please. What think you, Tim? Are not these rare Fellows to make
Apostles? Can such Men as these be sent from God, or have any of the Spirit of
Jesus Christ? Is it possible for Presbyterians and other Phanaticks, while they
maintain such Principles and Doctrines, to be at the same time Phanaticks and
good Subjects? Can they at the same time endeavor to Depose and Murder their
King, and yet be true and faithful to him and his Government?


Tim. Say your say out, and then I Will tell you what I think on it.


Phil. The Presbyterians and other Phanaticks here in England learned this
Lesson perfectly, and followed it exactly. In the time of the late horrid
Rebellion, it was publicly Preached by Phanatical Zealots in all places where
the Rebels prevailed, to the utter ruin for a time of King and Government. And
according to the Doctrine of these Bellows of Sedition, the House of Commons
Voted, That the Supreme Power of the Nation was in the People, and consequently
in them their Representatives: Or words to this effect. And what sad
Consequences ensued thereupon, I shall tell you when from these horrid
Principles I come to declare their bloody Cruelties.

And now at present, did not the Lord Russel die with this Persuasion, That
it is lawful to raise Arms against our Sovereign in the case of Religion? And
would not Mr. Sydney needs be thought to die a Martyr for this good Old Cause?
And this is the true reason, why they in a manner justify themselves at their
death, without any open repentance of the Crimes for which they suffer; that
those of their Faction, whom they leave behind them, may still attempt what
they could not bring to pass by theirendeavours.

And hence it proceeds, that whatever tends to advance among them the good Old
Cause, must be sanctified; so that Lies, Perjuries, Sacriledges, Treasons,
Sham-Plots, real Conspiracies against King and Government, Seditions,
Rebellions, Murder of their Sovereign, Massacres, must all be good and lawful
to order and advance what they call Religion and the good Cause, that they may
fish in troubled Waters, and lord it over Prince and People. Now, Tim, what
think you of these Firebrands, who break nothing but Flames and Confusion to
Kings and Kingdoms.


Tim. In verity Phil, I did not think so much wickedness could have layn hid
imwardly under the outside of so much piety; but now I see all is not Gold that
glisters, and that Phanaticks are dangerous People, teaching such Doctrines so
destructive of Monarchy. I begin to be your Convert, and shall for the future
look more narrowly into their Actions.


The Second Lesson. Of Phanatical treasons, cruelties and bloody practices.
Timothy. I Have well considered what you told me about Phanatick Principles
against Kingly Government, and am amazed and confounded at it. For I took the
Papists only for such Regicides; and all the bloody cruelties that have been
acted in several places, our Preachers tell us have been caused by Jesuits and
Papists for the Catholic cause.


Phil. Believe me Tim, you Phanatick Preachers are not to be credited, who
think all lies lawful for the good old cause as they call it. You see already
by most evident testimonies of their own Books, their horrid Pinciples against
Regal power: and I shall make it as clear, that their bloody Practices have
been answerable to their doctrines, the cursed fruit of so bad a tree.


Tim. Make that good once; and I will then confess the Saints have thiir
failings, as well as others.


Phil. After Luther began to gather followers in Germany; these Phanati^k
Principles raised such rebellions in those parts against the Emperor, that
above a hundred thousand were slain in those wars; accompanied with such
miseries as made Germany an object of pity to all Christian hearts. Did not the
same prodigious doctrines put Bohemia into a miserable combustion, that these
new Saints might possess the Earth, and Lord it over their Lawful Governors?
What tragedies did the same principles act in Switzer-land, to the overthrow of
Government, and the ruin of all Order and Religion where they prevailed? Did
not the furious Calvanists by virtue of the same principles rebel against their
Bishop and Prince and make themselves Masters of his Goods and Territories?
What bloody cruelties, prophanations, sacriledges, murders, treasons,
rebellions were acted by these headstrong. Zealots in France, cannot but force
tears from those who read the Chronicles of those times. And did not the
Hollanders with some other Provinces rebel against their Liege Lord and King,
and possess themselves of his Rights and Dominions, annimated by these horrid
doctrines? Neither can Kings ever expect better where Phanaticks are strong
enough to head a party against the Government.


Tim. I never knew this before. But I was told Phil, that the Papists and
Jesuits were the cause of all those stirs and insurrections.


Phil. They impose upon you. Tim, it is nonsense to say so. All those places
enjoyed peace and quiet, till these Phanaticks arose, and became Incendiaries
by these wicked doctrines. Did not Knox and his fellow Martial Gospellers raise
a horrid rebllion against their Lawful Sovereign Queen Mary of Scotland, and
force her to fly to save her* life? What think you? Are all the tragical
cruelties, sacriledges, murders, blood shed, and Miseries attending civil wars
to be laid to the charge of the poor innocent Queen, or these firebrands? I
know they talk much of bloody Papists in Ireland, but I have been told by those
who were actually in the wars there, that the Phanatick Zealots did equalize
if not out do them in their butcheries.

But to come home, did not these Presbyterian principles raise the late
rebellion here in England against our gracious Sovereign Charles the first, and
murd^r the best of Princes in so barbarous a manner, as justly renders them
detestable to all Posterity; And were not the Phanaticks now again endeavoring
by a most horrid and bloody Conspiracy to act the like or worse tragedy, to
ruin King and Kingdom, and make poor England a field of blood, to fill all
places with massacres, horrors and confusions? And all this, being annimated
and set on fire by these principles, these wretched principles. Insomuch that
it is observed by a Protestant Doctor in his Caveat for Princes against
Presbyterians, Page 93. That in this last Century of years, there have been
more Princes deposed and murthr^d for their Religon by Protestants of
integrity, as they call themselves, then in all the others since Christ's time,
by the attempts of Roman Catholics. For indeed these cruelties and bloody
Conspiracies are the natural fruit of their rebellious Principles but such
Papists as have rose in arms against their Sovereign, have been taught better
things. Witness that famous Decree of the Sorbonists, whereby they condemn the
doctrine of deposing King, and absolving their Subjects from their sworn
allegiance, to be pestilential, damnable doctrine, and to be abhorred of all
men, as new, false, erroneous, contrary to Scripture, giving occasion to
schisms, derogatory to the Authority of Kings depending on God alone, hindering
the conversion of Heretical and Infidel Princes, destroying the public peace,
and tempting subjects from their obedience, and animating factions and
rebellions against Princes which Sorbon Sentence was approved by the whole
Ecclesiastical body of France, and declared in a public admonition to the
King, Dec. 13. 1625.


Tim. I do not much value what the Sorbon Doctors say, though I cannot quarrel
with this decree But I am covinc'd Phil, especially by the last instance of the
Conspiracy; which though the Godly Party endeavor to excuse, or deny, or
extenuate by lies and forgeries, as in the case of the Earl of Essex; yet it is
so evident by self-confession, and proofs irrefragable, that who now denies it,
may as well say it is not day when the Sun shines. And truly I begin to be
weary of their company, now I plainly perceive, I cannot be a Phanatick and at
the same time a good Subject.


Phil. Pray Tim, take notice also that those great pretenders to Religion are
grown to that degree of Madness, as to take part with the Turk against
Christianity. For our Mahometans Christians here, because they were too far off
to assist the enemies of Christ with their hands, did as much as they could
help them with their tongues, by praying for their success against the
Christians.


Tim. Indeed I like it not, I see the hatred of Popery has made them almost
cease to be Christians.


The Third Lesson. Of Phanatical Pride.
Philonax. LET me tell thee Tim, they who judge of Religion by the actions of
some particular persons shall never be able to justify any though never so pure
and holy in it self. For seeing their Religion teaches otherwise, why should
that be condemned for their extravagancies? If some Roman-professors have
behaved themselves with pride arrogance, and others of the same Church condemn
them for it, it is evident that such pride is not the fruit of their faith, but
the fault of those men, and they must answer for it. But the most intolerable
pride of some Phanaticks, of the first magnitude and highest elevation among
them, which I shall mention, was approved by their followers and therefore may
justly be imputed to them.


Tim I cannot say but you speak reason go on in your discourse.


Phil. Did you never hear Tim, of John of Leyden, that famous Phanatick? This
monster of mankind at length arrived to that height of blasphemous pride and
insufferable arrogance, that he took upon him to be Jesus Christ himself and
true Savior of the World; and sent abroad from Munster, where he had got by
pious artif^ces and rebellious principles the temporal power into his hands,
his twelve Apostles to preach his new Gospel unto the World; and his crew of
followers did maintain him in this pro^igious pride and blasphemy till at
length divine vengeance fell heavy on his and their accursed heads, to terrify
others from such antichristian Blasphemies.

But to come home to our selves. In the time of the long Parliament, who by no
mean pride made themselves Kings by by destroying Monarchy, was not one James
Naylor, for his wonderful seeming Sanctity, cried up for the Savior of the
World by the Phanatick Rabble, and set upon an Ass to ride in triumph on
Palm Sunday, as our blessed Savior did to Jerusalem, they using to him the
same acclamations, and he glorying in their Blasphemies? Can any Pride be
comparable to this? Lucifer's ambition was to be but like to God, ero similis
altissimo; but these Men, or rather antichristian Monsters, must be no less
than Jesus Christ and God himself. It Is true, this blasphemous Naylor was
afterward punished for this prodigious pride, but his Followers called it a
Persecution. However, let not Phanaticks rail so simply against Popish Pride,
till they themselves afford some Examples of Humility.

I know, Tim, you are no small Scripturist, read the third Chapter of the
second Epistle to Timothy, and you will find a perfect description of these
men, For are not they boasters of their own ways and holiness, prond above
measure, blasphemers, disobedient, traitors, heady, high minded, having a form
of godliness, and denying the power thereof? Can this be denied of them? And
therefore I say to thee, Tim, what St. Paul there says to us all, From such
turn away.


Tim. I think your counsel's good. For it is time to turn from those whom I see
now endeavor to overturn the Christian World with Pride and Blasphemies.


The Fourth Lesson. Of Phanatical Prayers and Devotions.
Timothy. ARE not those strange devotions Phil, which the Papists use, related
in the Protestant Looking-Glass?


Phil. Yes truly Tim, strange and rediculous enough, as there related, if any
Papists be so silly as to use them. But take my word for it, if the adversaries
of the Church of Rome had no better arguments to confute her devotions, they
will not be thought the worse of by rational men. However if some Papists may
be guilty of rediculous devotions, I am sure Phanaticks of all men have no
reason to lay it to their charge, who too often disgrace this principle part of
Christian-worship by their extempore effusions in their public meetings. What
think you of this Presbyterian Cant, among other such stuff, by a Scotch
Minister before Sermon? Lord maintain thine own Cause, gu'd Lord maintain our
holy Covenant; Lord, let the Covenant and the Common Prayer Book wrestle, gu'd
Lord wrestle, wrestle I say Lord, and I am sure the Covenant will throw the
Common Prayer book upon his back. Is not this pitiful, rediculous Stuff to be
made use of in the place of Public Worship? One might fill a book with such
canting stuff in Presbyterian prayers and preaching.

But if you come to Phanaticks of a higher elevation, who discover
Gospel-verities by a mysterious light which is unintelligible, what a Rapsody
have you of fine words in themselves which signify nothing as they jumble them
together in their nonsensical devotions? What strange disorders and confusions
are they guilty of by their pretending to the Spirit and Light within,
fathering their lies on the Father of Lights, with horrid Blasphemies? And I
have been told by those who have been present at the Meetings of some
Phanaticks, that they have seen such absurd Impieties and Abominations, as are
not once to be named among Christians. And yet all these will needs be Saints,
and being strongly deluded by Satan, think all the World in a Error besides
themselves. If I should descend to Particulars there would be no end.


Tim. I have enough of them, and am resolved to be no longer deluded by them.


Phil. Let me also tell thee, Tim, That what the Protestant Looking-glass
speaks of Popish Pardons and Penances, etc. is such jeering, scurrilous stuff,
filled with such abominable Lies and unchristian Censures, that if the Author
had any sense of Christianity, he would blush to abuse the World with such
Railaries. I am not one who will Patronize ridiculous Penances; but this I am
sure of, that a Religion which enjoins Penances for Crimes committed, is more
agreeable to the Practice of primitive Christians, than that which has none at
all, and laughs at such Devotions.


Tim. For my part, I shall not trouble my self to know what the Primitive
Christians did. I am for the Purity of the Gospel, which holy Scripture
declares unto us.


The Fifth Lesson, Of Phanatical Miracles.
Phil. IT is evident from Sacred Writ, That the Christian Faith was confirmed
by innumerable Miracles from Heaven, that both Jews and Gentiles might by such
Divine Attestations believe in Jesus Christ and save their Souls. The Acts of
the Apostles declare this sufficiently without dispute. And that in after ages
God did work many Miracles in his Church for the manifestation of Truth, and
conversion of Unbelievers, cannot be denied by rational men. Now if besides
such as cannot rationally be doubted of in unquestionable Records, some
foolish, wicked men, have counterfeited Miracles for politic ends; their
faults are not to be imputed to the Church of Rome, who severely punishes such
Impostors.


Tim. Methinks, Phil, you incline too much to the Romish side. Though your
Discourse has brought me to dislike Phanaticism, yet I hate Popery as much as
ever.


Phil. And I love any one who is a Loyal Subject to his Sovereign. My aim, Tim,
is to make you a good Subject; which Phanaticks neither are, nor can be by
their Principles. But pr'ythee, Tim, if all Miracles are ceased in the
Christian Church, and must no longer attest to supernatural Truths, why did
Calvin so endeavor, by a counterfeited Miracle, to confirm his Doctrine?


Tim. Why, you jest, Phil, did he so?


Phil. It Is a well known story, related of him by good Authors; That compacting
with a Zealous Sister, and her Husband, he was to counterfeit himself dead, and
the Wife to come running out, crying in the Streets, That her Husband died
suddenly; at the same time, as was agreed between them, Calvin comes gravely
walking by, and demands the cause of her Tears and Exclamations. She opens her
Case; he answers in Gospel-Language, Weep not, good Woman, thy Husband is not
dead, but sleeps; and walking in, the People about him, called together by
the Woman's outcries, falls to his Prayers, and after a while pronounces with
great authority, I say unto thee, arise. This being redoubled, the Man stirs
not, the Woman wonders, and after all endeavors to awake him, he is found dead
indeed. Which made the poor Woman change her feigned Tears into real Sorrow,
and being almost mad at this unexpected accident detects the whole Imposture.
Whereby the Counterfeit is punished, Calvin disgraced, and God glorified. Who
desires to know more of this Godly Reformer, let them consult Dr. Jerome Bolsec
his constant Physician, who knew him perfectly, and Francis Baldwin, and
Florimond de Remond, Men justly to be credited in their Relations.

Moreover, If you observe it, Tim, Fox in his Martyrology is very greedy to
make every strange thing a Miracle, to Canonize his Saints.


Tim. I shall like the Calvinists the worse for ever for their Father's sake,
if all be true is said of him.


The Sixth Lesson, Of Phanatical Impurities.
Phil. HOliness becomes the House of God for ever; Christian Religion is a holy
Religion, and the Catholic Church according to our Creed is a holy Church: but
what Prophanations and Sacriledges brought Phanaticks into the World, and with
what Impurities and Impieties they have continued to infect and disturb it, is
too notorious to be denied, and much to be lamented by all good Christians.

There Is no Society upon the face of the Earth, though endowed from Heaven with
all means possible to advance Holiness, but has some Members that deviate from
their Profession, and neglect so great a Salvation provided for them. How
impertinent therefore is it to rail against Religion for the wickednesses of
some Men, who despising her Counsels, to follow their own corrupt Inclinations,
will not be reformed, though the zealous Preachers of their own Profession,
thunder against their wicked Lives, to reduce them to goodness? And how
abominable is it for the failings of some, to endeavor, by prodigious Lies, to
make the rest odious to the World, who are precious indeed in the sight of God?
Those that are bad are justly condemned, but the Religion is to be commended,
which takes such Care and Pains to bring them to Holiness. And I wish I could
say as much for the Carnal Impurities committed by Phanaticks, who make
Religion the Patroness of their Wickedness, and must be Saints for all their
black abominations.

In the days of the usurping Saints of the long Parliament, when Licentiousness
passed for Christian-Liberty, a holy Phanatick, though married, had an
Inspiration from Heaven, as he pretended, to lie with a Gentleman's Wife, who
was a holy Sister, and a handsome Woman, she was soon taken with his pious
Rhetoric, for seeing he said it was the Will of God, it must be lawful, and
done also. His own wife takes them in their wickedness, and he to justify
their execrable adultery, tells her, he could not but wonder that she being his
wife so long, did not yet know the privilege of the Saints, and that it was
also lawful for her, though his wife, to lie with others, who have a call from
God for it; and thereupon brought her a holy Brother, who pretending an
inspiration, did ratify the new known privilege to her content.


Tim. Come Phil, you abuse the Godly Party this is hardly credible.


Phil. Believe me Tim, it is so well known as to be discourse of the Country for
a time, and appear in print; which the Gentleman hearing being a
Parliament Man, whose Wife this white Devil had corrupted, came presently home,
and finding it too true, could not be persuaded but that this privilege of the
Saints was against the privileges of Parliament: And so my holy Brother was
forced to fly to save himself from the lash of Justice.

A Zealous Quaking Sister at Holm in Yorkshire, not far from the Town where
then I lived, staying too long with her holy Brother to return to her own
dwelling that night, was invited by him to take a bed there, which she
accepted, and in the night time being tempted with the Devil of lust, came to
his bed side, and calling to him, said, good Brother, our Father bids me come
and lie with thee; he replied if it be our Fathers will, I ought not to resist
it. And thus they make God the Patron of their wickednesses.

Another Quaker in those parts when the furious spirit was upon him, came
running out into the Streets as a man possessed, and crying he had a call from
God to kill his Father. And what other madnesses and impurities are committed
among them, I had rather bury in silence, being a shame to Christianity, then
fully my paper with the relations.


Tim. I did not think such great seeming Saints could have been guilty of such
Impieties. But I see it is high time to return to the Protestant established
Church, and Loyalty to my Sovereign.


Phil. I wish you many Followers. For the Phanaticks at present are so bloody
minded, and impatient to get all Power into their hands, that if the infinite
goodness of God had not detected their horrid Conspiracies against King and
Kingdom, all good Subjects, before now, had been Massacred by such cruel,
bloody-thirsty Rebels, and the glory of England buried in Anarchy and Confusion.

Blessed be God for all his Mercies in delivering us from the hands of these
merciless Men. And to prevent it for the future, we will conclude this short
Caution with this cordial Prayer: From the Tyranny of furious Zealots, and all
their detestable Enormities, from Phanatical Massacres, Associations, Lies and
Perjuries, from Wolves in Sheeps clothing, from Profaneness and Sacriledges,
from a Presbyterian Zeal, and an Oliverian Mercy, good Lord deliver us. And let
every true English heart say, AMEN.


FINIS.

