AN ANSWER TO A LETTER From a Clergyman in the City, to his Friend in the
Country, Containing his REASONS for not Reading the Declaration.
With Allowance, June the 4th. 1688.
LETTER.
SIR,
I Do not wonder at your concern for finding an Order of Council published in
the Gazette for Reading the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience in all
Churches and Chapels in this Kingdom. You desire to know my Thoughts about it,
and I shall freely tell them; for this is not a time to be reserved.

Our Enemies who have given our Gracious King this Counsel against us, have
taken the most effectual way not only to ruin us, but to make us appear the
Instruments of our own Ruin, that what course soever we take, we shall be
undone; and one side or other will conclude that we have undone our selves, and
fall like Fools.

ANSWER.
They who had formerly heard the frequent Sermons upon Loyalty preached over
Tea an^ Coffee at Sam's Coffee-House, would hardly then have believed that ever
any Clergyman of London of that stamp, would have been seen in public
pickeering against the Orders of his Prince, especially issued forth after
mature debate in Council. I know not kow he can boast such a vast stock of
Loyalty as this Gentleman pretends to, when he shall be so homely as to tax the
King with following Council to the Ruin of his Subjects. So that the business
of this Pamphlet is to render his Majesty a person that follows ill Counsel to
the Ruin of the Church of England's Party. Nor is it to be questioned but that
this single Clergyman speaks the sense of many more, or at least would have
many more believe, what he does. That what course soever they take they shall
be undone. And yet we find that his Majesty has publicly declared it to be his
Aim to fix his Government upon such a Foundation as may make his Subjects happy
in the enjoyment of their Religion with freedom of Exercise, and their Property
without Invasion. However this Loyal Town Clergyman is an Infidel that will
give no credit at all to the solemn Attestations of the King in this
particular. Nay he will have it, that both the one and the other side will
conclude that they have undon themselves, and fall like fools; that is to say,
should they have Read the Declaration in their Churches according to the order
of Council. By which it is apparent that the Church of England men have a very
bad opinion not only of the Declaration, but of the very design and meaning of
it as if it were framed to draw them first into Inconvenience and then to undo
them. For says he,

LETTER.
To lose our Livings and Preferments, nay our Liberties and Lives in a plain
and direct opposition to Popery, as suppose for refusing to read Mass in our
Churches, or to swear to the Trent-Creed, is an honorable way of falling, and
has the divine comforts of suffering for Christ and his Religion; and I hope
there is none of us but can cheerfully submit to the will of God in it. But
this is not our present Case; to read the Declaration, is not to read the Mass,
nor to profess the Romish Faith; and therefore some will judge that there is no
hurt in reading it, and that to suffer for such a refusal, is not to fall like
Confessors, but to suffer as Criminals for disobeying the lawful Commands of
our Prince: but yet we judge, and we have the concurring Opinions of all the
Nobility and Gentry with us, who have already suffered in this Cause, that to
take away the Test and Penal Laws at this time, is but one stop from the
introducing of Popery; and therefore to read such a Declaration in our
Churches, though it do not immediately bring Popery in, yet it sets open our
Church doors for it, and then it will take its own time to enter: So that
should we comply with this Order, all good Protestants would despise and hate
us, and then we may be easily crushed, and shall soon fall with great dishonor
and without any pity. This is the difficulty of our Case; we shall be censured
on both sides but with this difference: We shall fall a little sooner by not
reading the Declaration, if our Gracious Prince resent this as an act of an
obstinate and peevish or factious Disobedience, as our Enemies will be sure to
represent it to him; We shall as certainly fall, and not long after, if we do
read it, and then we shall fall unpitied and despised, and it may be with the
Curses of the Nation, whom we have ruined by our compliance; and this is the
way never to rise more And may I suffer all that can be suffered in this World,
rather than contribute to the final Ruin of the best Church in the World.

ANSWER.
Here is a very plausible Harangue built upon the bare supposition of a single
Town Clergyman, while he refuses to read the Declaration which is the very Act
of his Majesty's Grace and Favor that secures him from all those fears and
jealousies which he labors to instill into the People. Nor is it to be thought
that men of Reason and Loyalty, will as the City Clergyman seems to be
convinced, so readily believe that the King and his Council sit to impose
Dilemma's upon the Subject. We shall fall if we do, and we shall fall if we do
not read it. But this is only the Clergyman's supposal; On the other side, the
refusal to read it is an unquestionable Act of Disobedience to the Command of
the Sovereign Authority, than which there cannot be a greater mark of that
Disloyalty which the Clergy of the Established Religion of much disown. Besides
that it is a Disobedience to the Orders of the Church it self, which injoyns
her Ministers to read during the time of Divine Service whatever is enjoined by
the King. But, says he, the Reading such a Declaration in our Churches, though
it do not immediately bring in Popery, yet it sets open our Church doors for
it, and then it will take its own time to enter. But says the Declaration, In
the first place we do declare, That we will protect and maintain our
Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy, and all other our Subjects of the Church of
England, in the free exercise of their Religion, as by Law Established, and in
the full enjoyment of all their Possessions without any molestation or
disturbance whatsoever: Here is the word of a King to bar the Introducing of
Popery so much feared: which if it were sacred as coming from the Lips of a
Crowned Head, they would have rendered still more solemn by reading it in their
Churches. And therefore the refusal of it seems to be rather an Act of wilful
indiscretion, than of that Religious Care and wary Zeal to which the City
Clergyman pretends.

LETTER.
Let us then examine this matter impartially, as those who have no mind either
to ruin themselves, or to ruin the Church: I suppose no Minister of the
Church of England can give his consent to the Declaration. Let us then consider
whether reading the Declaration in our Churches be not an interpretative
Consent, and will not with great reason be interpreted to be so: For,

First, By our Law all Ministerial Offcers are accountable for their Actions:
The Authority of Superiors, though of the King himself, cannot justify
inferior Officers, much less the Ministers of State, if they should execute
any illegal Commands; which shows, that our Law does not look upon the
Ministers of Church or State to be mere Machines and Tools to be managed wholly
by the Will of Superiors, without exercising any Act of Judgment or Reason
themselves; for then inferior Ministers were no more punishable than the
Horses are which draw an innocent man to Tyburn: and if inferior Ministers are
punishable, then our Laws suppose that what we do in obedience to Superiors,
we make our own Act by doing it, and I suppose that signifies our Consent, in
the eye of the Law, to what we do. It is a Maxim in our Law, That the King can
do no wrong; and therefore if any wrong be done, the Crime and Guilt is the
Minister's who does it: For the Laws are the King's public Will, and therefore
he is never supposed to command any thing contrary to Law; nor is any Minister,
who does an illegal Action, allowed to pretend the King's Command and Authority
for it: and yet this is the only Reason I know, why we must not obey a Prince
against the Laws of the Land, or the Laws of God, because what we do, let the
Authority be what it will that commands it, becomes our own Act, and we are
responsible for it; and then as I observed before, it must imply our own
Consent.

ANSWER.
This Paragraph runs all along upon a mere Begging the Question. For it would
enforce an Argument from a Topic that neither can nor ought to be allowed him:
Besides, that it smells very strong of Commonwealth Logic: as pickeering
against the Power of Princes, and insinuating the Declaration to be Illegal,
contrary to the Laws of God and the Land, and therefore not to be obeyed. So
that a greater presumption certainly could not have entered the Breast of a
Clergyman of the Church of England, than thus to question the Legality of the
King's Public Acts. Certainly it was never thought unlawful, till this
Gentleman found it out, for a King to grant an Act of Indulgence and a
Toleration of Religion to his Subjects. And then again to say, the King can do
no wrong, insinuates that some Body has done wrong, in advising the Order:
which is a Reflection of too great Importance for men of Loyal Dispositions to
scan. If he mean that the Order, or rather the Declaration, is contrary to the
Law of the Land, that is to say, to the Penal Laws, and the Law enforcing the
Test, that is absolutely to deny the King's Royal Power of Dispensation, which
has already rendered them invalid. For he should have first made it out that
the Penal Laws and Test were such Sacred and Inviolable Statutes, that all
things done contrary to them, were contrary to Justice and Equity, before he
had so slily Inferred an Impossibility of giving his Consent to reading the
Declaration, as contrary to the Law of the Land, and the Act of a Superior
Authority nor justifiable by the King himself. But this Gentleman did not
consider that there is no such Stress to be laid upon the Sanctimony of the
Penal Laws, and that supporting the Test. For that the Conditions of all Humane
Laws are, That the Law be Honest, Just, Possible, Convenient to Time and Place,
and Conformable to Religion and Reason. In every one of which Characters the
Penal Laws, etc. are deficient, if for no other, though there are many, yet for
that very Reason alleged in His Majesty's Declaration, because they discourage
and disable his Majesty's Subjects that are well inclined and fit to serve him,
from doing him those Services which by the Law of Nature they are bound to do.
But he goes on

LETTER.
Secondly, The Ministers of Religion have a greater tie and obligation than
this, because they have the care and conduct of men's Souls, and therefore are
bound to take care that what they publish in their Churches, be neither
contrary to the Laws of the Land, nor to the good of the Church: For the
Ministers of Religion are not looked upon as common Cryers, but what they Read,
they are supposed to recommend too, though they do no more than Read it; and
therefore to read any thing in the Church, which I do not consent to and
approve, nay which I think prejudicial to Religion, and the Church of God, as
well as contrary to the Laws of the Land, is to Mis-guide my People, and to
Dissemble with God and Men, because it is presumed, that I neither do, nor
ought to read any thing in the Church, which I do not in some degree approve.

ANSWER.
If Arrogance and high Conceit might pass for Arguments, here is a fair show of
both: For one would think that the Head of the Church might be as competent a
Judge of what is fittest to be read in the Churches under his protection, as
the Parson of the Parish. Whoever thinks otherwise must have a very low opinion
of the Head, who takes upon him to be so wise and censorious a Member. When the
Head of the Church sends his Mandates and Injunctions to his inferior
Ministers, Reason does in no measure justify their Disputes and Oppositions to
the Inverting the Order of Nature. And therefore it would have argued a much
more noble confidence in the truth of his Majesty's Sincerity and Piety, to
have read without boggling, the Declaration recommended to their publishing in
Churches, which they could not in good Manners believe that their Sovereign
Head would have enjoined them, had he not fore-deem'd it both proper and
warrantable. We find the Declaration grounded upon the solid foundation of
Constant Royal Sense and Opinion, which no question, had the Concurrence of
many able Divines of the first Order in the Church, among whom that Learned
Prelate, and famous Combatant against the Church of Rome, the B. of L. appears
to be none of the meanest. So that upon so fair a poise, besides the
over-ballancing judgment of the King himself, the Opposit^^^ of any other
Sanhedrim within this Nation, can never be thoug^^ to be so equal as they
pretend, in their own Cause; A Cause wherein Interest, rather than any deep
sense of Religion seems to carry the greater sway. The Declaration duly
considered, and framed with mature deliberation, is of one Judgment, but They,
hand over-head, are of another: The Declaration finding the Consciences of the
Subjects pestered and encumbered with Penal Laws, Oaths, and Tests, endeavors
to remove those encumbrances. They on the other side, strive to uphold the
Dagons of their Animosity against all other Opinions but their own. Who are now
to be the Deciders of this Controversy? who indeed but the Sovereign Authority
in the person of the King who is Gods Vicegerent; and to whom for that very
reason, unless they will deprive him of that supreme Dignity, all other persons
are bound to submit, there being no higher Tribunal upon Earth to give a more
Authentic Determination. And therefore it was that Cicers in his Oration for
Cluentius, tell us, that the Supreme Magistrate is the Judge of the Laws, and
the chief Interpreter of the Law; we only the Servants of the Law, that we may
be free. Which being so true as it is, what must be thought of them that set up
an Interpretation of their own against the Interpretation of the Sovereign
Magistrate? But the City Clergyman goes on with a very quaint Distinction.

LETTER.
Indeed, let men's private opinions be what they will, in the nature of the
thing, he that reads such a Declaration to his People, teaches them by it. For
is not Reading Tea^^ing? Suppose then I do not consent to what I read, yet I
consent to teach my People what I read; and herein is the evil of it; for it
may be it were no fault to consent to the Declaration, but if I Consent to
teach my People what I do not consent to, my self, I am sure that is a great
one: And he who can distinguish between consenting to read the Declaration, and
consenting to teach the People by the Declaration, when reading the Declaration
is teaching it, has a very subtle distinguishing Conscience: Now if consenting
to read the Declaration be a consent to teach it my People, then the natural
Interpretation of Reading the Declaration, is, That he who Reads it, in such a
solemn teaching-manner, Approves it If this be not so, I desire to know, why I
may not read an Homily for Transubstantiation, or Invocation of Saints, or the
worship of Images, if the King sends me such good Catholic Homilies, and
commands me to read them? And thus we may instrust our People in all the points
of Popery, and recommend it to them with all the Sophistry and artificial
Insinuations, in obedience to the King, with a very good Conscience, because
without our consent: If it be said, this would be a contradiction to the
Doctrine of our Church by Law Established; so I take the Declaration to be; And
if we may read the Declaration contrary to Law, because it does not imply our
consent to it; so we may Popish Homilies, for the bare reading them will not
imply our consent, no more than the reading the Declaration does: But whether I
consent to the Doctrine or no, it is certain I consent to teach my People this
Doctrine; and it is to be considered, whether an honest man can do this.

ANSWER.
The first Question here is, Whether a man that consents to read, consents to
teach? Or rather, Whether Teaching and Reading be all one? Certainly no man of
reason but will believe the City-Clergy-man was very hard put to it to lay the
stress of a Refusal to obey the Command of Sovereign Authority upon a Cavil
about the signification of a word or two. Who could have imagined it would ever
have been requisite for the Council to have consulted a Tribunal of Grammarians
to obviate such an Objection as this, before they issued forth the Order for
Reading the Declaration. But whether Teaching and Reading be all one, is
nothing here to the purpose; For there is not any thing as yet appears in the
Letter which proves the Declaration unlawful to be read: Which he ought first
to have done before he had gone about to split the signification of Words to
gratify a Conscience, therefore squeamish because over-surfeited with the
Kings Favors. For there is no Person in England ought to uphold that Law which
the King condemns, if it be not in it self unjust and contrary to the Union of
Mankind. For the Introducing of Popery into England, or the Abolishing of any
Laws that may prevent it, if it be the Will and Pleasure of the Sovereign
Government, is no more Illegal in it self, than it was for the United
Netherlands to abolish Popery and introduce the Protestant Religion into their
Dominions, contrary to the Constitutions of the Empire, and the Laws of Spain.
So that this City-Clergyman moves all this while upon an Assertion, That the
Declaration is Illegal and contrary to the Law of the Land. For if the King of
England may be deprived of his undoubted Right of Altering, Repealing, or
Suspending such Laws as are inconsistent with those Maxims of Rule which he
proposes at his coming to the Crown, and which he finds destructive to the
greatest part of his Subjects, he loses one of the greatest Advantages which he
enjoys, to pursue those Methods of Government which he deems most proper for
the renowning his Reign in future History. So much the more hard, when the only
means which he accounts most proper for his purposes shall be condemned for
Unlawful by a nice Splitter of Verbal signification. And yet the distinction of
Reading and Consenting is not so difficult as he pretends. For Consent is an
agreement of Thoughts as well as Words. But a man may read the Story of Bell
and the Dragon in the Church, and yet not agree it to be Orthodox. Nor can a
man by reading be said to teach his People, unless he inculcates what he reads
by Instruction; for though Instruction comprehends Reading, Reading does not
comprehend Instruction. Which is the reason there are so many ignorant Persons
in the world, to whom the Bible and the Creed it self are read every Sunday in
the Year, and yet at the Years end they are not able to tell ye whose Son Jesus
Christ is, or who was Solomon's Father. And whereas he says, the King might as
well command him to read a Homily for Transubstantiation, as the Declaration,
the Inference is false, The one being an Actual Invasion upon the Articles of
the Church of England, from which the Declaration upon the Word of a King, is
the very thing that secures him: the other only a Civil Duty required in
Obedience to the King's Command: and the Refusal of it only a piece of Fineness
to render the King's Authority and his Proceedings suspected to the People.

LETTER.
Thirdly, I suppose no man will doubt, but the King intends, that our Reading
the Declaration should signify to the Nation, our Consent and Approbation of
it; for the Declaration does not want Publishing, for it is sufficiently known
already: but our Reading it in our Churches must serve instead of Addresses of
Thanks, which the Clergy generally refused, tho it was only to Thank the King
for his Gracious Promises renewed to the Church of England, in his Declaration,
which was much more innocent, than to publish the Declaration it self in our
Churches: This would persuade one, that the King thinks our reading the
Declaration, to signify our Consent, and that the People will think it to be
so. And he that can satisfy his Conscience, to do an action without consent,
which the nature of the Thing, the Design, and intention of the Command, and
the Sense of the People expound to be a Consent, may, I think, as well satisfy
himself with Equivocations and mental Reservation.

ANSWER.
Here is nothing still but barely repeated Supposition, together with an open
and gloried in Confession of the Ingratitude of the generality of the Church of
England; than which he could not certainly have bestowed a worse Character
either upon himself or his Friends. Since it was an Obstinate Ingratitude that
no renewances of the King's Favors could reconcile to him, as proceeding from
a sour Disgust, that his Majesty had granted to others the same Liberty which
they enjoyed. As if all Mankind besides them, were bound to groan under the
continual Yoke of their Penal Laws and Tests, no less Rigorous and
Uncharitable. To the remainder of this part, the Gentleman has formed a very
substantial Answer of himself. I or, says he,

LETTER.
There are two things to be answered to this, which must be considered. I. That
the People understand our Minds, and see that this is matter of Force upon us,
and mere Obedience to the King.

ANSWER.
Then the Refusal was a work of Supererogation, the People being better
instructed, than all their reading could teach them; and then they must fall
that way by going about to instruct them by their Obstinacy, who were of
opinion that their Obedience would have been a far better Admonishment. To
which he answers,

LETTER.
1. That possibly the People do understand that the matter of the Declaration
is against our Principles: But is this any excuse, that we read that, and by
reading recommend that to them, which is against our own Consciences and
Judgments? Reading the Declaration would be no Fault at all, but our Duty, when
the King commands it, did we approve of the matter of it; but to censent to
teach our People such Doctrines as we think contrary to the Laws of God, or the
Laws of the Land, does not lessen but aggravate the Fault, and People must be
very good natured to think this an Excuse.

2. It is not likely that all the people will be of a mind in this matter, some
may excuse it, others, and those it may be the most, the best, and the wisest
man, will condemn us for it, and then how shall we justify our selves against
their Censures? when the world will be divided in their Opinions, the plain way
is certainly the best, to do what we can justify ourselves, and then let men
judge as they please. No men in England will be pleased with our Reading the
Declaration, but those who hope to make great advantage of it against us, and
against our Church and Religion* others will severely condemn us for it, and
censure us as false to our Religion, and as betrayers both of Church and State:
and besides that, it does not become a Minister of Religion, to do any thing,
which in the opinion of the most charitable men can only be excused; for what
needs an excuse, is either a fault or looks very like one; besides this I say;
I will not trust men's Charity* those who have suffered themselves in this
Cause, will not excuse us for fear of suffering; those who are inclined to
excuse us now, will not do so when they consider the thing better, and come to
feel the ill consequences of it: when our Enemies open their Eyes and tell them
what our Reading the Declaration signified, which they will then tell us we
ought to have seen before, tho they were not bound to see it; for we are to
guide and instruct them, not they us.

ANSWER.
Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur in illis -- Time was when there was nothing
more abominable, more heinous, or more cried down by the Gowned Clergy of
England, than Vox Populi; now Vox populi is the only Suprema ^ex that guides
them; they have no other fears than of the Condemnations and Censures of Vox
Populi: Vox populi is Vox Dei, and they dare not read the King's Declaration
for fear of Vox populi: And all this out of an Infallible Certainty, that no
people in England will be pleased with their reading the Declaration but their
Enemies. More than this, they see ill Consequences in the Declaration, and find
Doctrines in the Declaration contrary to the Laws of God and the Land;
invisible however to all those vast numbers of loud and thankful Addresters for
the publishing of it. Quick-sighted Synxes in their own Concerns: but such as
cared so little for the Voice of the People, that they never melted at the
Groans of the People, when they had the Scourge in their hands.

LETTER.
II. Others therefore think, that when we read the Declaration, we should
publicly profess, that it is not our own judgment, but that we only read it in
obedience to the King; and then our reading it cannot imply our consent to it:
Now this is only Protestatio contra factum, which all people will laugh at, and
scorn us for: for such a solemn reading it in the time of Divine Service, when
all men ought to be most grave and serious, and for from dissembling with God
or Men, does in the nature of the thing imply our approbation; and should we
declare the contrary, when we read it, what shall we say to those who ask us,
Why then do you read it? But let those who have a mind try this way, which, for
my part, I take to be a greater and more unjustifiable provocation of the King,
than not to read it; and I suppose, those who do not read it, will be thought
plainer and honester men; and will escape as well as those who read it and
protest against it: and yet nothing less than an express Protestation against
it will salve this matter; for only to say, they read it merely in obedience to
the King, does not express their dissent: it signifies indeed, that they would
not have read it, if the King had not commanded it; but these words do not
signify, that they disapprove of the Declaration, when their reading it,
though only in obedience to the King, signifies their approbation of it, as
much as (...) can signify a consent: let us call to mind how it fared with
those in King Charles the First's Reign, who read the Book of Sports, as it was
called, and then preached against it.

ANSWER.
Then it appears that the Declaration has been read, and that by several
Gentlemen of the Church of England also. So that it appears that the reading of
it is not of that dangerous Consequence to the Conscience, as the Author of the
Letter would pretend to. For we are to have that charity for those that read it
as for those that refused it, that the form had as much care for their
Consciences, as the latter. Now then to what purpose all these Terrors and
affrights of Conscience, all this dread of the censures of the People for
reading it, since the business admits such a positive variety of Opinion. The
Loyal and Obedient may read it, but the Scrupulous and Refractory will not.
Well then, if the case be so, the City Clergyman should have done well, to have
reserved his Niceties and Slicing of significations to himself, and not have
gone about so Zealously to spread the infection of his Scruples to the
discouragement of others. But he has past the Rubicon and will forward.

LETTER.
To return then to our Argument; If reading the Declaration in our Churches be
in the nature of the action, in the intention of the command, in the opinion of
the People, an interpretative consent to it, I think my self bound in
conscience not to read it, because I am bound in conscience not to approve it.

ANSWER.
To this the Loyal Gentlemen that read it, reply, That if Reading the
Declaration in their Churches, be neither in the nature of the Action, nor in
the Intention of the Command, nor in the Opinion of the People an
Interpretative Consent to it, they think themselves bound in conscience to read
it, because they are bound in conscience to approve it. But, says he,

LETTER.
It is against the Constitution of the Church of England, which is established
by Law, and to which I have subscribed, and therefore am bound in conscience to
teach nothing contrary to it, while this Obligation lasts.

ANSWER.
He must of necessity allow the Constitution of the Church of England to be a
strange uncharitable constition, that will not allow Liberty of Conscience to
any but it self. And it is his misfortune, that he has subscribed to a Church
that wants the bond of Perfection, which is the reason that many believes he
mistakes the Constitution of the Church of England.

LETTER.
It is to teach an Unlimited and Universal Toleration, which the Parliament in
72. declared Illegal, and which has been Condemned by the Christian Church in
all Ages.

ANSWER.
What the Parliament Declared in 72, signifies nothing against the Authority of
the Scripture, which all along declares the contrary. And whereas the Gentleman
is pleased to say, That Universal Toleration has been condemned by the
Christian Church in all Ages; There is nothing more contrary to the infinite
Sayings of the Primitive Fathers and their Successors, and that celebrated
Maxim of Tertullian, Religionis non est Religionem cogere.

LETTER.
It is to teach my People, that they need never come to Church more, but have
my free Leave, as they have the King's, to go to a Conventicle or to Mass.

ANSWER.
This is like Cardinal Wolsey, Ego and Rex, His leave and the King's. But they
are a sorry sort of People, That do not know already, That a Rector of a Parish
is no Sovereign; but that the People may come and go where they please without
his Leave.

LETTER.
It is to teach the Dispensing Power, which alters what has been formerly
thought, the whole Constitution of this Church and Kingdom, which we dare not
do till we have the Authority of Parliament for it.

ANSWER.
It seems the King's Authority signifies nothing, with this City Clergyman. But
if he had the Authority of Parliament for it, he would stretch his Conscience,
and Read the Declaration. In the mean time, The King's Dispensive Power is no
Business for a Man in his Station to meddle with: Nor is he to be such a Judge
of Royal Declarations, as to be the Interpreter of their Meaning or Intention.
That Power is not within the Verge of his Desk or Pulpit either, neither can
the Authority of Parliament warrant any such Boldness among Ecclesiastics.

LETTER.
It is to Recommend to our People, the Choice of such Persons to sit its
Parliament, as shall take away the Test and Penal Laws, which most of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Nation have declared their Judgment against.

ANSWER.
Then, not to Read the Declaration, is to recommend to the People, the Choice
of such Persons, as shall not take away the Test and Penal Laws; as if the
Peoples Election of Parliament Men depended upon the Recommendation of the
City-Clergymen. But the Declaration requires no such Officious Recommendation
from them: And therefore the Gentleman might have spared his Complement to the
Nobility and Gentry.

LETTER.
It is to condemn all those Great and Worthy Patriots of their Country, who
forfeited the dearest thing in the World to them, next a good Conscience, viz.
The Favor of their Prince, and a great many Honorable and Profitable
Employments with it, rather than consent to that Proposal of taking away the
Test and Penal Laws, which they apprehend destructive to the Church of England
and the Protestant Religion; and he who can in Conscience do all this, I think
need scruple nothing.

ANSWER.
The Nobility and Gentry are mightily beholding to the City-Clergyman for his
kind Encomiums: But whether they would have thought it any Condemnation of
their Resolutions, in Reference to the Penal Laws and Test, is uncertain; for
the Nobility and Gentry do not depend upon this Gentleman's Divinity; their
Motions, and the Circumstances that guide their Actions being of a higher
Nature, than to care for the Condemnation of their Chaplains. However, if the
Nobility and Gentry were so Kind to do what they did for their sakes, the
City-Clergyman has ill retaliated their Favor, to lay the Load of his Actual
Disobedience upon the Shoulders of the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation. But
now he is come to his Effects and ill Consequences: for says he,

LETTER.
For let us consider further, What the Effects and Consequences of our Reading
the Declaration are likely to be, and I think they are Matter of Conscience
too, when they are Evident and Apparent.

This will certainly render our Persons and Ministry infinitely Contemptible,
which is against that Apostolic Canon, Let no man despise thee, Tit. 2. 15.
That is, so to Behave himself in his Ministerial Office, as not to fall under
Contempt; and therefore this obliges the Conscience, not to make our selves
Ridiculous, nor to render our Ministry, our Counsels, Exhortations, Preaching,
Writing, of no effect, which is a thousand times worse than being Silenced: Our
Sufferings will Preach more effectually to the People, when we cannot Speak to
them: But he who for Fear or Cowardice, or the Love of this World, betrays his
Church and Religion by undue Compliances, and will certainly be thought to do
so, may continue to Preach, but to no purpose; and when we have rendered our
selves Ridiculous and contemptible, we shall then quickly Fall, and Fall
unpitied.

ANSWER.
He is now wrapped up in the Spirit of Prophecy, what Strange things will befall
him for reading the Declaration, which he calls a Betraying the Church by undue
Complyances: But the Prophet mistakes the Points that renders the Ministerial
Office he means Ridiculous; for while they keep to the Business of Sound
Doctrine, and merely True Divinity, there is not a more Profound or Learned
Clergy in the World, than are they of the Church of England; but when they will
be Studying the Points of Royal Declarations, which are Acts of State, will be
making their Pulpits the Stages of Farce and Satyr, will be Interloping and
Intruding into State Affairs, which nothing at all concern them; when they will
be Teaching the King, the Judges, Deputy Lieutenants, and all other
Magistrates, their Duties: This is that which renders the Ministry, before
mentioned, or any Ministry in the World, Ridiculous. And it is to be feared,
The City-Clergyman has not altogether freed himself from that Contempt, in
calling the Reading of the Declaration, a Betraying of the Church by Undue
Complyances; and then Complementing the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation to
Justify his Ridiculous Language; and all this to gain Popularity, or to
preserve the Possession of his Living under the Name of the Protestant
Religion; for he must not take it amiss, That others dive with the same
severity into his Meaning as he dives into the King's Intentions.

LETTER.
There is nothing will so effectually tend to the final Ruin of the Church of
England, because our Reading the Declaration will Discourage, or Provoke, or
misguide, all the Friends the Church of England has: can we blame any man for
not preserving the Laws and the Religion of our Church and Nation, when we our
selves will venture nothing for it? can we blame any Man for consenting to
Repeal the Test and Penal Laws, when we recommend it to them by Reading the
Declaration? Have we not Reason to expect that the Nobility and Gentry, who
have already Suffered in this Cause, when they hear themselves condemned for it
in all the Churches of England, will think it time to mend such a Fault, and
reconcile themselves to their Prince? and if our Church fall this way, is there
any Reason to expect that it should ever rise again? These Consequences are
almost as evident as Demonstrations, and let it be what it will in it self,
which I foresee will destroy the Church of England and the Protestant Region
and Interest, I think I ought to make as much Conscience of doing it, as of
doing the most immoral Action in Nature.

ANSWER.
Here we find him talking as if the Final Ruin of the Church of England, lay
upon the Church of England-mens Reading or Not Reading the Declaration, and
that by Not Reading it, they had saved the Palladium's and Ancilia of their
Religion. And all these Rodomontado's upon bare Suppositions and Imaginations
no ways compatible to Reason; for it is not Rational to Believe, That the
Nobility and Gentlemen of England, when they delivered their Sentiments
contrary to what was Proposed to them concerning the Test (for as to the Penal
Laws, it is well known, Their Judgments are much more Remiss) did what they did
for Fear of being Condemned by the Levites whom they feed. It Is therefore a
Presumption in the City-clergyman to arrogate in the Plural Number such a Power
over the Nobility and Gentry, as if they were bound to Justify his and his
Friend's particular Acts of Disobedience, and could not be Safe in their
Resolutions, unless they were Obstinate. What was proposed to the Nobility and
Gentry was one thing, what was commanded them was another; and there is a great
Difference between not Consenting to a Proposal, and not Submitting to a
Sovereign Command.

LETTER.
To say that these mischievous Consequences are not absolutely necessary, and
therefore do not affect the Conscience, because we are not certain they will
follow, is a very mean Objection. Moral Actions indeed have not such necessary
Consequences, as Natural Causes have Necessary Effects; because no Moral Causes
act necessarily. Reading the Declaration will not as necessarily destroy the
Church of England, as Fire burns Wood; but if the Consequence be plain and
evident, the most likely thing that can happen, if it be unreasonable to expect
any other, if it be what is plainly intended and designed, either I must never
have any regard to Moral Consequences of my Actions, or if ever they are to be
considered, they are in this case.

Why are the Nobility and Gentry so extremely averse to the Repeal of the Test
and Penal Laws? why do they forfeit the King's Favor, and their Honorable
Stations, rather than comply with it? If you say that this tends to destroy the
Church of England and the Protestant Religion, I ask whether this be the
necessary consequence of it? whether the King cannot keep his Promise to the
Church of England if the Test and Penal Laws be repealed? We cannot say, but
this may be: and yet the Nation does not think fit to try it; and we commend
those Great Men who deny it; and if the same Questions were put to us, we think
we ought in Conscience to deny them our selves: and are there not as high
probabilities, that our Reading the Declaration will promote the Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws, as that such a Repeal will ruin our Constitution, and
bring in Popery upon us? Is it not as probable, that such a Compliance in us,
will disoblige all the Nobility and Gentry, who have hitherto been firm to us,
as that when the power of the Nation is put into Popish Hands; by the Repeal of
such Tests and Laws, the Priests and Jesuits may find some salvo for the Kings
Conscience, and persuade him to forget his Promise to the Church of England?
and if the probable ill consequences of Repealing the Test and Penal Laws, be a
good reason not to comply with it, I cannot see but that the as probable ill
consequences of Reading the Declaration, is as good a reason not to Read it.

ANSWER.
These are all mere Comments and Descants of the City-Clergyman, upon the
Honor and Conscience of his Majesty, and the evil design of the Declaration
upon the Church of England, drawn from Probabilities of the evil consequences
of Repealing the Penal Laws and Test, which the Church of England must no more
part with, then the Jews with their Ark, without exposing themselves to utter
ruin and destruction. For the charitable Clergyman takes no care of any other
part of the Protestant Religion, so the Church of England be secure. To all
which if he would have but vouchsafed to have read the Declaration, he might
have found an Answer shining fully out, and dispelling all the Fogs and Mists
of his Probable Consequences in His Majesty's own words; where he declares a
second time, That ever since His granting the Indulgence, he has made it His
principal Care to see it preserved without distinction; And farther adds his
Resolutions, To use His utmost Endeavors to Establish Liberty of Conscience on
such just and equal foundations, as will render it unalterable, and seoure to
All People the free Exercise of their Religion for ever. But this will not
serve the City-Clergy-man's turn; he must have the Rains of Temporal as well as
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in his own hand, and drive on for ever, or else
there is nothing to be done. They are like Caesar, contemning all Superiors;
and like Rompey, disdaining all Equals. A passionate conceit of their own
Perfection above all other, which no Man of common sense can be reconciled to;
and a convincing Argument that those Persons must have but little or no
Conscience themselves, who with so much vigor and obstinacy labor to uphold a
Civil Persecution of Penal Laws and Tests, so directly opposite to all the
Dictates of Conscience and Reason.

LETTER.
The most material Objection is, That the Dissenters, whom we ought not to
provoke, will expound our not Reading it, to be the effect of a Persecuting
Spirit: Now I wonder Men should lay any weight on this, who will not allow the
most probable consequences of our Actions, to have any influence upon
Conscience; for if we must compare consequences, to disoblige all the Nobility
and Gentry by Reading it, is likely to be much more fatal, than to anger the
Dissenters; and it is more likely, and there is much more reason for it, that
one should be offended than the other: For the Dissenters who are Wise and
Considering, are sensible of the Snare themselves, and though they desire Ease
and Liberty, they are not willing to have it with such apparent hazard of
Church and State: I am sure that though we were never so desirous that they
might have their Liberty, (and when there is opportunity of showing our
Inclinations without danger, they may find that we are not such Persecutors as
we are represented,) yet we cannot consent that they should have it this way,
which they will find the dearest Liberty that ever was granted.

ANSWER.
After his Complements put upon the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation, the
Author of the Letter descends to scrape a new acquaintance with the Dissenters,
and fain would draw them into his Belief, upon a very odd surmise, that they
are now in some kind of manner reconciled. But the Complement is at such a
remote distance, that he betrayed his Politics to court them at such an
indifferent rate. And indeed his Expressions are so obscure, that if this
Church of England Man, is so nice that he dare not trust the King upon such
clear and solemn Promises, the Dissenters, who have had such severe Experience
of their Favors, have much less reason to credit the forced Complement of the
City-Clergyman. This is only to be wondered at, that the City-Clergyman should
make the King so dear a Seller of Liberty of Conscience, when there was no
Price could purchase it from the Persecution of the Penal Law-Men, his
undoubted Brethren.

LETTER.
This Sir, is our Case in short, the Difficulties are great on both sides, and
therefore now if ever, we ought to besiege Heaven with our Prayers, for Wisdom,
and Counsel and Courage, that God would protect his Church and Reformed
Christianity, against all the devices of their Enemies: Which is the daily and
hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your Friend and Brother.
May 22. 1688.
ANSWER.
Being thus come from his Politics to his Prayers, it is time to leave him, not
doubting but if his Prayers be Just, they will be heard; if not, neither his
Letter nor his Prayers will signify any thing.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have just now seen H. Care's Paper, called, The Public Occurrences, which
came out to day, and cannot but set you right as to his News about the Reading
of the Declaration on Sunday: He tells you, That several Divines of the Church
of England, in and about the City, eminent for their Piety and Moderation, did
Yesterday Read His Majesty's late Declaration in their Churches, according to
the Order in that behalf; but some (to the great surprise of their
Parishioners) were pleased to decline it. You in the Country are from this
Account to believe, that it was Read here by the generality of the Clergy, and
by the eminent Men among them: But I can and do assure you, that this is one of
the most impudent Lies that ever was printed: For as to this City which has
above a Hundred Parishes in it, it was Read only in Four or Five Churches, all
the rest and best of the Clergy refusing it every where. I will spare their
Names who Read it; but should I mention them, it would make you who know this
City, a little heartily to deride H. C's. Account of them. And for the Surprise
he talks of, the contrary of it is so true, that in Wood-street, where it was
Read by one Dr. M. the People generally went out of the Church. This I tell
you, that you may be provided for the future against such an impudent Liar,
who, for Bread, can vouch and put about the Nation, the falsest of things.

I am Yours.

ANSWER.
The City-Clergyman has given the Lie to the Author of the Public Occurrences:
It were to be wished that the Author had named all the rest besides those we
already know, that were so Loyal as to Read the Declaration. If they were not
so numerous as they are said to be in the Occurrences, we wish they had been as
many in number as their Loyalty required. But we leave this for the Author
himself, to do himself Justice by a more particular Answer.

FINIS.

