^r. POWELS Answer To A Late ^^CTITIOUS PAMPHLET PUT FORTH BY ^^o Leading
Quakers, viz. John Vaughton AND John Field.

In Which (...) ACCOUNT of a Discourse between Them and Him is here ^^^tified,
every Thing that is Material in Their said Book, Answered, and several
Notorious Lies therein detected, to the Just Shame of the Publishers.

ALSO Counsel in the Conclusion of the Whole, to such that are the Principal
Leaders of the Quakers, or any that are Promoters of Fundamental Errors.

WITH (...) ^^^stolary Discourse Touching the Imputation of Sin to CHRIST, and
the ^onsonant Testimonies of Divines both Ancient and Modern about it.

Ignatius Martyr in his Epistle ad Trallianos. ^^dam vaniloqui, and mentis
Seductores, non Christiani, sed Christum Mer^^, and Ca^ponantes Verbum
Evangelii, qui venenum Erroris commiscentes ^^blandimento, sicut anomeli, ut
qui biberit illius potus gustabilem sensum, ^^ine captu^, in observanter Morti
addicatur. ^^^re certain vain Talkers and Seducers, not Christians, but such as
make ^^andize of Christ and his Gospel, who mingle the Poison of their Er^^^
with sweet and pleasing words, as Vintners that mingle Honey with Wine, so that
he which drinks of that pleasant Cup, being delighted (...) ^he Taste, is
unawares mortally poisoned.

(...) first in his own cause seems just, but his Neighbor comes and
searches, him, Prove. 18.17. London, Printed in the Year 1676.

To the Impartial and Judicious READER.
THOU can not be unsensible of those Volumnes (written by able Men) which
have discovered the Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies of these times, and many
excellent Treatises in Print there are particularly, against that turbulent and
incorrigible Sect, viz. Crakers; especially such, that have been imposed by Mr.
Hicks, Mr. Faldo, and Mr. Haworth, who have ^ought such things to light, that
will for ever render the Quakers the est disingenious People, that has been in
any Age whatsoever. The consideration of which discouraged me (knowing my
inabilities) from ^^tempting any thing of this Nature, and so thought to have
slighted ^y Adversaries Book by Silence, being also well satisfied, that
neither Christians, nor my Acquaintance, would give credit to any thing the
Quakers should say of me; but after mature deliberation, (...) Proverb is,
Oculus and Eama non patiuntur joces, A Man's Eye, and his good Name can bear no
Jests.
togethe^ with advice, I found there was a necessity to clear my self from
those ^oss things, that they would have fain suggested to the World concern^g
me. Hereupon I betook my self to Pen and Paper, and at length time brought
forth this little Script, which I submit to the Judgment of all indifferent
Persons, that will be at the pains to understand (...) Occasion of the late
Clamours, that diverse of this vexatious sort, viz. Cuakers, have made about my
self.

Some time ago, walking by the house of John Vaughton, I was ^esired by him to
go into his House, who upon his Request immediately ^^sented, (he being Related
to me by Marriage.) and a little while ^ntinued thus friendly together, as
afore-time we used to do; but at ^^at time above all the rest we could not
agree, arguing Pro and Con, till to much Fierceness breaks forth, it is
probable, upon both sides; and ^e thing occasioning at other, I came to say,
that Jesus Christ was a sinner, and yet no sinner; and further added, that he
was the greatesh Sinner in the world, as I could make out; This he desired
under my Hand, which I readily yielded unto (being unacquainted with the
Quaters subtilty) for I gave it under my Hand only as a Thesis, to be made out
by me at that time, and so no more of it, but when he had gotten it into his
hands, he would not let me have it again, unless I would fully recant it; unto
which I Replied, I should not, because I could make it out, saying, that it was
to be under stood by Imputation, re^^ing the word several times over. A little
while after he makes ^^pies of what I had given under my hand, and comes to
those Meet^^^ houses where I used to Preach, opposing me in a malicious
reproac^^^^ manner, scattering those Papers amongst the People, up and down
streets, as Doctors Bills, wherein was writteis these words,

Jesus Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World, I Thomas Po^^ of the
Gospel, Minister, affirms. Yea, such was their exceeding great envy, that there
was no stone unturned, or means unattempted, to take away my good name; For
great was the pretended impulse of the spirit in them, that they co^^^ not be
satisfied with disturbing me in London, but they came ab^^^ twenty Miles into
the Country in Hartfordshire, a Place where (...) Preach every other Lords
Day, (out of pure love to souls, and not (...) of love to lucre, as the Quaker
falsely insinuates, and that these th^^^ years almost, only Charges defrayed,
and that not till very lately* There these Quakers came three times together,
scattering their Pap^^^^ up and down in the Country, as before in the City,
standing upon (...)* For n^^, upbraiding against me, telling the People, that
if they follow their Priest, they would go to hell; And all this in the
Aftornoon before I came. I having information of it, I repaired to my place
soon^^ then I intended, and made shift to get through the Crowd to the Pulp^^
beholding the Assembly in a great Confusion, which filled me with inexpressible
grief, considering also my self to be but one, and they many and of such a sort
of People, whose humors and subtilties I was not we^^ acquainted with. I
endeavored to silence them, telling them, that (...) had something to say to
them, but still they prated to the people, venti^^ their heretical Notions, and
drowning me with their Stentorian voi^ that I could not have the liberty to
Apologize for my self, though in my own place, People there being not so
docible and ready to defend their Minister, as in London: these things coming
together, provoked Passion, (and not without cause,) as that I said to one of
them, Sirrah, come down; And withal said to the People, Sirs, We must be forced
to depart, (if we would not lose this Afternoon) for what shall we do with
them, unless they are whipped, scourged or put into the Stocks: And I avouch
still, they deserved to be served so, because we who would have served God in
the Ways of his Appointments, were scandalized, upon the Account of that
Confusion and Vproar which they made, and we no ways could help our selves.
Nay, it is uncreable, unless you had been present. So rude, and so uncivil,
were the ^rriage and actions of these Men, that one would have thought they
some from a Bear-Garden, people telling them ever and anon, that the Lords day
was not a day for such things to be debated, and they took as the course
whereby to win upon people. Yet notwithstanding all his, they would have their
own ways, binding us to their Laws, Nay, one of them had such a brazen
Forehead, as to tell (...) they would not go out of the place unless I would
dispute the Point, ^^n when I should Preach, or suffer them to declare their
Testimony against me to the people. And then they would depart.

I told them I dared not enter into a Disputation on the Lords day, and at that
time when I should Preach. If you will defend your self, ^y they, we will tarry
till you have done Preaching, I still alleged an convenience of so doing, in
respect of the day, and then of my inability, which without doubt would have
been, if I after I had Preached ^ice, had then engaged with all them that were
fresh. The Assembly ^ing great for a Country Assembly, I was moved with
compassion of ^^l, and being loath to lose the opportunity of Preaching to them,
I was ^illing to condescend to any probable way to please my Adversaries, and
^^erefore told them that I would discourse the Point on the Monday allowing,
as soon in the Morning as they would, at which all the People ^^uted, saying, It
was fair, It was fair; yet unto this would not ^^se Men yield, unless Articles
were subserib'd unto, after what man^^ the Disputation should be managed, and
all this on the Lords Day, which would have taken up our present opportunity,
whereas I would not we made any such Proposal to them about disputing with them
my ^f, had it not been pure Necessity, viz. to please the Adversaries, ^ut so
we might not lose our present opportunity of waiting upon ^^d in his way, as we
esteemed; but such Roysters were they, that ^y would have their own way in
spite of our Teeth, insomuch that ^y made us who were a great Assembly, to
desert our Place, for could not get them out, unless (as aforesaid) we would
have ^ip'd them, and Scourged them, which were the occasion of my taking those
words; And after we were gone, two of those Qua^s got into my Pulpit, and there
Preached, only (I think) they throw'd ^n the Cushion.

After this I was forced by reason of their defaming me, to put fort^ Paper in
defense of my self, Entitled, A Word to the Wise is ^^ough; which I have here
Inserted for the Information of such, that might not see the Paper alone. Since
this, the Quakers put forth Book against me, which is, That that I have
Answered in the ensuing Sheets; And thus, Reader, I Will assure thee, thou have a
true Narrative of the Quakers Proceedings against me, which have been so irr^
gular, boistrous and uncivil, that I never knew the like all my days, an^ could
not have believed it, unless I my self had experienced it, and (...) withal
think, that never any one was more troubled with them as m^self, during the
time, and considering all other circumstances.

I do further declare, that the malice of these Men is so much against me, (for
I know not what,) that I fear to go any where by my self, th^^ have so dogged
me, and follow^d me into all Places, and I am but (...) young Man, newly
Arrived to the one and twentieth year of my Age and what should be the reason
of their so assaulting me as they do, tru^^ I know not; I never meddled with
their opinions, i.e. so as others have done, never uttered any invective
speeches against them, always till no^ had very charitable thoughts, especially
of him that is now become (...) enemy, because I Preach the Truth as it is in
Jesus, and will not co^form to his ways.

I come now to the Doctrine of Imputation, being the thing in deba^^ between
the Quakers and my self; Mr. Pen cal^s it, A Doctrine of Devils. Bellarmine
himself after many Disputations about Justification, does yet conclude,
Tutissimum est, fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere. It is most safe to put all our confidence in the sole mercy and power
of God. De Justificat. l. 5. c. 7.
and that which by them as be^^ bran^ed with all the ignominious Epithites and
Appellations that th^^ could give unto it, yet a doctrine so fundamental (that
I would (...) for a world but that I did confide in, and upon it lay the whole
stress (...) my salvation; and would to God that Papist, Socinians and Quake^^
would come to this before it be too late, for how many have strenuou^^^ argued
against the aforesaid doctrine, that in the approach of de^^^ have changed
their opinion about it. Now denying or gainsaying (...) this being an error
of pernicious consequence, I shall here consider (...) according to my poor
abilities.

This Doctrine of Imputation, (as I humbly conceive) includes a^^ signifies two
things, 1. Our sins reckoned Christ's. 2. Christ's Rig^^teousness reckoned ours.
That which I shall principally manage is the former, viz. Our sins reckoned
Christ's; And that I may briefly and clearly speak to this, (because it is for
the unknowing in this Point, th^^ I design this Disoourse,) take me as
follows, and I hope it is a^cording to Scripture, and the Sentiments of the
Pious in all Ages.

That our Lord Jesus did undergo punishment, we have a full rel^^^^^ ^^ thereof
in the History of his Life and Death; all that I shall ^^ in the Defense of
this great Truth is this, Either Christ died ^ly or unjustly; I mean, God the
Father in punishing his Son, Act^^ therein either justly or unjustly; unjustly
who dares to assert, justly ^o dares to deny; and if God inflicted punishment
on his Son just^^ then of necessity his Sonmust be a peccant Person one way or
other, i.e. sinner; If he was a sinner, it must be either inherently or
imputively; inherently he was not, imputatively he was, or else he could it
have undergone punishment. Christ was accounted a sinner by ticked men, but
this is not all, he was accounted also a sinner by his Fa^^er, or else his
Father would not have dealt so severely with him as he ^^id; why did such a
Father deal with such a Son? what was the cause ^^at a Person so innocent
should suffer as he did? Secondly, 'twas (...) (not his, but ours) had it not
been for this, God had never sent his ^^n in Flesh, and then have punished him
in that Flesh; as he did. Christ might thank Sin for all his sufferings, and
lay all the evils which ^sustained in soul and body at its doors: Sin set his
Father against him, Sin laid the Foundation of all his sorrows, Sin brewed that
bitter ^up which he was to drink, Sin was the meritorious cause of all the
siseries that befell him, 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ also has once effered for
sins; so that Christ died, not only for an example, but for ^ns, and that
either for his own or for others; not for his own, I say gain and again, which
maintains the Purity of our Savior, but for ^hers, which does not impeach his
Purity; Christ was a Sinner by ^uputation and reputation, the latter of which
the Quakers will grant, ^ut the former they deny, both of which Divines do
assert, viz. Christ the greatest Sinner in the World by Imputation and
Reputation, and yet still not a Sinner at all inherently or actually; so that
if it ^ere not malice and envy in men, what need they misrepresent any one
(...) the World for holding Christ to be a Sinner, whenas they have what they
seem to desire to have, viz. That Christ was not a Sinner in he ^ently or
actually; Can any more be spoken in the defense of Holy Jeus then this; If I,
or I dare say any of my Reverend Fathers and ^rethren do affirm holy Christ to
be a Sinner, it is then according ^he import of those Phrases in Seripture,
Isa. 53.6. And the Lord ^ath laid on him the Iniquity of us all. Now in sin
there is ma^a and the reatus, the stain (or the filth) and the guilt of it; Or
iniquity.
or ^^ns: There is in sin the fact, the fault and the guilt: the two for^ur are
solely ours, but the third and last Christ was pleased to take upon himself:
What is guilt but obligation unto punishment? if the Holy Jesus will freely put
himself under that Obligation, Sufcipiende ^enam, and non suscipiende culpam,
and culpam delevit and paenam. Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in Luc. Sermon. 37.
what can (...) said against it? certainly that he might do, and yet (in
himself) be as holy and innocent as ever he was, and neither he the Committer
of sin, nor in the least defiled by it, (for the macula and the reatus are two
different things) Christ's sufferings we all grant are Penal; but how could
they have been so without guilt; Guilt therefore he had not contracted but
assumed; Punishment necessary presupposes guilt, he first took the guilt upon
him, and then the punishment.

2 Cor. 5.21. He has made himself to be sin for us.

It Is well known, those words, He has made him to be fin, sounds more harsh,
then if it had been said, He has made him to be a finner; There may be good in
a sinner, for good and bad are sinners; but there can be no good in sin, sin is
evil it self in the abstract, and therefore can admit of no good at all; Sin is
the quality, Sinner the subject, both are bad enough, but of the two, the
quality inherent is the worse; so that there is more in these words, He has
made him to be sin, then we are aware of. By sin here (I know) many understand
a Sacrifice for sin, as the word Sin sometimes is taken, which I acknowledge to
be a godly sense, yet that is not all; it notes also his voluntary susception of
the sinners guilt. Thus Doctor Jacomb on the Place. I shall further add,

Methinks the Holy Ghost, choosing to term Christ rather Sin then Sinner, seems
hereby to respect the magnitude and multitude of sins that were upon our
Savior, which the word Sinner could not so well comprehend as the word Sin.

1 Pet. 2.29. Who his own self bear our sins in his own body on the Tree.

The punishment of them did he bear, He has made him to be sin, i.e. He has
made him to be a sinner, saya Downham upon the place. He has made him to be
sin, i.e. (says Trap upon the place. a Sin-offering, or an exceecing sin. ner.
surely the guilt also, or else I understand not how he should bear the
punishment of them. Again, I know not any Medium more apt whereby to evince
this truth, then considering two things in this grand Sacrifice our Lord Jesus,
1. The meritorious cause of his being a Sacrifice, viz. Sin, not his own, but
his Peoples, This we have already touched upon. The other is the Surrogation
and Vicegerency of Christ, our grand Sacrifice, i.e. He was a Sacrifice on our
behalf; Christ substituttd himself in the Sinners room, took our guilt upon
him, and put himself in our place, died not only for our good, but in our
stead, did undergo what we should have undergone, vouch safed to die that we
might not die.

Now the Socinians and Quakers cannot endure to hear this. Oh how do they rally
all their force, unite all their strength, set themselves with their might, to
oppose and beat down this great truth. To deny is suffering in our stead, is to
loose the Cornerstone of our Juntion, says Mr. Flavel Sermon. Gal. 3.13. Yea,
they which do ^^y it, says Dr. Jacomb, are pernicious Gospel-destroyers. As
suffering, dying, satisfying in our stead, room or place, is e^^d by all as the
sum of Gospel-Revelation, the great Article of the ^stian faith, the main prop
and foundation of a believers hope. And ^^ll observed by our Divines, who
assert the Vicegerency and Sub^^tion of Christ in his sufferings; that all
those Greek Particles ^^h we translate [for] when applied to the sufferings of
Christ, do the meritorious, deserving, procuring cause of his suffering. Thus
^.10.12. He offered one sacrifice (...), for sins, ^^.3.18. Christ once
suffered (...), for sins, Romans 4.25. He delivered (...), for offenses, Matthew.
20.28. He gave his life a some (...), for many. Christ suffered for us, i.e. in
the stead, ^^ and place of us. So that it is evident, as Christ suffered in our
^^, took the guilt of our sins upon him, he was the greatest of sinners,
^articular sinner having only his own sins to answer for: but Jesus ^^st,
(though he had no sin of his own) yet he had all the sins of the ^^t laid upon
him, and so he has more to answer for then any partier sinner; and therefore in
that sense is the greatest of sinners, be^^s Scripture allows, viz. those
three, Isa. 53.6. 2 Cor. 5.21. 1 Pet. ^4.

Samething of this truth may be shadowed forth by this Plain Simile. sohn
Vaughton should engage himself for the greatest part of the ^tors in the World,
and is accepted for their Surety, may not he the justly reputed the greatest
Debtor, because he assumeth their ^^ts unto him, though he never contracted
them. I shall leave my ^^der to apply it, because I will not be tedious,
Testimonies of the Fathers, that Christ was made a sinner for us.
I shall only hereunto ^e what Divines ancient and moaern have said about this
same ^^g. (...)
Chrysostom, Him that knew no sin, says the Apostle; Him was Righteou sness it
self, he made sin, that is, he suffered him to indemn'd as a sinner, and to die
as one accursed. The like have Oecumenius, His Son being Righteousness and
Holiness; He made that is, he suffered him to be crucified as a sinner, and as
a guilty son: so likewise on Heb. 9. ult. He further says.

Christ was very much a sinner, as having taken upon him the sins of the whole
world, and made them his own. Bishop Downham quotes Thophilact and Theodoret
for the (...) purpose. Augustine Interpreting those words of Psa. 22. v. 1.
^^cording to the Translation of the Septuagint and the Vulgar L^^^^ Verba
Delictorum meorum: quia nostra peccata sua reputat.

He says the words of my sins, because our sins he reputed (...) his own; and
again on those words Psa. 38.7. Because of min^ ^^iquity, for as he was made
subject to the worse, that he m^^ deliver us from the curse of the Law; so he
professed him (...) sinner, who bore our sins, and on these words, (Cogitabo
pro pe^ meo) Christ's sins are the sins of Mankind. Peccata Christi, hu^^
delicta sunt generis.

Thus you see how many favors these words, (Jesus Christ a si^^^^ or the
greatest of sinners) in that sense that I mean. Some say ac^^^^ing to Scripture
that he was made sin, that our iniquities were laid (...) him, that he was an
exceeding great sinner, that his sins were the (...) all Mankind. That there
was a voluntary susception of our (...)* That holy Jesus suffered in our room,
which is the sense (...) import of my Position. See it further confirmed by
Later ^^vines.

These words, Luther on Gal. page 136. Christ took upon him the Person of a
Transgressor, and therefore must be hanged. Treatise of Justif. ^ 5. c. 1.
sect. 7.
(Jesus Christ was the greatest sinner in the World) well known I came from
Luther, that famous Reformer of the Ch^^^^ and since him others have made use
of it, as I will instance in (...) few.

That famous Gospel-Preacher Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs, (...) Book. Entitled,
(Christ's Invitation of Sinners to Rest,) say (...) same, quoting Luther for it.
That Orthodox Bishop Downham^^ the same, quoting many for it also.

Doctor Roberts on his elaborate Treatise about the Covenan^ (...) God, has
the same expression page 1609. Mr. Flavel in his Entitled Fountain of Life,
74. Has these words.

He could not have suffered or dyed by the Fathers Hands, (...) not been a
sinner by imputation, and in that respect as ( L^^^ speaks) he was the greatest
of sinners.

Doctor Jacomb upon the Romans tells us also, The Churches Riches by Christ's
Poverty. page 12.
that Christ too^ (...) guilt of our sins upon him, and then bore the
punishment, p. (...) Doctor Sibs also has words to the same essect. He
(Christ) too^ (...) on him guilt as far as guilt is an Obligation to punishment.

Anthony Burgess has also these words, Treat. of Justis
For he (Christ) could ^^a Sacrifice for sin, or be a Surety to expiate it, if
it were not ^^on him, and he reputed of us so in his sufferings, though in of
holy and unspotted: so that as it is with us, though we the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, yet inherently we silth, and the remainders of
corruption; so though our sins imputed unto Christ, yet inwardly and inherently
he was ab^tly holy and innocent. Diodate upon 2 Cor. 5.21. His Annot.
has the (...).

^^ere are many more that I might here insert, were I furnished with (...), but
these I suppose may suffice.

^^at other Point touching the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to ^^hath
also been ever owned in the Church, and he that denies it must ^^quently
overturn the Law, the Gospel, and the Satisfaction of ^^st; but this I am not
called as yet to vindicate, and therefore do (...) my Reader to those men that
have treated largely of it in their suises of Justification.

READER, Thine to serve thee, THO. POWELL.

^r. POWELS Paper, put forth in defense of himself, upon the Quakers first
Aspersing of him with Blasphemy, is here Inserted, that every Judicious Reader
may judge whether it needed any Answer, but only that the Quakers had a Mind to
have the last word: though it was a Lie.
A Word to the Wise is enough. OR, Whether this Position, Jesus Christ was the
greatest Sinner in the World, as is in this Paper held forth, be Blasphemy.
JESUS CHRIST was no Sinner actually, i. e. He committed no Sin; He was neither
guilty of Original Sin, Blemish, nor actual Blot, but was Holy, Harmless and
Undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 1.19. Yet as he suffered in
(...) Room, took the guilt of our sins upon him; He was the greatest (...)
sinners; One particular sinner having only his own sins to Answer for: but
Jesus Christ, (though he had no sins of his own,) yet he h^^ all the sins of
all the Elect laid upon him, and so he had more to Answ^^ for then any
particular sinner; And therefore in that sense is (...) greatest of sinners,
being as Scripture allows, Isa. 53.6. 2 Cor. 5.2^^ 1 Pet. 2.24.

Whereas John Vaughton and some other Quakers have cast such k^^^ of Papers up
and down in City and Country, with a design to aspe^^^ Thomas Powell Preacher
of the Gospel; the said Thomas Power thought it convenient to give the World
this sasisfaction, that thou^ these words abovementioned, Jesus Christ was the
greatest Sinner (...) the World, were given under his hand to John Vaughton
Quaker; (...) that was his sense, and is his sense still, scil. by Imputation,
and was ^^ peated by him several times, even before and after he had written
th^^ words, is Witnessed by Thomas Bye an Apprentice seven years to ^^ said
John Vaughton, and who was then present when this Discourse w^ agitated between
John Vaughton and Thomas Powell, which takes ^^ the calumny thrown upon Thomas
Powell by the Quakers, and they ^^ Christians still made good.

What Mr. Thomas Powell Preacher of the Gospel h^^ said in his own Defense, I
Attest to be Verity.

THOMAS BYE.

Thus, Reader, I have given thee my sense upon my own word which privilege
every man has, and my words in their explained sense considered, are I am sure
so found and Orthodox that none but the bold Socinias and the silly Quaker
would gainsay it.

But seeing that my Adversary has cavill'd with this same Pap^^ of mine, in his
pretended Answer thereunto, I shall consider in the first place that, and then
his whole Book, which he styles, A Vindication of Jesus Christ.

First, I begin with his pretended Answer which you will find (...) page 7.
stuffed with notorious Lies. He tells the World that I have abused my Witness.
Wherein I pray?

New Thomas Bye has since this Paper was Published, John Vaughons Lies
notorious.
declared (...) the Presence of several Persons, that T.P. did not speak nor
mention the word Imputation, before he writ those words, so that the World m^^
see that he has abusd his VVitness.

Lie 1. Note Reader, If John Vaughton had been a Christian, (...) would have
done like a Christian, i.e. done me right, by acquainting (...) world, that
though Tho. Bye denied the word Imputation, as taken by me before, yet he
denied not but that it was spoken by me jus^^^^r it was written, nay, he
believes a hundred times before ever we ^^^^ed from one another. Again, I can
produce the Original that I ^^ve under Thomas Bye his hand, which is as I have
inserted in my ^^^er, scil. That the word Imputation was repeated even before
and ^^^; but since my VVitness has called to mind, that he cannot remember
that I had the word Imputation before, yet he does not say Positive^^^ that I
had not; whereas John Vaughton relates thus,

Now Tho. Bye has since this Paper was Published, declared in the ^^esence of
several Persons, That T. P. did not speak nor mention the ^^^d Imputation
before. So that you may see what a flagitious Re^^^or this Quaker is; but see
further of his Impiety.

Lastly, Thomas Bye my Witness to clear me from this cruel As^^sion, viz. A
Lie, (which I would not be guilty of for a world) ^^th here set his hand, that
though (since he has considered) he cannot remember I had the word Imputation
before, yet I had his hand ^^^ely and voluntarily from him, to what I have said
in my own de^^^ce.

The Refult of all touching the abusing of my Witness, you see, friendly
Reader, i, a Lie of John Vaughtons own hatching, and yet ^^ow fain would this
confident Quaker have fastened it upon me; but shall forbear my corrosives for
his lying, till I have particularized ^^^m all.

Lie 2. John Vaughtons other Lie is in p. 9. wherein he makes use ^^ Mr.
Faringtons name, telling hie Reader, that he said I was a Liar, ^^ denied also.
Mr. Farington acknowledges that I was mi^^ taken, in that I said the word
Imputation was in, and was not, for so (...) understood me, and so he told my
Adversary: but that he said I was (...) Liar, and had told many Lies about it,
he denies, and further says, that if he knew me to be a Liar, he would not
have told such as the Quakers, who think no pains too much to scrape in the
Kennels and Dunghills of mine and his Brethrens infirmities, to have dirt to
cast ^^on us.

Lie 3. John Vaughtons next Lie, is his charging Mr. Farington with a Lie, for
so it is in effect, in that he charge Mr. Farington with beach of Promise,
whose Fidelity in Point of Promisc, I shall make ma^^fest, by transcribing my
Adversaries own words. And that he should at Preach in his Meeting House till
he had Publicly condemned it.

But Now John Vaughton, thou know, and besides thee, an (...) sembly of
people, that I condemned them in a Sermon, and no^^ this time These Words
(Jesus was the greatest Sinner in^^ World) as thou in thy ignorance took it,
viz. That he was a S i^^ Actually. I pleaded as much for the Innocence of my
dear^^ viour, as thou pretendest to do. My Text was at that time, 2 (...) 5.21.
Which fitted the sense and scope of my Position. (...) knew no sin. i.e.
Experimentally, he felt no sin in his own he^ he acted no sin in his Life.
Chamiecus, Bcza, By field and Grotius in looc.
But otherwise he knew fully wha^^^ was, he knew well the effects of it, Say
all Expositors upon (...) place. He was made sin for us, as he was made a
Sacrifice for (...) for the Sin Offerings in the Old Testament were called sin.
(...) was made sin. i* e. By Imputation, etc. Sins were charged u^^^ him. This,
and such like was the whole matter of my Ser^^^ Preached at Mr. Faringtons
Meeting House, and elsewhere, (...) satisfied both him and others, but if I had
meant no otherwise by (...) Position then what thou would fain suggest to the
poor people (...) do assure thee thou would have found Mr. Farington as good
as word that way as well as this.

Lie 4. When I say, the Quakers are no Christians, I mean their principal
Leaders, not all their followers, for I believe there are many poor souls, who
if they knew the Quakers principle, would abominate them.
Another Lie, that I charge John Vaughton with is, in (...) he denies the
Quakers to be no Christians, thing that has been pro^^^ and shall still be
proved when they please. To Illustrate this, is bu^^ lighting a Candle at noon
day, etc. For has not the late Ingen^^^ Mr. Hicks, undertaking to prove them
hererodox, both in princi^^^ and practice, and they are dumb, being consious to
themselves that (...) are no Christians.

Lie 5. The fifth Lie he is his denying that to be their principle wh^ they
have so often Declared, viz Christ dying only as an Example, ind^^^ they dotalk
of Redemption, but this Redemption is of the Seed, wh^^^ Seed is Christ, so
that Christ came to Redeem himself, of which you m^^^ read with satisfaction in
Mr. Hicks Dialogues.

Thus thou feast, my Friendly Reader, what a Brow of Brass (...) Adversary has
in laying his Brat at in Door, and yet it seems (...) Adversary, (as I have of
late understood) is accounted a great Prophet amengst the Quakers, but I am
sure he is a lying one, as m^^^ be proved by the Catalogue of his Lies here
inserted, and by an^^ ^^^^stance, which I shall here acquaint (...) ader with,
and I (...) it will make him smile.

The same Quaker, John Vaughton by name pretends (upon (...) having those
words abovementioned und^^ my Hand) to be ^^^'d of God to reprove, or (as he
phraseth^^^) bear Testimony a^^^^st me in the Country as well as in the ^^^cy;
it happened that ^^^n he came into the Country, which ^^s above twenty miles
(...), I was then at London, and he came t^^^e place where I Preach, (...) then
there was neither Preacher nor people, I being there but (...) a Fortnight.
Surely, this man (...) no more to Reve^^^s, if he does who will believe him,
(...) that he has been the ^^^wils fool hitherto, and by the Father of Lies
was sent upon a shev^^^ Errand.

Now thou false Prophet who have censured me, what shall I say (...) have
proved thee guilty of such wilful studied Lies; Thou (...) called me a Liar,
but I have proved thee one; And therefore in (...) Name of my great Lord and
Master, I do Pronounee thee Ac^^^sed; and that if thou repentest not, Thou
shall be damned.

I come now to my Adversaries Book, John Vaughtons Pamphlet fictitions.
as it declares his ability ^^^hing the Defense of several Tenets among the
Quakers. I have (...) in general to say of it, abstracting what is there
written from ^^^tologies, vain Repetitions and other Impertinencies; the mat^^^
of it may be contained in a Nut-shell; but seeing that I have (...) Pen to
Paper, I Will answer it more particularly. I shall first con^^er the Title of his
Book, which is this, A Vindication of Jesus ^^rist the Immaculate Lamb of God.

I admire the confidence of this Man, how he dares to style his ^^ok A
Vindication of Jesus Christ. If he had not been a Quaker (...) were something,
but forasmuch as thou art a Quaker, and talkest of ^^^dicating Holy Jesus, Lay
thy Mouth in the dust for how dare (...) to Vindicate that which thou do
not hold. A Vindication of ^^^rist, I cant't believe it; thy title is only a
color, a pretense, a ^^^t, whereby thou may allure souls to swallow down thy
poi^on^^^ errors; but notwithstanding this, my Adversary perhaps ^^y reply, He
and all his Friends own Christ; I answer, Friends, i.e. Quakers.
so thou (...) thy Friends will say of every Principle in the Christian
Religion; (...) own this, and you own that; and by this Engine it is, that the
^^vil makes use of you to prevail upon poor souls, whenas Persons (...) at are
able do by a diligent scrutiny find out your lies, absurd ^^^nings, fallacies
and specious pretenses.

Reader, Give me leave to tell thee this, The Quakers owning (...) Christ, or
any other principle of the Christian Religion, is no ot^^^ th^n a mere mystical
Romance. They acknowledge such a Ch^^^^ as un-Christs Christ. They deny him to
be God and Man in^^^^ Person. They deny Christ to be a distinct Person from the
Person of the Father, and they deny him also to be a distinct Person f^^^^ any
of his Members; For proof whereof see what I have (...) Quoted out of their own
Books.

Gods Christ is not distinct from the Saints; Gee. Fox great Mystery. p. 2.6.
spoken in the presence of Mr. Hicks and several others. G. Whitehead Diph. p.
13. G. Fox. great Mist. 206.
I know the beginning and date of thy Christ Jesus Christ, a Person without us,
is not Scripture Language, but the Anthropomorphites and Mugletonians. (...)
there be any other Christ but he that was crucified within, he is the (...)
Christ. And he that has not this Christ that was risen and crucified within,
is a Reprobate; Though Devils and Reprobates (...) make a talk of him without.
It would have better become t^^^^ John, to have Entitled thy Book thus, No
Christ but Conscien^^^ and in this thou would have been true to thy
principle, for w^^^ know, that that Christ which thou in thy Book vindicatest,
is C^^^ science, Light within, not Jesus Christ God man without us. (...) no
marvel why the Quakers cannot understand how Jesus Ch^^^^ should be a sinner by
Imputation, how Jesus Christ should be b^^^ of a Virgin, be made a curse for
us, when they still by Christ understand Conscience.

The next thing which I would take notice of in my Adversa^^^^ Book, Reader, if
thou believe that this Discourse, passed between John Vaughton and I. th^^
must value his memory then at a high rate, but I am apt to think, his memory is
as fallible as yours and mine, though he had the considence to tell me that he
was perfect.
is a Discourse that he says past between him and I, whi^^ avouch to be
seigned, save a passage or two.

He relates this as our Greeting one another, viz. You Quakers hold damnable
and erroneous doctrines.

This is true we all know: but that I saluted him thus, or (...) such kind of
words by way of greeting, is another of his Lies. (...) he knows we friendly
saluted one another: Reader, most of (...) Discourse is fictitious, both in its
dependence and in its matter, a^^^ might instance diversely, but I shall only in
this. He brings me (...) speak as follows.

T.P. There are none perfect who are not free from temptations.

J.V. Christ Jesus was tempted, was not he perfect?

T.P. He was the greatest sinner in the world.

J.V. Who was the greatest sinner in the world?

T.P. Christ Jesus was the greatest sinner in the world.

None, he makes my saving these words, viz. Jesus Christ (...) (...) greatest
sinner in the World; to follow upon his saying, Christ (...) was tempted, was
he not perfect? whereas he knows, (if he ^^^ld but appeal to Conscience, The
light within) that he wrong^^ me much, because the occasion of these words
dropping from me (...) a discourse between him and I, touching the Imputation
of ^^rists Righteousness to us and our sins to Christ. To do that which has
bin sufficiently don already, I forbear, therefore shall not discourse here
largly about Scripture and Revelation which offers it self so ^a^ely to me,
being that which was between my Adversary and I. The Quakers doctrines have
been discovered and confuted by those who know them better then I. viz. Mr.
Hicks, Mr. Faldo, Mr. Raworth. I only answer, him as to some of his own lies,
that he fathers upon me.


Another thing that I shall take notice of in his fictitious Discourse, (...) is
bringing me to speak again as follows.

T.P. What do you own Revelations in these days?

J.V. Yes, we do own Revelations in these days.

T.P. Then burn the Bible, etc.

This, Reader, is also another of his Lies, and Mr. Bye my witness ^^th also
Attest, That as far as he remembers I said no such word, (...) Away with the
Bible, which was the words I spoke I very well ^^member, implying thus much, if
Revelation, were so ordinary and ^^^^non as he talked of; there was no need
then of the written ^^rd. Cast thy eye, my Reader, upon the Margin and then
about ^^^ipture light and Revelation-light, take my Advice as follows. (...)
that most famous Book of that Worthy Divine Mr. William ^^dge of Yarmouth,
entitled, Scripture Light the most sure Light, ^pared with 1. Revelations and
Visions. 2. Natural and superna^^^al dreams: 3. Impressions with and without
Word. 4. Light and (...) within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian experience.
7. Hu^^^ Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology.

Its a Book worth its weight in Gold. I would not (...) any Christian to be
without it, for I know it will (...) their esteem of the Scripture, and so long
as People do but (...) the Scripture that veneration it deserves, they shall
never turn ^^akers, or be overturned with any error. The last thing that I
(...) take notice of in my Adversaries Pamphlet is as follows.

Then a young Man of T.P. his Hearers asked this Question, (...) Seeing you are
but a People of about twenty five years standing, and (...) say that your way
is the right way, what became of the People that (...) before you were a People?

Thomas Powel takes upon him to answer it in the name of the ^^akers thus, They
(said he) believe they are all damned.

This he imputes to my malice and envy, if he had imputed to my Judgment, he
would not have been mistaken. I do here gain avouch that one of the Quakers
principles is, that all exc. themselves should be confounded and damned, which
principle theirs I learn from an undeniable consequence that resulteth fr^
several Phrases scattered up and down in their own Books, as ^^ their way is
the only way, which if it be, then this Consequential follows, all that
approve not what they do are damned. Other heretical Books are bad enough, but
the Quakers are the very fink and Common-shore of all, The quintessence of all
He esie.
At (...) time I have but one Quakers book in my Study, Entitled a Catech^ for
little children, put forth by G.F. A great Leader among (...) Quakers, and in
it I find this to my purpose, p. 13.

Quest.

Father, are Jews, and Gentiles, and Christians, that do not beli^^ in the
light which does Enlighten every man that comes into World, all out of him who
is the Light, the Life of men?

Answ.

Yea, Child, says the Father to it.

Many more passages (were it not for wasting of good Pap^^ might I transcribe
out of that hellish Book, I beseech you, who (...) Parents, to get other kind
of Catechism's for your children, for (...) principles contained in G. F's
Catechism, are principles that the Devil of hell has hatched, ergo, They are
Soul-damning.

For a further confirmation of my assertion, I would desire (...) Reader to see
Mr. Faldo's Key, which will interpret many of (...) Quakers Words and Phrases,
as follows.

Publicans and sinners, i. e. All that are not Quakers.

The Royal Seed, i. e. Christ and every Quaker.

Sons of God, i. e. The Quakers only.

The Synagogues of Satan, i. e. The Assemblies of any sort of people for divine
worship who are not Quakers. Cummultis aliis

For a perfect confirmation of my assertion, viz. That the Quaker do hold that
all who dye not in belief of their principles shall damned. See in this ensuing
Relation, which I shall stand by.

Once a Maiden Acquaintance of mine, was courted by a zealot Quaker, who during
the time he was Suitor, had prevailed with her to go with him to hear his
Friends. S i. Quakers, and that once or twice, at last he demands of her how
she liked them, she answered worse and worse, which occasioned him to break off
from her, and withal to say that if she heard any other, she would certainly be
damned.

I know not any thing else in his fictitious discourse, that requires answer. I
have considered every thing that I judgd Material, as to his opprobrious term^s
scattered in his Book, viz. Minister of the Power of Darkness, Enemy to God,
etc. I look upon as below my self to take notice of, and if so be I am
accounted a Blasphemer by such who are the greatest Blasphemers in the World, I
shall rejoice, knowing that it is one Note and Character of false Prophets, to
cast dirt, filth and Reproach upon the true.

In the Postscript of my Adversaries book, I find him to be offended at such
expressions in my prayer, as (I believe) will record his heterodoxy to
pesterity, and spoil him I am sure for a Gospel Minister, notwithstanding his
crowing Divinity of late, our best duties are Fly blown with sin, and best
performances are Bed ridden. These words (It seems) do stumble the Quakers much
its no marvel, because they hold perfection to be attainable, but let these
imaginary Perfectonists, boast as they please, we know that such who are
Christians understand these Phrases well, unto whom they are so acceptable that
I need not enlarge any further. As to the other Expression, We must have no
dependency upon Christ within.

I say so still, i. e. As the Quakers understand it, and do say that our hopes
of Salvation must hang and depend upon what Christ God-man without has done
without us.

I do find also that my Adversary has lined his book with many excellent Texts
of Scripture, unto which I shall only say this. A poifonous Pill is never a
whit the less poisonous, because it is gilded over with Gold; nor a Wolf is
never a whit the less a Wolf, because he has put on a Sheep-skin; nor the
Devil is never a whit the less a Devil, because he sometimes appears like an
Angel of Light. So neither is John Vaughtons Book, any whit the less an
Erroneous book, because of Scriptural Phrases and Sentences.

I come now to the Conclusion of my Adversarys Book, which you have in these
words, Let Thomas Powel (and all others to whom these Lines may come) know,
that our Owning and Preaching Christ within, a the holy Apostles did, does not
at all gainsay or oppos Christ as he was Manifest without in the days of his
Flesh; for we have a Dear and Honorable Esteem unto our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, in all his manifestations, both within and without; and he who
professes and talks of him only or wholly without, denying him any place
within Man, is a Deceiver and an Antichrist.

Unto which I answer briefly.

I confess the words as they lie in themselves are good, but notwithstanding
this fairness, I smell a Quakers Rat in it and do avouch that what they say
concerning Christ without, is a mere Equivocation in short, by Christ without
they mean only this Christ in you without me. This my ingenious Reader is all
they mean by Christ without, and should they deny this, they must be fain then
to deny what they have said in other of their books. So by this you may see by
what means the Quakers do entangle poor silly souls, viz. By a seeming
approbation of every principle pertaining to the Christian Religion

The Conclusion wherein is contained in brief, Seasonable, Soul-Affectionate,
and good advice unto the principal Leaders of the Quakers or any that are
promoters of Fundamental errors.

Sirs,

You are the most injurious of that because by owning of errors you prejudice
your selves, and by propagating of errors you prejudice others. Oh the
precious time, strength and spirits that you spend in advancing that which you
shall be no gainers, but losers by, you are the greatest Engineers that the
Devil has, for persecution and heresy has been the main Engines, whereby that
Prince of Darkness has endeavored to undermine Religion. Persecuters touch the
body, but such that are Fementem of heresy touch the soul. Persecution with
Saul kills its thousands, but heresy with David its ten thousands. Persecution
is the arrow that flies by day, but Heresy is the Pestilence that rages in
the night. Persecution is the Pruning-knife that loppeth off the Branches of
Religion, but Heresy is as the Axe which is laid to the Root of the Tree,
Persecution is the Dragon that drives the Woman into the Wilderness, but
Heresy is the B^ast that speaks Blasphemy. Persecution began in Nero a Tyrant,
but Heresy began in Simon a Witch, Persecution began about 66 years after
Christ's Ascension, but Heresy immediately after Christ's departure about the
Sixth year of Caligulas Reign. Persecution is the wild Boar of the Forest,
Heresy is the little Fox that eats the tender Grapes.

Oh ye falls teachers, speak nor write any more that which is erroneous, cannot
you be content with deceiving your own souls, but you must deceive others too.
O profligate flagitious Wretches, that must embrue your hands in the blood of
souls, that you cannot go to hell alone, but you must have company with you,
that you must put a Cheat not only upon your selves, but upon others. If ever
you are saved it must be by fire. Spair your pains, cost, and charges, make
much of time, ere long it will be no more, spend no more of it in erroneous
Excogitation. Acknowledge your selves lying Prophets, confess your faults and
errors, God is Faithful and Just, to forgive and cleanse from all
unrighteousness. Call home your Devilish Pamphlets and Books, Rec^^ what you
have written and said, Now you may and you shall do well, ere long you must,
but then it shall go ill: Besides,

Not only damage of soul accrues by such kind of service, but also the thing
aimed at shall never come to pass. Veritas vincit, Truth at last will Triumph,
it shall never be wholly Eclipsed, and therefore all your attempts, (O ye
Promulgators of Error) will be but vain. I trust in God that truth will never
go out of this Land, notwithstanding the specious pretense, of truths Enemies,
though their books are published abroad, having fair Titles in their
Frontispieces, promising fair, I say in their Title pages, yet some piercing
eyes there are that (with facility) perceives the Croaking Toads, and crawling
vipers that swarms therein, and causes them immediately to die the death. Oh
that the consideration of the vileness of the service, hurt of the soul, and
impossibility of effecting what in error is designed, might prevail upon these
poor men to proceed no further, for though they are the Leaders of a great many
to hell: Yet they will be as unable to bear the heat of hell as others.

Men and Brethren according to the Flesh, weigh these things seriously, and
then tell me whether hitherto ye have not been the servants of the Devil and
your own humors. That all our infamous hererodox teachers, may become famous
orthodox teachers has been, Is, and shall be the earnest Prayers of him who is
an earnest well-wisher to all your souls,

THO. POWEL,

POSTSCRIPT.
IF so be any of my Adversaries shall return an Answer hereunto, though I know
not unto what; I have been so faithful in what I have written; yet if they do,
I expect, and also every Judicious Reader, that in the first place they clear
themselves of those notorious Lies and Forgeries that I have charged them with,
or else manifest repentance for the same, in making confession thereof unto the
world, and then I presume we shall be satisfied. If they say any thing in the
defense of their Principles, I expect that it be pertinent, and then I shall do
according as God may direct; If impertinent, as they use to do, any competent
Judge will then discern what a ridiculous Sect the Quakers are, and the badness
of such a cause, that is fain to be supported, either by nothing at all said in
the defense thereof, or if any thing is said, it is in pertinent, irrational
and absurd. In the mean time I leave this to their consideration, advising them
to take heed what they do. For Mr. Hicks in my Presence, and the Presence of
several others, at my Meeting in the Country, offered to prove their Religion
a Cheat, and moreover has promised me to do it at any time, with any one
Person that they shall Assign.

Tho. Powell.
What Occasion there has been for my Name in this Book, I Approve Thomas Bye.

FINIS

