The Religious Rebel.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SOUTH-MARSTON NEAR HYWORTH IN WILTSHIRE, On the Ninth of
September; BEING The Day of Public Thanksgiving for the Deliverance of His
Majesty's Sacred Person, His Royal Brother, and the Government, from the late
Hellish Fanatic Conspiracy.

By CHARLES POWELL, M.A. Sometime Student of Christ-Church in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1683.

TO THE GENEROUS AND PIOUS, ASSERTOR OF LOYALTY And the True PROTESTANT
RELIGION, THE HONORABLE Sir THOMAS CVTLER, One of his Majesty's Deputy
Lieutenants, Justice of the Peace and Quorum for the County of Gloucester, and
Captain in his Majesty's Royal Citadel at PLYMOVTH, etc.
Honored Sir,
WHat You have so often fought for, and the Church of England has so long
prayed for, it has pleased the great King of Kings in Mercy at last to bring to
pass, the discovery, and thereby, the disappointment of the Enemies of this
Church and State. For which as we are all bound to render our unfeigned Thanks
to the Almighty, (who alone gives Victory to Kings, and has once more preserved
our Royal David from the hands of Bloodthirsty and deceitful Men.) So have none
more reason to rejoice before the Lord, than those that serve at his Altar, and
were designed to be Sacrificed upon it. And among those, none more than your
poor Servant, whose unfeigned (though useless) Loyalty has been so long counted
his Crime, that it can scarce yet render him acceptable to those men, who say
to the Ministers of the Gospel, as the Rebellious Jews did to the Prophets of
old; Speak unto us smooth things, Prophecy deceits; Get you out of the way;
turn aside out of the path: cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from us. But
blessed be God, who has preserved the Clergy of the Church of England from the
Superstition of Popery, and the Atheistcal Hipocrisy of Fanaticism. To both
which, as the whole World can witness your Loyal and Zealous Aversion; so am I
bound in Gratitude to acknowledge the great Encouragements I have always
received from your Generous Bounty in that narrow Sphere, wherein I move; For
which I can only offer up my Prayers to the Great God of Recompenses; That be
would still continue you in that true Religion, which you have received from so
many Noble, so many Honorable Ancestors, in the deserved Favor of the best of
Princes, and the best Judge of Worthy Persons, and in the due Respect and
Honor of all Loyal Men, among whom be pleased to admit of the most humble,
most grateful Acknowledgments of,

Sir, Your much Obliged and very Faithful Servant, C. P.

PSALM. X. 10. He falls down and humbles himself, that the Congregation of
the Poor may fall into the hands of his Captains.


REbellion (says Samuel) is as the Sin of Witchcrast; Nor need we seek far for
proof of his Assertion, since they both betray themselves to be the Offspring
of the same Father. Satan first rebelled against the great Monarch of the whole
World, and, though his Ambition tumbled him down from the bright Regions of
Bliss into eternal Chains of Darkeness, yet his Instruments carry on the same
Rebellion still; though the Scene be changed, and the Plot carried on at a
distance, the Design is still the same, only that our earthly Rebels are in
this the worse Devils, that they dare rebel against God and the King too. Nor
do they in any thing more resemble the first Founder of their Society, and the
perpetual President of their Dark Cabal, than that all their unsuccessfulness
does rather enhance than abate their Malice, only drive them the more
desperately on, though they are convinced that Heaven it self, and all that is
called God be armed against them, and all the Powers of Hell and Darkeness not
able to protect them from that Fate, which they seem to hug, because they
cannot avoid. To search the Records of all backward Ages of the World, and show
you this black Spirit working in the Sons of Perdition ever since there was a
Monarchy on Earth, which, I am sure, is the Ancientest and, consequently, the
best Government in the World, instituted by God himself, the great King of
Kings, by whom all Kings reign, and from whom alone they derive their Power, as
being the only Representatives of the Celestial Polity; (for in Heaven
there is no Republic.) This would be as far from the business of the Text, as
it is, from my Intentions; let it suffice that I have chosen an instance in the
Reign of him, who was not only Anointed by Gods immediate command, but in a
more especial manner a Type of Gods Anointed, Christ the Lord; persecuted and
harassed by that very Brood, whose unhappy Offspring crucified the King of
Glory. Holy David (we all know) had troubles more than enough, and the more,
because he was Holy (all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
Persecution) whose whole life, though it were but one continued Scene of
Afflictions, yet we find his Cross doubled, when he came to the Crown: The
outward splendour of which, though it be admired by all, yet is it is intrinsic
Weight and Burden understood by few, but those that bear it. But of all the
Troubles, which like Thorns stuffd his Diadem, and pierced his Sacred Temples,
we find none strike so deep, as that which occasioned this Psalm and Text, Viz.
a Rebellious Son, and a Perfidious Favorite; The one of whom, as he might
reasonably have expected to be the Staff of his Age; so might he justly have
hoped, that the other by his Wisdom and Counsel should have guarded his Crown
and Dignity, who was exalted to so great Eminency in the State, and admitted to
such an Intimacy with his Prince. But alas! we see, (and I wish we had never
seen it) that the best of Princes cannot transmit Virtue with their Blood; nor
infuse Gratitude, where they bestow their greatest Favors. Let Absalom be never
so dearly beloved and caressed by a tender David? yet a little Popular Air
shall stifle his Duty to him, who gave him Life; Let Achitophel be raised never
so high by the Beams of Majesty; yet the next blazing Comet shall make him
forget the benign Influences of that Sun, that exalted him from the Dunghill to
set him among the Princes of the People. I hope you do not suspect, that I am
going about to draw that Parallel, which is so obvious to every eye, and has
already been the task of so many Satirical Pens; I remember I am this day to
Preach; and it is below the Sacred business of the Pulpit to stab with Goose
Quills, or execute Malefactors with Invectives. David tell us, Psalm. 45.5.
that Gods Arrows are sharp in the hearts of the Kings Enemies; and we need not
add sharpness there, where Conscience daily sets the Edge; Eccles. 2, 1.
yet since Solomon tells us, that To every thing there is a Season, and he that
would be accounted a Faithful Steward in Christ's Family, Math. 24.45.
must give the Household, as their Meat, so in due Season too. I hope the
present face of things will justify my choice of the Subject now before us, and
if you cannot choose but make the Application your selves, upon their Heads be
it, who gave the Cue. That I may not therefore disappoint you of a Sermon by a
tedious Preface, or by making A pologies for my Discourse before hand, (which
yet not long since they had need to do, that durst speak Loyalty even in the
Pulpit) give me leave to lead you to the Text, by looking a little back on the
Context, which will give you the occasion of the Psalm, and the meaning of the
words I am to insist on.

The Psalm therefore in general is a Pathetical complaint of David to Almighty
God, of the Pride, Treachery, Malice and Cruelty of wicked Men, who (as his
Son, the wisest of Kings, says) seek only Rebellion; and these wicked men
(Expositors tell us,) are those whom he had maintained and preferred in his own
Court, and therefore were the more wicked, and the more dangerous; Of which
very Persons he says: It is not an Open Enemy that has done me this dishonor,
for then I could have born it: Neither was it mine Adversary, that did magnify
himself against me: for then (peradventure) I would have hid my self from him.
But it was thou, even my Companion, my Guide, and mine own Familiar Friend; We
took sweet Counsel together, and walked in the House of God as Friends. And
this very well agrees with the Character in my Text. For though in the former
part of the Psalm, we have the Lion drawn Rampant, roaring out his Cruel and
Bloody Intentions, scorning all Resistance, either from God or Man, as if he
were sure of his prey, boasting of his hearts desire, and confident that he
could not be moved, Verse. 6. Yet, lest this boisterous noise might rouse the
Royal Game, and make them provide for their own security; in my Text and the
two preceding Verses, we find him in another posture; though he will in no wise
forsake his Lionish Ferity and Cruelty, yet he will draw on the Fox's Skin to
conceal it, and therefore he turns Huntsman, Verse. 8. He sits lurking in the
secret places of the Villages, (...), he lurk's among the Rich Farmers and
Country men; among those who are most likely to be drawn in by his glozing and
specious Pretenses, and there he lies secretly as a Lion in his Den, Verse. 9.
and there (...), futled upon his Nest, wrapped in an Hypocritital garb of
Humility and Piety, he falls down, and humbles himself, that the Congregation
of the Poor may fall into the hands of his Captains.

So that my Text is the Character of a Religious Rebel, a Villain; for so it
will easily appear, if we look on the words, either as a part of the foregoing
Metaphor, or as a description of him, who was the occasion of this querulous
Psalm, viz. the Rebellious Ahsolom, who humbly beg's leave to go to Hebron; not
to pay his Vow to the Lord, 2 Samuel: 15, 7
as he falsely pretended, but to prepare a Rebellion against his King; not out
of any regard to Religion, but to serve his own Ambition; not to serve God, but
his own Interest; where he falls down indeed, and seems to humble himself to
God, but in the same posture Courts the People; and all this, that the
Congregation of the Poor, the Caetus Inopum, the Multitude of Poor helpless
People, that knew not his Drifts, nor were prepared to resist him, might fall
into the hands and power of his voracious Followers, or as it is according to
the 70. (...), that himself may Lord it over the Poor.

Divisions are of late so dangerous, that I shall not dare so much as to divide
my Text, and therefore shall only raise from it one Proposition, which I hope
to prove more infallible, than ever proceeded either from the Roman Chair, or
the Geneva Classis: And that is this, That it is no new thing for the Worst of
men to make use of the Sacred Name of Religion, to palliate the most abominable
Undertakings. Bloodshed, the Murder of the Fathers and Defenders of Religion,
pious Kings and Princes, destruction and Massacre of their fellow Subjects,
pulling down and overturning of all Order and Polity in the world, must be all
usherd in (as we see it this day) with the Lamb-like, harmless voice of
Religion: And though in these Glorious times of the Gospel they cannot possibly
think so, yet they will pretend, that in all this they do God service; so true
is that of our Savior; Math. 7.15.
They come to us in Sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

My Proposition has been so often, and so sadly proved, even among our selves,
that to go about to confirm it by Arguments or Presidents, were to light you
with a Lanthorn in the Sunshine, or to persuade you that you are wounded, when
you are roaring under the smart and anguish of the blow. Yet, since the
Sincerity of our Religion, and the Justice of our Nation will not suffer us to
pass Sentence upon any thing without full proof, let me beg your patience,
while I call an Evidence or two out of the Record of Scripture, and the
Chronicles of former Ages; which, though they do not speak (viva voce,) as
Witnesses in Temporal Courts use and ought to do, yet since their Evidence is
handed down to us by the Infallible Spirit of God, who neither will deceive,
nor can be deceived; I hope we need not fear an Ingnoramus on the Bill; for if
Men believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they believe, though one
arose from the Dead, to testify his Knowledge of the thing.

That I may not therefore instance in matters of Private Concerns (in which
also wicked Men palliate their Evil Designs with the show of Piety and
Religion) I shall confine my-self to that which is more properly the Business
of the Day, viz. Rebellion against Lawful Kings and Princes; Of which the First
that offers it self to us in Holy Writ, is that remarkable one of Corah and his
Company against Moses, the meekest Man upon all the Earth, and therefore the
most likely to have retained the Love and Allegiance of his People, had he not
been to deal with a Stiff-necked and Rebellious Generation, of whom God himself
says by his Prophet, that they were Rebellious from their Youth up; even in the
Infancy of their Government they began to be Rebellious. And this Rebellion we
find ushered in with the pretext of Religon. For though Moses and Aaron
governed them by Laws both Temporal and Spiritual, which were dictated by God
himself; yet in the Pride of their Hearts they thought themselves already so
perfect in what they could teach them, that they were become a Law to
themselves, and therefore counted it a piece of Usurpation, an Invasion of
their Privileges, for the Prince to command, or the Priest to presume to teach
those, who now thought themselves fit to be Teachers of others, and therefore
say they, Ye take too much upon you, you Moses and Aaron; are not all the
Congregation Holy as well as ye? and must we still submit to your Magisterial
Commands? No, we have Princes of the Congregation, that will vindicate our
Liberties, and force a Toleration for us, that every Man may do, what seems
good in his own eyes; we all know, as well as you, how to Serve and Worship
God, and therefore will not any longer be restrained by Human Authority. You
have no Power over our Consciences; that is Gods Prerogative; we have our
Charter from him; and rather than part with that, we will burst your bonds
asunder, and cast away your Cords from us. And had not Gods Providence and Care
of future Ages Signalized this Primitive Rebellion with a Notorious and
Miraculous Punishment, I am afraid, our Age would have argued it as a
President, and from thence have pleaded the Lawfulness of Rebelling for Liberty
of Conscience. For ever therefore blessed be the great King of Kings, who has
set forth their Punishment as a Landmark for others to avoid the same Rock; And
thrice blessed be his Glorious Name, who has so Graciously delivered our meek
Moses and our Pious Aarons from the Bloody Zeal of those Sons of Rebellion, who
with the false Name of Religion would this Day have extirpated the best
Government and the Purest Religion in the World; Even so let all thine Enemies
perish, O Lord, but let those that love him be as the Sun when he goes forth
in his Might!

The next Instance we have of this, is that of Absalom, who is now grown so
stale a Theme, that you cannot but think it Superfluous, though not
impertinent, to mention him. We all know his pretended Zeal to Religion and
Justice, the one of which was not pure enough for his Tender Conscience at
Court, but he must to Hebron to perform his Vow there; and the Other (as he
falsely and Traitorously pretended) either perverted, or so slackly
administered, that he gets him to the Gate, where in an Humble posture he
proffers himself to the Rabble (who had need, I confess, of Severity of Justice
to curb their Insolences) and there he falls down and Humbles himself before
them; When any Man came nigh unto him, to do him Obeisance, he put forth his
hand and took him, and kissed him; and in the next Verse it is said, So Absalom
stole the hearts of the Men of Israel: But it is not long before we hear the
paying of his Vow in Hebron, and his performance of Justice in the Gate; the
Congregation of the Poor are fallen into the hands of his Captains, and his
King and Father forced to save his life by an Ignominious Flight. But once more
and for ever praised be the great Jehovah, who delivered David his Servant from
a Rebellious Son, and Ungrateful, and Perfidious Counselor, who hung up that
Trophy of his Justice, that Posterity and future Ages might, see, and do no
more so wickedly! And let us pray, that all the Enemies of our Royal David, and
all that rise up against him to do him hurt, may be as that Young Man is.

It would be too tedious now to display Jeroboam's Religious Stratagem to move
the People to a Rebellion, by pretending to ease them of the Burden of that
Worship which was established by Law at Jerusalem, and therefore inviting them
to his own way of Worship, in places as remote, as he could, from the Royal
City and Mother Church, that so they might not be won by the Loyalty and
Uniformity, which they should see there, either to their Allegiance to the
House of David, or to David's Religion. I shall not trouble you with a
Transcript of Josephus, or Eusebius, concerning Theudas the Sorcerer (of whom
St. Luke writes in the Acts of the Apostles) who, that he might stir up the
Jews to a Rebellion, called himself a Prophet, and told them, that for their
Deliverance out of the hands of the Enemies of their Religion, he would work
Wonders for them, make Jordan divide it self as for their Forefathers of old,
that they might escape out of the Idolatries of Egypt. Nor shall I mention
Judas the Galilean, who, as Eusebius tells us out of Josephus, seduced the
People of that Region to Rebellion, telling them that they ought not to suffer
Humane Authority to rule over their Consciences, or to prescribe Laws in matter
of Religion. Still it is in Nomine Domini, the Sacred Name of God is brought in
to palliate their Rebellion; and how many cold Blasts of this Doctrine we have
had from the Scotch-Horn, who under the Pretexts of Religion and Reformation
have permitted so few of our Sacred Kings Ancestors to go in Peace to their
Graves is fitter for Authority to remember, than for me to mention. Nor need I
do it, since at this very day we see, that a Conspiracy against the Life and
covernment of the best of Kings, cannot be carried on without a Religious (I
mean a Scottish) Agitator. I shall not trouble you therefore with more Witnesses
(though they be almost innumerable) to prove the Truth of my Assertion, but
shall conclude my Evidence with a Maxim of the wisest of Kings, Prove. 17.11. An
evil Man seeks only Rebellion, therefore a Cruel Messenger shall be sent
against him.

Now because the End of all Sermons is Instruction, and the best Instruction is
that which tends most to Practice; give me leave to draw down those Practical
Inferences, which are most Natural from the Text, and most Useful for our
selves upon this Occasion.

The first Inference therefore will be; That we have a care how we hearken to
those men, that make the greatest Noise about Religion, which is not a thing of
Talk and Noise and Tumult, but a Quiet, Calm, Peaceable thing. The Author of it
was the Lamb of God, who neither stirred up the Jews to Rebel against the
Roman Heathen Caesar, nor did he ever make use of any Sinister, or Violent
Means to escape the hands of his Bloody Persecutors and Crucifiers, who envied
him for nothing more than his Religion which he came on Purpose to plant among
them, and which was to be waterd with his own Blood, and brought to perfection
by his own Death. But he was oppressed, and he was afiicted, yet he opened not
his mouth; he was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her
Shearers is dumb, so opened he not his mouth. Isa. 53.7. As for Corruption in
Religion, it was never so general among the Jews, as at his coming into the
World; Yet in all his Sermons and Discourses to them, (though some times he was
forced to pronounce a Woe to the Hypocritical Professors, and Lewd livers among
them) yet he never did (as he might have done) in the least excite the Romans
their Governors to perfecute or destroy them, but himself submitted to them,
that they might not take any Occasion from his Practice to deal hardly with his
Countrymen and Brethren according to the Flesh, and exhorted all his Hearers to
do so likewise, that they might not Pull down Vengeance on themselves. In all
his Actions in the whole Course of his Life, he was a Pattern to them of
Meekness, Gentleness, Peaceableness and Subjection. And truly, I am afraid,
those men, who make such an Hurry and Clutter about Religion, are not his
Disciples, nor did they ever learn it from the King of Righteousness and the
Prince of Peace, especially when they make Religion the Argument of Public
Commotions and Disturbances. And therefore it will nearly concern us to take
St. John's Advice, 1 Ep. 4 chapter 1. v. not to believe every Spirit, but to try
the Spirits, whether they be of God; not to follow every Teacher, that pretends
to be inspired, but to make Trial of all, that shall so pretend, by the Rules
afforded them both by Moses and Christ. For certainly there is no thing does
more trush and hinder us in our Journey to the heavenly Canaan, than to stand
still, and listen to every Whisper, to every one that shall pull us by the
Sleeve, and talk to us on the Road.

Do you meet any then, that says, It Is true, your Aim is good, your Design pious
in the Voyage you have undertaken toward Heaven and Happiness; but are you sure
your Guide is faithful, that he will not Hand you about, or bring you into a
wrong way, which will never bring you, at least not safely, to your Journeys
end? I am your Friend, (says he) and I speak this out of Kindness to you, and
in the Fear of the Lord, it is dangerous to trust those guides, that are imposed
on you by Human Authority, Since God himself has chalked you out a Way so
Plain, that you cannot miss it, and you have Eyes in your Head, and can see as
well as those, that call themselves Seers in Israel. Have a care of such a Man;
Either he is out of the way himself, and out of a Blind Zeal endeavors to
seduce other into the same Mazes and Labarynths, (for even Error it self
desires Company, and loves not to be alone:) Two is better then one, is a Maxim
that all men, bad as well as good, grant and acknowledge;) or else he is Proud
and Ambitious, and thinks himself fit to Judge and Censure others; and would
have you throw off, and disown your spiritual Guides, pretending, that he
himself has greater Sanctity and abillity for those very Offices, which he
would decry in others. Remember that God led his People of old by the hands of
Moses and Aaron, and their slighting of those Guides made them wander so long
in the Wilderness, and so few of them to enter into the promised Land. And
remember also, that it was God, and not Man, who gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, Ephise. 4.11.
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the prefecting of the Saints, for the work
of the ministry for the Edifying of the Body of Christ; And they that set light
by those, and will have Guides of their own setting up, Rebel against God, by
whom they are sent, and can entitle themselves to no other Leader, but to him,
who is called Abaddon and Apallyon, the King of Locusts, and the Destroyer of
all Grace and Goodness. In a word, Dan and Bethel may have Temples, or rather
Conventicles, outwardly pargitted with the show of Reverence and Religion,
Holiness to the Lord may be written on the walls, but the gods within (to which
Men fall down and humble themselves) are but the Calves of the People, to whose
service they consecrate their Earrings and Jewels, while Jeroboam sets up his
Tyranny, and swallows their Estates. Jerusalem only is a City that is at Unity
within herself, where is that Mount Sion, in which is the Temple of the Lord,
which he has chosen to be an Habitation for himself: of which he has said This
shall be my Rest for ever, here will I dwell, Psalm. 11.21. v. 15.
for I have a delight therein. And that the poor may not be enveigled with the
pretenses of wealthy Hypocrites, or be moved to transgress for a piece of
Bread, and (as Solomon says in another case) V. 16. of that Psalm he says, I
will bless her Victuals with Increase, and will satisie her Poor with Bread.
And that the Priests may not be staggered in their service, nor desert their
Station in the House of God, v. 17. he says, I will deck her Priests with
health, and her Saints shall rejoice and sing. And that David also may not be
discouraged in waiting upon his God (though perhaps an Absalom, or Jeroboam may
with glittering shows, and glaring false Pretenses at once seduce and make the
People to Sin) he says, v. 18, 19. There will I make the Horn of David to
flourish, I have ordained a Lanthorn for mine Anointed; As for his Enemies, I
shall cloth them with shame, but upon himself shall his Grown flourish.

Again, Does any one come to you in Samuels Mantle, in the garb and posture of
a Prophet? and in that Sacred Disguise falsely whisper to you, what that
Apparition said truly to Saul; That God is departed from the King, and become
his Enemy (for such Sprights also there are now abroad in the World, and those
in black too) have a care now, and stand upon your Guard! Look diligently about
you, are ye not got into Endor e're you are aware? Is not the Witch and the
Devil at work now instead of Samuel, tempting you to ill Thoughts of him, whom
that more sure Word of Prophesy, the Word of God tells you, ye shall not dare
so much as to think irreverently of? Remember that Apparition was an
Extraordinary thing, never permitted but once, a thing that frighted the Witch
herself, and not likely to be repeated again for every Fantastic mans-sake,
that would pretend to Inspiration. It Is true indeed, there are such Spirits in
the World, but they are (...), Wicked Spirits, Spirits of Rebellion and
Mischief and Murder, as St. Paul prophecies of, 2 Timothy 3. v. 4. Traitorous,
heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God. Such as St.
Jude describes, v. 8. who despise Dominion, speak evil of Dignities; and these
St. Paul tells us in the forementioned place to Timothy, have a form of
Godliness; they appear like Lucifer himself, when he is transformed into an
Angel of Light, all clad with the bright and glorious Rays of pretended
Sanctity, as if they were Sons of the Morning, some of the Corpse du Guard to
the great King of Heaven: But then have a Care, Mulier formosa superne Desinit
in Piscem. Beware of the Cloven foot under the Robes of Light; for though they
have the Form of Godliness, yet you may be sure they deny the power of it, who
endeavor to lessen and vilify those Persons in your Opinion, who bear the
Image and Stamp of Him, from whom they derive their Authority; and while they
command nothing but what is in their Commission, are no less to be Obeyed, than
he that sent them, and set them over us, however are not in any case to be
Resisted; for whosoever Resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation, Romans
13.2. I need not tell you the seasonableness of this Caution, the practice of
the men of our Age has saved me that labor. We too well know what they were
doing, when under a Pretext of defending Religion, they endeavored the
repealing of those Laws, which are the only Hedge and Mound for its
preservation, and under the vizor of Zeal to protect his Sacred Majesty from
Popish Cruelty, they went about to destroy him with a fanatical Rebellion. But,
O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret, Genesis 49.6.
unto their Assembly mine honor, be not thou united! who speak friendly to
their Neighbors but imagine Mischief in their Hearts; Destruction and
unhappiness are in their ways, Ps. 28.3.
and the way of Peace have they not known.

Secondly, Therefore how great Cause have we to bless God, who has in mercy to
us discovered these (...), (...). 6.11.
these wiles and contrivances of the Devil and his Accomplices, who in mercy,
mere mercy to this Sinful and Rebellious Nation has delivered David his Servant
from the peril of the sword, and from the hand of Strange Children, whose mouth
talks of vanity and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity, who has
preserved him from the Blood-thirsty, and deceitful Man, from the Bloody
Romanist, and from the deceitful Enthusiast, Ps. 5. v. 6.
both whom the Soul of God abhors. A King so dear to heaven, that it has
shown as many Miracles in his preservation, as Hell has produced Plots even to
a Miracle for his Destruction. I need not tell you of the Star at his Birth,
which though some men will not admit to be either new or Miraculous, yet I am
sure was very strange and unusual, and was set there by that hand, which as it
never did any thing in vain, so did it never bestow such Signal Remarks, but
upon Extraordinary Persons, and upon Extraordinary Occasions. Nor need I
refresh your Memories with a rehearsal of the wonderful Acts of Heaven in his
whole Life, which though it has had its black lines of Affliction, more perhaps
than any other King we read of, in the Murder of that Glorious Saint his Royal
Father, the Exile of Himself, and the whole Royal Family, in which he suffered
more than I can relate, or he would have born, had he not been sustained by the
Right Hand of the Most High (while he was, 2 Cor. 11.26.27.
what St. Paul says of himself, In journying often, in perils of waters, in
perils of robbers, in perils by his own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen,
in perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the Sea, in
perils among false Brethren: In weariness, in painfulnes, in watchings often,
in hunger and thirst, in fassting often, in Cold and nakedness; besides those
things, that are without, that which came upon him daily, the Care of the
Church of God: witness that fierce Assault of Militiere, which he so piously
sustained, and as generously repel'd and vanquished. Nor shall I insist upon
his stupendous and Miraculous Restoration, which we all ought gratefully to
admire, though we can never reach that, which is past finding out. And above
all, with him, the Restoration of our Religion, which went away and returned
with him, as if there were no God, while there was no King in Israel, and we
could not serve and worship the one, as we ought to do, unless we performed our
Homage and Allegiance to the other. And all this in mere Mercy to us; for I can
scarce call it any to him, who seems to be restored only to new Afflictions, by
the Ingratitude and repeated Rebellions and Conspiracies of a stiff-necked and
Hipocritical Generation, who repay all those Blessings that by him are conveyed
to us, not only by reproachful and contumelious language, Exodus 22.28.
which Moses calls Reviling of the Gods, (which has been the frequent and too
known practice of many in their Seditious Clubs, and Traiterous Cabals, even of
those persons, who would seem to be Religious;) but by Atheistically,
Sacrilegiously and Rebelliously plotting and contriving his Death, to whose
Mercy and God-like Act of Oblivion, so many among us owe those Lives, which
they would yet once more Sacrifice to the God of Rebellion, whom they have so
long served. But God, who alone gives Victory to Kings, has once more delivered
David his Servant from the peril of the sword, And why? because the King
puts his Trust in the Lord, and in the Mercy of the most Highest he shall
not miscarry. O Let us rejoice therefore, and triumph in the Name of the Lord
our God! This is the day, which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad
in it, even in the presence of all those, that have an evil will at Sion. And I
hope I need not urge many Argument to excite your Praise and Gratitude in this
Day of our Salvation, only let our Joy be such, as becomes good Christians and
good Protestants; let us in the Words of our Orthodox and Loyal Mother the
Church of England, show forth our Joy, not only with our Lips, but in our
Lives, that the due Sense of this great Mercy and Deliverance may move us all
to walk more uprightly, and more sincerely before God, and make us for the
future more Loyal to our King; that we may not any longer deal Hypocritically
with the one, or Rebelliously with the other, but That with well doing we may
put to silence the Ignorance of foolish men. That God may once more speak Peace
unto his People, and to his Saints, that they turn not again; that God may
delight to dwell among us, and glory may dwell in our Land; that we may once
more go into the House of God as Friends, and worship God in the Beauty of
Holiness; that there may be no more Heartburnings among us, but that we may
with one Mind, and one Mouth Glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. To whom, etc.

FINIS.

