A DISCOVERY OF Indirect Practices IN THE COAL-TRADE, OR A Detection of the
pernicious Maxims and unfair Dealings of a certain Combination of Men, who
affirm, It is a Cheat to be Just, and Just to Cheat.

To which are added some Proposals for the Improvement of Trade and Navigation
in general, and of the Colliery-Trade to New Castle in particular.

By Charles Povey.

LONDON, Printed by and for H. Hills, and Published by A. Baldwin in
Warwick Lane, 1700.

A DISCOVERY OF Indirect Practices IN THE COAL-TRADE, OR The Combination, that
affirms, It is a Cheat to be Just, and Just to Cheat, with the Vanity of False
and Malicious Reports detected, and exposed to Public View, by C. P.
I.
I Think myself obliged in several Respects, to Publish this short Tract for my
own Vindication; Not doubting in the least, but it will be very acceptable to
all impartial and disinteressed Persons, though as unpleasant to some few, that
are otherwise disposed: And to assUre those few, who are my unreasonable
Enemies, That what I have done was not out of Choice, but mere Compulsion: Not
to gratify any Malevolent Humor, but to make them sensible of their own
Failings: Not with any Design to expose their Trade and Reputation, as they
have done mine; but with a Desire to Rectify every Thing that may be amiss in
them: Nay, what I have done, I had much rather have left undone, had there not
been an absolute necessity for it: For what Man living can be silent, when he
finds himself wronged in the highest Nature imaginable, and Robbed of his
Reputation, which is the richest Jewel in this World, that any one can be
Master of? But after all this, I should have been silent, and looked upon a few
Words as a blast of Wind, that might have Vanished like a Morning-Cloud, or an
early Dew: But when I perceived my Name called into Question, before a
Magistrate and a Court of Justice, for doing to others, as I would be done by:
When I observed my Reputation endangered by twelve inconsiderate Men, even
against the Consent of a just Judge: When I saw every Thing, that was dear to
me in the World, just a going to be Shipwrack'd on the Shoals of false and
Malicious Reports; where many a good Reputation has been Split, and buried in
the Land of Oblivion: Then I thought it high time to avoid so dangerous a Gulf
before it was too late. Thus I Considered with my self, how easily I might
prevent my own Ruin, and that of many more who may he under the same Misfortune
with my self, by putting a stop to the Proceedings of the Malicious: More
especially since I am so Fortunate as to have an opportunity of wiping off all
the Aspersions that have been most unjustly Cast upon me; by the testimony of
several Witnesses of undoubted Credit; besides many Arguments and Reasons to
Confirm it; none, I hope, will blame me for so doing: Nay, I am persuaded, The
worst of my Enemies will forbear to censure my Conduct, when they suppose
themselves under the same Circumstances, and seriously Consider, that I have
writ nothing but the real Truth in every Particular: For I desire to proceed
with all possible Moderation, without Passion or Prejudice, wishing them all
the success imaginable in their Lawful Undertakings; since my whole Design is,
to Undeceive the World, that no Man may be Imposed upon, with groundless
Suggestions, and false Reports.

II.
We live in an Age that is so full of Calumnies, and false Reports, that the
most quick sighted of Men can scarce Discern the Difference between that which
is Plain and Fair in the way of Dealing, and that which is Foul and Unjust; An
Age wherein many Men live, who have no regard to their Neighbors Trade and
Reputation, whenever they have a Prospect of Advancing their own: An Age so
wise in worldly Wisdom, and especially in making such Cunning Reflections, that
most People are apt to believe what they say, to be the real Truth, till the
Injured Person has a fair opportunity, to justify his Integrity, and by setting
matters in their true light, makes the falsehood of their odious Calumnies
plainly appear, beyond Contradiction, and then all their Machiavilian Policy,
and Subtle Artifices, are suddenly detected and exposed to Contempt; But alas!
how many innocent Persons are there who lie under the Lash of a Virulent and
Scandalous Tongue, and are not able at least for some time, to vindicate their
own Reputation. The main Reason (as I take it) is, That their Enemies are so
Sly and False, that they never Discover themselves to the injured Person but
Judas like Crucify his Reputation in his Absence; Flattering him with smooth
Words and a Treacherous Heart before his Face: So that such Men may well be
compared to the Venom of Asps, to Juneper-Coals, and to Arrows; and indeed,
they are worse than all these: For there are Antidotes against the Venom of
Asps; but what can secure a Man from the S^ing of an Evil Tongue? Not even
Innocence it self: And Juneper-Coals, tho they be very hot burn none, but those
that touch them; whereas a spiteful Tongue hurts them that never Offended it:
As for the Arrows, Distance of Place will preserve one from them; but
wheresoever a Man goes, the Malice of a lying Tongue will still persecute him:
For such Infernal Furies no sooner open their foul Mouths to speak, but the
noisome Stench of their corrupt Hearts burst forth, infecting with their
poisonous Breath, both the Air, and the Ears of the Hearers. To conclude, a
Malicious Person is just like the Crooked Serpeut, that having his Head one
way, can distort his Heart, to another.

III.
But to come to matter of Fact; There is a certain Combination of Men, and I
have good reason to believe, that most of them go under the Denomination of
Coal-Merchants, who according to their mutual Compact have united themselves
together, with a full Resolution, to ruin my Trade and Reputation, and to
persuade the World, That it is a Cheat to be Just, and Just to Cheat; the
falsehood of which Position will plainly appear by the following Discourse, and
I Doubt not but to Discover the Rancour of their Hearts, by their False and
Malicious Reports. I am also well satisfied, that there are very few Persons of
any Note within the Bills of Mortality, who can be ignorant of their
Proceedings against me. These Gentlemen have been pleased to give themselves
the trouble, to go from House to House; Casting many sinister Reflections on my
Way of Dealing; and not only so, but have Encouraged their Friends, Agents and
Servants to do the like, and have used their utmost Endeavors to Confirm their
Villainous Practices by the method following.

I.
IN the first Place they give it out, That I Cheat every Person I have any
Dealings with, in their Measure of Coals, and to make their Assertion good,
they confidently affirm, That they have twenty Indictments against me, and have
already Convicted me for a Cheat, upon several of them, and particularly, that
on the thirteenth day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand and seven
hundred, I was fined forty Pounds, for want of seven Bushels of Coals in half a
Chaldron: A Report so Notoriously false, that it must needs make their Names
stink in the Nostrels of all Men of sound Reason; especially when the first
Rise of it is Discovered to the World; which I shall endeavor to do, with all
the Plainness Imaginable. Two Persons whose Office it is, to see that every Man
have his full Measure of Coals, took an occasion, not long since, to give me a
visit, during which, their Demeanor was very agreeable, their Countenance
Smiling, their Expressions Smooth and Diverting; wishing me much Happiness and
a good Trade; speaking well of my Undertakings; declaring that Nature it self
had ordered every thing for my Convenience; and setting forth, how beneficial
the Coal-Trade would be to me, if I complied with their Demands: Whereupon I
asked them what it was for, and how much they required? One of them Replied, it
was for Winking-mony, and that others gave them ten Shillings a Quarter, upon
the same Account. My Answer was to this Effect, That I Designed to give every
Man his full due, and tho I might meet with many Obstructions from them, and
the Coal-Merchants, at my first Beginning; yet I doubted not, but in the End,
it would Redoun'd to my Advantage, by giving the True Measure; for my Intention
was not to make three, four, or five and twenty Chaldrons out of a Score. Thus
these Industrious Officers finding themselves Disappointed of their Quarterly
Salary, in a few Days after, they watched one of my Carts with a Chaldron of
Coals, and Measured them in Chiswel-street, near Moor-fields, where I had sold
three Chaldrons of Coals which is the seventh part of a Score, full Pay, and in
that Chaldron, which was the last of the three, there was half a Bushel over
and above four Fats of Coals; which they were forced to acknowledge upon their
Oaths, at Guild Hall, on the thirteenth Day of May, One thousand and seven
hundred However their Spite was so great, that they told the People of the
House, that there wanted three Bushels and a half of Measure, and forewarned
them to Pay me any Money till they gave Orders: Afterward, they went to
Billinsgate, and raised a Crowd of Coal-Merchants about me, who called me
Cheat; hoping thereby to impair my Credit in a Public Market, and one of them
offered to lay twenty Guinies, That that Chaldron of Coals, which was Measured
in Chiswel-street, by the two City Measurerers, was not Measure, nor
Water-Measure: Whereupon, I took the Gentleman at his Word, and laid them
twenty G^^^es, That the same Chaldron of Coals, which was Measured in
Chiswel-street, was true Measure, and Water-Measure. However, in a few Hours
after, they were sick of their Wager, and employed many of their Friends, to
make up the Matter: But I replied, I was obliged in several respects to
Vindicate my Measure and Reputation, and to Expose the Gentlemen, with their
Winking-mony to the Public View of the City and Suburbs, that the People many
observe how finely they are Imposed upon in these Affairs.

This Trial I design (God willing) to bring on in Michaelmas-Term next ensuing
Anno Dom. One thousand and seven hundred, to prove that I fell Measure, and
Water-Measure. In the mean while for the satisfaction of the Public, I shall
explain in a few Words, what is meant by the Water-Measure, which is so termed
for these three principal Reasons: The first is, that every Fat and Bushel,
before it is Sealed, or becomes a Lawful Standard-Measure, is Measured and
gagged by Water; every Coal Fat Containing Sixty six Gallons of Water, and every
Coal-Bushel, Eight Gallons and one Quart of Water, neither more nor less. So
that a Fat ought to Contain Nine Bushels, as you may read, in the Act of
Parliament, for the five Shillings Duty on every Chaldron of Coals; and every
Chaldron of Coals to Contain Thirty six Bushels; for a Fat is the fourth Part
of a Chaldron. The Second reason is this, that the Coal-Fats and Bushels, are
larger than those that are used in the Measuring of Grain: So that this is
generally called Water-Measure, to Distinguish it from Water, and it is always
used on the Water: So that I think every Person will, and of necessity must
acknowledge, that the most proper Name that can be given it, is Water-Measure;
if they will allow it any Name at all. As for Instance, is there not the same
reason to impose that Name upon it, as to call a Man by his Christian Name, or
to call a House or a Street, by the Name of the Founder of it; more especially,
Considering, that this Measure has been known by that Name, time out of mind,
and by the Coal-Merchants themselves; nay, they never use to call it by any
other Name. But since they perceive, I am Resolved for a Trial, they come in
with a nonsensical Sham, much like the three-Penny Indictment, and tell you,
that Water-Measure is full Pay; that is to say, the Chaldron of Coals that is
given into the Score, and which is commonly called the Ingrain. Now to Expose
their Wisdom to the View of every Reasonable Person, I shall Confute them in
their own Words. If one Chaldron be Water-Measure, is not the twentieth
Chaldron the same, as long as they are all Measured by the same Fat? The
Parliament makes no Difference between that Chaldron and any other, but only
Declares, That every Chaldron of Coals which Contains thirty six Bushels, shall
pay eight Pence Meetridge, and five Shillings to the King. For example, suppose
the Master of a Ship is Disposed to give two or three Chaldrons into a Score,
does that alter the Property of the Measure, or give the Measure its Name? But
to come closer to the Matter, and to Confute their own Writings; he that is
their Petty King has Printed a Book called the Coal-Dealers Companion, and
there is not one of the whole Tribe, but follows the Rule of this Book in all
Respects; which I must own is very useful, and the Scope of it is pertinent to
my present purpose: For the Author tells you, that fourteen Chaldrons of Coals
make two third Parts of a Score, full Pay; which they themselves acknowledge to
be Water-Measure, as they call it; as also, that seven Chaldrons are one Third
of a Score; five Chaldrons and a Fat, the fourth Part of a Score; three
Chaldrons and two Fats, the sixth Part of a Score; and one Chaldron and three
Fats, the twelfth Part of a Score. Then they must unavoidably grant, that the
three Chaldrons of Coals which I Sold and Delivered in Chiswel-street, were the
seventh Part of a Score, and that the single Chaldron which they have Laid
their twenty Guinies upon, is the One and twentieth Part of a Score; which is
Water-Measure, according to their own Confession.

II.
These acute Gentlemen are pleased to tell you, that no Master of any Ship will
deliver his Coals at my Wharf twice, by reason there is so much Danger, in the
badness of the Ground, where they lie to Unload. This is so Notorious an
Untruth, that few Words are needful in the Answering of it: For in the short
time that I have Delivered Coals without the use of Lighters, or Porters
Backing them, I have had Ships Delivered at my Wharf, four several times; with
a desire to come to the same Place the next Voyage; there being no better
Ground, for that purpose, in the River of Thames; which any Person may be
satisfied in, with the viewing of it. For it has been Ship Carpenters Ways for
many Years and Ships of great value come on those Ways upon other Occasions;
and they never, as yet, received any Damage in the least: However, I could
relate many sad Accidenas that have happened to several Vessels, when they have
layn from the Shore in the River.

III.
They affirm, That I give more for my Coals, than they; by Reason of the
Trouble there is in the bringing Vessels a shore. This looks so much like a
Drowning Man's Catching hold of every Straw, that I cannot but Condole the
Weakness of their Arguments: For can it be reasonably supposed, That any Master
of a Ship, when he lies within sight of the Wharf, (as all Ships of five, six
and seven Score of Coals do) can have much trouble in weighing his Anchor, and
fastening a Rope a shore to bring the Vessel in: Which is Completed in the
space of an Hour, without any Charge in the least; more especially Considering
that I always Buy the whole Freight together, and give them a quick Dispatch?

As for instance, I have gone on Board a Ship of eighty eight Chaldrons of
Coals in the Morning, and agreed for them. Then I having caused the Vessel be
brought to my Wharf, and the Engine to be fixed, I have delivered the eighty
eight Chaldrons into my Yard, taking the Engine away; paid the Master, so that
the Ship has put off again to the same Place where she lay before; and done all
in the space of twelve Hours, without the least Charge to the Master, who
declared, It would be much more expedient for his Owners and himself, to sell
their Coals, Sixpence in a Chaldron cheaper to me; than to be at the trouble
and Charge of going to Billinsgate, where they are obliged to wait two or three
Days, till the Price is Fixed, and then to sell twenty Chaldrons to one, ten to
another, and five to a third Person, and sometimes a smaller Quantity; and at
last, to take a great deal of pains in Collecting the Money, at so many several
Places: Nay, tho the Coals are sold all at a set Price, and Lighters on board;
nevertheless, if they happen to fall, the Master must look out for a new
Customer: But if they be upon a Rising Market; he must stand to his Bargain, or
be threatened with a Lawsuit: And often times, when the Coals are very good for
the most Part, yet if they chance to Rise Small, for five or six Chaldrons
together, the Buyers give them an ill Name, and Drop the Ship, till the Master
is forced to abate of the Price which he had really Sold them for. I firmly
believe, There is scarce any Master, who Trades to Newcastle, but knows this to
be too true, by his own Experience, some time or another.

Moreover, if any Persons will give themselves the trouble, I will make it
appear, by the Masters Receipts, That I have frequently bought my Coals a
Groat, and Sixpence in a Chaldron cheaper than the Market-price; considering
the goodness of the Coals: And I do solemnly protest, I never gave a bove the
Market-price; excepting the first Ship that I delivered, which was Threepence
in the Chaldron; by reason, I could not promise the Master when I could
Discharge him, for it was to try the Experiment.

IV.
They give it out, That I cannot deliver above twenty Chaldrons in a Day. One
would be apt to believe, That these Gentlemen have laid a great Wager amongst
themselves, who should tell the unlikeliest Story: When at the same time, they
know, that I can, and have Delivered ten Chaldrons of Coals in the space of an
Hour, for eleven or twelve Hours together; and will Engage my self under any
Penalty, to Deliver One hundred and twenty Chaldrons between Sun and Sun.

V.
They insinuate, That the Engine I Deliver these Coals by, is only a Cart with
two Wheels. Now to show the vanity of this, as well as of all the rest of their
false Reports; I shall here give a particular Description of my Engine, with
the Method of using it. At first I lowered my Wharf about two Foot, and
Planck't it the whole breadth: Then I caused two Rows of Planks of One hundred
and sixty Foot in Length to be laid, as also a Ground-Plot in the River, about
sixteen or eighteen Foot from the Wharf, with two Mortises and four Iron-loops:
Now there are two upright Pieces about ten Foot high, two Tenons, four
Iron-hooks, four Plates of Iron full of Holes, with two Iron-pins and Chains,
and these are fixed in the aforesaid Plate: There is also a Cross-beam with two
Mortises bound round with two Iron-Plates, and these Mortises are put into the
upright Pieces with two Braces: To these are added four small Beams eighteen
Foot in length, with Irons and Large Mortises at one end; which are put over
the Cross-beam, and the other end is Pinned to the Wharf: Then they are covered
like a Platform, and fenced with Rails on each side; but it ought to be
observed, That the whole Frame may be Raised higher or lower, as Occasion
requires. Besides this, there is another Platform of the nature of a Bridge,
twenty two Foot long, and six Foot broad; with Rails on each side, and three
great Chains at one end: These Chains are hung to the Ship, and in the other
end, lie on the Cross-beam above described, so that this Fabric is in Motion
with the Ship or Vessel; for as she rises and falls, comes nearer to the Wharf,
or goes farther into the River, or goes a Head or a Stern, it is in a continual
Motion as the Vessel it self, without any manner of trouble. For sometimes the
Ship is within ten, fifteen, or twenty Foot of the Wharf, at other times as far
again; and yet the Work is not hindered. Lastly, there are two Boxes running on
Coach-wheels, which hold a Fat of Coals each, and serve to convey them from the
Ship into the Yard: To conclude, every thing is so ordered, that the whole
Engine may be removed in the space of a quarter of an Hour, and this is a true
Description of it in every Particular, which any Person may see for further
satisfaction.

VI.
These Gentlemen avouch, That they give as good Measure as I, which Assertion
is so Notoriously untrue, that it scarce Deserves the trouble of Answering: For
none can be Ignorant of their Making three, four, or five and twenty Chaldrons
of Coals out of a Score; as may appear to every Man's natural Reason. For
Example, when Coals are at twenty Shilling per Chaldron in the Pool, they
undertake to send them in at three and twenty Shillings a Chaldron; and so let
them be at what Price they will, they will Deliver them into your Houses, for
three Shillings a Chaldron besides the Prime Cost of the Coals. If these
Gentlemen are so very honest as they pretend, they must needs have the
Philosophers stone to turn Coals into Silver: For can it be believed, that they
can live on the Air? Since most of them pay Sixty, Seventy, Eighty, or a
Hundred pounds a Year Rent, and keep one or two Clerks; allowing them forty, or
fifty pounds a Year each, besides all Expenses, which are very considerable.
Neither can it be supposed, That they keep their Houses with all Conveniences,
for less than One hundred pounds per Annum; besides their own Public and
Private Expenses: And if they are Men of any considerable Business in the
World, what by the loss of Horses, and bad Debts; they must needs sustain very
great Damages: For some of them have freely owned to me, they have lost One
hundred pounds in some Years by Horses, with One hundred and fifty pounds a
Year in bad Debts; nevertheless these Men live, and get good Estates, and are
willing to Pass off the Stage for honest Dealers: Besides all this Charge I
have summed up out of their three Shillings in a Chaldron, there are many more
Expenses to be defrayed out of it; viz. eight Pence per Chaldron for Meetridge,
nine Pence per Chaldron Lighterage, (nay some give twelve Pence) and six Pence
to the Porters that load the Carts: If they hire Carts, they must give two
Shillings, or two Shillings and six Pence per Chaldron for the Carriage of
them, and if they keep Teams of their own, what with the Charge of maintaining
Horses and paying the Farrier, Collar-maker, Wheel-wright, and the Carman's
Wages, with their being often out of work, they cannot be at less Expense than
is above specified.

After all this, they make a great Noise about the largeness of their Measure,
which is so palpable a Contradiction, that I Challenge the whole Combination,
to make it appear to the World, by Reason, and one good Argument, That they do,
or ever did give every Man his full Measure, for three Shillings, besides the
Prime Cost of the Coals, and the Advantage of one Chaldron in twenty, which
makes four Shillings. Upon the whole, if they cannot make it out, then all
People may plainly see where the Cheat is, and how they have been so long
Imposed upon in the Measure of their Coals.

VII.
To touch our just Dealers to the Quick; they are all sensible, that the main
Reason of Casting so many Reflections on me, is this: Because I deliver my
Coals, without the use of Lighters, or Porters backing them, and give every Man
his full due; which is so great a Contravention to their Way of Dealing, that
they are afraid of being Intercepted in their former Method: So that they
Judged it the Highest Pitch of Wisdom, to Cry out Cheat first; just like common
Shop-lifts, Cry out, Stop Thief; hoping by that means to make their Escape: So
these Gentlemen would fain have persuaded the World, That all the sinister
Tricks and Cheats in the Coal-trade were Acted at no other Place, but at
Execution-Dock: And yet none of these Men can produce any one single Instance,
that any one Chaldron, or Load of Coals went out of my Yard, less than full
Measure, ever since I kept a Wharf, with the Ingrain when ever I agreed for it:
On the contrary, I always allowed the same Measure that I received my self from
on board the Fleet.

VIII.
The Combiners perceiving, that all their Attempts hither to proved fruitless,
thought fit to call a General Council to Consult what was fit further to be
done in the Matter, and after a great Debate, during which many Things were
proposed; at last, they came to a Resolution. For having intelligence, That I
was in a great hurry of Business, and was Obliged to employ a poor Man to drive
one of the Carts, who was not used to the Measuring of Coals; they doubted not,
but by this Opportunity to compass their unjust Designs. At last a Farrier near
Bishopsgate, was Pitched upon, as the Vanguard for this glorious Atchievment: He
Receives his Commission, with a wish of good Success, and his Orders were as
follows, viz. to go to the Wharf at the Hermetage-Bridge, and to bespeak a Load
of Coals to be brought to the Farrier's House, about twelve or one a Clock.
They being acquainted with the Design, muster up a set of Large Sacks, which I
really believe, had not seen the Sun, for several Months; at the same time
giving the Men a strict Charge to Sack them up, with all the might imaginable:
This done, they send them to the Farrier's House; where G-'s Son-in-Law, who
Measured my Coals in Chiswell-street, and one of them that was Disappointed of
the Winking-mony, came and Measured his Father's Coals in an open Yard, in the
presence of many People; and they hold out good Measure, rather over than
under. Then the Farrier came mounted on the Back of one of his Patients, to my
Wharf, with a great many Entreaties, that I would not fail to send a Load of
Coals to his House, precisely by two a Clock. I gave Orders for the Measuring
of them, and sent them accordingly, by the aforsaid Porter. They were no sooner
brought, but Mr. G.'s Son-in-Law who gave his Attendance, ordered the Porter to
shoot them on the Pavement: This done, he Commands him to fill every Bushel,
and when the same Porter had laid on as many as he could; he took the Shovel,
and heaped up as many more, on every Bushel, as he possibly could; hoping by
that means, that there might have wanted two or three Bushels: But in the
Conclusion of the Matter, after the Measuring of the Coals in my Yard;
notwithstanding the Jolting of them in the Cart, and what might drop out of the
Sacks by the way, or be lost in Shooting them on the Pavement, and the
Measuring of them, after such a manner as they did; there wanted but a poor
Peck and a half of Coals, which at most, cannot be Computed at above three
Pence. This Accident put the whole Council to a Nonplus, and another Council
was soon called; wherein great Disputes Arose: Some were of the Opinion, that
if they made any Words about it, it might tend more to their disadvantage, and
therefore thought it more advisable to wait for a fairer Opportunity. However,
in general they Concluded, That somewhat ought to be attempted, now or never;
judging it requisite to give it out, That there wanted six or seven Bushels,
and that I was one of the greatest Cheats in the World. To color the Matter,
they gave me a Summons to appear before my Lord Mayor; which I did accordingly:
Whereupon the Farrier and G-'s Son-in-Law gave their Oaths, That there wanted a
Peck and half. My Lord Replied, That Coals would waste in the Measuring, and
there might be some Spilt out of the Sacks by the Way. This prudent Answer
could not Appease their Wrath, but they would needs have me bound over to the
next Sessions, so that in less than the space of forty eight Hours, the News
was spread abroad throughout the greatest Part of the City and Suburbs, That
they had twenty Indictments against me, and they would not be in my Condition,
for a hundred Pounds. Thus being obliged to vindicate my Reputation, after to
many invidious Reflections, and scandulous Aspersions had been cast upon me; I
resolved to join Issue with them, and to stand the Trial; which came on
accordingly on the thirteenth Day of May, One thousand and seven hundred.

The Substance of the Trial was as follows, being carefully taken in Shorthand.
THE King's Counsel, My Lord, I am of Counsel for the King in this Cause; this
Person Charles Povey stands Indicted for selling a Load of Coals less than
Measure, and we shall prove to you, that in a Load of Coals, there was a Peck
and a half less than Measure, and to prove it we will call our Witnesses.

Witnesses Sworn. Mr. Sergeant, Pray give an Account, what you know of Coals
that Mr. Povey sold you.


Witness, He sold me a Load of Coals, and there wanted a Peck and half of
Measure.


Mr. C. Who Measured them?


Wit. This Man.


Mr. D. Mr. Povey's Counsel, Did you buy any Coals of him ever before?


Wit. No.


Mr. C. Did you Measure these Coals?


Wit. Yes my Lord.


Mr. C. You are one of the Sworn Measurers, are you not?


Wit. Yes my Lord.


Mr. C. How much did there want of Measure?


Wit. There wanted a Peck and half.


Mr. R. Did you Measure the Coals out of the Sacks?


Wit. No Sir.


Question, How did you Measure them?


Wit. We had a Bushel, and a Man with us; and we threw them down in an heap,
and Measured them, and there wanted a Peck and half.


Mr. D. Have you not watched Mr. Povey's Coals before now?


Wit. Yes Sir.


Quest. Did you not Measure them, at one Mr. Clayton's in Chiswet street?


Wit. Yes Sir.


Quest. How did they hold out there?


Wit. Half a Bashel more than Measure.


Quest. Did you ever Measure any Coals of Mr. Povey's at any other Place, that
there wanted Measure?


Wit. No.


Mr. D. No Indictment of this Nature has been preferred here before, nor ought
to be preferred upon the Reading of Mr. Povey's Paper, for the felling of
Coals; which is the true reason of this Prosecution; because Mr. Povey was not
bred a Coal-Merchant: But in that Place, he may Lawfully follow that Trade, and
he having been Industrious, has found out a Way, whereby he can assord to make
better Measure than others can do, and does so; as appears by what the Evidence
says: For at Mr. Clayton's they held out half a Bushel above the true Measure.
Now Gentlemen, as to what is pretended in this Case, the want of Measure, there
is but a Peck and half in a Load; which is very inconsiderable, and such a
quantity may easily be lost in Carrying from Mr. Povey's to that Man's House in
Bishopsgate-street; no doubt but Coals will shed in Carrying.


Mr. C. Not out of the Sacks.


Mr. D. Some of them will, I hope the Jury will observe, That Coals will shake
out, and if you Shoot them on the Ground, and Measure them afterward, they
will not hold full Measure: Now if there be such an inconsiderable Difference,
no one can believe, there was any Design to Cheat; but that so small a quantity
might be lost in Carrying, and scattered upon the Ground, after they were
thrown out of the Sacks. But Sir, We shall prove to you by the Bushel which we
have here, That there Coals were fairly Measured by a Bushel, which agrees with
the Standard: We will prove to you, That this was his Order to his Servants
constantly, to give good Measure: And if he did that, if his Servants did at
any time by mistake, do that which was contrary to his Order; the Master cannot
help that. But indeed, this was a Trick and they had a mind to try, if they
could catch him faulty; and I am glad, they could do it in no greater a matter
than in three Penny worth of Coals. He says, he has Measured them at other
times, and then they were over-Measure: Some must be lost in Shooting out, did
not you demand some Winking money of Mr. Povey? We think we ought not to pay you
more than your due.


Wit. Not so much as our due, as we have of other People.


John Lucas, Edward Oliver, and John Snow, called and Sworn. Mr. D. Do you live
with Mr. Povey?


Wit. Yes.


Mr. D. Do you remember the Coals carried to that Man?


Wit. John Lucas, Yes.


Mr. D. Were they good Measure?


Wit. Yes Sir.


Quest. Did you see them Measured?


Wit. Yes Sir.


Quest. Where is the Bushel they were Measured by?


Wit. It is here.


Quest. Is it a Sealed Bushel?


Wit. Yes


Quest. And for Coals?


Wit. Yes Sir, and we have no other.


Quest. Have you Measured it by the Standard?


Wit. Yes Sir.


Quest. And is it full Measure by the Standard?


Wit. Yes it is.


Quest. Were the Coals Measured by that Bushel?


Wit. Yes they were


Quest. And put into the Sacks so Measured?


Wit. Yes, and so sent away.


Quest. What Directions did your Master use to give to his Servants?


Wit. He always gave Directions for every one to have his full Measure.


Quest. You have driven this Business a great while, have you not?


Wit. Yes I have a great while.


Mr. M. Then, suppose a Load of Coals be Measured, and put into the Sacks, and
Shot out upon the ground, will they hold their first Measure afterward?


Wit. No, they will not.


Quest. Why?


Wit. There is loss, in Carrying and Measuring.


Quest. How in Measuring?


Wit. Some have not so much judgment as others have; some will Play the Knave,
and some do not understand the Measuring of them.


Quest. Were these Coals Measured honestly?


Wit. Yes, upon my Oath, they were.


Mr. M. Was Mr. Povey there, when they were Measured?


Wit. No, but he was there before.


Mr. Oliver called. Mr. M. Were you by, when the Coals were Measured?


M. Oliver, Yes I was.


Quest. And were they fairly Measured?


Mr. Oliver, Yes, they were, upon my Oath.


Quest. By the proper Bushel?


Mr. Oliver, Yes.


Quest. Have you tried the Bushel?


Mr. Oliver, Yes.


Quest. Does it hold out full Measure?


Mr. Oliver, Yes, and these Coals were Measured by that Bushel.


Quest. Were they sent away, as they were Measured by that Bushel?


Mr. Oliver, Yes Sir.


Mr. Snow called. Quest. Were you by, when the Coals were Measured?


Mr. Snow, No Sir.


Quest Does your Master give Orders to make full Measure?


Mr Snow. He always says, give them their full Due.


Quest. Does he always order you to fid the Bushel?


Mr. Snow, Yes.


Mr. Davis a Sworn Meeter was Sworn. Mr. M. Was Mr. Povey's Bushel a bigger
Measure than the Standard?


Wit. Yes Sir.


Mr. D. Mr. Davis, are you a Sworn Meeter?


Mr. Davis, Yes Sir.


Quest. Have you Measured by Mr. Povey's Bushel?


Mr. Davis, Yes Sir.


Quest. Is it a Lawful Bushel?


Mr. Davis, No.


Quest. Why?


Mr. Davis, It is rather too Large, it is Bigger than the Office-Bushel.


Mr. R. Was it as Big as the Standard?


Wit. It was Bigger.


Mr. D. They were full Measure when they went out of his Yard, and they were
Measured by the same Bushel.


Mr. R --. Gentlemen of the Jury, Mr. Povey is Indicted, for selling of Coals
less than Measure; the Evidence for the King Swears, That he bought a Load of
Coals of him, being Invited by a Bill delivered to him, whereby he promises to
fell good Bargains; and has found out an Engine, whereby he can save Many; and
can fell Coals two Shillings a Chaldron Cheaper than other Men can; and
here-upon, he did buy a Load of Coals. And a Second Witness Swears, He shot
them out of the Sacks, on the Ground and Measar'd them; and there wanted a Peck
and half in that Load: If that be true, it is a Breach of the Law, and he will
be found guilty of the Indictment: But to Contradict this, he calls several
Witnesses; first his Servants that did Measure these Coals, and they Swear,
They were full Measure, by that Bushel which he uses. There were three more
that Swore, He always Measures by that Bushel; for he has no other: Nay, one
Swears, It cannot be a Lawful Measure, because it is too Big: If it were big
enough, it answers the Law; and if they did Examine it by the Standard, then
that is the Question, Whether, when they were Sold and Delivered at his Wharf;
whether they were Lawful Measure or no? Not what they were, after they had been
carried a Mile and half. Now as to this they say, when Coals are Shot on the
Ground, they cannot gather them all up; there must be some Diminution and Loss.
But the Question is, how they were when Delivered? They tell you, that in
carrying so far, there will be some wanting: You are to Enquire, Whether it
were Lawful Measure or no? If there did want a Peck and half in a Load, it was
an Error; but on the othet side, you must not do him wrong, if it were Lawful
Measure: If there were any Diminution, or Loss afterward, by any Accident,
then it was not his Fault, but an Accident, then you must acquit him.

Instead of acquiting me, the Jury brought me in guilty of the Indictment, and
I was fined thirteen Shillings and four Pence.

The Bench Declared, they had done me wrong.

I.
CHarles Povey has made Oath before Sir Rich. Holford Master in Chancery, That
ever since he kept a Wharf, and proposed to give the full Measure; either
Directly, or Indirectly, according to his Knowledge, Order, or Directions; he
never sent any less than four Fats of Coals for a Chaldron, out of his Tard;
which four Fats of Coals are thirty six Bushels, commonly called Water-Measure.
And further, That he always gave Orders to his Men, to Act accordingly; and he
further makes Oath, That he never will Directly, or Indirectly, by his
Knowledge, Order, or Consent, ever suffer a Chaldron of Coals to go out of his
Tard, with less than the Measure aforesaid: And the said Charles Povey does
declare, That he never used any other Bushel than one; which Bushel over-runs
the Fat, by a Bushel and half in a Chaldron, and is very near two Bushels
bigger than the Office-Bushel; as it was tried by two Sworn Meeters, Edward
Foulk, and John Davis in Goodman's Yard in the Minories, on the 8th day of May,
One thousand and seven Hundred, in the presence of many People: And on the
thirteenth day of May, One thousand and seven hundred, this Bushel that he
always Sold by, was Measured and gagged by Water, at the Guild Hall; and it held
above a Quart of Water more than a Standard-Bushel ought to Contain.

Charles Povey.
Jurat. 17th July, 1700 Coram me, Rich. Holford.
II.
JOhn Snow, Edward Oliver, Edward Griffeth, and John Lucas, makes Oath before
Sr. Rich. Holford Master in Chancery, as follows, viz. That they have served
Mr. Povey a considerable time, especially. Edward Oliver and John Snow, almost
ever since he kept a Wharf, as his Measurers and Servants: And that he always
gave us Orders, to give every one his full Due; which he ever did to the best
of our knowledge: And we all further make Oath, That we never gave any one less
than full Measure: And that all the Coals which Mr. Povey ever Sold out of the
Yard, and since we come to him, were Measured by the Fat out of the Ship and so
Delivered or else Measured by that Bushel, which holds above a Quart of Water
more than any Bushel ought to contain; as was tried at Guild Hall, on the
thirteenth Day of May, One thousand and seven hundred, and is Bigger than the
Office-Bushel by two Bushels of Coals in a Chaldron: Which was tried in
Goodman's Yard in the Minories, on the eighth Day of May, One thousand seven
hundred, at the Sign of the Shears, by two Sworn Meeters, Edward Foulk and John
Davis; where many People were present. John Snow further makes Oath, That the
Officer, who Measured the Load of Coals at Mr. Clayton's in Chiswell-street,
where there was half a Bushel of Coals more than Measure; which he owned upon
his Oath a^ Guild Hall, on the thirteenth Day of May, One thousand and seven
hundred, when he Swore the Indictment about the Peck and half of Coals: Told
Mrs. Clayton, that there wanted three Bushels and half of Measure. And the said
John Snow firmly believes That the main occasion of his casting such
Reflections on Mr. Povey and his Measure, was, that he was disappointed of his
Winking money, or his Quarterly Salary. Edward Oliver and John Lucas makes Oath
That that Load of Coals which Mr. Povey was Indicted for, as a Cheat, was
Measured and Delivered out of the Yard, without any Fraud or Deceit, in any
Respect whatsoever.

John Snow. Edward Oliver. Edward Griffeth. John Lucas.

Jurat. 17th July, 1700, Coram me, Rich. Holford.
III.
WIlliam Essington Citizen, makes Oath before Sir Rich. Holford Master in
Chancery, That he with some others, were at the White-Lion Tavern in St. John's
Wapping, on the 26th Day of June One thousand and seven hundred, with two of my
Lord Mayor's Officers, that Indicted Mr. Povey, where one of them declared in
Company, that if Mr. Povey, had given them Winking-mony, the Trial about the
Peck and half of Coals had never been: And he further makes Oath, That he saw
one of them take Money on the same Account, according to his own Confession when
he Received it.

Will. Essington.
Jurat. 17th July, 1700, Coram me, Rich. Holford.
IV.
N. T. Druggist, and R. Brown Builder, makes Oath before Sr. R. Holford Master
in Chancery, That they went on Board a Ship, saw a Chaldron of Coals fairly
Measured by a Sworn Meeter into the Fat, the eighth Day of May, One thousand
and Seven hundred; besides part of four Shovels full of Coals that the Meeter
gave over and above. These Coals were put out of the Fat into a clean Lighter,
and brought ashore, and put into Sacks, and Loaded into a Cart, and carried
into Goodman's Yard in the Minories, at the Sign of the Shears: Where two Sworn
Meeters came and Measured this Chaldron of Coals, by Mr. Povey's Bushel, and
there were no more than thirty four Bushels and a half by his Bushel. Then they
Measured them over again, by another Bushel, which they declared to be the
Bushel belonging to the Meeters-Office; and by that Bushel, there were thirty
six Bushels and better: So that Mr. Povey's Bushel, which he and his Men
declared they always Measured by, ever since he kept a Wharf, was bigger than
the Fat, by one Bushel and half of Coals; and near two Bushels better than the
Office-Bushel. And we make Oath, That we never left the Coals, from the time of
their being Measured on Board, till they were Measured on Shore. And to the
best of our apprehensions, there was no Fraud or Deceit used in the Measuring
of them. The next Day being the ninth of May, we saw a Load of Coals fairly
Measured by Mr Povey's Bushel, in his Yard put into Sacks, Loaded into the
Cart, and carried about a Quarter of a Mile; then brought back again, and Shot
on a clean Floor, and Measured again, by the same Man a second time, and rather
lighter Measure than before; and there wanted half a Peck and better. Then we
saw them Measured over again a third time, a little heavier than before, and
there wanted half a Bushel, and half a Peck. So that we do firmly believe, That
a Load of Coals may be sent out very good Measure, and not a Coal lost, nor
wasted by the Way; and yet there may want a Peck and half of Coals, or more, by
the Measuring of them again, a little heavier than ordinary.

N. T. Rob. Brown.

Jurat. 17th July, 1700, Coram me, Rich. Holford.
V.
JOhn Davis Sworn Meeter makes Oath, before Sr. Rich. Holford Master in
Chancery, That he and one Edward Foulks another Sworn Meeter, Measured a
Chaldron of Coals in Goodman's Yard, in the Minories, at the Sign of the
Shears, on the eighth Day of May, One thousand and seven hundred with Mr.
Povey's Bushel, and there wanted one Bushel and half of a Chaldron by his
Bushel: And then we Measured them again by the Office Bushel, and there was a
complete Chaldron of Coals, and better: So that I do declare, That Mr. Povey's
Bushel is too large, and that it holds above a Quart of Water, more than the
Standard.

John Davis.
Omnia Jurat. 17th July, 1700, Coram me, Rich. Holford.
NOw to make it appear beyond Contradiction, That there are no grounds in the
least, to raise such Scandalous, False and Malicious Reports, but what
proceeded from the Ill nature of a Spiteful and Envious Combination of Men; I
do hereby declare to the World, That it any two of these Gentlemen, who have
given occasion to these base and unmanlike Reflections on me, or any two
Persons whatsoever of Credit and Reputation: Nay, I will accept of that very
Person, who Swore against me at Guild Hall, on the thirteenth Day of May, one
Thousand and seven Hundred, about the Three penny worth of Coals, and has
devised so many notorious Untruths concerning me, to be one of the two: I say,
if they will make Oath before a Master in Chancery, as my Witnesses and I have
done; with respect to any one of the following Articles, they shall receive of
me for their Oaths so made, forty Pounds of good and Lawful Money of England:
And I will own it to be as due a Debt, as if I had given a Bill or Bond for the
Payment of it, viz.

I. That I never had any one Ship delivered at my Wharf, four several times; in
regard it has been so slily reported for a real Truth, That never any Ship
would deliver there twice.

II. That I never did deliver into my Yard in one Day, Eighty eight Chaldrons
of Coals, without the use of Lighters, or Porters backing them; since it has
been confidently affirmed to many People, That I could not deliver twenty
Chaldrons in a Day.

III. That there ever were any more Indictments preferred against me, since I
kept a Wharf, than that about the Peck and half of Coals; although a malicious
Report was spread abroad, at that time, on purpose to make me odious in the
sight of all Men, That there were twenty Indictments against me for a Cheat,
and that I was fined forty Pounds on the thirteenth Day of May, one Thousand
and seven Hundred.

IV. That I never allowed the Ingrain; it being given out, that I never did.

V. That I ever Sold by any other Bushel; since I kept a Wharf, to this Day,
July the 17th one Thousand and seven Hundred, but with that Bushel which holds
a Quart of Water more than it ought to contain: And that it did not overrun
the Fat, by a Bushel and half of Coals in a Chaldron, when it was tried in
Goodman's Yard, in the Minories, by two Sworn Meeters, on the eighth Day of
May, one Thousand and seven Hundred; notwithstanding that some Persons, would
fain have persuaded the Public, as well as Mrs. Clayton in Chiswel-street,
that it wanted three Bushels and half of Measure in a Chaldron.

VI. That there ever went out of my Yard, by my Knowledge, Direction, Order, or
Consent, since I have proposed to give the Water-Measure, less than four Fats
of Coals to every Chaldron.

If they will Swear to any one of these six Particulars, they shall certainly
Recover the forty Pounds aforesaid. I shall only desire them as soon as they
have made their Affidavits, to Publish their Names with the respective Places
of their Abbde, in the Gazette, and then they will acquit themselves like
honest Men; and the Public will believe, That all that has been said of me, is
matter of Fact: But let them Swear the Truth and shame the Devil, or else I Will
prove the Truth, and put them to shame, in the Pillory, before the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill.

Moreover, these worthy Gentlemen are pleased to give it out, That the
Advertisement, I published concerning my Method of Dealing, is full of Lies,
and that there is not one Word in it, but what Contradicts another. Surely
these Persons have been at School in the lower Regions, to learn of Satan
himself, how they may persuade Men out of their Senses and Natural Reason. To
prove matter of Fact on them, in this repect, my Advertisement is as follows.

AT Charles Povey's Wharf near Execution-Dock in Wapping, all sorts of Paggets,
Billets, Bavius, and the best Sea-Coals are to be Sold: Where all Persons may
have the same Measure of Coals, that is usually Measured on board the Fleet,
and at the same Pelee, as in the Peel; the Fleet lying so near the said Wharf,
that he has the Privelege of Choosing such Cools, as will give all People
satisfaction; freeing them at the same time from the Charge of Lighters, and
the Inconveniency of waiting for Tides.

The said Charles Povey has lately Invented and Ca^sed a certain new Engine to
be made, of singular Advantage; which eff^ctually delivers One hundred
Chaldrens of Coaols into his Yard, in one Day, without the use of Lighters, or
Porters backing them, for twenty Shillings Charge; which cannot be done
elsewhere by any other Person, at less expense than ten Pounds.

It is also more especially observable, That neither this, nor any other Engine
can be used at any place, but at the said Povey's Wharf; who has likewise built
a Warehouse capable of holding three thousand Chaldrons of Coals: So that all
Persons may be speedily supplied with what Quantity they please. To answer all
Objections that can be made, with respect to the true Water-Measure, any
Persons whatsoever may stand on the Wharf, and see their Coals Measured out of
the Ship, into the Fat, by a Sworn Meeter; afterward Loaded in Carts, and
immediately carried to their respective Places of Abode.

This Method has already given such general satisfaction, that the Undertaker
has gained above five hundred Customers, especially considering, That the
Charge of Wharfage, Leading and Carriage, amounts to no more than what is
usual.

Every Chaldron of Coals conveyed from his Wharf fill us fourteen Sacks; and
all Persons who deal with him, may be assured according to their own Judgment,
of saving two Shillings in every Chaldron.

Moreover the said Charles Povey freights several Ships, upon his own Account,
and these Persons that are minded to take their Coals out of his Yard, shall
have the same Measure, as is usually given on board, a Sworn Followship Perter
being employed in the Yard, from time to time, for that purpose.

They that cannot come themselves, if they send a Penny-post Letter, with their
Names and Direction, where they live, may have what Quantity they please,
delivered at the Price and Measure, as if present, Or any one of the Clerks
shall be ready to wait on them, when they think fit, and treat with them about
this Affair. But in confideration, that the Profit is so small, ready Money is
Expected, upon the Delivery of the Coals.

It only remains to let the World know, That forasmuch as this Business is
apparently too great, to be carried on with success, by any one single Person;
several Gentlemen, have thought fit to join with the said Charles Povey, as a
Company, and have actually advanced two or three thousand Pounds, for the
better Management of the Undertaking.

I shall now proceed to give a particular Explication of this Advertisement,
and then leave the Decision of the Matter, to the Judgment of any impartial
Person whatsoever.
I.
I Think it is very plain, That I live near Execution-Dock, and as plain, that
any Person who has occasion, may be supplied with any sorts of Faggots,
Billets, Bavins, etc.

II. As for the best of Sea Coals, there are hundreds of Families that will
testify, they never burnt better, and as many who will readily give their
Oaths, That they have seen their Coals Measured out of the Ship; and that they
have Received as many Coals, as ever they used to have out of any other Vessel;
and have paid no more for them than the Price such Coals went for in the Pool.

III. It is evident, That the Fleet lies so near my Wharf, that I may Discourse
with some of the Masters from thence, and go on board the farthest of the
Vessels, in a few Minutes: Then it follows, that I have an Opportunity of
Choosing any Ship of Coals, before any other Person; and such Coals as will
give my Customers satisfaction.

IV. I think it is as certain, That every one is freed from the Charge of
Lighters, and the trouble of waiting for Tides, by the Engine I have Invented,
of which I have elsewhere given a large Description; showing how great a
quantity of Coals it will Deliver in a Day, for twenty Shillings Charge; which
will cost all other Persons ten Pounds to bring them into their Yards, or
Warehouses. As for Instance, the Brewer, who lives next door to me, nay nearer
to the Waterside than I do, gives one Shilling a Chaldron Lighterage, and one
Shilling a Chaldron to the Porters that carry them: So that every hundred
Chaldrons of Coals that he Consumes, Costs him in Lighters and Porters backing
them, Ten Pounds. Another Brewer, who lives at a little farther distance from
me, gives for Lighters and Porters carrying them, fifteen Pounds sixteen
Shillings and eight Pence, for every hundred Chaldrons so Delivered in: Nay,
most of the great Dealers in Coals at Fleet-Bridge, give one Shilling
Lighterage, three Pence Wharfage, and nine Pence to the Porters that load their
Carts, without laying them up in their Warehouses.

V. It is Apparently manifest to the sight of all Men, who have, or may give
themselves the trouble of viewing my Engine, or of Inventing any other of the
like Nature, That it cannot be of any Use, or Advantage to any Person
elsewhere; by reason of the Largness of my Ware house for the stowing of Coals,
with many other Conveniences too tedious to be recited in this small Tract: Nor
indeed, is there any occasion for it, in regard that thousands of People have
Declared, That there are not such Conveniences, any where else in London, nor
such a spacious Warehouse in England, being large enough to hold three thousand
Chaldrons of Coals.

VI. It cannot reasonably be denied, but any Persons may be furnished with what
Quantity they shall have occasion for.

VII. Come we now to plain ocular Demonstration; so that no Man can, or will be
persuaded from what he sees with his own Eyes: For all may have the Liberty
that desire it, and are pleased to give themselves the Trouble of coming down,
or sending their Friends, or Servants, to see that they have the true.
Water-Measure, and the Ingrain with it; by standing on the Wharf, and seeing
their Coals Measured out of the Ship, into the Fat, by a Sworn Meeter, then
loaded into Carts, and Immediately carried to their respective Dwellings, with
the Ingrain as is usual. This Method has given such a general satisfaction,
that it has gained five hundred Customers, more especially considering all
other Charges are so Reasonable; which any Person may be satisfi^d in the truth
of, by the looking over my Account-Books: And none can deny, but that I
Constantly deliver fourteen Sacks in every Chaldron, and such Sacks as are
generally used at other Places; which my Servants can give their Affidavits of,
as well as the Party that sells the same Sacks: For I never had any made of a
lesser size for my Use, and these are always filled to the utmost Extent.
However the stress of the matter, does not lie so much on the dimonsions of the
Sacks; but respect ought always to be had to the largeness of the Measure.

Now to show how two Shillings may be saved in every Chaldron: I shall soon
make it appear to all Persons of S^nse, if they will be pleased to consider the
following Particulars. First then, is it not a great satisfaction to every Man
to have his full Weight and Measure? In the next place, Would not most People
choose rather to give somewhat more to be certainly assured, that they have
their full Due; than to have some small matter abated, and be at an
uncertainty? To make this Argument plain, I have proved by undoubted
Testimonies, that I deliver every Man his full Due, and allow all Persons the
same Measure that I receive my self. Nay I challange any one that keeps a
Wharf, to prove by as many Witnesses and good Arguments as I have done, that he
has Acted conformably to the same Method at all times: Not but that I will
grant, the Wharfingers may give as good Measure as they receive themselves, if
they get a Price accordingly: And thus much I further believe, and know to be
true of them, that for the Honor of their Wharfs, and in hopes of doing me a
Diskindness, they will let a Customer have Water-Measure at their usual Price;
tho they lose two Shillings by the Bargain; hoping by this means to persuade
the Ignorant, that they do so at all other times. But I have already made it
appear, according to every Man's Reason, that they cannot defray their Charges,
and get Estates by losing Money out of Pocket, or by felling cheaper than what
their Goods lie them in, considering the great Expances they are as.

However, it ought to be observed, That I have nothing to Charge the
Lighter-Men with, concerning their Trade; for I firmly believe, in the general,
they give every Man the same Measure they receive themselves: Neither will I
condemn all those that keep Wharfs; for I am persuaded, that some few of them
are Men of Justice and Honesty: So that what they do, is more out of Custom
than Choice, and I have this Assurance from some of them, That they design to
follow my Method; that is to say, to take their Price, and give every Man his
full Due at all times. And indeed, although the Combination may blame them; yet
all the Malice of the Winkers, and the Gentlemen with their Three penny
Indictments, can never shame them in the End.

Now to come to the Point of saving two Shillings in the Chaldron, I grant, I
have something more, than what is usual at other Wharfs; but in consideration
thereof, I give every Man his full Due, and in so doing, I am Assured, that
every one who buys of me, is a considerable Gainer: For I will give at any
time, three Shillings and Sixpence, or four Shillings, for any two Sacks of
Coals, before they go out of my Yard, and yet they shall have twelve Sacks
remaining and as good Measure, as has been sold at some places for a Chaldron.
For Example, if any Persons would give themselves the trouble, to look into the
Records at Westminster, Hicks's-Hall, and Guild Hall, of all the Indictments,
Trials, Fines and Cheats that have been transacted in the Coaltrade, they will
soon be convinced, That it would be more expedient for them to give two
Shillings more in Money for a Chaldron of Coals, and have their full Due; than
to be Cheated out of three or four Shillings.

In the mean while, I would desire the Combination, First, to give me an
Account, how many Chaldrons of Coals generally they make out of a Score; and
who it was that sold no more then Eighty Chaldrons of Coals for a Hundred, to
Alderman Lewin's Glass-house at Ratelif-Cross?

II. Who it was that delivered no more than fifteen Chaldrons three Fats of
Coals, at the Devel-Tavern in Fleet Street, for one and and twenty Chaldrons?

III. To declare, who he was that Cheated a certain Lord out of so great a
quantity of Coals; insomuch that he was Obliged to give the said Lord twenty
Guines to pass it by; which said twenty Guinies were honorably given to the
Poor of the Parish, by the said Lord's Appointment?

IV. To let the World know, who it was, that sent no more than thirty Bushels
for a Chaldron to a Pastrey-Cook's, almost over against Shoreditch Church; and
whose Coals were those that were Measured by one Davis a Meeter, when there
wanted six Bushels?

V. Whose Coals were those, that were Measured in White-Chappel, by Order of
the Court Leet, when a Tobacconist, who lives near St. John's Church in Wapping
was on the Jury; and there wanted four Bushels and half in a Chaldron?

VI. I would willingly know, whose Coals were those, that were Measured at
Guild Hall, where there wanted three Bushels in half a Chaldron, and the Coals
were seized on for the Use of the Poor. Let those Gentlemen give me a direct:
Answer to these few Questions, besides several others that I know of, and a
great many more that are unknown to me; and in so doing, they will extremely
oblige their humble Servant, C. P.

Now I think I have made it as manifest as the Sun at the Meridian, that every
Man, who deals with me, saves Considerably: But to make the matter still more
plain to the meanest Capaciaty: I have proved by several Evidences, That the
Bushel I ever sold by is bigger than the Fat, and I have likewise proved, that
the Bushel was always well filled by my Servants: So that every Chaldron of
Coals that I have sold, has contained a Bushel and half or two Bushels, more
than it ought; which is above the Ingrain that belongs to any one Chaldron: I
have also often given the Ingrain, notwithstanding the largeness of my Bushel.

Moreover to prevent all Objections, we will suppose, that some Rubbish-Coals
may be sold some small matter cheaper than mine, and the same Measure, the
Ingrain only Excepted, which none of them pretends to give: Yet had not every
Person much rather give a Shilling or two more, and conclude, that two
Shillings are saved by the Bargain? For what can be a greater Inconvenience to
any Family, than bad Coals, especially in the Winter? And every one knows,
there is a great deal of Difference in the Price, between the Best and the
Worst.

It remains only to show, That I have at all times the best Coals that Money can
purchase, which appears from hence, that among all the Families I served the
last Year, there are not five of them, but came again, or promised to come,
this; a plain Demonstration, that I served them with the best of Coals: More
especially, by reason that I buy the whole Freight, and always deal in small
Shipping; which every body will own to have generally the best Coals; for they
can go to Sunderland, and other Places, where great Shipping cannot come: So
that I hope, I have plainly Demonstrated to all unbiassed Persons, That partly
in the Largness of the Measure, and partly in the goodness of the Coals, two
Shillings is saved: I shall Explain the rest in a few Words.

As for the Frieghting of Ships upon my own Account, I think it is very
apparent, by several Vessels that are actually set out, from time to time, on
my particular Account: And for what relates to Persons, who take their Coals
out of the Yard, I have proved by my Servants, that my Mearsure is as big or
bigger than the Fat: So that it is evident, That they have as good Measure out
of the Yard, as they receive on board the Fleet: And instead of having a
Fellowship-Porter, I have a Sworn Meeter ashore, to receive the Coals from the
Meeter on Board: So that upon the whole, all Persons may certainly be Assured
of having their full Due, and I presume none will Question the Possibility of
having Coals when they are sent for. To Conclude, most People know, That I make
but one Price with all my Customers; neither can they doubt but my Clerks are
most proper to wait on them upon such Occasions.

As to the last Article about ready Money, it is plain, I do expect it upon the
delivery of the Coals, and for what relates to those worthy Gentlemen, who have
thought fit to be Concerned with me, their underwritten Names, are an
undeniable Proof of the matter of Fact; besides the Sum of Money that is
actually raised, for the carrying on of the present Undertaking.

I doubt not, but what has been delivered, will be judged a sufficient
Explication of my Advertisement, the Publishing of which has so much
exasperated my Adversaries against me, and a satisfactory Vindication of my own
Integrity.

However, it is worth the while to produce, Three notable Instances more of
their Inveterate Malice toward me.
I.
NOt long since, a Linnen-Draper came to me, out of Fleet Street, next Door to
the Horn-Tavern, and bespoke five Chaldrons of Coals: As soon as the first Load
was carried, there appeared a certain Person from a Wharf, attended with two
Officers, and Measured two Sacks of my Coals. The Linnen-Draper desired them to
Measure a whole Chaldron, which they refused to do; telling him it was all a
Cheat, and that there wanted six or seven Bushels in a Chaldron; fore-warning
him to pay me any Money at his Peril, till he heard from them; and assuring him
at the same time, that they would give as good Measure, for twenty three
Shillings a Chaldron, as he gave me twenty five for. Whereupon, I thought it
most proper, to make an Example of the Spark, who pretended to belong to the
Wharf: Accordingly, I went to him, and required him to put in Bail to my
Action; but mistrusting the justice of his Cause, he used many Entreaties;
Disowning every Word that he had said; laying the Blame on the two Officers;
promising in the presence of the Linnen-Draper, he would be an Evidence against
the Officers; and Declaring, that it was done out of Spite, on purpose to ruin
my Trade I went to the two Officers, requiring them likewise to put in Bail to
my Action; for all the Fault was now imputed to their Conduct. They seemed to
be much surprised, and Disowned every Thing they said or did; transferring the
Blame on the aforesaid Person. However, I brought them before the Linnen-Draper
and his Man, who plainly proved Matter of Fact on them. However, after many
Entreaties, and owning their Misdemeanors, before the Linnen-Draper, with an
ingenuous Confession, that it was merely done out of Spite, and a promise of
Amendment, for the future, I withdrew both my Actions, and forgave them. For
the Linnen-Draper declared, according to the best of his judgment, he had as
many Coals of me in four bare Chaldrons, as ever he used to have at any other
Place, for four Chaldrons and half; besides the Fat that he received as the
Ingrain, in the five Chaldrons.

II.
Mrs. Woodman, who keeps a Distillers Shop in the Minories, next door to the
Sun dial, having desired me to send her in three Chaldrons of Coals, which is
the seventh part of a Score, full Pay, and Water-Measure, even according to the
acknowledgment of the most rigid of my Adversaries: My Servants Measured the
same Quantity, and conveyed them to her House, in three several Carts; but as
soon as one half of them was delivered, two Gentlemen appeared, with a Bushel,
one of whom is a Warden of a certain Company, and the other a considerable
Dealer in Coals; the first Letters of their Names being R. E. and T. G. Indeed,
they make no small Figure in the World, and (as I am apt to believe) are
sufficiently blessed with the Earthly Mammon. However, the Condescension of
these two rich Dons was so great, that they took upon them the drudgery of
Measuring four Sacks of my Coals, in the second Chaldron: In the mean while, my
Servant John Snow, desired them to Measure the whole Chaldron, alleging, that
otherwise they could not possibly do justice to both Parties: But taking no
notice of this Admonition, they peremptorily declared to Mrs. Woodman, that
there wanted above two Bushels of Coals, in the four Sacks, and consequently,
that seven Bushels were wanting in every Chaldron; reckoning fourteen Sacks to
the Chaldron. Nay one of them told this Gentlewoman in my hearing, That if she
would Indict me, they would readily take their Oaths before a Magistrate, to
confirm the Truth of their Assertion. Whereupon perceiving, I had to do with
two Knights of the Post; I sent to the Meeters-Office for a Measure and three
Sworn Meeters, who having actually Measured the said Coals, on the second Day
of August, One thousand and Seven hundred, there were three Pecks over Measure;
to the extreme Mortification of the above mentioned haughty Gentlemen, the Air
of whose Countenance is now quite changed; so that they hold down their Heads,
and lowr like a couple of Irish Evidences just a going to lose their Ears:
Although the Day before, they boldly declared, in the presence of several Persons,
That their Flesh trembled within them to see how I had Cheated Mrs. Woodman, in
the Measure of her Coals, and upon what they had said to her, she refused to
take in the third Chaldron.

Here follows the Declaration of three Sworn Meeters relating to this Affair.

On the second Day of August, One thousand and Seven hundred, we Measured two
Chaldrons of Mr. Povey's Coals, at Mrs. Woodman's in the Minories; as to which
two Chaldrons, we heard T. G. affirm, That he would take his Oath, there wanted
above two Bushels of Coals in four Sacks, according to his Way of Measuring
them: On the contrary, we are all ready to make our Corporal Oaths, before a
Master in Chancery, That there were two complete Chaldrons, with three Pecks
over and above: And we further declare, That the said Coals were Measured
without any Collusion, Fraud, or Deceit in the least, and that three Chaldrons
of Coals, are the seventh part of a Score, full Pay, as also, That one Chaldron
is the One and twentieth part of a Score, commonly called Water-Measure.

John Cleavely Sworn Meeters to the City. John Davis Sworn Meeters to the City.
Samuel Barnes Sworn Meeters to the City.
III.
My over-industrious Adversaries, use their utmost Endeavors to persuade the
Masters of Vessels, That they lose a Chaldron of Coals in every Score, by
Measuring them at my Wharf; which is so absurd and extravagant an Asseveration,
that it would seem much rather to have been uttered by a Buffoon on a Stage, or
a Liar in the Stocks, than by a Coal-Merchant at Billinsgate: For can it be
reasonably supposed, That a Fat is capable of holding more at my Wharf, than it
is at any other Place? Or would they induce the World to believe, That the
Meeters-Office keeps a particular Fat, for my Use; or that Execution-Dock has
an irresitible Charm, to oblige the Meeters to break the Sacred Oaths, by which
they are bound to do justice, between Buyer and Seller?

But if the above-specify'd Assertion holds good, viz. That I have larger
Measure, than any other Dealer in the Coal-trade; then it is evident, That all
Persons have a doubleAdvantage, in dealing with me: For instead of making
twenty one Chaldrons out of every Score; they are sure of receiving Twenty two,
from me, whenever they see them Measured out of the Ship; as many or most do,
who take any considerable Quantity: So that of Necessity, they must wave this
Argument, or else all their Customers will come to Execution-Dock.

NOw if such Things as these, are allowed of and encouraged, no Man Living can
be safe, but is liable to be ruined in his Trade and Reputation, at the
Pleasure of every desperate Villain; especially by such proceedings, as the
Three-penny Indictment. For Example, suppose a notorious Rogue, or any other
Malicious Person should come to a Maulster, whom he has a Spleen against, or
send a third Person to Buy two or three Quarters of Malt; with Instructions to
convey them to a certain Place: The Maulster being ignorant of their Treachery,
orders his Servants to Measure the same, according to the aforesaid Directions.
Whereupon, notwithstanding the Malt was delivered full Measure from his House;
partly through the treachery of a Secret Enemy, and partly by the Waste that may
happen in the Grain, a Peck and half, or half a Bushel of Measure is wanting,
upon the delivery at the Place appointed. So likewise, if a Brewer should
deliver a full Barrel of Beer to his Servants; nevertheless, by the Jolting of
the Dray, it might want a Pint, or a Quart of being full, when brought to the
Victualler; which every body knows, cannot be prevented, and many other
Instances of the like Nature, might be easily produced: I say if these Things
are allowed, every Man is as liable to be ruined by the Breath of a spiteful
Miscreant, as he may be by Devouring Flames, or a Rogue that Riffles him of his
Substance: Nay the Case is worse than either of these; for he may recover a
Loss by Fire, by the Charity of well disposed People; or peradventure he may
Apprehend the Villain, and Regain his Substance: But when he is once deprived
of his Trade and Credit, and perhaps without the least Provocation, by a set of
prosligate Wretches, it is a thousand to one, whether ever he be able to
retrieve it to his Dying Day.

Many Judicious Persons are apt to believe, That the next Age will surpass
this, in Villainy, Perjury, and Malicious Slanders; but I am of the Contrary
Opinion: For what Age ever did, or can outdo this in Subtle Devices,
Perfidiousness, and all manner of sinister Practices; especially in such
Instances as I have been treating of? What would a Turk, a Jew or Heathen take
Men to be, if they should hear of a Three-penny Indictment, carried on by a
Combination of Men under the Color of Justice, that never used any themselves;
but instead of that, are Recorded for the worst of Actions, that can be
committed in the way of Trade? What would they think, if they were to see
twelve Men Sworn by a Sovereign Prince, to do Justice, to the best of their
Knowledge, and according to the Evidence given; and at the same time, Acting
quite Contrary in all Respects: I am persuaded, they would Conclude, That it
was a Combination of Men, that had met with some Person or other, who gave them
a Check in the full Career of their fraudulent Dealing: And since no Matter of
Fact, could be proved against him, they devised a counterfeit Cheat, to impair
the Reputation of such an over-bold Opposer. And as for the Jury, they would
take them to be Men deprived of their Senses, or Persons of debauched
Principles, disbelieving a future State: Or at the best, Conclude, That some of
the Combination, with several of their Agents, were Impannell'd with them, with
a Resolution of defending their bad Old Cause against all manner of Opposition,
whatever it might cost them, even to the making Shipwreck of a good Conscience
in this World, and to the hazard of their everlasting Happiness hereafter.

I doubt not but in a few Years, the great Council of the Nation, will consider
it among their most serious Debates, so as to empower the Gentlemen of the
Meeters-Office with the same Prerogative, and Management of the Coal-trade
ashore, which they have on board the Fleet, in the Pool: Then a stop will be
effectually put to the Lawless and exorbitant Demands of the Quarterly
Winking-mony: Then the thirty Bushels instead of a Chaldron, will be absolutely
laid aside; and all Persons will have the same Measure ashore, as they now
Receive on board the Fleet: In short, when Matters are so regulated, one of the
main Oppressions of the disconsolate Widows and Orphans of this populous City,
will quite cease, and they will no longer have any cause to Complain, for want of
their due Measure in Coals.

Among many other subtle Contrivances, my industrious Adversaries thought fit
to give it out, That they had a Tract in the Press called, An Answer to Povey's
Advertisement concerning his Method of selling Coals; but this proves as false
as all the rest of their notorious Slanders. However I now peremptorily
Challenge the wisest of them all, nay the whole Combination together, to give
such an Answer to the Contents of this small Tract, as shall be reputed
Satisfactory, by any Competent and impartial Judges whatsoever, or to produce
any authentic Evidences, or solid Reasons and Arguments for the making good
their Allegations, and the heavy Charge, they have brought against me.

If they can do this I shall readily submit to the severest Censure of the
World; but if they refuse, then it will appear, That what I have writ, is plain
matter of Fact.

To conclude, let those Catch-poles who were Disappointed of their
Winking-mony, be transported with Spleen and Passion; let them Swear, It is a
Cheat to be Just, and Just, to Cheat; let them Commence a New Indictment, upon
a pretended Cheat of their own Contrivance: Let twelve Men be summoned to give
their Verdict in a Three-penny Sham; let them slight the Charge of a Just
Judge, and the Checks of their own Consciences; let them break the inviolable
Oaths of doing Justice between Man and Man: Nay let the whole Combination unite
themselves in a stricter League than ever; let them Cheat and Defraud, and
endeavor to persuade People, out of their own Natural Reason; let their Fury
be raised to the highest Pitch of Spite and Envy: Nay let them disturb the
Repose of Civil Society, with the false Alarms of an imaginary Cheat, that was
never transacted, nor so much as thought of, but only proceeded from the
rancour of their own corrupt Hearts: Let them Sweat and Run from House to
House; discovering the Vanity of their own distempered Brains, by the Venom of
a Spiteful Tongue: Nevertheless, in the midst of all this Hurry and Noise, I Will
Steer on my Course, in the Channel of Truth and Justice. And tho at any time
the Floods of Wrong and Oppression, augmented with the Spring-tides of Spite
and Envy, may for a while intercept my Steady Course, and retard my intended
Voyage through a Stream of uninterrupted Calmness: Yet I have this assurance, That
I shall be assisted with the fresh Gales of a quiet Mind. and at last, arrive
in a safe Harbor; where the swelling Tides of Perjury and Oppression, will Ebb
in the Streams of a silent Calm.

FINIS.
PROPOSALS for the Improvement of Trade and Navigation in general, and of the
Colliery-Trade to New Castle in particular.
AS no considerate Person can be ignorant of the great decay of Trade in
general, more especially that Part of it which has any relation to Maritime
Affairs: So on the other hand, very few are sensible of the true Causes of such
dismal Misfortunes. Some attribute this Defect to the Vices of the Nation, and
others to the Scarcity of Money; but the main Source of these Miscarriages, (as
I take it) is the want of a regular Conduct, in the management of every
particular Trade, or Calling: Indeed, many ways and means have been devised,
which have hitherto proved ineffectual, and the chief causes of such
Disappointments may be reduced to these two Articles, viz. First, that the most
proper Methods are not followed, or Secondly, whenever they have been proposed,
they were rejected; few, or none thinking it worth the while to canvass the
matter, or to give themselves any trouble in the rectifying of Errors:
Insomuch that what every individual Person ought to apply his utmost Endeavors
to remedy, is now altogether neglected by the whole Community; and instead of
using the means, we only make it our business to utter lamentable Complaints.
For wheresoever a Man goes, he either perceives, or hears of the effects of a
bad Trade, or of some grievous Disaster, amongst all sorts of Professions: Thus
if you happen to meet with any Gentlemen who enjoy plentiful Estates, they are
apt to complain of the small Improvement of them; and if recourse be had to
their Tenants, they tell you, Their Rents are so great, and the Times so bad,
that they are rendered incapable of defraying the necessary Charges incident to
Humane Life: If application be made to the Tradesmen, they immediately cry out,
of the dullness of the Times and the general decay of Trade, or else they accuse
one another of felling their Goods or Merchandises at so low a Rate, that they
cannot subsist any longer: If enquiry be made of the Merchant, he tells you,
That Merchandising is now reduced to so low an Ebb, that he can improve his
Cash in the public Funds, or Banks of the Nation, or in Stock-Jobbing, at
home, to much better purpose, than venturing at Sea: If you should at any time
accost the Owners of Shipping, they are ready to give you a doleful Account of
great Sums of Money ventured in their Bottoms, without any Improvement at all,
but rather Loss than Gain; adding perhaps, That in a few Years the greatest
Part of their Stocks will be sunk by the decay of their Ships, or the Masters
running out of the Stock: When you come to discourse with the Masters of such
Vessels, they declare, That Freightage is so low in most Countries, that they
know not whether to go, to get any Thing themselves, or to satisfy their
Owners, and as for the Common Sailers, you may here them in general, wishing
for the encouragement of Navigation, and the increase of their Monthly Pay:
Lastly, if you enquire after the Laboaring Man's Condition, he makes a grievous
Complaint for want of Employment, or that when he is employed, his Daily Wages
are so inconsiderable, that he is not able to maintain his Family.

I could produce many more Instances of the like Nature, but my present design
and this little Tract will not admit of such large Digressions: Neither indeed,
is there any occasion for a farther Display of these melancholy Scenes, or to
insist any longer on such plain matters of Fact, which all Persons must needs
be sensible of, at one time, or another. Therefore I shall now explain the main
Point of the Business, and endeavor to overcome all manner of obstacles, by
laying down such Rules, which, if put in practice, will effectually redress all
our above-specify'd Grievances. As it has been an ancient Maxim amongst us in
our Island of Great Britain, That the safety of the Nation depends on the
strength of our Fleet; so I am as fully satisfied, That the Grandeur and
Flourishing Trade of England is chiefly promoted by the improvement of
Navigation: For as Money is said to be the Sinews of War; so rich Fleets of
Merchantmen constantly arriving at the Ports of any City, may be justly
reputed the Nerves, or rather the main Basis of Trade. But if it be demanded,
by what means Trade may be reduced to a flourishing Condition? I answer, There
is not one Trade-Society, or Corporation, within this Kingdom, but by a
discreet management of Affairs among themselves, may make such Bylaws, or
mutual Contracts as will be sufficient for the preventing of all those
Misfortunes, that usually happen in the way of Trade; nay, had I a fair
opportunity, I could give a particular Account to the Public, of the ill
Conduct of most of them: I could also produce certain Rules and Directions for
the rectifying of many Irregulatities incident to Trade, and solve all
Objections, that might be made to the contrary. Indeed, most of our
Disappointments as to this Affair, are owing to the want of Public Spirits,
Men of generous Principles, who would not grudge to spend their Time, or Money,
in promoting the Advantages of the Commonwealth: But alas! Instead of so
laudable a Practice, every one is ready, upon all Occasions to consult his own
private Interest, without any regard to that of the Community, and it is to be
wished, That such Self-interest do not at last overthrow it self and prove more
prejudicial to those that adhere to it, than they are aware of. But it is now
time to resume the former Arguments, and to give a more particular account of
my present Design.

It is well known, That the Colliety-Trade brings up a greater number of
Seamen, than all our Navigation elsewhere, and it must be acknowledged, that
when Owners and Masters of Vessels gain by Trading to New Castle, then, and
then only, our Trade to foreign Parts is in a flourishing Condition: But were I
obliged to produce a true Description of the lamentable State of the New Castle
Trade, I am persuaded, it would appear almost past all Belief: Should I tell
you, how many thousands of Pounds have been run out within the space of a few
Years, and more especially this Summer: Should I inform you, That some Owners
of Vessels, who have laid out two, or three thousand Pounds in fitting them for
the said Trade to New Castle, would be glad to dispose of them for half the
Value, and to my certain knowledge, have not made One per Cent. of their Money,
for several Years last past; nay should I add, that many Inhabitants of this
City have ruined themselves and their Families by this means: Should I certify
you of the general Complaint I hear from the Masters of such Vessels, how they
have run out their Stocks and reduced themselves to Penury, by losing ten,
twenty, or thirty Pounds in a Voyage, besides Wear and Tear, and the hazard of
their Ships: Lastly, should I conduct you to the Prisons and show you the great
number of Traders to New Castle confined therein; or should I bring you the
File of Tradesmens Bills, that are as yet unsatisfied: You would certainly
conclude the Trade of the Nation, and especially that of New Castle, to be in a
most deplorable Condition, and past reviving, unless some proper Remedy, were
speedily applied; which (in my Opinion) must needs be effected by one of the
two following Methods, viz.

I. That an authentic Instrument be drawn up conformably to the Common
Interest of the Society, and that of every individual Person; so as none may,
or can reasonably refuse to sign it; the substance of which may be to this
effect, viz. 1. That the Masters of Vessels shall be obliged to give no more
than one Penny for every Chaldron they bring into the River of Thames, and by
that means be assured of receiving twenty Fold: 2. That the greatest part of
the Profits arising from that Penny in a Chaldron, shall be appropriated to the
relief of their Widows and Orphans, after their Decease, or even to their own
Use, when by Age, or Losses, they shall be rendered incapable of following
their Employments: 3. That all engaged in this Concern, except one, shall be
Masters of Vessels who Trade, or have Traded to New Castle, and Men of their
own Choice (according to the majority of Votes) shall be the Managers of it.
Now if any Masters of Ships should at first seem unwilling to consent to such
an Agreement, it is not to be doubted but their Owners will oblige them to it:
But admitting that some may peremptorily refuse to subscribe, can it be
imagined, That a few obstinate Persons will be able to alter the property of
the Market? Or can it be reasonably supposed, That Men will give their Goods
away, when they may be disposed of at a Market-price?

II. Forasmuch as the Lighter-men and Watermen are incorporated into a
Company, by a late Act of Parliament, it would be expedient to settle an Office
at Billinsgate, that might oblige all Masters of Vessels, who Trade to
New Castle, to enter their Names therein, and to sell their Coals, according to
the Directions of the said Office: In case of their Refusal, the Company may
agree among themselves to send no Lighters on board such Ships, till they
complied with so reasonable a Proposal; and in consideration thereof, all
Masters of Vessels shall allow One Penny in every Chaldron of Coals they bring
into the River, to be disposed of as follows; that is to say, One half of the
Profits arising from the said Impost of One Penny per Chaldron, for defraying
the Charges of the Office, and the other half, for the Use of the Company, to
relieve the Widows and Orphans of Lighter-men and Watermen, as also such of
them as are past their Labor, or otherwise fallen to Decay.

If Time and the bulk of this small Tract would permit, I could propose several
other Methods, and confute all manner of Objections that might be started in
opposition to what has been above-deliver'd, or against the establishing of so
commendable a Settlement, which (as there are good grounds to believe) would be
extremely advantageous to the Nation in general, and to the Coal-trade in
particular. To conclude, if these my Endeavors to be serviceable to the
Public, meet with a favorable Reception among the Judicious, I shall be
encouraged to draw up such Articles, as I doubt not but will give general
satisfaction, and afford the best means for the accomplishing of the proposed
Design.

In the mean while, let our most Gracious King be always triumphant and full of
honorable Success; revered in the highest degree both at home and abroad; ever
Reigning in the Hearts of his Subjects, and striking a Terror within those of
His Enemies: Let His Parliaments be transcendently eminent for their Wisdom and
Unanimity: Let His Nobles be magnificent and sagacious, and all His People
Loyal: Let His Arms be Victorious and His Coffers full: Let our Clergy be
learned, and our Laity industrious: Let our Churches and Congregations be
numerous: Let our Preachers be eloquent in the Pulpit, and exemplary in their
Lives and Conversations: Let our Auditors be attentive, and ready to put in
practice what they hear: Let Vice, Immorality and Profaneness be reduced to the
lowest Ebb: Let Tragedies, Comedies and Farces, be hissed off the Stage: Let
the Actors and Buffoons do Penance for their horrid Blasphemies; and let their
Playhouses be turned into Hospitals for the relief of the Poor: However,
notwithstanding all these singular Advantages; unless some proper Measures be
taken for the more effectual Improvement of our Navigation and Maritime
Commerce, more especially to New Castle, we can never hope to be a People
completely happy, or to see that noble Stock of TRADE, (in which England may
well be said to surpass the greatest Part of the European Nations) Flourishing
in its Meridian Luster and utmost Latitude.

FINIS.

