Licensed,

August 20th. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.
THE WOMAN As GOOD as the MAN: OR, THE Equallity of Both Sexes.

Written Originally in French, And Translated into English by A. L.

London: Printed by T. M. for N. Brooks, at the Angel in Cornhil, 1677.

THE PREFACE, Containing The Platform and Design, of the Discourse.
THere is nothing more nice and delicate, than to Treat on the Subject of
Women. When a Man speaks to their advantage, it is presently imagined a piece
of Gallantry, or Love: And it is very probable, that the most part Judging of
this discourse by the Title, will take it at first for an effect of the one or
other; and will be glad to know the truth of the motive and design thereof.
Take it thus:

The most happy thought, that can enter into the minds of those who labor, to
acquire a solid Science, after that they have been instructed, according to the
Vulgar Method, is to doubt if they have been taught aright, and to desire to
discover the truth by themselves.

In the progress of their inquiry, it occurs to them necessarily, to observe
that we are filled with prejudices, (that is to say, opinions past upon things
without true Examination); And that we must absolutely Renounce them, to attain
to clear, and distinct Knowledges.

In the design of insinuating so important a Maxim, we have believed it the
best, to choose a determinate, and famous Subject, where every one takes an
interest; to the end, that having demonstrated, that a Sentiment as ancient as
the World, of as great extent as the Earth, and as Universal as Mankind is a
prejudice or error, the Learned might at length, be Convinced of the necessity
of Judging of things by themselves after having examined them, and not to
refer themselves to the opinion or credit of other men; if they would avoid
being deceived.

Of all prejudices, there is not any to be observed, more proper for this
design, than that which men commonly conceive of the inequality of the two
Sexes.

Indeed, if we consider them in their present condition, we may observe them
more different in their civil functions, and those which depend on the mind,
than in such as belong to the body. And if we search for the reason of this in
ordinary discourse, we find, that all the World, those that have Learning, and
those that have none, and even Women themselves agree, to say, that they have
no share in Sciences nor Employments, because that they are not capable
thereof; that they have not the parts of men, and that they ought in all things
to be inferior to them as they are.

After having tried this opinion, according to the Rule of Verity, which is to
admit of nothing for truth, but what is supported by clear, and distinct
Notions; On the one hand it has appeared false, and grounded on a prejudice,
and Popular tradition; and on the other we have found that both Sexes are
equal; that is to say, that Women are as noble, as perfect, and as capable as
men. This cannot be established, but by refuting two sorts of adversaries; the
vulgar, and almost all the learned.

The former having no other ground for what they believe, but Custom; and some
slight appearences: the best way to confute them, seems to be, to let them see
how that Women have been Subjected, and excluded from Sciences, and
Employments; and having led them through the Principal conditions, and
occurrences of life, give them occasion to acknowledge, that Women have
advantages which renders them equal to men; and this is the design of the
first part of this Treatise.

The second is employed to show, that all the arguments of the learned are
vain. And having established the Sentiment of equality, by positive reasons,
Women are Justified from the defects of which they are ordinarily accused, by
making appear that they are either imaginary, or of little importance; that
they proceed only from the education which is given them, and that they mark in
them considerable advantages.

This Subject might be handled two ways, either in a flourishing, brisk; and
complementive Style, or otherwise after the manner of Philosophers by
Principles, to the end of being instructed therein to the bottom.

Such as have the true idea of eloquence, know well that these two styles are
almost inconsistent together, and that one cannot enlighten the mind, and
tickle it by the same Method. It is not but that the flourish may be joined
with reason; but that such a mixture often hinders the end which ought to be
proposed in discourse, which is to convince, and persuade, that which is
pleasing, musing the mind, and not suffering it to rest on what is solid.

And as men have peculiar regards for Women, if in a treatise made on their
Subject, we mingle any thing that is gallant and courtly, those that read it,
pursue their thoughts too far, and lose sight of that which ought chiefly to
affect them.

Wherefore there being nothing in the World that concerns Women more than this
design, where we are obliged to speak in their favor, matters of the greatest
force, and verity, as far as the capriciousness of the World can suffer it; we
thought that it behooved us to speak seriously, and give notice thereof, lest
that the conceit, that it might be a piece of airy Gallantry, should make it
slightly perused, or rejected by scrupulous persons.

We are not ignorant, that this discourse will render a great many male
contented, and that they whose Interests and Maxims are contrary to what is
proposed here, will not fail to cry out against it. To give means to answer to
their complaints, we advertise persons of Spirit, and particularly the Women
who are not the Spaniels of those that take authority over them, that if they
give themselves the trouble to read this Treatise, with the attention at least
that the variety of matters therein contained does require, they will observe
that the Essential Character of truth, is clearness, and evidence, Which may
serve them to know whether the objections that may be adduced against them be
considerable or not.

And they may remark, that the most specious shall be made to them by people
whose profession seems at this day to engage them to renounce experience,
common sense, and themselves, that they may blindly embrace all that agrees
with their prejudices, and interests, and oppugn all kinds of Truths that seem
to oppose them.

And we pray consider, that the bad effects, which a panick fear may make them
apprehend from this enterprise, may never perhaps happen in one single Woman,
and that they are counterpoised with a great advantage, which may redound
therefrom; there being perhaps no way more natural, or sure, to draw the
greatest part of Women from idleness, to which they are reduced, and the
inconveniences that attend it, than to persuade them to study, which is almost
the sole thing in which Ladies at present can employ themselves, by making them
know that they are as proper thereto as men.

And as there are none but unreasonable men, who abuse the advantages that
custom has given them, to the prejudice of Women; neither can there be
likewise any, but indiscreet Women, that should make use of this piece, to make
them rise against men, who would treat them as their companions, and equals. In
fine, if any one be Choked with this discourse, for what reason soever it be,
let him quarrel with Truth, and not the Author: and to free himself from
peevishness, let him say to himself, that it is but an Essay of wit: it is
certain, that this jurk of imagination or a like, hindering truth from gaining
upon us, renders it much less uneasy to those who have pain to suffer it.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE Unprejudiced Reader.
I Well foresee, that my pains, in making this ingenious French Author speak
English, will, according to the bias of prejudiced, and interested humors,
undergo various Censures; a great many men, especially those who defy the
French, with their Shop-tooles, will be at it Tooth and Nail, and cry out, that
so many outlandish Trinckioms having already crept into use amongst the Women;
he that would endeavor to introduce more, is no friend to the liberty of the
Subject. But such men do but hunt their own shadow; my intent by this
Translation being quite contrary.

When I Considered, that of all Nations, The English did most heartily assert,
and sutably entertain the worth of the lovely Sex; and by civility, and good
nature, as well as prudence, and justice, freely grant an equality to Women, in
all things wherein established, and unalterable customs might not be violated;
which strangers, even the French themselves, the great complimenters of that
Sex, do by the force of Philosophy, and with reasons which wrestle against
prejudices, but at most discourse of. I thought I could not do less for the
Satisfaction of such English Men, who do not understand my Author in his own
Language, than to make him intelligible, and so give them opportunity to infer
from his opinions; that what in this matter the Virtuosi, and enquirers of that
Nation, Squeeze from subtle Speculation, and Logic, is no more than what
every English Man Practices by common sense, and Natural inclination. And
herein I hope not at all to have offended that Sex.

I think I have no great reason to apprehend ill will from the Virtuous Women,
for my endeavors of letting them hear strangers speak in their favors; since
they may Lawfully conclude from thence, that if they enjoy more than their
Neighbors of what is their acknowledged due, it must be their peculiar
advantages beyond others, that makes them more considerable in the eyes of
their Judges: there being no Country which produces Women, who ought more
Justly to boast of the favors, and endowments of nature, in respect of body
and mind, than this; or who more fully enjoy, or modestly use the privileges
which upon that account, are reasonably allowed them.

This I conceive may be sufficient to warrant my undertakeing, especially
seeing so candid a piece of Philosophy, may in a great measure vindicate the
honor of the Nation, (which much grieves to be imposed upon by the modes, and
punctilio's of the French so much in fashion) by letting the world see, that
the English, Nobly complying with that Justice which is therein so strongly
pleaded for; do in matters of importance give an Example so truly Imitable,
that the more ingenious must impute it to Salick Laws, long Custom,
masculine, and harsh constitutions, that they are not Universally proposed as
patterns.

It is not my province to attempt the answering of objections, which may be
made against this kind of Doctrine; both since my Author, whose task it was,
has fully done it; and that there is no great danger of inconveniences, here
to publish that which is already believed and put in practice. And therefore,
if any corrupt minded sales-man, who may pretend to know Women better than
either the Author or my self, because he has seen more in their Bodices, shall
unlace and let fly a dotument, and tell me that in this meddling generation I
have been a little too pragmatical to follow the steps of a stranger, and tread
upon snailes when they show their horns; I am so innocent as not to reply, but
leave him in his chafe, to be convinced by reason, and a good wife: and speak a
word to the impartial reader by way of advertisement concerning the Treatise.

The Author himself gives his Reason, why he has handled this Subject in so
serious a manner, and in so short, and Doctrinal a style: So that I need say no
more, but as a faithful Translator, I have stuck to his words, and sense. I
resolved indeed to have accommodated this Treatise as much as possibly I could
to the manners, and present customs of this nation; but finding therein,
somethings whereon the Author does insist as material to the establishing of
his opinion, which are not well known in this Kingdom, there being no order of
People, nor public houses here, which in every thing runs Parallel with NVNS,
ABBESS, and MONS ASTERIES, but especially with those whom he mentions: I
thought it convenient to translaete his words Literally, and for the
understanding of one passage, which may seem difficult, advertise the Reader,
that there is an order of Nuns at Paris, who, because they make it their
business to relieve, and supply prisoners, and other indigent persons, have the
name of Charity; and that in the great Hospital the L'Hostel dieu there, which
is indeed a great Theater of Humane infirmities; all the sick, are attended by
Religious Women. If the Reader be herewith satisfied I have my design; and if
not, I shall not, I hope, lose the name of a friend, which is.

A. L.
ERRATA.
PAge 43 line 20 read on Aspects for or Aspects p. 121 l. 1. r. Offices f.
Officers.

THE WOMAN as Good as the MAN, OR, THE Equality of the two Sexes.
The First Part. Wherein is shown, That the Vulgar Opinion is Prejudicated; and
that, comparing (impartiality) that which may be remarked in the Conduct of
Men, and Women, we are obliged to acknowledge an entire Equality between both
Sexes.
MEN persuade themselves of very many things, for which they can give no
Reason; because their Assurance is founded only upon slight Appearances, by
which they suffer themselves to be hurried: and would have as strongly believed
the contrary, if the Impressions of Sense or Custom had thereto determined them
after the same manner.

Setting aside a small number of Learned, all the world hold, as a thing
unquestionable, That the Sun moves about the Earth: Though that which appears
in the Revolution of Days, and Years, equally inclines those (who attentively
consider) to think, That it is the Earth that takes its course round the Sun.
Men Imagine, that in Beasts, there is a certain Knowledge that guides them, by
the same reason that wild Savages fancy, some little Spirits to be within
Clocks, and other Engines which are shown them; where of they understand not
the Fabric, or Movements.

Had we been brought up in the midst of the Seas, without having ever come
Ashore, we should not have failed, to have believed (as Children do when they
put off in Boats), that in our Floating-houses, the Land went from us. Every
one esteems his own Country the best, because there he is most accustomed; and
that the Religion, wherein he has been Nursed, is the True, which he ought to
follow; although he has never perhaps dreamed of examining, or comparing the
same with others. We find our selves always more inclined for our
Countrymen, than for Strangers, even in matters where Right is on their side.
We are more pleased to Converse with those of our own Profession, than others;
though neither their Wit, nor Virtue, be so great. And the Disparity of
Estates and Conditions, make many judge, that Men amongst themselves are
altogether unequal.

If we enquire into the ground of all these diverse Opinions, we shall find
them bottomed on Interest, or Custom; and that it is incomparably more
difficult, to draw Men from such Sentiments, wherein they are engaged by
Prejudice, than from the Opinions which they have embraced upon the Motive of
the strongest, and most convincing Arguments.

Amongst these odd Opinions, we may reckon the common Judgment which Men make
of the Difference of the two Sexes, and of all that depends thereon; there is
not any mistake more Ancient, or Universal. For, both the Knowing and Ignorant,
are so prepossessed with the Opoinion, That Women are inferior to Men in
Capacity and Worth, and that they ought to be placed in that dependence wherein
we see them; that the contrary Sentence will not miss to be eyed, as a Paradox,
and piece of Singularity.

However, for the Establishing of it, it would not at all be necessary, to use
any positive Reason; if Men were more just, and less interested in their
Judgments, it might suffice to advertise them, That hitherto the difference of
the Sexes (to the disadvantage of the Female), has been but very lightly
discoursed off; and that to judge soundly, whether our Sex have obtained any
Natural Pre-eminence beyond theirs: we ought to think thereon seriously, and
without Partiality, rejecting all which has been hitherto believed upon the
simple Report of other Men, without Trial, or Examination.

It is certain, that if a Man would set himself in this State of Indifferency,
and Neutrality, he must acknowledge (on the one hand) that it is Weakness and
Precipitancy that make us reckon Women less Noble and Excellent, than our
selves: and that certain Natural Indispositions render them obnoxious to the
Failings, and Imperfections that are attributed to them; and thereby
contemptible to many. And, on the other hand, he must see, That these very
Colors which cheat People concerning their own Subjects, when they slightly
pass them over, would serve to undeceive them, if they sounded them a little
deeper. In short, if that Man were a Philosopher, he would find that there are
Natural Reasons, which invincibly prove, that both Sexes are a like, both as to
Body, and Soul.

But as there are not many Persons, in a condition of themselves, to put in
Practice this Advice; so it must remain useless, without some pains be taken to
labor with Men, and to put them in the way of making use of it. And seeing the
Opinion of those who have less studied is the most general, with it we shall
begin our Enquiry.

Let every Man (in particular) be asked his Thoughts of Women (in general) and
that he would surely confess his Mind; he will tell you without doubt, That
they were not made but for Man; That they are fit for nothing, but to Nurse,
and Breed little Children in their Low Age; and to mind the House. It may be
the more Ingenious will add, That there are many Women that have indeed Parts,
and Conduct; but that even they who seem to have most, when they are nearly
examined, discover still somewhat that speaks their Sex: That they have
neither Solidity, nor Constancy; nor that depth of Judgment which they think
to find in themselves: And that it has been an Effect of Divine Providence,
and Wisdom of Men, to have barred them from Sciences, Government, and Offices:
That it would be a pleasant thing indeed, to see a Lady in the Chair (in
quality of a Professor) teaching Rhethorick, or Medicine; marching along the
Streets, followed by Officers, and Sergeants; putting in Execution Laws:
Playing the part of a Counselor; pleading before Judges: Seated on a Bench,
to Administer Justice in Supreme Courts: Leading of an Army; giving Battle; and
Speaking before States, and Princes, as the Head of an Embassy.

I do confess, such Practices would surprise us; but for no other reason, but
that of Novelty. For, if in modelling of States, and establishing the different
Offices that compose them, Women had been like-wise called to Functions; we
should have been as much accustomed to have seen them in Dignity, as they are
to see us. And should have found it no more strange to have seen a Lady on a
Throne, than a Woman in a Shop.

If these Blades be pressed a little further, we shall find their mightiest
Arguments reduced to this, That, as to Women, matters have always past as now
they go; which is a mark, that they are really such, as they are esteemed: And
that, if they had been capable of Sciencies, and Offices, Men would not have
denied them their shares.

These kind of Reasonings proceed from the Conceit that we have of the Equity
of our Sex; and a false Notion which Men forge to themselves of Custom: It is
enough with them to find that a thing is established, to make them believe it
well grounded. And as they judge, that men ought to do nothing without Reason;
so the most part of People cannot imagine, but that Reason has been consulted
for the introducing of such Practices, as they see universally received; and
fancy to themselves, that Prudence, and right Reason, have established the
Customs, to which they both oblige us to conform; since, without breach of
Order, we cannot therein dispense with our Obedience.

Every one sees (in his own Country) the Women in such Subjection, that, in
all things, they depend on Men, without being admitted to Learning; or any of
those Conditions, that afford opportunity to become remarkable by the advantage
Parts: No Body affirms, that he has ever seen them treated other-wise. And all
know, That matters go so with them every where, that there is no place in the
World, where they are not used after the same manner, as we find at Home. In
some Countries their Usage is worse, where they are regarded as Slaves. In
China they keep their Feet little from their Childhood, to hinder them from
rambling out of Doors; where they never see any thing but their Husbands, and
Children. In Turkey the Ladies are strictly enough confined; And in Italy they
are not much better. Almost all the People of Asia, Africa, and America, use
their Wives, as we do our Serving-Maids. They are no where employed in any
thing, but that which is esteemed low, and base: And because they only
discharge the lesser care of Hus-wivery and Nurses, Men commonly persuade
themselves, that, for that end alone they are in the World; and that they are
incapable of any thing else: They cannot easily represent to themselves how
matters could be other-wayes; it appearing impossible to alter them, what
endeavor soever be used.

The wisest Lawgivers in founding their Commonwealths have established
nothing on this Account, in favor of Women. All their Laws seem only to have
been made to confirm Men in the Possession they have got. Most part of Men, who
have passed for Learned, have not said any thing to the advantage of Women: And
the Conduct of Men, in all Ages, and Places of the World, appears so uniform in
this case, that it seems they have conspired; or other-wayes (as many imagine)
have been led thereunto by a secret Instinct; that is to say, Letters-Patent
from the Author of Nature.

Men are still the more persuaded in this, when they consider in what manner
the Women (themselves) support this their Condition. They look upon it as a
thing natural to them; whether it be that they reflect not upon what they are;
or that being born, and bred in dependence, they make the same Judgment
thereon, as Men do. Now, upon all these views, the one, and the other, let
themselves believe, both, That their Spirits are as different as their Bodies;
and that there ought to be as great distinction betwixt the two Sexes, in all
the Functions of Life, as there is in those which are peculiar to either:
Whilst, in the mean-time, that persuasion (like the most part of those which
we draw from Use, and Custom,) is nothing but Prejudice, formed in us by the
appearances of things, for want of closer Examination; and of which we might
easily undeceive our selves, if we would but take the pains to return back to
the Fountainhead, and judge in many Occurrencies of that which has been done
in former times, by what is practiced at this day; and of the Custom of the
Ancients, by what we see in Vogue in our own times: Had Men followed this Rule
in many of their Sentiments, they had not so easily fallen into mistakes. And
as to what concerns the present state of Women, they would have acknowledged,
that they have not been subjected by any other Law, than that of the stronger;
and that it has not been for want of Natural Capacity, or Merit, that they
have not shared with us in that which raises our Sex above theirs.

Indeed, when we consider seriously the Affairs of this World, both past, and
present, we find that all agree in this, That Reason has always been the
weakest: And it seems, that Histories have only been composed, to Demonstrate
that which every one sees in his own time, That ever since there has been Men
in the World, force has always prevailed. The greatest Empires of Asia, in
their beginnings, have been the work of Usurpers, and Thieves. And the
scattered Wracks of the Grecian, and Roman Monarchies, have not been gathered,
but by those who thought themselves strong enough to resist their Masters, and
domineer over their Equals. This Conduct is no less visible in all other
Societies. And if Men behave themselves so toward their Fellows, there is
great likelihood from stronger Reason, That, in the beginning, they have done
so, every one toward his Wife. And this is almost the manner how it has
happened.

Men observing, that they were: the stronger, and that in relation of Sex, they
had some advantage of Body, fancyed that they had the same in all; the
Consequence was not great for Women in the beginning of the World, Affairs
being in a Condition far different from what now they are: when neither
Government, Science, Office, nor Religion, were established, the Notion of
Dependence had in it nothing at all of Irksome. I Imagine that Men lived then
like little Children, and all the Advantage that was, was like that of Play.
Men and Women (who then were simple, and innocent) were equally employed in
laboring of the Land, or Hunting, (as the Wild Indians do at this day): The
Man took his Course and the Woman here is; And they that brought Home most
Profit, were commonly most esteemed.

The Inconveniences that attend and follow the big-Belly, weakening the
Strength of the Female for some Intervenal of time, and hindering them to
labor as formerly, required (necessarily) the Assistance of their Husbands;
and the more still, whilst they were taken up with the care of their young
Children. This produced some Regards of Esteem, and Preferrence in Families,
which then were only composed of Father, Mother, and some little Babes: But
when Families began to be enlarged; and that in the same House, lived not only
the Father, but the Father's Mother, the Children's Children; with Brothers,
and Sisters, Elder and younger: Then did Dependence dilate it self, and become
more sensible: Then was to be seen, the Mistress submitting to her Husband, the
Son honoring his Father, and he commanding his Children. And as it is most
difficult for Brothers, always, perfectly to agree; we may easily conceive,
that they lived not long together, before that some Difference happened amongst
them: The Elder, stronger than the rest, would condescend to them in nothing:
So, Force obliged the Lesser to bow under the Greater, and the Daughters to
follow the Example of their Mother.

It is easy to be imagined, that in such Families, there were then several
different Functions; That the Women, being bound to stay at Home to bring up
their Children, took the Care within Doors: The Men (more free and strong)
charged themselves with the Affairs abroad; and that after the Death of the
Father and Mother, the Firstborn took upon him the Government. The Daughters,
accustomed to the House, had no thoughts of going abroad; but some Younger
Brothers, discontented, and more fierce than they, refusing to submit to the
Yoke, were obliged to withdraw, and set up for themselves: And so, several of
the same Humor meeting together, made a shift to live on their Fortunes, and
easily contracted Friendship: Who, finding themselves without Estate, sought
out means to purchase what they wanted: and seeing there was no other way but
to take from their Neighbors, they fell upon that which came next to hand:
And, to confirm themselves in the Possession of their New Conquests, at the
same time made themselves Masters of the owners.

The voluntary Dependence, which was before in Families, ceased by this
Invasion; Fathers and Mothers, with their Children, being constrained to obey
an unjust Usurper: So that, the Condition of Women became harder than before.
For, as till then, they had never been married but to Men of their own House,
and Family; they were afterward forced to take Strangers, and unknown Husbands,
who only considered them as the loveliest part of their Booty.

It is ordinary with Conquerours, to despise those amongst the Subdued, whom
they judge the weakest: And the Women appearing to be such, by reason of their
Employments (which required not much Strength), were looked upon as inferior
to Men.

Some there were who contented themselves with this first Usurpation; but
others, more ambitious, (encouraged by the success of their Victory) resolved
to proceed in their Conquests. The Women being more humane, than to serve such
unjust Designs, were left at Home; and the Men chosen as the most proper for
such Enterprises, where there is need of Force. In this state of Life matters
being no other-wayes esteemed, but as Men thought them useful to the ends which
they proposed; and the desire of Dominion being now become the strongest of
Passions, which could not be satisfied but by Violence, and Injustice; of
which, men were the only Instruments: It is no wonder that they were preferred
to Women. Men like-wise, serving to maintain the Conquests which they had made:
Their Counsels were only taken for to establish their Tyranny, because none so
fit to put them in Execution. And so, the Mildness, and Humanity of Women, was
the sole cause which excluded them from having any share in the Administration
of Public Government.

The Example of Princes was quickly imitated by their Subjects, every one would
carry it over his Companion; and private men began to rule more absolutely in
their Families. So soon as a Lord found himself Master of a People, and
considerable Country, he shaped it into a Kingdom, made Laws for Government,
chose his Officers from amongst the Men; and raised to Places those who had
best served him in his Enterprises. So notable a Preferrence of one Sex above
the other, lessened still more the Esteem for the Women; and their Humor and
Course of Life, being far from Butchery, and War; Men believed them no
other-wayes capable to contribute to the Safety and Preservation of Kingdoms,
but only by helping to people them.

States and Common-VVealths could not be established, without the placing of
some Distinction amongst those that did compose them: So Marks of Honor were
introduced for distinguishing of Orders, and Signs of Respect invented to
testify the Difference, which was acknowledged to be amongst Men. And to the
Notion of Power, was added the External Submission, which is commonly rendered
to those who have the Authority in their Hands.

It is not at all necessary to tell you, how God has been known of Men; but it
is certain, that since the beginning of the World, he has been adored by
them; though the Worship which Men have rendered to a Deity was never Regular,
but since they were assembled in Bodies to make up Public Societies.

Now, as Men were accustomed to Reverence the Powers, by External Marks of
Respect; they thought it like-wise their Duty, to Reverence God by some
Ceremonies, which might serve to manifest the Sentiments which they entertained
of his Greatness. Temples were built, Sacrifices appointed, and Men (who were
already the Heads of Government) failed not also, to take to themselves, the
care of that which concerned Religion. And Custom having now prepossessed the
Women with an Opinion that all belonged to Men, they contentented themselves
without aspiring to any part of the Public Miniry. But the Idea which Men
conceived of a Godhead, being extremely corrupted by the Fables and Fictions
of Poets, they forged to themselves Divinities, both Male and Female; and
appointed, She- Priests for the Service of those of their Sex; but still with
Subordination to the Conduct, and Pleasure of their Priests.

Women have been likewise known to have Governed great States; but we must not
imagine, that it was because they have been called thereto out of a purpose of
Restitution of their right; but because they had the Dexterity so to dispose of
Affairs, that Men could not snatch the Authority out of their Hands.

It is true, there are at this day Hereditary States, where the Females succeed
to Males, as Queens, or Princesses; But we have no Reason to believe, but that
if Men have suffered the Scepter to fall into the place of the Distaffe, it was
only that they might prevent the People from falling together by the Ears; And
that, if they have permitted Female Regencies, it was in consideration, that
the Mothers (who always extremely love their Children) would take a more
particular Care of their States during their Minority.

So that, now the Women being no other-wayes employed, but in their Huswivery,
and finding therein business enough; let us not think it strange, that they have
not invented any of these Sciences; whereof the greatest part (at first) have
been but the work, and task of some idle Loyterers.

The Egyptian Priests (who had not much to do) busied themselves in chatting
together, concerning the Effects of Nature, which seemed most to touch them:
And after much talking and reasoning, began to make Observations; the noise of
which, stirred up the Curiosity of some Men to come in search of them: But
Sciences being but then in the Cradle, did not allure the Women out of Doors.
Besides, that the Jealousy which already imbroyled the Husbands would have
filled them with Suspicion, that their Wives had gone to visit the Priests
rarather for Love to their Persons, than Learning which they had obtained.

After that several Men had received some tincture of this new Learning, they
began to assemble themselves in certain Places, to discourse thereof more at
leisure; where every one speaking his Thoughts, Knowledge ripened, and
Colleges and Accademies were appointed, where the Women were not admitted; but
in the same manner were excluded from Learning, as they had been from all the
rest.

Notwithstanding, the Restraint wherein they were kept, hindered not, but that
some of them procured the Conversation and Writings of the Learned; whereby (in
a short time) they equalled the progress of the most Ingenious: But Custom
having already enjoined an impertinent Decorum, that Men durst not come to
their Houses, nor other Women visit them for fear of giving some umbrage, they
made no Disciples, nor founded Sects; but all the Light which they had
attained, uselesly, dyed with themselves.

If we observe how Modes and Fashions creep into use, and how they are daily
imbelished, we may judge, That (in the beginning of the World) People took no
great care of their Dress: All was then simple and plain, nothing minded but
necessity. Men flayed Beasts; and fastening their Skins together, framed to
themselves Habits. But afterward, Commodiousness began to be devised; and
every one accowtering themselves according to their fancy, the Fashions that
were most decent, were presently followed; and they that were under the same
Prince, strove to conform themselves to his Mode.

It happened not so with Modes and Fashions, as with Governments and Sciences;
the Women here had their Share with Men: who perceiving them by their dress
more lovely, took no care to rob them thereof. And both the one, and the other,
finding that some sort of Apparel set off more gracefully, and rendered more
amiable the Person, both strove to find out the Knack: But the Employments of
Men being greater, and more important, hindered them from the more eager
Pursuit.

The Women herein showed their Prudence, and Skill; For, observing that new
Ornaments made them more agreeable, and dear to Men, and thereby their
Condition more supportable; they neglected nothing which they thought might
serve to render themselves Charming, and Lovely. To that end, they employed
Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones, as soon as they grew in Vogue: And seeing
that Men had deprived them of Means, to make themselves Conspicuous by their
Parts, they applied themselves solely to find out that which might render them
amiable, and pleasing. In this they have very well succeeded: For, their
Beauty, and Attire, have advanced them to greater Esteem in the Eyes of Men,
than all the Books and Learning of the World could ever have done. This Custom
has been too well Established, to admit of any future Change; the Practice
thereof, has continued to our times; and it seems to be a Tradition too
ancient to be now contradicted, or opposed.

It appears clearly (from this Historical Conjecture), That, according to the
manner of dealing familiar to all Men, it is only by Force and Empire that they
have reserved to themselves these Extrinseral Advantages; from which, the
Female Sex is debarred. For, to warrant them to say, That it has been grounded
on Reason, they must never have communicated them amongst themselves, but to
those who have been most capable; Always made the Choice of such with exact
Scrutiny, and Discretion: Never have admitted to study, but such as they knew
disposed for Letters: Never raised to Charges, but those that were fittest for
Employment; and excluded all others. And, in short, Never have set any Man, on
any thing, but what was suitable to his Inclinations.

We see the contrary daily put in Practice; For, there is nothing but Chance,
Necessity, or Interest, which engages Men in the different Conditions and
States of Civil Society. The Children learn their Father's Trade, because that
it has always been mentioned to them. One is forced to the Gown, who would
have been better pleased with the Sword, had it been at his own choice: and the
ablest Man in the World shall never enter into Employment, if he want Money to
buy his Place.

How many are there grovelling in the dust, who would have made themselves
famous, had they been but in the way? and how many Clowns are there, that might
have become great Doctors had they been sent to School? We have but little
ground to pretend that the present Virtuosi are only such of the times, who
have had the best Genius for the things wherein they excel; and that, amongst
so many Persons buried in Ignorance, there are none who, with the same means
which they have had, could have rendered themselves more capable.

Why is it then, that we assure our selves, that Women are less fit for such
things than our selves? sure it is not Chance, but Unavoidable necessity that
hinders them from playing their parts. I urge not, that all Women are capable
of all Sciences and Employments; that any one is capable of all: No Man
pretends to so much; but I only desire, that, considering the Sex in general,
we may acknowledge an aptitude in the one as well as the other.

Let us but glance a little upon that, which we see daily in the play and
smaller divertisements of Children. The Girls show therein a more gentile air,
more of Wit, and greater dexterity: And when fear or shame does not stifle
their Humors, their Discourse, is more ingenious, and pleasant; and their
conversation more lively, brisk, and free: They Learn sooner what they are
taught, if they be equally plied: They are more industrious, more painful,
more submiss, more modest, and more reserved; In a word, we may remarke in them
in a more eminent degree, all those excellent qualities, which being found in
young Men, make them esteemed fitter for high matters, than those who are
otherwise their equals.

Notwithstanding that, that which appears, in the two Sexes, whilst they are
as yet in the cradle, is sufficient to make us conclude, that the more lovely
gives also the fairest hopes; yet men take no notice thereof; Masters and
Teaching are only for the Men: Particular care is taken to instruct them in
all which is thought proper, to form and improve the mind; whilst in the mean
time, the Women are let languish in Idleness, Softness, and Ignorance: Or,
otherwise grovel in low, and base employments.

But for all this, we need but two eyes to perceive, that the case of the two
Sexes is just like that of two Brothers, in the same family; Where the younger,
notwithstanding of the neglect of his breeding, makes often appear, that the
elder has no advantage over him, but the start in coming into the World.

For what end serves commony the Education which is given to Men? It is useless
to a great many for the proposed end: Nor does it hinder, but that many fall
into vice, and dissolution: And that others remain still ignorant, and even
many times become greater Fops than they were before. If they had before any
thing of breeding, of briskness or civility, they lose it by their study. All
goes against them, and they against all things; So that one would say, that
they had spent their youth in traveling in Foreign Countries where they had
only frequented the Society of Salvages; so much Clownishness, and rudeness of
manners they bring home with them. All that they have Learned is like goods of
Coutreband, which they either cannot or dare not vend: And if they have a mind
to venture into the World again, and therein appear as they ought, they are
obliged to go to School to the Ladies, there to learn garb and complaisance;
and all that outside which now adays compleats a Gentleman.

If we come nearer, and consider this: Instead of undervaluing the Women,
because they have no great Stock of Learning, we should the rather esteem them
happy: Since that if on the one hand they are thereby destitute of the means to
set off the parts, and advantages which are the peculiar on the other hand,
they have not the occasion to spoil or lose them: Who, notwithstanding that
defect, advance in Virtue, Wit, and good Grace as fast as they grow in Years.
So that, should we without prejudice, or a biased Judgment, compare young men
when they come new off of the press, with the Women of their own (...) and not
know how either the one or the other had been bred, we could not but believe,
their education to have been quite contrary.

The outside alone, the air of the face, the looks, the gate, the countenance,
and the gestures, in Women, speak somewhat 'posed, grave, and discreet, which
sufficiently distinguishes them from men; none can be more reserved than they,
words of double meaning never escape their lips, the smallest equivocation
wounds their ears, nor can they endure the sight of any thing that choaks
modesty.

The Conduct of most men is of a quite different stamp. Their March is often
rash, and precipitant; their gestures odd and Antic, their eyes Rambling and
un-settled: And are never more pleased than when they are entertained and fed
with things which ought either be kept silent or hid.

Let us but converse a little with Women, and that which the world call the
Learned, either in company together, or a part by themselves, and we shall see
the difference that is between the one and other. One would say that the men
had stuffed their heads with study, that they might Clogg, and confound their
Wits. Nothing comes clearly from them, and the pain that they put themselves
to, to pump for the words, quite spoils the relish of that which they might
have said to purpose; So that unless the natural Wit be good, or they in
company with men of their one Gang, hardly can they entertain an
houres-Discourse.

Women on the contrary, express neatly, and in order, what they conceive: Their
words cost them nothing; they begin, and go on at their pleasure, and when they
have their liberty, their fancy supplies them always with inexhautible
liberality. They have the gift of proposing their thoughts, with a sweetness,
and complacency that insinuates as strongly as Reason: When men on the other
hand, do it in a manner rough and dry.

Let any Questions be started in presence of Women of clearer Wit, they have
presently the point that is drove at; They consider it under more appearances:
What is said to purpose, finds sooner acceptance in their minds; And when that
we are a little known to them, and that they have no suspicion of us, we find
their prejudices not so strong as those of men; nor they thereby so armed
against the truth proposed. They are altogether averse from contradiction, and
dispute, to which the learned are so addicted: they nibble not vainly at words,
nor make use of those Scientifick, and Mysterious terms which are so proper to
cover Ignorance; but all what they say is sense and intelligible.

I have taken delight to entertain my self with Women, of all the different
conditions that I could meet-with, both in the Town, and Country; to the end,
that I might discover the best, and worst; and I have found amongst those of
them whom necessity, and labor, had not rendered stupid, more sound judgment
than in the most part of the works, which pass with great credit among the
vulgarly learned of the age.

In speaking concerning God, it never entered into one of their heads to tell
me, that she conceived Him, under the shape of a venerable old man: On the
contrary, they said, that they would not imagine, (that is) represent him to
themselves, under any appearance like to men: That they conceived there was a
God, because they could not comprehend that they themselves, or that all other
things which did environ them, could be the work of chance, or of any creature:
and that the conduct of their affairs being no effect of their prudence,
because that the success thereof rarely answered the ways, and methods, which
they had taken; it must needs be the effect of Divine Providence.

When I asked them, What they thought of their Souls; they never made me
answer: That it is a very subtle, and thin flame, or a disposition of the
Organs of their Bodies; nor that it was capable of extension, or contraction.
On the contrary, they answered, that they perceived very well, that it was
distinct from their bodies; And that the greatest certainty that they could say
thereof, was that they believed it altogether unlike any of those things, which
they perceived by Sense; but that if they had been Book-learned, they should
have known to a Hair what it was.

It never enters into the Head of a Nurse, to say as Physicians do, that
their Sick began to be better, because the Concoctive Faculty performs
(laudably) its Functions: And when they see a great Quantity of Blood stream
from a Vein, they laugh at those who deny a Communication of the others
therewith by Circulation.

When I would know of them, Why it was that they believed, that the Stones
exposed to the Sun, and Southern-Showers, did sooner wear, than those that lay
to the North? There was none simple enough to Answer me, That it comes to pass
by reason that the Moon gnawes them with sharp Teeth, as some Philosophers
pleasantly fancy; but that (they being dried by the Heat of the Sun) the
following Showers made them the more easily moulder.

I have demanded (at least) of twenty for the nonce, If they believed not that
God (by an Obediential, or Extraordinary Power) could elevate a Stone to the
Beatifick Vision? But could never draw from them any other Answer, but that
they thought, I jested with them by such a kind of Question.

The greatest Fruit that we can expect from Learning, is a just Discerning, and
exactitude in Distinguishing of that which is true and evident, from what is
false and obscure; thereby to avoid falling into Error, or Mistake. People are
easily inclined to believe, that Men (at least such as pass for Knowing) have
in this the better of the Women. Nevertheless, if we have but a little of that
Discerning and Exactitude of which I spoke, we shall find that it is one of the
Qualities they want most; For, they are not only obscure, and confused in their
Discourses, (by which good Quality they often sway, and attract the Belief of
simple and credulous Persons); but they even reject that which is evident, and
scoff at those who speak in a manner clear and intelligible, as too easy and
common: They fall first upon any Obscurity proposed to them, as being the most
Mysterious of the rest. To Convince them of this, we need do no more but hear
them with a little Patience; and afterward, oblige them to explain themselves.

The Women are of an Humor very far from this. We may observe, that such as
have a little seen the World, cannot endure that even their own Children should
speak Latin in their Presence; they mistrust others that do so; and often say,
That they are afraid lest some Impertinency be hid under such strange Attires.

We never hear them meddle with the sacred Terms of Arts, as Men call them;
Nay, they cannot be made so much as get them by ^eart, though their Memories be
very good, and that they have heard them often repeated. And when we speak to
them in obscure and hard Words, they frankly confess, that they want Wit and
Understanding to reach our Meaning; or other-wise, they well perceive, that
such as Cant after that manner, want Knowledge and Learning to speak other-wise.

In fine, if we consider the several ways and methods, whereby the Men, and
the Women, bring forth what they know; we must judge, that the one are like to
Laborers that work in Quarries, who (with great Pain) win from thence rude and
shapeless Stones; And that the Women (like skillful Architects, and Masons)
polish, and fitly place in Work, what they have put into their Hands.

We find an infinite number of Women, who not only Judge of things with as
much Exactness, as if they had had the most exquisite Education; without either
Prejudices, or confused Notions (the ordinary Stumbling Block of the Learned);
but also, see many, that (with a Judgment clear and just) can Discourse of the
Objects of the most Refined Sciences, as if they had always studied them.

They express their Minds with a Grace; and have the Knack by hitting on the
best Terms in use, to speak more with one word than Men can do with many. If we
Discourse with them of Languages in general, they have that pitch of Thoughts
which is not to be found but in the ablest Grammarians: And, in short, They are
observed to draw more from Custom alone, for the embellishing of their
Language, than the most part of Men from Study and Practice both together.

Eloquence is a Talent so natural, and peculiar to them, that no Body can
dispute it: They persuade what they please; and can Indite and Defend without
the help of Laws: So that, there are but few Judges, who have not proved them
the most prevalent Proctors. Can there be any thing more weighty, or Elegant,
than the Letters of several Ladies upon all the Subjects that fall under
ordinary Conversation, and principally upon the Passions? The Movements of
which, make up all the beauty and secret of Rhetoric. They handle them with so
delicate a Touch, and express them so Naturally, that we are obliged to
confess, that we feel them to be such as they speak them; and that all the
Oratory of the World is not able to give to Men, that which costs nothing to
Women. The Flights of Eloquence, Poesy, Harangues, Sermons, and Discourses,
soar not at all above their reach; And nothing is wanting to their Critics,
but the Rules, and a few Terms of Art.

I am not ignorant, that this Treatise it self, will not escape their Censure;
and that there are many who will find fault with it: Some will condemn it, as
not at all proportionate to the Grandeur, and Dignity of the Subject: That the
Strain of it is not so Gallant, the Style so Noble, nor the Expressions so
Lofty and Elevated as was fit: That there are several Passages slightly
handled, where many Important Remarks might have been employed: But I hope my
Good Will, and the Design which I proposed, to speak nothing but Truth, and to
avoid the forced Expressions which savor of Romance, will plead Excuse for me
at their Hands.

They have (moreover) this Advantage, That the Eloquence of Action is in them
much more lively than in Men: There, Men alone lets us see, that they intend so
to speak, as to gain the Point.

Their Air is noble and great, their Port free and Majestuous, their Carriage
decent, their Gestures natural, their Style engaging, their Words easy, and
their Voice sweet and melting. The Beauty and Grace of their Discourse (when it
enters once the Mind), opens to them the Door of the Heart. If they reason of
Good and Evil, on their Countenance appears that Character of Integrity, which
renders the Persuasion more prevalent: And when they would excite Love for
Virtue, their Heart is seen on their Lips; and the Image which they give
thereof (decked with the Ornaments of Discourse and Graces, which are so
peculiar to them) appears a hundred times more Lovely.

It is pretty to hear a Woman, that sets herself to plead; how clearly she
explains, and unties all the Knots and Labyrinths of Affairs; precisely states
her own, and Parties Pretensions: Discovers what has given ground to the Suit,
and the manner how she has managed it; what Engines she has set a work in all
her Proceedings; and how (in all things) she shows a certain Capacity in
Business, which is wanting to the most part of Men.

It is this which makes me think, that if they made it their business to study
Law, they would succeed in it (at least) as well as we; But we see, that Peace
and Justice is their study; With Grief they hear of Differences, and with Joy
endeavor to take them up friendly: Their Care in that, makes them find out
Turns, and singular Expedients, for the Reconciling of Minds; And, upon the
Conduct of their own, or their Neighbors Families, they naturally make these
Reflections of Equity; upon which, all the knowledge of Law and Justice is
founded.

In the Rehearsals of those who are Witty, there is always some pleasingness
with order, which is not to be found in ours: They discern what is proper, or
impertinent to the Subject; decide the interests; describe the persons, with
their true and natural Characters; unfold the intrigues, and trace the greatest
as well as the least, when they set thereon. This is evidently to be seen in
the Histories, and Romances of ingenious Ladies who are still alive.

How many are there that Learn as much at Sermons, in Discourse, and some
little books of Piety, as many Doctors with Thomas Aquinas in their studyes, or
upon their deskes? and speak with that solidity, and depth about the highest
Mysteries of all the Christian Morality; that they might often pass for great
Divines, if they did but wear a liar, or could Lugg into play Latin sentences.

Women seem born to practice Physic, and to restore the sick to health; for
the neatness and complying humor eases one half of the distemper; and they
are not only proper to apply remedies, but likewise to invent: They find out an
infinite number, which are commonly called Small, because they cost less than
those of Galen or Hippocrates, and are not prescribed by Receipt, but which are
by so much the more easy, and secure, as they are simple and natural. In fine,
they make their observations in their practices, with so much exactness, and
discourse thereof with so good reason; That they often render useless all the
Places of the Schools.

Amongst the country Women, those that labor in the fields, are wonderfully
skillful in the odd, and unconstant Freaks of Seasons; and their Almanacks are
a great deal more certain than those, which are printed from the hands of
Astrologers. They explain naturally the fertility and barrenness of years, from
the Winds, Rains, and what else is produced by the change of VVeather; so that
no body can hear them discourse thereof, without pity and compassion of the
Learned, who charge all these Effects or Aspects, Conjunctions, Ascendencies of
Planets and the like; which makes me think, that if Women had been taught,
that, the alterations to which the body of man is subject, might come upon him
by reason of his particular constitution, his exercise, the climate wherein he
lives, his food, education, and different occurrences of Life; they had never
let it enter in their Heads, to have referred these Various Inclinations and
Changes to the Influencies of Stars; Bodies at so many Thousand Miles distant
from us.

I confess, there are some Sciences, of which Women are not at all heard speak;
because they are not the Sciences of ordinary Vent, nor Society. Alegebra,
Geometry, and the Optics, never (or rarely) leave Studies, and Learned
Academies, to come into the Crowd. And, as their greatest use is, to give just
Measures to our Thoughts, they ought not to appear in ordinary Converse; but
secretly, like hidden Springs that move, and make great Machins Play: my
Meaning is, that we should make such Application of them in the Subjects of
Converse and Entertainment, as to think and speak truly, and Geometrically,
without making great show of our Art.

All these Observations on the Qualities of the Mind, may be easily gathered
amongst Women of a middle Condition; But if we advance as far as the Court,
and be admitted into the Entertainments of Ladies, there is quite another thing
to be Remarked. It seems that their Genius is Naturally suited to their
Quality; their Quaintness, and polite Discerning, speaks a frame of Spirit,
delicate, fine, and easy; and somewhat Great and Noble, which is their own.
We may say, that Objects (like Men) approach them with Respect; they always
see them in their best Dress, and speak of them with an Air beyond the Common.
In a word, show a Man that has a taste, two Letters of Ladies of a different
Rank, and he shall easily know which of them is Highest in Quality.

How many Ladies have there been, and how many are there still, who ought to be
placed amongst the number of the Learned, if we assign them not a Higher
Sphere? The Age wherein we live has produced more of these, than all the past.
And as they have in all things run parallel with Men, upon some Particular
Reasons, they ought more to be esteemed than they: For, it behoved them to
surmount the Softness wherein their Sex is bred, renounce the Pleasures and
ness, to which Custom had condemned them, overcome certain public Impediments
that removed them from study, and to get above those disadvantagious Notions,
which the Vulgar conceive of the Learned; besides, those of their own Sex in
general: All this they have performed. And whether it be, that these
Difficulties have rendered their Wit more quick and penetrating, or that these
Qualities are the peculiar of their Nature, they have (proportionably) made
Progress and Advancements beyond Men.

It may be said nevertheless (without diminishing the Sentiments which are due
to such famous Ladies), that it is occasion, and External means, which has
advanced them to this State, as well as the more Learned amongst us; and that
there are infinite numbers of Women, which could have done no less, had their
Advantages been Equal.

And, seeing it is great Injustice to believe, that all Women are Indiscreet,
because we know five or six to be so; we ought also to be so equitable, as to
judge their Sex capable of Sciences, since we see many that have raised
themselves to a perfection therein.

It is commonly believed amongst us, that Turks, Barbarians, and wild Savages,
are not so proper for learning as the people of Europe; though it be certain,
that if we found five or six of them here, that had the capacity or title of
Doctor (which is not at all impossible) they would correct our opinion; and
confess, that these being men like to our selves, they are capable of the same
things; and that if they had been taught, they would not have yielded to us in
the least. The Women, with whom we live, deserve surely as much as Barbarians,
and Savages, to oblige us to entertain thoughts no less reasonable or
advantageous for them.

But if the headstrong vulgar (notwithstanding these observations) will still
stand upon it, that the Women are not so fit for Arts, and Sciences as we are;
they ought at least to acknowledge, that they have less need of them. For it is
for two ends that we apply our selves to Learning; The one, that we may attain
to a true knowledge of the objects of our Sciences; and the other, that by such
knowledge, we may rise to virtue: So that in this our short life, Knowledge
being but the Handmaid to Virtue; and the Women in possession of this: we may
conclude, that by a particular happiness, they have gained the principal
advantages of Sciences, without having ever taken the pains to study them.

What we see daily, is sufficient to convince us, that they are no less
Christians than men; They receive the Gospel with Simplicity and Humility; and
in following the Rules and Maxims thereof, are exemplary: Their reverence
toward Religion, has always appeared so great, that they are esteemed
without contradiction more devout and pious than we: or, though it be true,
that their worship sometimes goes too far; yet therein I cannot find them so
culpable; since the ignorance wherein they have been bred, is the necessary
cause of that excess. If their Zeal be undiscreet, their Persuasion is at
least true; And we may affirm, that if they had a clearer sight of Virtue, they
would embrace it after another manner; since they cleave to it so fast, even
through obscurity and darkness it self.

It seems, that mercy and compassion which is the Virtue of the Gospel is in
love with their Sex* The calamity of their Neighbor no sooner touches their
mind, but it pierces their heart, and brings tears in their eyes. Is it not
their hands that in public afflictions distribute the largest Charity? And is
it not at this day the Ladys that take the particular care of the poor and sick
in the parishes, visit them in prisons, and serve them in the Hospitals? Is it
not these Religious Nuns, dispersed in every quarter, who have the charge at
certain hours of the day, to carry to such their food, and necessary remedies;
and have thereby deserved the name of that Charity, which they have so worthily
practiced.

In fine; If there were no other Women in the world that discharged this Virtue
toward their Neighbors but those who attend the sick in that great Hospital,
the L'Hotel-Di^u of Paris; I cannot think that with Justice men could pretend
to the advantage above their Sex therein. These are properly the Virgins, with
whom the Galleries of the Illustrious, and Noble Women, ought to be enriched:
Of their life it is that we should sing the highest Elogies, and honor their
death, with the most excellent Panegyricks: Since here it is that we may see
the Christian Religion, that is to say, truly Heroicke Virtue, practiced up to
the rigor, both in it is precepts, and counsels; by young Virgins, who
Renouncing the World and themselves, embrace a perpetual Chastity, and Poverty,
take their Cross, and that the most heavy Cross of the world, and render
themselves for the rest of their days, under the Yoke of Jesus Christ: Who
Consecrate themselves to an Hospital, where the inffirm of all sorts, of all
countries and Religions are indifferently received, there to serve all without
distinction, and to change themselves (according to the example of their Lord
and Husband) with all the infirmities of mankind: without being discouraged by
having their eyes Continually smitten with the most horrid of Spectacles, their
ears with the reproaches and cries of the sick, and their smelling with all
the infectious scents of Humane putrefaction: and who, for a mark of that
Spirit which does guide them, carry in their arms from bed to bed, and comfort
the poor wretches, not in vain words; but by the effectual, and personal
Example of patience, and invincible Charity.

Is there any thing amongst Christians to be conceived greater than this? And
yet, Other Women are no less inclined to assist, and comfort their neighbors;
they want nothing but opportunity, when other business does not divert them
therefrom. And I think it no less unworthy to imagine from thence, (as the
vulgar commonly do) that Women are naturally servants to men; than to pretend
that they, who have received talents, and particular endowments from God, are
servants, and slaves to those, for whose good they employ them.

The conduct of Women, in what kind of life soever they embrace, has always
somewhat remarkable. It seems that such who live single, and yet keep their
freedom in the world, remain only there to be a pattern, and give example to
others. Christian modesty appears in their countenance and attire, and Virtue
makes their chiefest Ornament. They wholly separate themselves from worldly
Conversation and pastimes; and their application the works of Piety, and
Religion, gives clear proof, that they have only refused the cares, and trouble
of Marriage, that they might enjoy a greater liberty of mind, and be obliged to
nothing else but to please God.

There are as many Monasteries under the government of Women as of Men, and
their lives therein no less exemplary. There, the recourse is greater, the
discipline no less Austere; and the Abbesses of no less worth than the Abbots.
They setle Rules with so admirable Wisdom, and Govern their Nuns with such
prudence, that seldom amongst them happens any disorder: and, in short, the
fame of Religious houses, and the great Rents which they possess, are the
fruits of the good order of their Superiors.

Marriage is a state of life, the most natural, and ordinary to men; when once
they are engaged therein, it is Death that must discharge them, and there they
spend these periods of age, where reason ought to be the chief guide, over the
different accicidents of Nature and Fortune (to which this Condition of Life is
liable) exercising them who live therein more than others, and gives them
occasion thereby to give greater trial of their Parts.

A little Experience is sufficient to inform us, That the Women here are more
fit and useful than we; For, young Maids are capable to order a House, at that
Age, when Men stand still in need of a Master. And the most proper Expedient to
reclaim a young Man, and restore him to the Right Way, is, to give him a Wife;
who may reclaim him by her Example, moderate his Extravagancies, and win him
from his Debauches.

What Compliance does not Wives use, that they may live peaceably with their
Husbands? They submit to their Humors, do nothing without their Advice, lay
constraint upon themselves in many things for fear to displease them, and even
deprive themselves of honest and lawful Recreations, to free them from
Suspicion.

It is well enough known, which of the two Sexes is the most faithful to the
other, bears more patiently the Misfortunes that happen in Marriage; and
thereby make appear greater Wisdom, and Discretion.

All the Families (for the most part) are Ruled by the Wives, to whom their
Husbands resign the Government: And the Care that therein they take of the
Education of their Children, is more considerable to Families, and more
important to the Commonwealth, than that which they take of the Estate; they
bequeath themselves wholly to their Good, and Welfare: The Fear which they are
in, left any hurt should befall them, is often so great, that (many times) it
robs them of their Rest: They deprive themselves often of their most necessary
Enjoyments, to the end that they may want nothing: They cannot see them suffer
in the least, without suffering themselves to the bottom of their Souls. And we
may say, That it is their greatest pain, that they cannot ease them, by
charging themselves with their Troubles.

Who can be ignorant, how earnestly they labor to instruct them in the ways of
Virtue, as much as their tender Age is capable of? They endeavor to make them
know and fear God, and teach them to Worship him in a manner suitable, and
proportionate, to their Years: They take care to place them in the hands of
Masters, as soon as they are fit; and choose such (with all imaginable Caution)
who may improve them in their Breeding: And, which is most to be esteemed, they
always join good Example to their Instruction.

If we should descend into an entire Catalogue, and Retail of all the
Occurrencies of Life, and of all the Virtues which Women practice therein, and
thereof examine the most Important Circumstances; we might have Subject enough
to enlarge into a most ample Panegyric. We might represent how far their
Sobriety in Eating, and Drinking, does go; their Patience in Trouble; their
Courage, and Fortitude, in supporting Affliction. Fatigues, Watchings, and
Fastings; their Moderation in Pleasures, and Passions; their Inclination to do
good; their Prudence in Affairs; their Integrity in all their Actions. And, in
a word, we might make appear, that there is no kind of Virtue, which is not
common to them with us; But, on the other hand, that there are a great many
considerable Faults, which are peculiar to Men.

These are the general and ordinary Observations, upon what concerns Women in
reference to the Qualities of the Mind; the Use and Practice of which, is the
only thing that ought to put a Distinction amongst Men.

Now, since there is not any Rancounter, where Men may not discover the
Inclination, the Genius, the Vice, the Virtue, and the Capacity of Persons;
those (who would undeceive themselves concerning this Subject of Women) have
always occasion to do so in Public, or in Private; at the Court, and at the
Convent; in Recreations, and Exercises; with the Poor, as well as the Rich; in
whatsoever Condition, or Quality they be. And, if we consider sincerely, and
without Interest, what may be observed on their behalf, we shall find, that if
there be some Appearances which seem less favorable to Women, there are also
more which are most advantageous for them; that it is not for want of Merit
(but of good Luck, and Strength) that their Condition is not Equal to ours:
And, in fine, that the common Opinion is but a popular, and ill-grounded
Prejudice.

THE WOMAN as Good as the MAN, OR, THE Equality of the two Sexes.
The Second Part
Wherein is made appear, That the Reasons which may be adduced against the
Opinion of The Equality of the two Sexes, from Poets, Orators, Historians,
Lawyers, and Philosophers; are all Idle, and Fruitless.
THat which confirms the Vulgar in the thought which they have of Women, is,
That they find it propt, and supported, by the Sentiment of the Learned: So
that, the Public Voice of those who Rule by Credit, agreeing in certain
general Appearances, to the Disadvantage of Women; it is not to be wondered
at, to see them so ill entertained in the Minds of the Ignorant, and Simple.
And, it happens in this as in a great many other things, that Men confirm
themselves in one Mistake, by another, Prejudice.

The Notion of Truth being Naturally pinned to that of Knowledge, Men fail not
to take that for true, which is proposed to them by those who have the
Reputation of being Learned: And, as the number of those which are such only by
name, is far greater than of these who are so indeed; the generality of Men
(who only count Heads) do rank themselves amongst the former; and do so much
the more willingly embrace their Opinions, as they find them conformable to
such as they have already entertained.

Wherefore, seeing that Poets, Orators, Historians and Philosophers, proclaim
(likewise) Women to be Inferior, less Noble, and Perfect, than Men, they
persuade themselves thereof the more, because they are ignorant, that their
Knowledge is the same Prejudice with their own (though of somewhat greater
extent, and more specious); and that they do no more, but join, to the
Impression of Custom the Sentiments of the Ancients; upon the Authority of
whom, all their Certainty is grounded. And I find, that (in respect of their
Sex) they that have studied, and they that have no Reading, fall commonly into
the same Mistake; which is, To judge, that whatsoever they (whom they esteem)
do say, is true; because, they are already persuaded, that they say well;
instead of forbearing to think that they say well, till that they are assured,
that they speak nothing but what is true.

Poets and Orators, having no other Design but to please and persuade;
Probability, and appearance of Truth, serves them to deal with the most part of
Men: So that, Exaggerations and Hyperbolies, being most proper to that purpose,
in Magnifying and Raising their Notions, according as they have need, they
render Good or Evil, Small or Great, at their Pleasure: And, by a very ordinary
fetch, they attribute to all Women in general, that which they find but in
some of them in particular. It is enough to them, to have known some Women
Hypocrites, to make them say, That the whole Sex is Guilty of that Failing. The
Ornaments with which they set off their Discourse, do wonderfully contribute to
gain them the Credit of such, as are not upon their Guard. They speak smoothly,
and with Grace; and employ some certain, pretty, taking (and not common) Forms
of Speech; whereby they dazzle the Mind, and hinder the discerning of Truth.

Men see a great many pieces (in appearance) very strong against Women, and
yield thereunto; because they know not what it is, that makes up the Force and
Verity thereof; that it is only the Figures of Eloquence, Metaphors, Proverbs,
Descriptions, Similitudes, Emblems, and other Flowers of Rhetoric: And,
because that there is ordinarily a good deal of Wit and Art in such kind of
Works, they imagine (likewise) that there is as much of Truth.

One persuades himself, that Women love to hear Tales told them; because he
has (perhaps) read the Sonnet of Sarrazin, upon the Fall of the first Woman;
whom he feignes only to have slipped, for lending her Ear to the Flourishes of
the Devil. It is true, the Fancy is pleasing, the Cast pretty, the Application
proper enough to his Design, and the Fall most Ingenious: But, if we examine
the Piece to the bottom, and turn it into Prose, we shall find, that there can
be nothing more false or faint.

There are some People silly enough to imagine, that Women are more inclined
to Fury than Men; because they have read, that the Poets have represented the
Furies under the shape of Women; without considering, that this is only a
Poetical Fancy: And that Painters, who paint the Harpyes with the face of a
Woman, paint likewise the Devil under the Appearance of a Man.

I have known, some undertake to prove Women Inconstant, from this, That a
famous Latin Poet has said, That they are subject to a continual Change; and
that another French Poet has pleasantly compared them to a Weathercock, which
turns with the Wind; Not minding, that all these manners of speaking are only
fit to tickle, but not instruct, the Mind.

Vulgar Eloquence is a speaking Optic, which represents Objects under what
shape and color Men please; and there is not any Virtue, which may not be made
appear Vice, by the Means which Eloquence affords.

There is nothing more ordinary, than to find among the Authors, that Women
are not so noble or perfect as Men; but, for Reasons, we see none: So that,
there is great likelihood, that they have taken their Persuasions as the
Vulgar do.

Women have no share with us in External Advantages, as Sciences and Authority,
wherein Men commonly place Perfection; and therefore, they are not so perfect
as we.

But, to be seriously convinced of this, it ought to be proved, That they are
not thereto admitted, because they are not at all proper; but that is not so
easy as Men conceive: Nor shall it be difficult (in the Sequel) to make the
contrary appear; and that the Error arises from this, That Men have but a
confused Notion of Perfection and Nobility.

All the Arguments of those who maintain, That the lovely Sex is neither so
Noble, nor Excellent as ours, are founded on this, That Men being the Masters,
they believe that all is their own: And I am assured, that they would more
strongly believe the contrary, (I mean, that the Men are only cut out for the
women) if they had all the Authority in their Hands, as in the Empire of the
Amazons.

It is true, that here amongst us they discharge no Offices, but what are
esteemed the Lowest: And, it is also true, that (upon that account) neither
Religion, nor Reason, values them the less. There is nothing base and low but
Vice, nor great but Virtue: And, Women showing greater Virtue than Men (in
their lesser Employments), deserve likewise to be more esteemed. And yet, I
know not, whether (in regard of their ordinary Charge, which is to Nurse and
Bring-up their Children) they are not worthy of the first Place in Civil
Society.

Were we free, and without Commonwealth, we would not assemble our selves
together; but for the better Preservation of Life, in the peaceable Enjoyment
of those things which are necessary thereto; and would have greater Esteem for
those who should hereunto contribute in greatest measure.

It is by reason of this, that we are accustomed to look on our Prince, as the
chief Person of the State; because his Care and Foresight is the most general,
and of greatest Extent; and, by Proportion, we Respect those that are under
him. Most part of Men prefer Soldiers to Judges, because they directly oppose
themselves to those who (in most terrible manner) attack our Lives; and every
one sets a Value upon Persons, as they judge them more or less useful. So that,
Women seem to be the most Estimable, since their Service (which they render to
the Public) is incomparably greater than that of all others whosoever.

Men might absolutely dispense with Princes, Soldiers, and Merchants, as they
did in the beginning of the World; and as Savages do still, even to this Day:
But, in our Infancy, we cannot be without Women. In States that are well
pacified, the most part of those who have Authority, are as Men dead and
useless; but Women never cease to be necessary to us. The Ministers of Justice
are only proper to preserve Goods and Estates, to those who possess them; but
Women, to preserve Life. Soldiers are employed for Men, grown up, and capable
to defend themselves; but Women labor for Men, when as yet they know not what
they are, if they have Enemies, or Friends; and at that time, when they have no
other Arms but Tears, against such as attack them. Masters, Magistrates, and
Princes, do not oftentimes bestir themselves, but for Glory, and particular
Interest; when Women do nothing but for the good of the Children, whom they
breed. In short The Pains, the Cares, the Troubles, and Assiduities, to which
they expose themselves, can in no wise be matched in any other state (of Civil
Society) whatsoever.

There is nothing (then) but Fancy, which renders them less Valuable. Men would
largely Reward him who had tamed a Tiger: Such who have the Skill to train
Horses, Apes, and Elephants, are well considered of; and we speak, with Elogy,
of a Man that has composed a small Work, which has cost him but little time
and pains; And shall we neglect Women, that spend many Years in breeding and
forming of Children? If we enquire into the Reason thereof, we shall find, it
is, Because the one is (only) more ordinary than the other.

What Historians say to the Prejudice of Women, makes deeper Impression on the
Minds of Men, than the Discourses of Orators; For, as they seem to put forth
nothing of their own Heads, so is their Testimony less suspected: Besides, that
it is suitable to that whereof Men are already persuaded, when they report
Women to have been in former times, the same which they are believed to be at
present. But all the Authority which they have upon the spirits of Men, is
nothing but a very common Prejudice, in regard of Antiquity; which Men
represent to themselves, under the Image of a Venerable Old Man, who (having
much Wisdom and Experience) is incapable of being deceived, or of speaking any
thing but Truth.

Whilst, in the mean time, the Ancients are no less Men than we are, and as
much subject to Error; and we ought no more at present to assent to their
Opinions, than we would have done in their own times. Men heretofore considered
Women as now they do, and with as little Reason: So, whatsoever Men say
concerning that, ought to be suspected; seeing they are both Judge and Party.
And when any one brings against them the Sentiments of a thousand Authors, that
History is only to be considered, as a Tradition of Prejudices and Mistakes.
There is, also, as little Fidelity and Exactitude in Ancient Histories, as
there is in Familiar Rehearsals; wherein we sufficiently know, that there is
(almost) none at all. They that have wrote Them, have therewith mingled their
Passions and Interest; and the most part (having but had confused Notions of
Vice and Virtue) have often mistaken the one for the other. And those, who
likewise Read Them (with the ordinary Pre-occupation) fail not to run into the
same Fault.

In the Prejudice wherein they have been engaged, they have made it their
business, to exaggerate and raise the Virtues, and Advantages, of their own
Sex; and to debase and weaken the Merit of Women, by a contrary Interest: This
is so easy to be discovered, that I need not adduce Instances.

Notwithstanding if we can but a little rip-up what is past, we may find enough
to prove, that Women have not in any thing yielded to men; and that the Virtue
which they have made appear, has been more excellent: if we sincerely consider
all the Circumstances thereof, we may observe, that they have given as great
marks of Wit, and Capacity, upon all occasions; That there have been some who
have governed great States and Empires with Wisdom, and moderation, that cannot
be paralleled: others who have rendered Justice with an integrity equal to that
of the Athenian Areopagites; Many, who by their prudence, and counsels, have
restablished peace, and tranquillity to Kingdoms, and a throne to their
Husbands. Some have been seen at the head of Armies, or with a courage more
than Heroical defending themselves upon the walls of Towns. How many have
there been, whose Chastity could receive no blemish, neither by the terrible
threats, nor splendid promises which men made to them, and who with a Generous,
and astonishing Gallantry, have endured the most horrible torments, for the
cause of Religion! How many have there been, who have rendered themselves as
complete as men in all sorts of Sciences! who have dived into the most Curious
Secrets of Nature, the most quaint of Policy, the most solid of Morality, and
who have Elevated themselves to the highest Pitch of Christian Divinity! So
that History, which the prejudiced abuse against that Sex to abase it, may
serve to those who look thereon with the eyes of equity, to prove that it is in
all respects as noble as our own.

The Authority of Laws has a great Weight upon many men, as to that which
concerns the Women, because they make particular profession of rendering to
every one their right. They place the Wives under the Juridiction of their
Husbands, as children under the power of their fathers; and allege, that it is
Nature that has assigned them the smaller functions of Society, and placed
them at distance from public Authority.

Men think themselves sufficiently grounded to say the same after them: but I
hope it is lawful without wounding the Respect which is their due, to differ
from them in Judgment. We should strangely puzzle them, If we obliged them to
explain themselves intelligibly about that which they call Nature in this case,
and make us understand in what manner she has distinguished the two Sexes, as
they pretend.

We must consider that they who have made or compiled the Law, bebeing men,
have favored their own Sex, as Women possibly might have done had they been
in their place: And Laws being made since the Constitution of Societies in the
same manner in respect of Women as they are at present; the Lawyers who had
likewise their prejudice, have attributed to Nature a distinction, which is
only drawn from Custom, besides that it was not at all necessary to change
the order which they found setl^d, for obtaining the end that they proposed,
which was the good government of a State by the administration of justice. To
be short, if they should be headstrong, to hold, that Women are naturally in a
condition of dependence upon men, we might fight them with their own weapons,
since they themselves acknowledge dependence, and servitude, to be contrary to
the order of Nature, which renders all mankind equal.

Dependence being a mere Corporal, and Civil Relation, ought not to be
considered but as an effect of chance, force, or custom; except in the case of
Children to those who have given them life. And yet neither does that pass a
certain age, wherein men being supposed to have reason, and experience enough
to guide themselves, are freed by the Laws, from the authority of an other.

Amongst persons of an equal or not much different age, there ought only to be
a reasonable subordination, according to which those who have less
understanding, willingly submit themselves to such as have more. And if we
remove the Civil Privileges, which the Laws have bestowed on men, and which
establish them heads of the family; we cannot find betwixt them, and their
wives, any other submission but that of Experience, and Knowledge: both one,
and other freely engage themselves at the same time, when the Wives have
as much, and often more Judgment than the Husbands. Their Promises and Covenants
of Marriage are reciprocal; and the power equal upon one and others Body; And
if the Laws give the Husband more Authority over the estate, Nature allows
the Wife more power, and right, over the Children. And as the will of the one
is not the Rule of the other; if the wife be obliged to do what the Husband
minds her of, he is no less bound to follow the advertisements of the Wife,
when she tells him his duty: And, except it be in matters just, and reasonable,
the Wife is not to be constrained to submit her self to the pleasure of her
Husband, unless youll say that he is stronger; which is the dealing of a Turk
with a Moore, and not of Men of reason.

We shall not need much trouble to rid our selves of the opinion of the
Learned, of whom I have spoken: because we may easily be satisfied that their
profession does not engage them to so exact an enquiry into the nature of
things; Appearances, and probabilities, are sufficient for Poets and Orators;
The Testimony of Antiquity to Historians; And Custom and Practice to Lawyers,
to bring them to their intended end: But as to the Sentiment of Philosophers,
we must not so easily pass it; seeing that they seem to be above all the
preceding considerations, as indeed they ought to be; and that they are thought
to try matters more strictly; which gains them the common credit, and makes it
believed unquestionable what they assert, especially when they contradict not
the received opinions.

So the common People confirm themselves in the opinion, that there is
inequality betwixt the two Sexes, because they see those whose Judgments they
regard as the measures of their own, and the same opinion; not knowing that the
most part of Philosophers walk by no other Rule than that of the Vulgar, and
that it is not by Virtue of Science or Knowledge, that they often dictate
especially concerning the matter in hand. They have carried their prejudices
even to the Schools, where they have learned nothing that might serve to
disengage them therefrom: On the contrary, all their Science is sounded upon
the Judgments that they have made from their Cradle; And with them it is a
crime or Error to call in question that which they believed before the years
of discretion. They are not taught to know Man by the body, nor by the soul:
And that which they teach, commonly may very well serve to prove, that betwixt
us, and beasts, there is no other difference, but that of Lesser and Greater in
the Same kind. They hear not a word of Sexes: They are supposed to know them
sufficiently already; Very far from Examining the Capacity, and real and
natural difference, betwixt them; which is one of the most curious, and
probably also the most important Question of all natural or Moral Philosophy.
They spend whole years and some all their lives, at Trifles, and Entia
Rationis, being no where to be sound without their own Brains; and to plod and
find-out, whether or not, there be beyond the world imaginary Spaces; and
whether the atoms or small dust which appears in the Beams of the Sun, may be
sliced out into infinite parts. What solid ground can we lay upon, what the
learned of this kind say, when we are to treat of serious, and important
matters?

Men may think, nevertheless, that (though they be so ill taught themselves,
yet) their Principles (probably) are sufficient to discover, which of the two
Sexes have (naturally) the advantage of the other; But none can think so, but
such who either know them not, or are pre-possessed thereby. The Knowledge of
our selves, is absolutely necessary to enable us, for the handling of that
Question aright; and especially, the knowledge of our Body, which is the Organ
of Sciences; after the same manner, as for to know how Telescopes, and Glasses
of Approach, magnify the Objects: we must know the Fashion of them. They touch
not this but in passing, no more than they do Truth, and Science; I mean, the
Method of acquiring true and certain Knowledges; without which, it is
impossible to examine, Whether or not Women be as capable thereof, as our
selves? And, without amusing my self to repeat the Notions that they give us
thereon, I shall declare (in general) what my Thoughts are thereof.

All Mankind being made alike, have the same Sentiments, and Notions, of
Natural things; for example, of Light, Heat, and Hardness; And all the
Knowledge which we labor to gain therefrom, is reduced to this, That we may
truly find out what is the Disposition (internal and external) of every Object,
which produces in us the thoughts, and conceits, which we have of them. All
that Masters can do, to guide us to this Knowledge, is but, So to apply our
Minds to what we remark, that we may examine the Appearances and Effects
thereof, without Precipitation or Prejudice; and to show us the Order, which we
are to observe in the ranking of our Thoughts, for to find what we look for.

For instance, If an Illiterate Person should desire me to explain to him,
Wherein consists the Liquidity of Water; I would not assert any thing, but only
ask him, What he had observed thereof? How, that if Water be not contained in a
Vessel, it sheds? that is to say, that all the Parts thereof separate and
dis-unite of themselves* without the Intermixtion of any other Body; that we
may thrust there-into our Fingers without trouble, and without finding
Resistance as from harder Bodies? And that, in putting therein, Sugar or Salt,
we perceive, that these two Bodies dissolve piece and piece; and that all the
Parcels thereof are dispersed through the several parts of the Liquor.

Hitherto, I should teach him no new thing; And if (after the same manner) I
had told him, What it is to be in Repose, or in Motion; I should have brought
him to acknowledge, that the Nature of Liquors consist in this. That their
insensible Particles are in perpetual Motion; which requires them to be
enclosed in a Vessel, and disposes them to give easy Entry to hard Bodies: And
that the Particles of Water, which are little, glib, and pointed, (insinuating
themselves into the Pores of the Sugar) shake and divide the Parts thereof, by
their Justling; and, moving themselves every way, transport with them into all
the Quarters of the Vessel, that which they have separated.

This Notion of Liquors (which is a Part, taken from the Body of Natural
Philosophy) would appear a great deal more clear, if we saw it in its proper
Place and Order: and it has nothing, which the meanest sort of Women are not
able to understand. The rest of all our Knowledges (being proposed in Order and
Method) have no greater Difficulty: And if we consider attentively, we shall
find, that every Science of Reasoning, requires but less wit and time, than is
necessary to learn to make Point or Tapistry.

In effect, the Notions of Natural things are necessary, and we form them
always after the same manner: Adam had them as we have; Children have them as
Old Men, and Women as Men: And these Idea's are renewed, confirmed, and
entertained, by the continual use of Sense. The Mind is always in Action; and
he that knows well how it proceeds in one thing, discovers (without trouble)
how it works in all others. There is nothing (but More and Less) betwixt the
Impression made by the Sun, and that of a Spark of Fire: And, to think well
thereon, there is neither need of great Skill, nor Exercise of Body.

It is not so, in the Works of which I have spoken. There is need of greater
Application of Spirit; the Idea's thereof being Arbitrary, are harder to be
learned, and retained; which is the cause, that so much time is necessary for
to Learn (well) a Trade, because it depends on long Exercise. There is Skill
required, rightly to observe the Proportions on a Canvas; to Distribute equally
the Silk or the Wool; to mingle with Exactness the Colors; neither to join
too close, nor keep too open, the Points; to place no more in one Rank, than in
another; to make the little Knots imperceptible. In a word, One must know to
make and vary, in a thousand different Ways the Works of Art, to be skillful
therein; when, as in Sciences, there is no more required, but an orderly
viewing of Works already made, and always Uniform: and, all the difficulty of
Success therein, proceeds more from the Incapacity of Masters, than from the
Objects, or Disposition of the Body.

We must not then (any more) wonder to see Men, and Women, (without Study)
entertain themselves, about things which concern Sciences; since the Method of
Teaching of them, serves only to certify our Judgments, which are confounded
by Precipitation, Custom, and Use.

The Notion which we have given of Knowledge (in general) might suffice to
persuade unprejudiced Persons, That Men and Women are equally capable thereof;
But, because the contrary Opinion is most deeply rooted, we must (for the
entire plucking of it up) Fight it by Principles; to the end, that (joining the
Appearances, agreeing to the Beautiful Sex, which have been presented in the
First Part, with the Natural Reasons which we shall here-after adduce) Men may
fully be convinced, in favor of it.

That Women (considered according to the Principles of Sound Philosophy) are as
capable as Men, of all Sorts of Sciences.
IT is easy to be Remarked, That the Difference of Sexes, regards only the
Body: there being no other, but that Part (properly) which serves for the
Production of Men: And, the Spirit concurring no other way but by its Consent
(which it lends to all after the same manner) we may conclude, That in it there
is no Sex at all.

If we consider it in our selves, we find it equal, and of the same Nature in
all Men, and capable of all sorts of Thoughts; The smallest busy it as well as
the greatest; and there is no less required to the right knowing of a Gnat,
than of an Elephant: Whosoever knows wherein consists the Light (and Fire) of a
Sparkle, knows also, the Light of the Sun. When we are accustomed to reflect on
things which only concern the Spirit, we perceive therein all (at least) as
clearly, as in the most material things which are discerned by the senses. I
can discover no greater difference between the Spirit of a dull, and ignorant
man, and of that one who is delicate, and ingenious, than betwixt the Spirit of
the same man considered at the age of ten years, and at the age of Forty: And
since there appears no more betwixt that of the two Sexes, we may affirm,
that their difference is not on that side, the constitution of the body; But
particularly the Education, Exercise, and the impressions that come from all
that does surround us, being every where the Natural, and Sensible causes of so
many diversities as are observed therein.

It is God who unites the Soul to the body of a Woman, as to that of a Man, and
who joins them by the same Laws. The sentiments, the passions, and
inclinations, make and entertain that Union; And the Spirit operating after the
same manner in the one as well as the other, is there equally capable of the
same things.

This is yet more clear, when we consider only the Head, the sole organe of
Sciences, and where the soul exercises all its functions; the most exact
Anatomy remarks to us no difference in this part between Men, and Women, their
brain is altogether like to ours: The impressions of sense are received, and
muster themselves there in the same fashion, and are no otherwise preserved for
Imagination, and Memory. Women hear, as we do, by the ears; they see by the
eyes; and they taste with the Tongue; And there is nothing peculiar in the
disposition of these Organs, but that the Women have them ordinarily more
delicate, which is an advantage. So that the outward objects affects them after
the the same manner, Light by the eyes, and Sound by the ears. Who can hinder
them then to apply themselves to the consideration of themselves? To Examine in
what consists the nature of the soul; how many kinds of thoughts there are, and
how they are excited by occasion of certain corporeal Motions; to consult
afterward the natural Notions, which they have of God; and to begin with
things Spiritual to dispose in order their thoughts, and to frame to themselves
that Science (...) we call, the Metaphysics? (...)

Since they have also eyes, and hands, may they not make themselves, or see
others perform, the dissection of an humane body? consider the Symmetry, and
structure thereof; observe the diversity, difference, and relation of its
parts: their figures, their motion, and functions; the Alterations to which
they are Subject? and to conclude, on the means to preserve them in good
disposition, and to restore it to them, when it is changed.

They need no more for this, but to know the nature of Extrinsical bodies,
which have any reference to their own, discover their Properties, and all that
renders them capable of making any impression good or bad thereon; this is
known by the aid of the Senses, and by the various Experiments that are made
upon them: And Women being equally capable of the one as well as the other,
might learn as well as we, Physic and Medicine.

Is there need of so much understanding, to know, that Breathing is absolutely
necessary for the preservation of life; and that it is performed by the means
of the Air, which entering by the pipe of the nose and mouth, is insinuated
into the lungs, for the cooling of the blood which passes that way in
Circulation, and there causes different Alterations, according as it is more
or less Gross by the Mixture of Vapors, and Exhortations, with which we see it
sometimes blended.

Is it a matter so difficult to discover, that the taste of Food consists on the
part of the body (in the different manner how it is allayed on the tongue) by
the Spitle? There is no Person, but finds after meals, that the Victuals which
then are put into the mouth, being divided quite other ways than those with
which we are Nourished, cause there a Sensation less pleasing. That which
remains to be known of the Functions of Man's body, being considered in order,
have nothing more of difficulty.

The Passions are certainly that which is most Curious in this matter: We may
therein observe two things, the Motions of the body, with the thoughts and
stirrings of the Soul, which concur in them. Women may know this, as easily as
we do And as to the causes which excite Passions, we know how they do it. When
we have once by the study of Natural Philosophy comprehended their manner, how
Circumambient things affect and touch us; And by experience, and use, how we
thereto apply, or separate, our wills and inclinations.

In making regular Meditations upon the objects of the three Sciences lastly
spoken of, a Woman may observe, that the order of her thoughts ought to follow
that of Nature; that then they are exact when they are conform thereto; that
there is nothing but have, and precipitation in our Judgments, which hinders
that exactitude. And marking consequentially the Economy which she has
observed to attain thereto, she may make Reflections, which may serve her as a
Rule for the future, and form to her-self therefrom a Logic.

If it be objected notwithstanding of this, That Women by themselves could
never acquire these knowledges, (which is but said); at least we cannot deny,
but that with the help of Masters, and Books, they might; As the ablest men in
all ages have done.

It is enough to allege the acknowledged property of the Sex, to prove it
capable of understanding the proportions of the Mathematics: And we should
contradict our selves to doubt, that if it applied it self to the making of
Engines, it would succeed as well therein as our own; since we our selves allow
it more invention and artifice.

There is need but of eyes, and a little attention, in observing the
Appearances of nature, To make us remark that the Sun, and all the Luminous
bodies of the Heavens, are real Fires, since they heat, and light us, in the
same manner as the Fires here below; that they appeared successively to answer
to several parts of the earth, and so be able to judge of their Motion and
Course: And whosoever can roll in his head great designs, and set to work the
Movements thereof, may there likewise with exactness turn the whole Machin of
the World, if he have but once well observed the diverse Appearances of the
same.

We have already found in Women, all the Dispositions which render Men proper
for the Sciences, which concern them (separately) in themselves: And, if we
continue to consider them within distance, we shall also fired in them those
which are necessary for the Sciences, which regard them, as tied altogether
with their like in Civil Society.

It is a Fault in Vulgar Philosophy, to place amongst Sciences so great a
Distinction; that, following that peculiar Method of it, we cannot acknowledge
any Tie or Coherence amongst them: which is the cause, that we restrain so much
the Extent of Humane Understanding; imagining to our selves, that the same Man
is never (almost) capable of many Sciences; that, to be fit for Natural
Philosophy or Medicine, one is not thereby proper for Rhetoric or Divinity:
and that there ought to be as many different Capacities, as there are Sciences,
in the World.

This Thought proceeds on the one hand, from this, That Men confound
(ordinarily) Nature with Custom; in taking the Disposition of certain Persons
to one Science, rather than another, for an Effect of their Natural
Constitution; when indeed, it is often but a Casual Inclination, coming from
Necessity Education, or Habit: And, on the other hand, for want of having
Remarked, that there is (properly) but one Science in the World, which is the
Knowledge of our selves; and, that all others are only particular Applications
thereof.

In effect, the Difficulty which we find at this day to learn the Tongues,
Moral Philosophy, and the rest; consists only in this, That we know not how to
referr them to this general Science: From whence, it may have arrived, That all
those who have believed Women capable of Natural Philosophy and Medicine, may
not have therefore judged them capable of the Sciences that we are to speak of.
However, the Difficulty is the same on both sides: It is the business in All,
to think aright: And this we do, by applying seriously our Minds, to the
Objects which represent themselves to us; that we may raise from them clear and
distinct Notions; that we may eye them in all their different Faces and
Relations, and that we may pass no Judgment thereon, but upon what appears
manifestly true. With this we need no more, but to dispose our Thoughts in a
Natural Order, for the obtaining of a perfect Science: And here, there is
nothing too High for Women; For, such of them who may be (by this way)
instructed in Natural Philosophy and Medicine, may likewise (by the same)
become capable of all others.

Wherefore, might they not perceive, that the necessity of living in Society,
obliging us to Communicate our Thoughts by some External Signs; the most
expedient of all others, is Speech; which consists in the use of Words, agreed
on amongst Men, That we ought to have as many of them, as we have Notions of
things? That they ought to have some Relation of Sound and Signification one
with another, to make us learn and retain them with more ease, and that we
should not be forced to multiply them infinitely? That they must be Marshalled
in the Order most natural, and suitable, to our Thoughts; and that we should
not employ more in Discourse, than what may be enough to make us be understood?

These Reflections might put a Woman in Condition, to labor (like a Virtuosi)
for the perfecting of her Mother Tongue; by reforming, and cutting off the bad
Words, introducing of New, Regulating Custom by Reason, and the true Notions
which we have of Languages: And the Method, by which she might have Learned the
Language of her Country, would wonderfully help her to the attaining of that of
Strangers, to discover the Delicacies thereof, to read Authors, and to become
most exact in Grammar, and that which is called Humanity.

Women (as well as Men) Discourse of things, to make them be understood, in the
same manner, as they know them; and to dispose others to do as they would have
them, which is called Persuading: In this they Naturally succeed better than
we. And yet, to perform it still with Art, they have no more to do, but to
study to represent things, as they present themselves to them; or as they would
represent them to themselves, if they were in the Place of those whom they
would affect.

All Men (being made after the same manner) are (almost) always moved in like
manner by Objects; And, if there be any Difference, it proceeds from their
Inclinations, their Habits, or their Quality; which a Woman might know with a
little Reflection, and Custom: And, being able to dispose her Thoughts in the
manner most convenient, express them neatly, and with Grace; adding thereto,
the Gestures, the Air of the Countenance, and the Voice, she might become
Mistress of the most perfect Eloquence.

It is not credible, that Women can so highly practice Virtue, without being
able to penetrate into the Fundamental Maxims thereof: In effect, a Woman
already so instructed as we above represented her, might discover of her self
the Measures of her Conduct, by discovering the three kinds of Duties which
comprehend all Morality; of which, the first regards God, the second our
Selves, and the third our Neighbor. The clear and distinct Notions, which she
may have formed of her Spirit, and the Union thereof with the Body, must
(infallibly) lead her to acknowledge, That there is another Spirit Infinite,
the Author of all Nature; and to entertain of Him the Sentiments, upon which
Religion is founded. And after, having (by Natural Phil^sophy) learned wherein
it is, that Sensual Pleasure does consist, and in what manner External Things
contribute to the Perfection of the Mind, and the Preservation of the Body; she
cannot fail to conclude, That we must be great Enemies to our selves, if we use
them not with great Moderation. And, if she come, in Sequel, to consider her
Self, as engaged in Civil Society, with others of the same Nature, subject to
the same Passions, and to the necessities which can not be satisfied without
mutual assistance); she must without trouble fall upon this thought upon which
depends all our Justice, That we ought to do to others as we would be done to;
and, that we ought to bridle those desires, whereof the exorbitancy which is
called Lusting or Covetousness, occasions all the trouble, and all the
unhappiness of life.

She might the more still confirm her self in the persuasion of the last of
these duties, if she advanced, and carried on her thoughts, to the point of
discovering the ground of Policy, and of Law and Justice. And, as both the one
and other, only regard the duties of men amongst themselves, she would judge,
that, Fully to comprehend to what it is that they are obliged in civil Society,
we must understand what it is that has inclined men to establish it. She would
then consider them as out of any such Society, and find them all entirely free,
and equal, with the desire only to preserve themselves, and a right alike to
all upon every thing that might be necessary thereto. But she finding that this
equality engages men in war, or continual mistrust (a thing contrary to their
end) the light of nature would dictate, that they could not live in peace,
without that every one yielded some what of his right, and came to covenants,
and contracts: And that to render these Actions valid, and stop all Jealousiy,
it would be necessary to have recourse to a third person, who taking upon him
Authority, might force every one to perform what they had promised to others;
That he being chosen only for the good of his subjects, ought to have no other
design; And that to obtain the end of this institution, it is necessary he
should be the Master of Lives, and Estates; of Peace and of War.

In Examining this matter, and the depth, what would hinder a Woman that she
should not discover, What natural equity is; What are Contract, Authority, and
Obedience; what is the nature of Law, the use of Penalties; wherein consist the
civil Law, and that of Nations; what are the duties of Princes, and of
Subjects: And in a word, by her proper Reflections, and by Books, she might
learn all that is necessary to make a Lawyer and a Statesman.

After that, she may have obtained a perfect knowledge of her self, and be
solidly instructed in the general rules of the conduct of Men, Probably she
would become curious to inform her self also how it is that men live in strange
Countries. And as she had observed, that the changes of weather, of seasons, of
place, of age, of diet, company, and exercises, had occasioned in her,
alterations and different passions, she needed not much trouble to find that
these diversities produce the same effect in regard of whole nations: That they
have Inclinations, Customs, Manners, and Laws different according as they are
more near, or distant from Seas, the South or North, according as their
country is plain or mountainous, watered with Rivers, and Woody, the soil more
or less fruitful, the particular kind of Food which it brings forth; And
according to Commerce, and the affairs which they have with other Neighboring
or remote people: she might study all these things, and so learn what are the
Manners, the Riches, the Religon, the Government, and the Interests of twenty
or thirty different Nations, as easily as of so many private families For what
concerns the Situation of Kingdoms, how Seas to Lands, Isles to the Continent
do answer; there is no more difficulty to learn it in a Mapp* than to know the
several quarters and streets of a Town; or the highwayes of the country, where
one lives.

The Knowledge of the present, might breed in her desire also to know what is
past: And that which she may have retained of Geography, would afford her great
assistance in this Design, enabling her better to understand affairs, as
Wars, Voyages, and Negoations, marking to her the places where they have
happened; the Passages, Roads, and the boundings of States. But the skill which
she may have obtained of the Transactions of men in general, by the reflections
which she may have made upon her self, would bring her into the Mystery of
Policy, Interest and Passions; and help her to discover the moving wheel, and
spring, of enterprises, the fountain and source of revolutions, and to supply
in great Undertakings the lesser things which have made them prosper, and which
have escaped Histories: And following their true Notions, which she has of
Vice, and Virtue; she may observe the flattery, passion, and ignorance of
Authors; and to guard her self from the Corruption, which infect men in reading
of Histories, where these faults are commonly mingled. As the ancient policy,
was not so refined as the modern, and the interest of Princes less conjoined in
former times than at present, and commerce of less extent; there is more
Judgment required to understand, and disentangle our Gazettes, than Lives of
Quintus Curtius.

There are a great many persons that find the Ecclesiastic History more
pleasing and solid, than civil or profane: because, there they find the
effects of Reason, and Virtue, farther pursued, and that passions, and
prejudices covered with a pretext of Religion, sets the mind upon a method,
altogether particular in its conduct. A Woman would apply her self thereto with
so much more affection, as she judged it more important. She might convince her
self, that the books of Scripture, are as authentic, as all the others which
we have; that they contain the true Religion, and all the Maxims whereon it is
founded; that the New Testament where the History of Christianity properly
begins, is no more difficult to be understood, than Greek and Latin Authors;
that they that read it with the simplicity of Children, seeking only the
Kingdom of God, discover the truth, and meaning thereof with more ease and
pleasure, than that of ridles, emblems, and fables; And after having regulated
her mind by the Morality of Jesus Christ, she may find her self in condition to
direct others; remove their scruples, and to resolve Cases of conscience, with
more solidity than if she had filled her head with all the Casuists in the
world.

I see nothing that could hinder, but that in the progress of her studies, she
might observe as well as a man, How it is that the Gospel has passed from hand
to hand, from Kingdom to Kingdom, from age to age, even to her own times, but
that she might gain, by reading of the Fathers, the Notion of true Theology,
and find out that it only consists in the Knowledge of the History of
Christians; and the Particular Sentiment of those that have written thereon.
So, she might render her self able to compose Works of Religion, Preach the
Truth, and batter down Novelties, by showing what has been always Believed
through the whole Church, about the Matters in Controversy.

If a Woman be capable to inform her self from History, of the Nature of all
Public Societies, how they have been formed, and how they are preserved by
virtue of a fixed and constant Authority* exercised by Magistrates and
Officers, subordinate to one another; she is no less, to Learn the Application
of that Authority, by Laws, Ordinations, and Constitutions, for the Conduct of
those who are submitted thereunto, as well to the Relation of Persons
(according to their several Conditions) as for the Possession and Enjoyment of
Goods. Is it a thing so difficult, to know the Relation between a Husband and
his Wife, between a Father and his Children, the Master and his Servants, the
Landlord and his Tennants, betwixt those who are Allied in Affinity, betwixt a
Guardian and his Pupil? Is it so great a Mystery, to understand what it is to
possess by Purchase, Exchange, Donation, Legacy, Testament, Prescription, and
Usufruit? and what are the necessary Conditions to render Use and Possession
valid?

There appears to be no more Understanding requisite to know (aright) the
spirit of Christian Society, than that of the Civil; to frame a right Notion of
the Authority which is peculiar thereto, and upon which is founded all its
Conduct; and to distinguish (precisely) betwixt that which Jesus Christ has
left to His Church, and the Dominion which only belongs to Temporal Powers.

After having made that Distinction absolutely necessary to the right
Understanding of the Canon Law, a Woman might study, and observe how the Church
is Governed in the State; and how the Spiritual Jurisdiction is mingled with
the Secular; wherein the Hierarchy consists; what are the Offices of Prelates,
the Power of Councels, Popes, Bishops, and Pastors; what is the meaning of
Discipline, what are the Rules and Changes thereof; what mean Canons,
Privileges, and Exemptions; how Benefices are Established, and what is the
Right and Possession thereof. In a word, What are the Customs and Ordinances of
the Church, and the Duties of all those that Compose it. There is (therein)
nothing at all, whereof a Woman is not most capable; and so, she might become
most Skilful in the Canon Law.

These are some general Notions of the Highest Knowledges, wherewith Men serve
themselves, to signalize their Parts, and raise their Fortune; and of which, to
the Prejudice of Women, they have been so long in Posse^^^on: And, although
they have as great right thereto as themselves, (...) (notwithstanding)
entertain such Thoughts, and carry with a (...) toward them, by so much the
more unjust, that nothing like is to be seen in the use of the Goods of the
Body.

It has been judged expedient; that, for the Peace and security of Families,
Prescription should take place: my Meaning is, That a Man, who (with a good
Conscience, and without trouble or molestation) might have enjoyed the Goods of
another for a certain space of time, should remain Possessour thereof, without
the After-claims and Pretensions of any whosoever. But, it has never entered
into the minds of Men, to believe, That such who had fallen from their
Possessions by Neglect or otherwise, should be incapable by some manner or
other, to retrive them; and their Incapacity has never been considered as
Natural, but only Civil.

On the contrary, Men have not only contented themselves not to call Women to
a share in Sciences, and Offices, after a long Prescription against them; but
have proceeded farther, to fancy, that their Exclusion therefrom, is founded on
a natural Indisposition on their Part.

In the meanwhile, there is nothing in the World more Fantastical than that
Imagination: For, whether that we consider the Sciences in themselves, or that
we regard the Organs, which serves to acquire them; we shall find, that both
Sexes are thereto equally disposed. There is but one only way to insinuate
Truth into the Mind (whereof it is the Food), as there is but one to convey
Nourishment into all sorts of Stomachs, for the Subsistence of the Body: And,
as to what concerns the different Dispositions of that Organ, which renders us
more or less fit for Sciences; if we would fairly and honestly acknowledge, Who
have the better, we must confess it to be the Women.

We cannot disagree; but, amongst Men, such as are gross and material, are
commonly stupid; and, on the other hand, the more Delicate, always most
Sprightly. I find the Experience of this too universal and constant, to stand
in need (in this place) of the Support of Reasons: So, the lovely Sex, being of
a Temperature more Fine and Delicate than ours, would not fail (at least) to
match ours, if it applied it self to Study.

I well foresee, that this Opinion will not be relished by many; who will find
it a little strange: I cannot help that. Men think that it concerns the Honor
of our Sex to take the Place in All; And I believe it to be Justice, to render
to every one that which is their right.

In effect, we All (both Men and Women) have the same Right to Truth, since the
Mind in all of us is alike capable to know it; and that we are (All) affected
in the same manner, by the Objects that make Impression upon the Body. This
Title to Knowledges (which Nature bestows on All) springs from this, That we
have All need of them, the one as well as the other. There is no Person that
seeks not to be happy; It is to that, that all our Actions tend; and no Body
can be solidly so, but by clear and distinct Knowledges: For, it is in that,
that Jesus Christ himself, and St. Paul, make us believe, will consist the
Happiness of the other Life. A Covetous Man never esteems himself happy, but
when he knows that he possesses great Riches: An Ambitious Person, when he
perceives that he is above others. In a word, All the Happiness of Men (Real or
Imaginary) is only placed in Knowledge; that is to say, In the Thought which
they have, that they possess the Good which they desire.

It is this which makes me believe, that there is nothing but the Notions of
Truth (which we procure by Study, and which are fixed and independent from the
Possession or Want of things), that can make up the true Happiness of this
Life. For, that which makes that a Covetous Man cannot be happy in the simple
Knowledge of Riches, is; Because that, that Knowledge which renders him happy,
ought to be joined with the Enjoyment, or the Imagination of poss^ssing of them
for the present: And, when his Imagination presents them to him as distant from
him, and out of his Power, he cannot reflect thereon without being afflicted.

It is altogether otherwise with the Knowledge which we have of our Selves, and
of all those which depend thereon; but, particularly, of those which enter into
the Society of Life. Since then, that both Sexes are capable of the same
Felicity, they have Equal Right to all that which conduces to the obtaining
thereof.

When we say, That Happiness consists (chiefly) in the Knowledge of Truth, we
exclude not Virtue; On the contrary, we think that it makes up the most
Essential Part thereof: Yet, a Man is not happy by Virtue, but in so much as he
knows that he enjoyes it, or that he endeavors so to do; that is to say,
That although it be sufficient to make a Man esteemed happy, that we see him
practice Virtue (though he know it not perfectly); and also, that such a
Practice (with a confused and imperfect Knowledge) may contribute to purchase
the Happiness of the other Life): yet, it is certain, that he cannot esteem
himself solidly happy, without he be Conscious to himself that he does good; as
he would not at all believe himself Rich, without he possessed Wealth.

The Reason why there are so few that have a Relish of, or Love for, true
Virtue, is, Because they know it not; and, not at all minding when they
practice it, they feel not that Satisfaction which it produces, and which
makes up that Felicity of which we speak. That arises from this, That Virtue
is not a simple Speculation of Good, to which we are obliged; but an Effective
Desire, which springs from the Persuasion that we have thereof: And we cannot
practice it with Delight, without the Resentment of some Emotion; because it
happens with it, as with the most Excellent Liquors, that seem some-time
bitter, or without Sweetness; if, when they are upon the Tongue, the Mind be
other-wise taken up, and does not apply it self to the Alterations which there
they cause.

The two Sexes have not only need of Light, to find their Happiness in the
Practice of Virtue; but likewise, need thereof to practice aright. It is sion
that sets us at work; and we are so much the more persuaded of our Duty, as the
more perfectly we know it.

That little which we have said here concerning Morality, suffices to
insinuate, that the Knowledge of our selves, is most important to strengthen
the Persuasion of the Duties, to which we are obliged. And it would not be
difficult to show, how all others contribute thereto; nor to make appear, that
the Reason why so many Persons practice Virtue so ill, or fall into Looseness,
is only the Ignorance of themselves, and what they are.

The Reason why People commonly believe, That Men need not be knowing for to
become Virtuous, is, Because we see many vicious Persons, that otherwise pass
for Intelligent; from whence, they imagine that Knowledge is not only
unprofitable for Virtue, but even that it is many times destructive thereto.
And, this Error renders the most part of those who have the Reputation of
being more Witty than others, suspect to weak ^udgments; and, at the same time,
makes them flight, and be averse, from the Highest Knowledges.

Men take no notice, that there is nothing but false Lights, which cast and
leave Men in Disorder; because that the confused Notions (which false
Philosophy gives us of our Selves, and of that which makes up the Body of our
Actions), so bemists the Mind, that not knowing it self, nor the Nature of the
things which surround it, nor the Relation which they have to its self; and not
being able to bear the weight of Difficulties which present themselves in that
obscurity: it must necessarily succumb, and abandon it self to its Passions;
Reason being too weak to stop it.

It is (then) but a Panick Fear, which has given occasion to the Capricious
Imagination of the Vulgar, That Study and Learning would render Women more
Wicked and Proud: There is nothing but false Knowledge, capable to produce so
bad an Effect. A Woman cannot Learn true Knowledge, without becoming thereby
more Humble and Virtuous: And there is nothing more proper to depress the
Vapors, and to convince her of her Weakness, than to consider all the
Movements of her Engine, the Delicateness of her Organs, the (almost) infinite
number of Alterations, and painful Failings, to which she is subject.

There is not any Meditation more capable to inspire Humility, Moderation, and
Mildness, into a Man (whatever he may be), than seriously to mind (by the Study
of Natural Philosophy) the Union and Tie of his Soul with the Body; and to
observe, that he is obnoxious to so many ^eeds, that the Dependence in which he
is (on the most ticklish and delicate Parts of the Body, in his Functions),
keep him constantly exposed to a thousand sorts of Troubles, and irksome
Agitations; that, what Knowledge soever he may have entertained, the least
thing in the World is enough (entirely) to confound it; that a little Choler,
or Blood, more Hot or Cold than ordinary, may cast himself into Extravagance,
Folly, and Madness; and make him suffer fearful Convulsions.

When such Reflections should find Acceptance in the Mind of a Woman, as well as
of a Man, they would chase thence Pride, far from letting of it in. And, if
after having filled her Mind with the best of Knowledges, she should call again
to her Memory all her bypast Conduct, to see how she had arrived to the happy
state, wherein she might find her self very far from elevating of her self
above others; she would see enough to humble her the more; since that, she
would necessarily observe by that review, that (hereto-fore) she had had an
infinite number of Prejudices, which she could not Conquer (but by Strength)
against the Impressions of Custom, Example, and Passions; which, in spite of
her, engaged her to them: That all the Effects which she had made to discover
Truth, had been almost unprofitable: That it has been, as by Chance, that it
has presented it self to her; and at that time, when she the least dreamt
thereof; and in such Occurrencies, which happen but once in ones Life, and but
to very few Persons: From whence, she would infallibly conclude, That it is
unjust, and ridiculous, to slight and despise those who have less Knowledge
than our selves, or who embrace contrary Opinions; and that we ought the rather
to have Complacency and Compassion for them; because, if they discern not
Truth as we do, it is not their Fault; but because that it has not presented
it self to them, when they have been in search thereof: and that there is still
some Veil on their Part or ours, that hinders it to appear to their mind, in
its full Light. And, considering that she might have held for true, that which
she had believed false before, she would judge without doubt. That it might
still happen in the Sequel, that she might make new Discoveries; by the which,
she might believe false or erroneous, that which had appeared to her most true,
and certain.

If there have been some Women, who (affected with their Knowledge) have
become disdainful; there are likewise a great many Men that daily fall into
the same vice; And that ought not to be considered as an effect of the
Sciences, which they have possessed, but because men have looked, on them as a
Mystery to the Sex: And as, on the one hand, such knowledges are ordinarily
very confused; and on the other, they that have them, propose to themselves
thereby a particular advantage; it is not to be thought strange that they take
occasion from thence to swell, and it is almost unavoidably necessary that in
this condition, it should not be with them, as with those who from a low birth,
and fortune, have with difficulty raised themselves to honor, and same: who
seeing themselves advanced to a pitch, to which, few of their quality have been
accustomed to mount, are seized with a giddiness, which presents to them,
objects quite other-wayes than in themselves they are. At least, it is most
probable, that seeing the pretended vanity of the learned Women, is nothing in
comparison of that of the learned men, who arrogate to themselves, the title of
Masters and Sages: Women would be less Subject thereunto, if their Sex were
admitted into equal share with ours, of the advantages which occasion it.

It is then a vulgar Error to fancy, that Learning is useless to Women,
because says one, they have no share in Offices, for the which, men apply
themselves thereto. It is as necessary to them as Felicity, and Virtue; because
without that, we cannot perfectly possess either the one or other. It is so for
the purchasing, of Exactness in our thoughts, and Justice in our actions: it is
so, for the right Knowledge of our Selves, and what is about us, that we may
make the right and lawful use thereof; and that we may regulate our passions
by Moderating of our desires. To become capable of places and dignities, is one
of the uses of Learning; and to be fit to be a Judge or Bishop, we should
strive to acquire as much as is possible, because without it the functions of
such Offices cannot be well discharged, but not precisely for that end, and for
to become more happy by the possession of the honors, and advantages which
they afford: That would be to abuse learning by a sordid and base end.

So that there is nothing but weakness, or a secret and blind interest which
can make men say, that Women ought to remain shut out from Learning, for this
reason, that they have never been publicly admitted to any share therein. It
fares not with the goods of the mind, as with the goods of the body; against
them there is no prescription: and how long soever, we have been deprived
thereof, we have always the right of Reversion. But it being impossible that
the same goods of the body, could at the same time, be possessed by several
persons, without domination on each side; men have had reason for the safety of
families, to maintain the possessours, with good conscience, in prejudice of
the ancient proprietaries.

But, as concerning the advantages of the mind, it goes quite otherwise. Every
one has a right to all that is intelligible, and good sense. The Spring of
reason is not limited; it has in all men an equal Jurisdiction; we are all
born Judges of what touches and affects us; And if we cannot dispose of the
same with equal power, we may at least, all know them with a like right. And as
all men employ the use of the light and air, without prejudice to any person,
by that communication, all may likewise possess the Knowledge of truth without
hurting one another. For the more that it is known, the more it appears
splendid, and lovely: The greater are the number of those that search after it,
and the sooner they find it: And if both Sexes, had equally busied themselves
therein, it had still the sooner been discovered. In so much then, that Truth
and Knowledge are goods which admit of no prescription; And such that have been
deprived thereof, may make a Re-entry, without doing injury to those who are
already Masters of the same; There can be none, but such as would rule men's
minds by belief, and credit, that have reason to apprehend this Reversion, for
fear, that if Sciences should become so common, glory might also; and that the
Fame to which they aspire, should be lessened by partnership.

Women are as Capable of Officers and Employments in civil Society as Men are.
THere is therefore no inconvenience, if Women apply themselves to Study and
Learning as well as we. They are able to make a very good use of them, and to
draw from thence the two Advantages which we expect therefrom; the one, to have
clear and distinct Knowledges, which we naturally desire, and whereof the
desire is often stifled, and annihilated by the confusion of thoughts, and the
cares, and agitations of life: And the other, To employ these Knowledges, for
the particular conduct of themselves, and for that of others in the different
conditions of Society, of which they make a part. This agrees not atall with
the common Opinion. There are indeed many that will believe, that Women may
learn what is to be attained by the Physics or Natural Sciences; but will not
admit, that they are as fit as Men for those which may be called Civil, as
Ethics, Laws, and Politics; and that if they should be able by the Maxims of
these Last, to conduct themselves, they could not therefore be capable of
guiding of others.

Men entertain this thought, because, they consider not, that the mind in all
it is actions, has need of no more but Discerning, and Exactitude, and
whosoever has once these two qualities in one thing, may as easily, and by the
same means have them in all the rest. The being Moral or Civil, changes not
the nature of our actions: They continue to be still Natural: Because that
Morality is nothing else, but to know the manner, how men regard the actions of
others, with Relation to the Notions which they have of good or evil, of vice
and virtue, of justice and injustice; And as that, when we have once rightly
conceived the Rules of Motion, in Natural Philosophy, we may apply them to all
the changes, and varieties which are remarked in Nature: So likewise knowing
once the true principles of civil Sciences, there remains no more difficulty to
make application thereof to the new, and incident Emergents which occurr.

They that are in places have not always more wit, though they have better
Luck than others: And indeed it is not necessary, that they should have more,
than the common; though it be to be wished, that none were admitted to
employments but the most worthy. We act still after the same manner, and by the
same Rules, in what estate soever, we find our selves; unless it be that the
more our conditions are raised, the more our cares and views are extended,
because we have the more to do. And all the change which happens to men who are
placed above others, is like to that of a person who being mounted to the top
of a Tower, caryes his prospect farther, and discovers more different objects,
than they who stay on the ground below: It is their favors, if Women be as
capable as we are to guide themselves, they are likewise to conduct others, and
to have place in charges and dignities of Civil Society.

The most Simple, and natural use that we can make of Sciences which we have
well learned, is to teach them to others: And if Women had studied in the
Universities with men, or in others appointed for them in particular, they
might have entered into Degrees, and taken the title of Master of Arts, Doctor
of Divinity, Medicine, Civil, and Cannon Law: And their genius so
advantagiously fitting them to learn, would dispose them likewise to teach with
success. They would find methods, and insinuating biassess, to instill their
Doctrine; they would discover the strength and weakness of their Scholars, to
proportion themselves to their reach, and the facility which they have to
express themselves; and, which is one of the most excellent talents of a good
Master, would complete and render them admirable Mistresses.

The employment which approaches most to a Schoolmaster, is that of Pastor
or Minister in the Church, and there can be nothing else but custom shown,
which remove Women therefrom. They have a Spirit as well as we, capable of
the Knowledge and love of God, and thereby able to incline others to know, and
love him. Faith is common to them with us: And the Gospel with the Promises
thereof, are likewise addressed to them, Charity also comprehends them in its
duties; and, if they know how to put in practice the actions thereof, may not
they likewise publicly teach its Maxims? Whosoever can preach by Example, from
stronger reason can do so by Words: And a Woman that should join her Natural
Eloquence with the Morality of Jesus Christ, should be as capable as another,
to Exhort, Direct Correct, admit into Christian Society those who deserved. And
cut off such who after having submitted themselves thereto, should refuse to
observe the Rules thereof. And if men were accustomed to see Women in a
Pulpit, they would be no more startled thereat, than the Woman are at the
sight of men.

We are not assembled into Society, but that we may live in peace, and find, in
a Mutual assistance, all that is necessary for the Body, and Soul. This we
could not enjoy without trouble, if there were no authority; that is to say,
that for that end, there ought to be some persons who have power to make Laws,
and to inflict punishment upon the breakers of them. And to make the right use
of that authority, we must know to what it obliges, and be persuaded that
those who possess it, ought to have no other design in the discharge thereof,
but to procure the welfare and advantage of their inferiors. Women being no
less susceptible of this persuasion than men, may not we then submit our selves
to them, and consent not only not to resist their Orders, but even contribute
as much as we can to oblige to obedience such as make any difficulty therein?

So that nothing needed to hinder, but that a Woman might sit upon a Throne,
and that for the government of her people, She might study their humor, the
interests, their Laws, their customs, and their practices: That she might
place in Offices of the Gown and Sword, only able and deserving persons; and,
in the Dignities of the Church, men of understanding, and Example. Is it a
thing so difficult, that a Woman could not perform it, to instruct her-self of
the strength, and weakness of a State, and of those that lay round it; to
entertain amongst strangers secret Intelligences for to discover their
designs, and disappoint their measures, and to have faithful Spies, and
Emissaries in all Suspected places; to be exactly informed of all that passes
there wherein she might have interest? Is there needful for the conduct of a
Kingdom more vigilance, and application than Women have for their families, or
the Religious for their Convents? They would prove no less refined in public
Negotiations, than they are in private affairs. And as piety and mildness is
natural to their Sex, their government would prove less Rigorous than that of
many Princes, and we should wish for under their Reign, that which is often
feared under that of many others, that Subjects would regulate themselves
according to the Example of their Governors.

We may easily conclude, that if Woman are capable to possess severally all
public authority, they are still more to be subordinate Officers and
Ministers: As Vice-Queens, Governants, Secretaries, Counselors of State, and
Treasurers.

For my part, I should be no more surprised to see a Woman with a helmet on
her head, than to see her with a Crown; preside in a Council of war, as well
as in a Council of State: To see her train, and exercise her Soldiers, drawing
them up in Battell-array, and divide them in several Bodies, and Squadrons,
with as much ease as she would please her self to see it done. The military Art
has nothing beyond others, whereof Women are not capable, unless it be that
it is somewhat more rude, causes greater noise, and does more mischief. The
Eyes are sufficient to learn from a Mapp, that is somewhat exact, all the
Highways of a country, the good and bade passages, and the places that are
most propper for surprises, and encampings. There is hardly a Soldier that is
not ready to know that a General ought first to gain all the Passes before he
venture there his forces, regulate all his enterprises according to the advice
of good Scouts; And even deceive his Army by Wiles, and counter-marches the
better to cover his design. A Woman can do all this, and can invent Stratagems
to surprise the enemy, put the wind and dust in his teeth, and the Sun in his
face: And Charging him on one side, Flank him on the other; Give him false
allarms, draw him into an ambush by a feigned flight; give battle, and be the
first that mounts a breach to encourage the Soldiers; Persuasion, and passion
does all: And Women testify no less heat, and resolution when their honor is
concerned, than is requisite to attack or defend a Place.

What can be reasonably objected, why a Woman of sound Judgment and
Understanding, might not take the chair in a court of Justice, and pre side in
all other companies. There are a great many able men who would learn the Laws
and Customs of a state with less trouble, than some Games at Cards, which
Women understand so well: And it is as easy to remember them, as an entire
Romance; is it not as easiy to see into the heart of an affair, as to trace an
intrigue upon the Stage, and make as faithful report of a Law suite, as of a
Comedy? All these things are alike ea^^y, to those who equally apply themselves
thereto.

Now seeing there is neither office, nor employment in society which is not
comprehended in these whereof we have spoken, nor where there is greater need
of knowledge or parts: it must be confessed, that Women are proper for all.

Besides, the Natural dispositions of the body, and the Notions which men have
of the function and duties of their places, there is still somewhat necessary
that renders them more or less capable to acquit themselves worthy thereof. The
true persuasion of what a man is obliged to do, the consideration of Religion,
and interest, emulation betwixt equals, desire of winning glory, and Honor,
and of making, preserving, or increasing ones fortitude. According as a man is
more or less touched with these things, his management is altogether different:
And Women being no less sensible thereof than men, in regard of employments,
they want nothing to render them their equals.

We may (then) with Assurance, exhort Ladies to apply themselves to Study;
without having Respect to the little Reasons of those who would undertake to
divert them there from. Since they have a Mind (as well as we) capable of
knowing of Truth (which is the only Subject, on which they can employ their
Pains worthily), they ought to put themselves in condition of avoiding the
R^proach, of having stifled a Talent, which they might put to use; and of
having detained Truth in Idleness and Pleasure. There is no other way for them
to Guard themselves against Error, and the Surprise to which they are exposed
(who Learn nothing but by the manner of Gazets; that is to say, upon the bare
word of another), nor to render themselves happy in this Life, by practicing
Virtue with Discretion.

What Advantage soever they propose to themselves besides this, they would meet
with it in Study. If their Parlours were turned into Academies, their
Entertainments would be Greater, more Solid, and more Pleasing. And every one
may judge, of the Satisfaction she should have to Discourse of Lofty Matters,
by the Content that she has to hear others speak thereof. How slight soever
might be the Subjects of their Conversation, they would have the Pleasure to
treat them more wittily than the Vulgar: And the delicate Manners, which are so
peculiar to their Sex (being fortified by solid Reasons and Arguments) would
far more sensibly affect the Hearers.

They who only desire to please, would there (to Admiration) find their
Design; For, the Splendor of the Beauty of Body, being heighthened by that of
the Mind, would thereby become a hundred times more Brisk and Lively. And, as
Women (but of ordinary Beauty) are always well regarded when they are Witty,
the Advantages of the Mind, Cultivated by Study, would give them Means
abundantly to supply what Nature or Fortune might have denied them. They would
be admitted into the Entertainments of the Learned, and reign amongst them
upon a double Respect. They would enter into the Management of Affairs: Their
Husbands would not refuse to abandon to them the Conduct of their Families, and
to take their Advice in all things. And, seeing that Matters are in such a
state, that they cannot (now) be admitted into Charges, (at least) they might
be able to know the Nature of Functions, and judge if they be deservingly
bestowed.

The Difficulty of arriving to this Pitch, ought not to scare them: It is not
so great as Men have made it. That which is the cause, why Men think there is
need of so much Trouble, for to gain a few Knowledges, is, Because they teach
(for that end) a great many things, which are most unprofitable for those that
aspire thereto. All Knowledge (even to this present) consisting only in
possessing of a History of the Sentiments of those that are gone before us; and
Men, having too much reposed on Custom, and the Credit of their Masters, very
few have had the good Luck to find the Natural Method. Herein we might labor,
and make appear, That Men may render themselves qualified, in far less time,
and with a great deal more Pleasure, than is ordinarily imagined.

That Women have an Advantageous Disposition for Sciences; and that the true
Notions of Perfection, Nobility, and Honesty, suit with them as well as Men.
HItherto, we have considered nothing in Women, but the Head; and, it has
appeared, that that Part (taken in general) has in them as much Proportion for
all the Sciences (whereof it is the Organ), as in Men. Nevertheless, because
that this Organ is not altogether alike, even amongst all Men themselves; and
that there are a great many, in whom it is more proper for some things than for
others: we must descend a little lower into the Particular, to see if there be
nothing in Women, that renders them less fit for Learning, than our selves.

We may observe, that they have a Countenance more stately and happy than we:
They have the Forehead high, lofty, and large; which is the usual Mark of
Witty and Imaginative Persons. And, we find in effect, that Women have much
Vivacity, Fancy, and Memory; which denotes a Brain so disposed, that it easily
receives the Impressions of Objects, even of the most Slight and
Inconsiderable, which escape such, as are of another Disposition; and that it
retains them without trouble, and presents them to the Mind in the instant that
it stands in need thereof.

When this Disposition is accompanied with Heat, it renders the Mind more ready
and quick to be affected by the Objects; to fasten on, and penetrate, into them
the more; and to extend the Images, and Impressions thereof, at pleasure: From
whence, it happens, that they who have good Imaginations (considering things on
more sides, and in less time), are very Ingenious, and Inventive; and discover
more with one only Glance, than many others after much Attention. They are fit
to represent things, with an insinuating and pleasing strain, and to find, on
the Spot, Turns and proper Expedients: They express themselves with Facility
and Grace; and set off their Thoughts with the greatest Aadvantage.

All this is Remarkable in Women; and, I can see nothing in this Disposition,
which is inconsistent with a good Wit. Judgment, and Exactness, make the
Natural Character thereof; to acquire which two good Qualities, we must become
a little Sedentary, and dwell on Objects* to the end, that we may avoid the
Error and Mistake, wherein Men fall by skipping. It is true, that the
multitude of Thoughts, in brisk Persons, hurries (many times) the Imagination;
But, it is likewise true, That, by Exercise, it may be fixed. We have the
Experience of this, in the greatest Men of this Age; who, for the most part,
are all very imaginative.

It may be affirmed, That this Temper is the fittest for Society; and that Men,
not being made to remain always alone, and shut up in a Closet; we ought (in
some measure) the more to esteem those who have the best Disposition,
pleasingly and profitably to Communicate their Thoughts. And Women, who have
naturally Wit, (because they have Fancy, Memory, and a sparkling Liveliness,)
may with a little Application, acquire the Qualities of a good Judgment.

This is sufficient to prove, That, in Respect of the Head alone, the Two Sexes
are Equal. There are Observations upon the rest of the Body, which are most
Curious; but of which, we must only speak in passing.

Men have always had this common ill-Luck, to spill and shead (if we may so
say) their Passions on all the Works of Nature: There is not any Notion, which
they have not blended with some touch of Love or Hatred, of Esteem or Contempt:
And these which concern the Distinction of the Two Sexes, are so material, and
so befogg'd with the Sentiments of Imperfection, Baseness, Undecency, and other
Trifles; that, seeing they cannot be touched without moving of some Passion,
and stirring up the Flesh against the Spirit, it is often Prudence to let them
alone.

And yet, it is upon that odd Medley, of always confused Notions, that the
Opinions disadvantagious to Women, are founded; and which the small Wits
(ridiculously) use to mortify them. The justest Mean and Temper, that can be
betwixt the necessity of explaining ones Self, and the Difficulty of doing it
Innocently, is, To observe what we ought (Rationally) to understand by
Perfection and Imperfection, by Nobility and Baseness, and by Decency and
Undecency.

When I conceive that there is a God, I easily conceive, that all things depend
on Him: And if, after having considered the Natural and Intrinsical State of
Creatures, which consists (if they be Bodies) in the Disposition of their
Parts, with a Reference to one another; and the Extrinsical, which is the
Relation that they stand in, to act or suffer with other Beings that environ
them: If (I say) I enquire into the Reason of these two Conditions, I can find,
none other but the Will and Pleasure of Him who is the Author of them. I
observe further, that Bodies have (ordinarily) a certain Disposition, which
renders them capable to produce and receive certain Effects; For example, that
Man can understand by the help of his Ears, the Thoughts of others, and by the
Instruments of Voice, express to them his own. And I Remark, that Bodies are
incapable of such Effects, when they are otherwise disposed: From whence, I
inform my self of two Notions; whereof the one Represents to me, the First
State of Things, with all their necessary Consequences; and that I call the
State of Perfection: And the other, the Condition contrary; which I name
Imperfection.

So, a Man (in my Esteem) is Perfect, when he has all that he needs
(according to Divine Institution), for the producing and receiving the Effects
to which he is appointed: And, he is imperfect, when he has more or fewer
Parts, than are necessary; or any Indisposition that removes him from this end.

Wherefore, he being formed in such manner, that he has need of Aliment for
Subsistence, I look not upon that Necessity, as an Imperfection; no more, than
the Need which is coupled with the use of Food; that, what is Superfluous, must
be avoided out of the Body. I find also, that all Creatures are equally
Perfect, as long as they continue in their natural and ordinary State.

We must not confound Perfection with Nobility: These are two things very
different. Two Creatures may be Equal in Perfection, and in Nobility Unequal.

When I make Reflection upon my Self, it seems to me, that my Spirit (being only
capable of Knowledge) ought: to be preferred to my Body, and be considered as
the most Noble: And, when I consider Bodies, without any Respect to my Self;
that is to say, without reflecting, that they may be profitable or hurtful to
me, pleasing or displeasing; I cannot persuade my self, that one is more Noble
than another, being All but made of matter diversely Figured. Yet, when I meddle
with Bodies (considering the Good or Hurt that they do to me), I come to esteem
them differently. Although that my Head (regarded without Interest) affects me
no more, than the other Parts; nevertheless, I prefer it to all the rest, when
I come to think, that it is of greater importance to me, in the Union of the
Spirit with the Body.

For the same Reason it is, that, although all the Places of the Body be
equally perfect, we have (nevertheless) different Esteems for them: The very
Parts themselves (whereof the Use is most necessary) being many times
considered with some sort of Contempt and Aversion; because that the Use is
less pleasing, or otherwise. It is so with all that surround and affects us;
For, that which makes that one thing pleases one Man, and displeases another,
is, that it has made impression upon them differently.

It is the Engagement of Men in Society, that produces in them the Notion of
Decency: So that, although it be neither Imperfection nor Baseness, to ease and
comfort the Body; and that it is even a Necessity, and Indispensable
Consequence of its Natural Disposition; and that all the ways of doing
thereof, are Equal; there are some notwithstanding, that are considered less
Decent; because they are more offensive to the Persons, in whose Presence they
are performed.

As all Creatures, and all their Actions, being considered in themselves, and
without any reference to Custom or Esteem that is made thereof, are as Perfect,
and as Noble, the one as the other; they are likewise equally Decent, being
considered in the same manner. Wherefore, we may say, that the Regards of
Decency and Undecency are almost all, in their Original, nothing else but the
Effects of Imagination, and the Capriciousness of Men. This appears by that,
That one thing which is Decent in one Country, is not all so in another; and
that, in the same Kingdom, but in diverse places, or (in the same time) but
amongst Persons of different Condition, Quality, and Humor; the same Action is
sometime conform, sometime contrary to Decency. So that, Decency is nothing
but the manner of using of Natural Things, according to the Esteem which Men
pass upon them; and to which, it is Prudence to Conform.

We are all possessed with this Notion; although we make no Reflection thereon,
That all Persons (whether they be our Beloved, or the Witty and Judicious; who
in Public, and according to the ordinary Custom, subject themselves to the
Rites of Decency) discharge themselves thereof in Private, as of Burdens
troublesome and foolish.

The Case is the same with Nobility. In some Countries of the Indies, the
Laborers have the same Rank, as the Nobles with us: In some Countries,
Swordmen are prefered to the Gown-Men; And in others, the quite contrary is
Practiced: Every one, according as his Inclinations leads him to favor such
States, or that he esteems them most Important.

Comparing these Notions, with the Opinions that the Vulgar have of Women; we
shall (without trouble) discover wherein consists the Error.

From whence is derived, the Distinction of Sexes; How far it extends it self:
And that it places no Difference betwixt Men and Women, with Relation to Vice
and Virtue: And that the Temperament, and Constitution in general, in it self,
is neither good nor bad.
GOD willing to produce Men in Dependence, one upon another, by the Concourse
of two Persons; for that end, framed two Bodies, which were different: Each was
perfect in its kind; and they ought both to be disposed, as they are at
present: And all that depends on their particular Constitution, ought to be
considered, as making a part of their Perfection.

It is then without Reason, that some imagine, That Women are not so perfect as
Men; and that they look upon that (in them) as a Defect, which is an Essential
Portion of their Sex; without the which, it would be useless for the end, for
which it has been formed; which begins and ceases with Fecundity, and which is
destined for the most excellent use of the World; that is, to frame and nourish
us in their Bellies.

The Two Sexes (together) are necessary to beget the like: And if we knew, how
it is that ours contribute thereto, we should find enough to be said against
our selves. It is hard to be understood, upon what they ground themselves, who
maintain, That Men are more Noble than Women, in regard of Children; since it
is properly the Women who Conceive us, Form us, and give us Life, Birth, and
Breeding. It is true, they pay dearer for it than we: But their Pain and
Trouble ought not to be Prejudicial to them, and draw upon them Contempt, in
place of Esteem, which they thereby deserve.

Who would say, That Fathers and Mothers (who labor to bring up their
Children, good Princes to Govern their Subjects, and Magistrates to render them
Justice,) are less Estimable than they whose Aid and Assistance they use, for
to discharge themselves of their Duties?

There are some Physicians, who have mightily enlarged themselves upon the
Temperament of Sexes, to the Disadvantage of Women; and have pursued their
Discourses out of sight; to show, That their Sex ought to have a Constitution
altogether different from ours, which renders it inferior in all things. But
their Reasons are only light Conjectures; which come into the Heads of such, as
judge of things only by Prejudice, and upon simple Appearances.

When they perceive the Two Sexes more distinguished, by that which regards the
civil, than particular, Functions; they fancy to themselves, that so they ought
to be; And, not discerning exactly enough, betwixt that which proceeds from
Custom and Education, and that which comes from Nature; they have attributed to
one and the same Cause, all which they see in Society; imagining, that when God
Created Man and Woman, he disposed them in such a manner, as ought to produce
all the Distinction which we observe betwixt them.

This is to carry too far the Difference of Sexes: It ought to be bounded by
the Design, which God has had to form Men, by the Concourse of two Persons;
and no more to be admitted, but what is necessary for that Effect.

We see, that Men and Women are alike (almost) in all, as to the inward and
outward Constitution of the Body; and that the Natural Functions (on which
depends our Conservation) are performed in both, after the same manner. It is
then enough to the end, that they may give Birth to a Third; that there be some
Organs in the one, which are not in the other: And yet, it is not necessary in
respect of that, (as Men imagine) that Women have less Strength and Vigor than
Men. And, as there is nothing but Experience, that can enable us to judge
aright of that Distinction; do not we find, that Women are mixed, as we are?
There are some both Strong and Weak in both Sexes. Men brought up in Softness
and Ease, are worse than Women; and sink at first under Labor: But when (by
Necessity, or otherwise) they are hardened, they become Equal, and sometimes
Superior to others.

It is just so with Women: They that are taken up and employed in painful
Exercises, are stronger than Ladies, who only handle the Needle. And this may
incline us to think, that if both Sexes were equally Exercised, the one might
acquire as much Vigor as the other; which, in former times, have been seen in
a Commonwealth; where Wrestling, and other Exercises, were common to both: The
same is Reported of the Amazones, in the South Part of America.

We ought not (then) to lay any ground on certain ordinary Expressions, drawn
from the present State of the Two Sexes. When we would (mockingly) blame a Man,
as having little Courage, Resolution, and Constancy, we call him Effeminate; as
if we would say, That he is as Low, and Cow-hearted, as a Woman. On the other
hand, to praise a Woman that is above the Ordinary, because of her Courage,
Strength, or Wit; we say, ^he is a Man. These Expressions (so advantageous to
Men) do not a little Contribute, to entertain the high Notion that we have of
them; Because we consider not, that they are but Likely-hoods; and that their
Verity indifferently supposes Nature, or Custom; and so, are purely Contingent,
and Arbitrary. Virtue, Mildness, and Integrity, being so peculiar to Women (if
their Sex had not been so little esteemed); when we would have signified, with
Elogy, that a Man had all these Qualities in an Eminent Degree; we would have
said, He is a Woman, if it had so pleased Men, to Establish this form of
Speech.

Whatever the Matter be, it is not the Strength of Body, that ought to
distinguish Mankind; otherwise, Beasts would have the advantage of them; and,
amongst our Selves, the Strongest. Notwithstanding, we know by Experience, that
such who have so great Strength, are proper for nothing but Matterial Works:
And that these, on the other hand, who have less, have commonly more Brains.
The ablest Philosophers, and the greatest Princes, have been Delicate enough;
and the greatest Generals, would not have (perhaps) been willing to Wrestle
with the meanest of their Soldiers. Go but to a Court of Justice, and you
shall see, whether the greatest Judge match always (in Strength) the lowest of
their Officers.

It is then useless, to lean so much upon the Constitution of the Body, for to
render Reason of the Difference which is seen betwixt the Two Sexes, in
Relation to the Spirit.

The Temperament does not consist in an indivisible Point: For, as we cannot
find two Persons in whom it is altogether alike; neither can we any more
determine, precisely, wherein it is that they differ. There are many sorts of
Cholericks, Sanguines, and Melancholicks; and all these Diversities hinder not,
but that they may be often as capable the one, as the other; and that there may
be excellent Men, of all sorts of Constitutions: And even supposing, that that
of the Two Sexes be as different, as it is pretended to be; there is still
found greater Difference amongst many Men, who are (notwithstanding) believed
capable of the same things. The More, and the Less, being so little
considerable, there is nothing, but a spirit of Wrangling, that can make it be
regarded.

It is propable, that that which engrosseth so much (into Notion) the
Distinction whereof we speak, is, That Men examine not precisely enough, all
that which is Remarkable in Women: And that Defect makes us fall into the
Error of those, who (having the Mind confused) distinguish not aright, what
(severally) belongs to things; and attribute to one, that which only pertains
to another; because they find them together in the same Subject. Wherefore,
finding so great Difference in Women, as to the manner of Actions, and
Functions; Men have transferred it to the Temperament, for want of Knowledge of
the true Cause.

However it be, if we would examine, which is the most Excellent of the Two
Sexes, by the comparing of Bodies; Women might pretend to the Advantage, and
without insisting on the Internal Fabric of their Bodies; and that it is in
them, that the thing in the World (the most Curious to be known) passes; to
wit, How that Man (the most Beautiful and Wonderful of all Creatures) is
produced: Who can hinder them to say, That that which appears in the
outside, ought to give them the better? That Comeliness, and Beauty, are
natural and peculiar to them; and that it is this, that produces Effects as
sensible, as ordinary: And that, if what they can perform by the inside of the
Head, renders them (at least) Men's Equals; the Outside seldom ever fails, to
render them absolutely their Mistresses.

Beauty being as real an Advantage, as Strength and Health, Reason forbids
not to plead Pre-eminence therefrom, rather than from the others: and if we
should judge of its Value (by the Sentiments and Passions, which it excites),
as we judge (for the most part) of all things; we would find; that there is
nothing more estimable, there being nothing so effective; that is to say, which
moves and stirs more Passions, and does mingle and fortify them more diversely,
as the Impressions of Beauty.

It would not at all be necessary, to speak any more concerning the Temperament
of Women; if an Author (no less Famous than Polite) had not thought fit to
consider it, as the force of the Defects which Men commonly charge them with;
which helps much to confirm People in the Opinion, That they are less to be
valued than we. Without relating his Opinion, I say, that for the right
examining of the Temperament of the Two Sexes (with a Reference to Vice and
Virtue), it must be considered in a State indifferent; when, as yet, neither
Vice nor Virtue were in Nature: And then we shall find, that that which in one
time is called Virtue, may in another, pass for Vice (according to the use that
Men make thereof); So that, in that case, all Temperaments are alike.

For the better Understanding of this Opinion, we must observe, that there is
nothing but our Soul capable of Virtue; which, in general, consists in a firm
and constant Resolution, of doing that which we judge, the best; according to
the diverse Occurrencies that we meet with. The Body (properly) is nothing but
the Organ, and Instrument of that Resolution (as a Sword in ones hand), both
for Offense and Defense: And all the different Dispositions (which renders it
more or less fit for that use), ought not to be called good or bad; but as
their Effects are more ordinary, and important, for Good and Evil: For example,
The Disposition to Flight, for avoiding the Evils which threaten us, is
Indifferent; because there are some, which cannot otherwise be shunned; and
then, it is Wisdom to fly: When, on the other hand, it is culpable Cowardice,
for one to betake himself to his Heels, when the Danger is superable, by a
generous Resistance; which produces more Good than Hurt.

But the Mind is no less capable in Women, than in Men, of that firm
Resolution, which makes up Virtue; nor of knowing the Ran-counters, when it is
to be put in Practice. They can Regulate their Passions, as well as we; and are
not more inclined to Vice, than to Virtue. We might even make the Balance turn
to their Favor on this side; since that the Affection toward Children
(without comparison, stronger in Women, than in Men), is naturally linked to
Compassion; which we may call, the Virtue and Bond of Civil Society. It being
impossible to conceive, That Society is rationally Established for other end,
than to supply the common Wants and Necessities of one another. And if we
nearly observe, How Passions are formed in us; we shall find, that after the
manner that Women contribute to the Production and Education of Men, it is a
Natural Consequence, that they should treat them in their Afflictions, in some
sort as their Children.

The Difference which is observed, between Men and Women, in regard of Manners,
proceeds from the Education which is given Them.
IT is so much the more important to Remark, That the Dispositions, which we
bring with us into the World, are neither (in their Nature) good or bad; that
otherwise, we cannot avoid an Error very ordinary; whereby Men often refer to
Nature, that which (only) springs from Custom.

Men torture their Minds, to search for a Reason, Why we are subject to certain
Faults, and have particular Customs; for want of having observed, that which
may be produced in us, by Habit, Exercise, Education, and outward Condition;
that is to say, The Relation of Sex, Age, Fortune, and Employment, wherein we
are placed in Society: It being certain, that all these different Views
diversifying, in an infinite number of ways, the thoughts, and passions,
answerably dispose the minds quite other-wayes, to look on the truths presented
to them. It is for that Reason, that the same Maxim, proposed at the same time
to Citizens, Soldiers, to Judges, and Princes, affects them, and makes them
Act so differently: Because, that Men caring for nothing but the outside; Look
on it as the Rule, and measure of their Sentiments: Whence happens, that the
one lets pass as useless, that which very much takes up others; That Swordmen
are Choked with that which flatters Gown-men: And that Persons of the same
Constitution take sometimes certain things in a contrary Sense; Which enter by
one and the same biass into the minds of Persons of different temperament; but
who have same the fortune, or education.

It is not that we pretend, that all men bring into the World the same bodily
constitution. That would be indeed, an ill-grounded pretense: There are some
that are quick, and some flow: but it appears not, that that diversity any
way hinders the minds to receive the same instruction: all that, it does, is,
that some receive it more readily and happily than others. So that what
temperament soever Woman have, they are no less capable than we, of truth and
studies. And if we find at present, in some of them some defect, or impediment;
or even that all of them, do not look into solid matters, as men do; to which
notwithstanding experience is contrary, that ought solely to be rejected upon
the outward condition of their Sex, and on the education, which is given them,
which comprehends the ignorance wherein they are left, the Prejudices or
Errors, which are instilled in them, the Example which they have of others
their like. And all the ways to which Decorum, restraint, reserve, subjection,
and fears, reduces them.

In effect, nothing is omitted, on their account which may serve to persuade
them, that this great difference, which they see betwixt their Sex, and ours,
is a work of Reason, or divine institution. The apparel, education, and
exercises, cannot be more different. A Maid is not in security but under the
wings of her Mother; or under the eyes of a Governant that never leaves her:
They Frighten her with every thing: Threaten her with Spirits, and Hobgoblines,
in all the corners of the house, where she may be alone: Even in the streets,
and Churches, there is something to be feared, if she have not her guards. The
great care which is taken to dress her, takes up all her mind: So many looks
as are glanced at her, and so many discourses, which she hears of beauty,
imployes all her thoughts; And the complements, which she receives on this
Subject, makes her therein place all her happiness. As they never speak to her
of any thing else, with that she limits all her designs, and carries no higher
her prospects. Dancing, writing, and reading, are the greatest exercises of
Women; all their library consists in a few little Books of Devotion, with that
which is in the little cabinet.

All their Science is reduced to work with a Needle. The Looking Glass is the
great Master and Oracle which they consult. Balls, Plays, and the Modes, make
the subject of their Entertainments: They consider their meetings as, famous
Accademies, whether they go to inform themselves of all the news of their Sex.
And if it happen, that some one or other distinguish themselves from the
common, by the reading of certain Books, which they had trouble enough to
catch, thereby to unlock their minds, they are often obliged to hide
themselves: The greatest part of their companions, out of Jealousy or other
respects, never failing to accuse them of intending to play the rare things.

As to Maids of meaner condition, forced to gain their livelihood by their
labor; their parts are still more useless. Care is taken to make them learn a
trade convenient to their Sex, as soon as they are fit thereto, and their
necessity of employing themselves continually therein, hinders them from
thinking of any thing else: And when both one, and others of them, bred in this
manner have attained to the age of marriage, they are engaged therein, or
otherwise confined to a Cloister, where they go on to live as they have begun.

In all that which is taught to Women, do we see any thing that tends to solid
instruction? It seems on the contrary, that men have agreed on this sort of
education, of purpose to abase their courage, darken their mind, and to fill it
only with vanity, and fopperies; there to stifle all the seeds of Virtue, and
Knowledge, to render useless all the dispositions which they might have to
great things, and to take from them the desire of perfecting themselves, as
well as we by depriving them of the means.

When I seriously think on the manner, how men look upon that which they think
to see faulty, in Women, I find that such a carriage has in it somewhat
beneath persons endowed with reason. If there be equal occasion of finding of
fault in both Sexes, that which accuses the other, offends against Natural
equity; if there be more evil in ours, and that we see it not, we are rash to
speak of the faults of others; if we see it, and conceal it, we are unjust to
blame the other who has less. If there be more good in Women, than in Men; Men
ought to be accused of ignorance, or envy, not to acknowledge it, when in a
Woman there is more Virtue than Vice, the one should serve to excuse the other;
and when the defects that she has are insurpassable, or that the means to rid
her self thereof, or guard therefrom, are wanting, as to Woman they are, such a
one deserves compassion, not contempt. In fine, if these defects be but slight,
or only apparent, it is imprudence or Malice to insist on them; And it is not
hard to prove, that men commonly carry so in respect of Women.

It is commonly said, that they are timorous, and incapable of defense; that
they are afraid of their shadow, that the cry a child allarmes them, and the
whistling of the Wind makes them tremble. That is not Universal. There are a
great many Women as bold as men, and it is known that the most fearful make
often of necessity a Virtue; timerousness, is almost inseparable from virtue,
and all virtuous persons have it: As they would not do hurt to any, and that
they are not ignorant how much wickedness is amongst men; a small matter is
enough to fill them with fear. It is a Natural passion, from which no body is
exempt: all men fear death, and the troubles of life; the most powerful
Princes apprehend the Rebellion of their Subjects, and the invasion of enemies,
and the most valiant Generals to be surprised unawares.

Fear is great, proportionably, to the force which men think they have to
resist; and it is not blameable, but in such in who are strong enough to repel
the evil which threatens them: And we should be as unreasonable to accuse a
Judge, or a man that had never minded any thing but his Book, of baseness, for
refusing to fight a duel; as to blame a Soldier who had always carried arms,
for not daring to enter into dispute against a learned Philosopher.

Women are bred in a manner that gives them ground to apprehend, and fear
every thing; they have not light enough to avoid surprises in matters of
Understanding. They have no share in the exercises which give strength and
dexterity for attacking, and defending; They see themselves exposed helplesly
to suffer the outragiousness of a Sex; so subject to Transports, which regards
them with contempt, and that often treats its like with more rage, and cruelty,
than Wolves do one another.

Wherefore timerousness in Women ought not to pass for a defect, but rather
for a Rational passion, to which they owe modesty, which is so peculiar to
them; and the two great advantages of life, which are the inclination to
Virtue; and the aversion from Vice, which the greatest part of men with all the
education and light which are given them, can hardly acquire.

Fear of want is the ordinary cause of Avarice, Men are no less subject
thereunto than Women; And if we came to an account, I know not if the number
of the first should not be found greater, and their covetousness more blame
worthy; Since the middle Virtue is not far distant from the two Vices, the
Extremes, men often mistake the one for the other, and confound avarice with
laudable frugality.

As the same action may be good in one, and bad another, it often happens that
that which is evil in us, is not at all so in Women: They are destitute of
all means to make their fortune by their parts, the door of Sciences, and
Employments, being shut against them; And so being in worse condition to guard
themselves against the misfortunes, and inconveniences of life, they ought more
to be concerned. It is no wonder then, that herewith they seeing what a great
trouble it is to purchase a small estate, they take care to keep it.

If they receive so easily that which is told them, it is an effect of their
candor, and ingenuity, that will not suffer them to think, that these who have
authority over them, are ignorant, or interested; and we offend Justice, to
accuse them of credulity, since there is yet more amongst us. The ablest men
suffer themselves to be too much allured by a false appearance; And all their
Knowledge is often times, but a mean credulity, but of somewhat greater extent
than that of Women: I mean, that they are not more knowing than others; but
because they have more Lightly given their consent, to a greater number of
things, of which they have retained the Notions, right or wrong, by having so
often run them over.

That which causes timerousness in Women, produces likewise superstition,
which the learned themselves impute to them: But in this, the learned appear
like those, who being most in the wrong, persuade themselves that they are in
the right, because they make a Louder Noise than others. They fancy that they
themselves, are clear from superstition, because they find it in some ignorant
Women, whilst in the mean time, themselves are therein miserably plunged up to
the ears.

Though all men were the true worshipers of God, in Spirit, and in Truth, and
that Women rendered him only Superstitious adoration, in this they would be
excusable. They are not at all taught to know God by themselves: they know
nothing of him, but what is told them: And, as the most part of Men speak of
him in a manner, so unworthy of what he is, and distinguish him not from his
Creatures, but only by the attribute of Creator; it is no wonder, that Women
only knowing him upon their report, Worship him by Religion, with the same
Sentiments that they have for men, whom they fear and reverence.

There are some men, that think they can sufficiently Mortify the Women, by
telling of them, that they are nothing else all of them but tatlers. They have
reason to be vexed, at so impertinent a calumny. Their body is so happily
disposed by the temperament which is propper to them, that they distinctly
retain the impressions of Objects, which once they have received: They
represent them to themselves without Trouble, and express them with wonderful
Facility: That is the Reason, that the Notions which they have, awakening on
the least occasion, they begin and continue their Conversation at their
Pleasure: And the Quickness of their Spirit (giving them Means to perceive,
easily, the Relation of things among themselves, they) pass without trouble
from one Subject to another; and, by that means, can speak a long time, without
letting the Discourse flag or dye.

The Benefit of Speech, is naturally accompanied with a great desire of using
of it, when occasion offers: It is the only Bond of Men in Society; and many
find, that there is no greater Pleasure in the World, nor more becoming the
Mind, than to Communicate their Thoughts to others. Wherefore, Women being able
to speak with Ease, and being bred and brought up with others; they were to be
blamed, if they failed to entertain themselves.

They ought not, then, to pass for Tatlers, but when they speak out of purpose;
and of things, which they understand not, without desire of Instruction.

We must not imagine, that People never tatle, but when they talk of Cloths and
Fashions. The Tatle of News-Mongers, is often more ridiculous: And that, store
of Words, heaped one upon another (and which signify nothing at all, in the
most part of Works), make a Chat far more simple, than that of the silliest of
Women. At least, we may say, That the Discourses of these, are real and
intelligible; and that, they are not vain enough, to imagine (as the greatest
part of the Learned do), That they are Wiser than their Neighbors; because
they utter more Words, and less Sense. If Men had a Tongue as free, it would be
impossible to make them hold their Peace. Every one entertains himself with
what he knows; Merchants about their Business, Philosophers with their Studies,
and Women about that which they have been able to Learn; And they may say, That
they would have entertained themselves better, and with greater Solidity, if
there had been as great Care for Instruction taken with them.

It choaks a great many, that Women, in their Conversation, testify a great
desire to know every thing. I know not what can be the Palate of these Men, that
cannot relish, that Women should be so Curious: For my part, I am well
pleased, that People should be curious; and I only advise them, to manage it
so, that they be not troublesome therewith.

I look upon the Conversations of Women, as upon those of Philosophers; where
it is equally permitted to all, to entertain themselves about things, of which
they have no Knowledge; and there are cross Times in the one, as well as the
other.

It is ordinary with many Men, to treat the Curious, like Beggars. When they
are in an Humor of bestowing, they take it not ill to be asked; and when they
have a mind to discover what they know, they are glad to be entreated; If not,
they fail not to say, Ye are a little too Curious. Because Men have forged to
themselves, that Women ought not to Study; they stand upon their Points, when
Women demand to be informed of that which is Learned by Books. I esteem them
Curious things; and regret, they have not the means to satisfy themselves
therein; being often (only) hindered by a just Fear, to address themselves for
that end, to touchy and foolish Heads; by whom they would find themselves
jeered, instead of receiving Instruction. It seems to me, that Curiousity is
one of the most certain Signs of a good Wit; that is, more capable of
Learning. It is a Knowledge begun,-which sets us forward, and makes us proceed
farther in the way of Truth. When two Persons are touched by the same thing,
and that the one looks upon it with Indifferency, and the other draws nearer,
with design to see it better; it is a mark, that this has the Eyes more open.
The Mind in both Sexes, is Equally sit for Sciences; and the Desire, which it
may have of them, is no more to be blamed in the one, than in the other. When
the Mind finds it self affected with a thing, which it sees but obscurely, it
seems to be by a Natural Right, that it would be cleared therein: Ignorance
being the most irksome Slavery (wherein it can be), it is as unreasonable to
condemn a Person, who strives to get out of it; as a Wretch, who should
endeavor to escape out of a Prison, where he were shut up.

Amongst all the Faults that Women are charged with, the Inconstant and Fickle
Humor, is that which makes the maniest discontented. In the mean-time, they
themselves are not less subject thereto; But because, they see themselves
Masters, they think that every thing is lawful to them: And that Women, being
once engaged to them, the knot ought to be indissoluble (only) on their part;
although that they be both Equal, and that every one is obliged for their own
share.

They would not so often (Mutually) accuse one another of Levity, if they
observed, that it is Natural to Men; and that, he that says Mortal, says
Inconstant; and that, it is an Indispensible necessity of being, in the manner
which we are made. We judge not of Objects, we love, or hate them not; but upon
Appearances, which depend not on us. The same things appear to us diversely;
sometime, because they have suffered some Alteration; some time, because we our
selves are changed. The same Meat, more or less Seasoned, (Hot or Cold) causes
in us quite different Sensations: And, remaining still the same, we are
otherwise affected therewith in Sickness, than in Health. In our Infancy, we
are indifferent, as to Things; which, ten Years after, we look upon with
Passion, because the Body is Changed.

If a Woman loves us, it is, Because she thinks us Lovely; and, if another
hate us, it is, Because we appear to her Hateful. In one time we esteem those,
whom we have slighted before; because they have not always appeared to us the
same; whether it be They, or We, who are Changed. And such an Object, being
presented to the Heart, has found the Door open; which, a Quarter of an Hour
sooner or later, had been barred against it.

The Hovering, wherein we many times find our Selves betwixt two different
Inclinations, which one and the same Object causes in us, convinces us in
spite of our Teeth, that the Passions are not free; and that we are unjust to
complain, That we are otherwise considered of, than we would. As a small Matter
is enough to kindle Love; so, a little thing can extinguish it: and that
Passion depends no more upon us in its Progress, than in its Birth. Of ten
Women, that aspire to be Loved, it falls out ordinarily, That she who has
least Merit, least of Birth and Beauty, shall carry it over the rest; because
that she may have had a Brisker Air, or somewhat more in Mode, or suitable to
our Gusto, in the Humor that then we find our selves in.

It is so far from doing wrong to Women, to accuse them of being more Cunning
and Artificious than Men, that Men speak for them, if they know what they say;
since; by so saying, they acknowledge them to be more Witty and Prudent.
Artifice is a secret way of attaining an End proposed, without being diverted:
There is need of Wit, to find out that way; and Dexterity, to manage it: And we
cannot find fault, that a Woman imployes Artifice, to avoid being deceived.
Craft is far more Pernicious, and more ordinary amongst Men: That has always
been the common Road, to enter into the Places and Employments, where they may
do greatest Mischief.

And, instead of that, That Men (who have a mind to Cheat), employ their Goods,
their Understanding, and their Power, from which we are rarely secure: Women
have nothing to use, but Caresses and Eloquence, which are natural Means;
against which, we may more easily guard our Selves, when there is any reason of
Mistrust.

For the Summary of Accusation and Defect, it is said, That Women are more
malicious and wicked than Men: And all the Evil, with which Men can charge
them, is shut up in this Opinion. I do not believe, that those who entertain
this Thought, do pretend, That there are more Women than Men, who do Mischief:
That would be a manifest Falsehood; For, they have no part in Employments, and
Charges; the abuse of which, is the cause of all public Calamities; and their
Virtue is too Exemplary; and the Disorders of Men too well known to call them
in question.

When Men (then) say, That Women have more Malice; it signifies no more, but
that, when they set themselves to do Evil, they do it more dexterously, and
drive it farther than Men. Let it be so. This marks in them a most solid
Advantage: For, one cannot be capable of doing much Mischief, without having
good Judgment; and without being also (by Consequence) capable of doing much
Good. So that, Women ought not to look upon this Reproach, more Injurious,
than that which might be made to Rich and Powerful Men; that they are more
wicked than the Poor, because they have more Opportunies of hurting: And Women
might answer, as they; That, if they can do Hurt, they can also do Good; and
that, if the Ignorance wherein they are left be the cause, Why they are worse
than we; Knowledge, on the contrary, would render them much better.

This short Discussion, of the most signal Defects (which Men conceive
peculiar, and natural, to the lovely Sex) proves two things; the one* That they
are not so considerable, as the Vulgar Imagine; and the other That they may be
Rejected, upon the little Education which Women have; and whatever they are,
they may be amended by Instruction; of which, Women are no less capable than
our Selves.

If the Philosophers had followed this Rule, in judging of all that concerns
Women, they would have spoken more soundly; and had not (in Respect of them)
fallen into Ridiculous Absurdities. But the most part, both of Ancient and
Modern, having only built their Philosophy upon popular Prejudices; and, having
been in great Igno-rance of themselves, it is no wonder, that they have so far
mistaken others. Without giving our selves any trouble to meddle with the
Ancients; we may say of the Modern, That the manner how they are Taught (making
them believe, though falsely, That they cannot become more knowing, than those
that have gone before them), renders them Slaves to Antiquity, and enclines
them, to embrace (blindly) all that they find therein, as Constant and
Universal Truths. And because, that all that they say against Women, is
principally founded upon what they have Read in the Ancients; it will not here
be unprofitable, to relate some of the most curious Conceits on this Subject;
which have been left to us, by these Illustrious Dead, whose very Ashes, and
Rottenness, are at this Day, held in so great Veneration.

Plato (the Father of Ancient Philosophy) thanked the Gods for three Favors,
which they had bestowed on him; but chiefly, for that he was Born a Man, and
not a Woman. If he had in his Eye their present Condition, I should easily be
of his Mind: But that which makes me think, that he had somewhat else in his
Thoughts, is, The Doubt which he is said to have been often in, If Women ought
to be placed in the Category of Beasts. That may be sufficient to Rational Men,
to make him Condemn himself of Ignorance, or Brutishness; and totally to
degrade him from the Title of Divine, which he enjoyes no more, but among
Pedants.

His Scholar Aristotle (to whom the Schools still continue the Name of the
Glorious Genious of Nature; upon a Mistake, that he has known her, better than
any other Philosopher) pretends, that Women are but Monsters. Who would not
believe it, upon the Authority of so Renowned a Personage? To say, It is an
Impertinence; would be, to choke his Supposition too openly.

If a Woman (how Learned soever she might be), had wrote as much of Men, she
would have lost all her Credit; and Men would have imagined it sufficient, to
have refuted such a Foppery; by answering, That it must be a Woman, or a Fool,
that had said so. In the meanwhile, she would have had no less Reason, than
this Philosopher. Women are as Ancient as Men; We see them in as great Number;
and no Man is surprised to meet them in his Way. To be a Monster (according to
the Opinion, it self, of that Man) there must be something Extraordinary, and
Surprising. Women have nothing of all that: They have been always made after
the same Fashion; always Pretty and Witty. And, if they be not made like
Aristotle, they may say, That Aristotle was not made like them.

The Disciples of this Author (who lived in the time of Philo), fell into a
Conceit, no less old Fashioned, in regard of Women; fancying to themselves
(according to the Relation of that Historian), That they were Half-Men, or
Imperfect Males. It is, without doubt, because they have not the Chin hung with
a long beard; unless it be that, I can apprehend nothing. The Two Sexes (to be
Perfect) ought to be, as we see them. If the one were altogether like the
other, it would be neither of the Two. If Men be the Fathers of Women, Women
are the Mothers of Men; which, at least, renders them Equal: And we might have
as much Reason, as these Philosophers, to say, That Men are Imperfect Women.

Socrates (who was the Morality and Oracle of Antiquity) speaking of the Beauty
of that Sex; was accustomed to compare it to a Temple of a Fair Show, but built
upon a Jakes.

If this Conceit do not turn our Stomachs, we must only Laugh at it. It is
propable, that he judged of the Bodies of others, by his own, or by his Wives;
who was a She-Devil, which made him detest her; and, that he spoke of her Sex,
to bring her down: And, that he himself was mad to the very soul, because he
was ugly as a Maggot.

Diogenes, Sir-named The Dog, because he was good at nothing but Biteing;
seeing one day (in passing) two Women, who Discoursed together; told the
Company, That there was two Serpents, an Aspe and a Viper, who Communicated to
one another their Poison. That Saying is worthy of an Honest Man; and I wonder
not, that it is Ranked among the goodly Philosophical Sentences. If the Wise
Men of Gottam had lived in his time, it is certain, we should have found their
Ran-counters more sprightly. The good Man was a little wounded; and they that
knew him a little, judged, that (at that time) he had nothing else to say.

For the admirable and pleasant Democritus; as he loved to be merry and laugh a
little, we must not take every thing literally which came from his Mouth. He
was a very tall Man; and his Wife, one of the least: Being one day asked, Why
he had so ill matched himself? He answered (according to his ordinary Rallery),
That when we are obliged to choose, and when there is nothing that is good to
be taken, the Least is always the Best. If the same Question had been put to
his Wife, she might have repartied with as much Reason; That a little and a big
Husband, being both alike, the one as bad as the other, she had taken here is hap
Hazard; for fear, that if she had chosen, she might have done worse.

Cato (the Sage and Severe Critic) prayed often, That the Gods would pardon
him, if he had been so Imprudent, as to trust the least Secret to a Woman.
There stuck in the good Man's Mind, a Famous Passage in the Roman History; which
Antiquaries use as a great Argument, to prove the little Secrecy of Women: A
Child of twelve Years of Age, being pressed by his Mother, to tell her the
Resolution of he Senate (where he had been Assistant), invented to baffle her;
that it had been decreed, That every Husband should have several Wives.
Immediately, she went and told her Neighbors, to consult about her Measures
with them; So that, in the space of half an Hour, it was all the Town over. I
would gladly know, what a poor Husband would do, if in a State, where Women
were the Mistresses (as in that of the Amazones); one should come and tell him,
that it had been resolved in Counsel, That every Husband must have an Helper:
without doubt, he would not open his Mouth.

These are some of the great and sublime Conceits, which they (whom the Learned
study as Oracles) have entertained, concerning the Beautiful SEX: And that
which is pleasant, and odd, both together, is, That Grave Men seriously make
use of that, which these Famous Ancients have often but said in Drollery: So
true it is, that Prejudices, and Pre-Occupation, do make Men themselves mistake
the Mark, who pass for the most Rational, Judicious, and Wife.

FINIS.
An Advertisement.
THE strongest Objections that can be made against us, are drawn from the
Authority of great Men, and Holy Scripture: As to the former, We think to have
sufficiently satisfied Them; by telling them, That we acknowledge no other
Authority here, but that of Reason, and good Sense.

As to the Scripture; it is not at all contrary to the Intent of this Treatise,
if me understand (well) both the one and the other. Here we pretend, That there
is an entire Equallity betwixt the Two Sexes, being considered Independent of
of Custom; which places often those of most Merit and Parts, in a Dependence
on others. The Scripture speaks not a word of Inequality: And, as the end of
it is only to serve Men for a Rule in their Conduct, (according to the Notions
which it gives of Justice); So, it leaves to every one the Liberty, to judge as
well as he can of the natural (and true) state of Things. And, if we mind it,
all the Objections which are drawn therefrom, are but Sophisms of Prejudice;
whereby sometimes, Men understand (of all Women) Passages, which only agree to
some few in Particular: Sometime they refer to Nature, that which only flows
from Education or Custom, and that which sacred Authors have spoken with
Relation to their own Times.

Books Printed for Nathanael Brooks at the Angel in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange.
Folio.
1. THE Institution, Laws, and Ceremonies of the most Noble Order of the
Garter; Adorned with many Sculptures: By Elias Ashmole of the middle Temple,
Esquire Windsor Herald at Arms: price 30s.

2. The History of K. John, K. Henry the Third, and the most Illustrious K.
Edward the First; wherein the Ancient Laws for the Sovereign Dominion of the
Kings of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, over all Persons and Causes is
Asserted, and vindicated against all Encroachments and Innovations whatsoever:
Collected out of the Ancient Records of the Tower of London, by William Prynn,
Esquire a late Bencher and Reader of Lincoln's Inn, and Keeper of his Majesty's
Records in the Tower of Land. price 20 s.

3. Gells Remains on the New Testament Opened and Explained; wherein Jesus
Christ, as Yesterday, to Day, and the same for Ever, is Illustrated in several
Pious and Learned Notes, and Observations thereupon; by the Learned Dr. Robert
Gell, late Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, London: price 30s.

4. The Sphere of Marcus Manilius, made an English Poem, with Annotations, and
a Astronomical Appendix; by the Learned Edward Sherburne, Esquire Illustrated with
many Copper-Cutts: price 30 s.

5. Christian Religions Appeal from the groundless Prejudices of the Sceptick,
to the Bar of Common Reason; wherein is proved, That first, The Apostles did
not delude the World. 2. Nor were themselves deluded. 3. Scripture Matters of
Fact have the best Evidence. 4. The Divinity of Scripture is as Demonstrable,
as the Being of a Deity; by John Smith, Rector of St. Mary's in Colchester:
price 12 s. A most Excellent Work.

6. The Admired Piece of Phisiognomy Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the Symetrical
Proportions, and Signal Moles of the Body explained, with the Interpretations
of Dreams: To which is added, The Art of Memory: Illustrated with Figures, both
pleasant and profitable; with very large Additions: price 12s.

7. The so well entertained Work; The New World of Words: Or, a General lish
Dictionary: Containing all Terms i^ Navigation; the Etymology, Definitions and
perfect Interpretations of the proper Significations of Hard English Words
throughout the Arts and Sciences, Liberal and Mechanic: As also, other
Subjects that are useful, or appertain to the Language of our Nation: A Work
very necessary for Strangers, as well as our own Countrymen: for all Persons
that would rightly understand what they Discourse or Read. Collected and
Published, with above 2000 Words added in this Edition: price 10s.

Quarto.
The Conveyance of Light: or, The Complete Clerk, and Scriviner' s Guide; being
an Exact Draught of all Presidents and Assurances now in use: Likewise, of all
Bills, Answers, and Pleadings in Chancery, as they were penned by diverse Learned
Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both Ancient and Modern:
Whereunto is added, A Concordance from Richard the Third, to this very time;
with very large Additions: price 12s.

The Sermons of Mr. Henry Smith, sometimes Minister of St. Clement's-Dane,
London: together with other of his Learned Treatises: all gathered into one
Volumn; with the Life of the Reverend and Learned Author, by Thomas Fuller, B.
D. price 8s.

A New Discovery of the Country of Surinam, with the Benefits of it: price 6d.

A Funeral Sermon of Dr. Brettons, at the Interring at Deptford, by Dr. Parr of
Camberwel: price 6d.

The Ingenious Satyr against Hyppocrites, worth perusal: price 6d.

The Batchelours Banquet: or, Fifteen Degrees of Marriage, fit to be known by
All: price 6d.

Large Octavo.
Moors Arithmetic, much Refined, and Diligently cleared from the former
Mistakes of the Press: A Work containing the whole Art of Arithmetic, as well
in Numbers as Species: Together with many Large Additions, by Sr. Jonas Moor,
etc.

Bakers Arithmetic, with large Additions: price 2s. 6d.

Fax nova Linguae Latinae; a New Torch to the Latin Tongue: very much enlarged,
by Paul asperenij, a Transilvanian. The Fourth Edition: A most Excellent piece
for all Clarks: price 8s.

Abcedarium Scolasticum: or, the Grammar-Schollars Abcedary; by Thomas Hunt,
Master of St. Saviors Free School in Southwark: very useful: price 1s. 6d.

The Psalms of K. David Paraphrased and turned into English Verse, according to
the Common Meter; by Miles Smyth, Esque price 3s.

Culpeppers School of Physic*

The Accomplished Cook; or, The Mystery of the whole Art of Cookery; with the
manner of Making all sorts of Sawces, as by the many Years Experience of Robert
May: price 5s. The best ever Extant.

The Queen's Closet Opened: Incomparable Secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery,
Preserving and Candying; which were Presented to the Queen, by the most
Experienced Persons of these Times: price 2s. 6d.

Claveland's Poems, now carefully Corrected; and large Additions Published by
his own Contemparies.

Culpeppers last Legacy; his Phy^cal and Chyrurgical Remaynes, left his Wife:
To which is added, A new Piece of Anatomy, newly come to hand by the said
Author.


