Imprimatur,

Geo. Stradling, S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Patr. D. Gilb. Episc. Loud. a Sac.
Domestic.
Ex Aed Sab. Aug. 5. 1663.
EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY, In Three-Books: Containing New Experiments
Microscopical, Mercurial, Magnetical.
With some Deductions, and Probable Hypotheses, raised from them, in Avouchment
and Illustration of the now famous Atomical Hypothesis.

By HENRY POWER, Dr. of Physic.

Perspicillum ( Microscopicum scilicet) si vidisset Democritus, exiluisset
forte; and modum videndi Atomum (quam ille invisibilem omnino affirmavit)
inventum fuisse putasset.

Fr. Verulam. lib. 2. Novi Organi, sect. 39. Hinc igitur facillime intelligere
possumus, quam stulie, quam inaniter sese venditat humana sapientia, quove
ferantur nostra Ingenia, nisi recta ratione, experientiaque (scientiarum omnium
magistra) nitantur and opin^^^is salebras accurate vitent.

Muffet. De Insect. cap. 15. page 115. LONDON, Printed by T. Roycroft, for John
Martin, and James Allestry, at the Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1664.

The Preface to the Ingenious READER.
DIoptrical Glasses (which are now wrought up to that height and curiosity we
see) are but a Modern Invention: Antiquity gives us not the least hint thereof,
neither do their Records furnish us with any thing that does Antedate our late
discoveries of the Telescope, or Microscope. The want of which incomparable
Artifice made them not only err in their fond Celestial Hypothesis, and
Crystalline wheel-work of the Heavens above us, but also in their nearer
Observations of the minute Bodies and smallest sort of Creatures about us,
which have been by them but slightly and perfunctorily described, as being the
disregarded pieces and huslement of the Creation; when (alas!) those sons of
Sense were not able to see how curiously the minutest things of the world are
wrought, and with what eminent signatures of Divine Providence they were
enriched and embellished, without our Dioptrical assistance. Neither do I think
that the Aged world stands now in need of Spectacles, more than it did in its
primitive Strength and Luster: for howsoever though the faculties of the soul
of our Primitive father Adam might be more quick and perspicacious in
Apprehension, than those of our lapsed selves; yet certainly the Constitution
of Adam's Organs was not diverse from ours, nor different from those of his
Fallen Self, so that he could never discern those distant, or minute objects by
Natural Vision, as we do by the Artificial advantages of the Telescope and
Microscope. So that certainly the secondary Planets of Saturn and Jupiter and
his Ansulary appearances, the Maculae Solis, and Lunations of the inferior
Planets, were as obscure to him as unknown to his Posterity; only what he
might ingeniously ghess at by the Analogy of things in Nature, and some other
advantageous Circumstances.

And as those remote objects were beyond the reach of his natural Optics, so
doubtless the Minute Atoms and Particles of matter, were as unknown to him, as
they are yet unseen by us: for certainly both his and our Eyes were framed by
providence in Analogy to the rest of our senses, and as might best manage this
particular Engine we call the Body, and best agree with the place of our
habitation (the earth and elements we were to converse with) and not to be
critical spectators, surveyors, and adaequate judges of the immense Universe:
and therefore it has often seemed to me beyond an ordinary probability, and
something more than fancy (how paradoxical soever the conjecture may seem) to
think, that the least Bodies we are able to see with our naked eyes, are but
middle proportionals (as it were) 'twixt the greatest and smallest Bodies in
nature, which two Extremes lie equally beyond the reach of humane sensation:
For as on the one side they are but narrow souls, and not worthy the name of
Philosophers, that think any Body can be too great or too too vast in its
dimensions; so likewise, are they as inapprehensive, and of the same litter
with the former, that on the other side think the particles of Matter may be
too little, and that nature is stinted at an Atom, and must have a non ultra of
her subdivisions.

Such, I am sure, our Modern Engine (the Microscope) will ocularly evince and
unlearn them their opinions again: for herein you may see what a subtle divider
of matter Nature is; herein we can see what the illustrious wits of the
Atomical and Corpuscularian Philosophers durst but imagine, even the very Atoms
and their reputed Indivisibles and least realities of Matter, nay the curious
Mechanism and organical Contrivance of those Minute Animals, with their
distinct parts, color, figure and motion, whose whole bulk were to them almost
invisible: so that were Aristotle now alive, he might write a new History of
Animals; for the first Tome of Zoography is still wanting, the Naturalists
hitherto having only described unto us the larger and more voluminous sort of
Animals, as Bulls, Bears, Tigers, etc. whilst they have regardlesly passed by
the Insectile Automata, (those Living-exiguities) with only a bare mention of
their names, whereas in these pretty Engines (by an Incomparable Stenography of
Providence) are lodged all the perfections of the largest Animals; they have
the same organs of body, multiplicity of parts, variety of motions, diversity
of figures, severality of functions with those of the largest size: and that
which augments the miracle, is, that all these in so narrow a room neither
interfere nor impede one another in their operations. Who therefore with the
Learned Dr. Brown, Relig. Med.
Doctor, admires not Regiomontanus his Fly beyond his Eagle, and wonders not
more at the operation of two souls in those minute bodies, than but one in the
trunk of a Cedar? Ruder heads stand amazed at those prodigious and Colossean
pieces of Nature, as Whales, Elephants, and Dromedaries; but in these narrow
Engines there is more curious Mathematics, and the Architecture of these
little Fabrics more neatly set forth the wisdom of their Maker.

Now as Matter may be great or little, yet never shrink by subdivision into
nothing; so, is it not probable, that Motion also may be indefinitely swift or
slow, and yet never come to a quiescency? and so consequently there can be no
rest in Nature, more than a Vacuity in Matter. The following Observations seem
to make out, that the Minute particles of most (if not all) Bodies are
constantly in some kind of motion, and that motion may be both invisibly and
unintelligibly slow, as well as swift, and probably is as unseparable an
attribute to Bodies, as well as Extension is.

And indeed, if the very nature of fluidity consist in the Intestine motion of
the parts of that Body called fluid, as Descartes happily supposed, and Mr.
Boil has more happily demonstrated, Why may we not be bold both to think and
say, that there is no such thing in the World as an absolute quiescence? for 1.
the greatest part of the World ( viz. the aetherial Medium (wherein all the
Stars and Planets do swim) is now confessed by all to be fluid, and so,
consequently, in a Perpetual Motion. 2. All the fixed lights of Heaven are
generally concluded to be pure Fire, and so consequently fluid also, and then
subconsequentially in motion also; not to mention the dinetical Rotations of
their whole Bodies, which every one is supposed to have, as well as our Sun: and
as for the Opace and Planetary Bodies of the Universe, they are all porous, and
the aetherial Matter is continually streaming through them, their internal fire
and heat constantly subliming Atoms out of them, the Magnetical Atoms
continually playing about them: Not to mention also their dinetical Motions
about their own Axes, and circumrevolutions about their central Suns: so that,
Is it not, I say, more than probable, that rest and quiescency is a mere
Peripatetical Notion, and that the supreme Being (who is Activity it self)
never made any thing inactive or utterly devoid of Motion?

Hence will unavoidable follow some other Principles of the ever-to-be-admired
Descartes:

1. That as Matter is made greater or less, by addition or subduction of parts,
so is Motion made swifter or slower by addition given to the Movent, by other
contiguous Bodies more swiftly moving, or by subduction of it by Bodies
slowlier moved.

2. As the parts of Matter can be transferred from one Body to another, and as
long as they remain united, would remain so for ever: so Motion may be
translated from one Body to another; but when it is not transferred, it would
remain in that Body for ever.

But these sublime Speculations I shall with more confidence treat of in
another place; the Speculation of Motion, and its Origin, being, as I conceive,
one of the obscurest things in Nature.

And therefore at present we shall keep within the compass of the Microscope, and
look at nothing further than what we can discover therein: The knowledge of Man
(says the learned Verulam) has hitherto been determined by the view or sight,
so that whatsoever is invisible, either in respect of the fineness of the Body
it self, or the smalness of the parts, or of the subtilty of its motion, is
little enquired; and yet these be the things that govern Nature principally:
How much therefore are we obliged to modern Industry, that of late has
discovered this advantageous Artifice of Glasses, and furnished our necessities
with such artificial Eyes, that now neither the fineness of the Body, nor the
smalness of the parts, nor the subtilty of its motion, can secure them from our
discovery? And indeed, if the Dioptricks further prevail, and that darling Art
could but perform what the Theorists in Conical sections demonstrate, we might
hope, ere long, to see the Magnetical Effluviums of the Loadstone, the Solary
Atoms of light (or globuli aetherei of the renowned Descartes) the springy
particles of Air, the constant and tumultuary motion of the Atoms of all fluid
Bodies, and those infinite, insensible Corpuscles (which daily produce those
prodigious (though common) effects amongst us:) And though these hopes be
vastly hyperbolical, yet who can tell how far Mechanical Industry may prevail;
for the process of Art is indefinite, and who can set a non-ultra to her
endeavors? I am sure, if we look backwards at what the Dioptriks has already
performed, we cannot but conclude such Prognostics to be within the circle of
possibilities, and perhaps not out of the reach of futurity to exhibit: however
this I am sure of, That without some such Mechanical assistance, our best
Philosophers will but prove empty Conjecturalists, and their profoundest
Speculations herein, but gloss'd outside Fallacies; like our Stage-scenes, or
Perspectives, that show things inwards, when they are but superficial paintings.

For, to conclude with that doubly Honorable (both for his parts and
parentage) Mr. Boil, When a Writer, Boil his Essays, page 10.
says he, acquaints me only with his own thoughts or conjectures, without
enriching his discourse with any real Experiment or Observation, if he be
mistaken in his Ratiotination, I am in some danger of erring with him, and at
least am like to lose my time, without receiving any valuable compensation for
so great a loss: But if a Writer endeavors, by delivering new and real
Observations or Experiments, to credit his Opinions, the Case is much
otherwise; for, let his Opinions be never so false (his Experiments being
true) I am not obliged to believe the former, and am left at my liberty to
benefit my self by the latter: And though he have erroneously superstructed
upon his Experiments, yet the Foundation being solid, a more wary Builder may
be very much furthered by it, in the erection of a more judicious and
consistent Fabric.

HENRY POWER.
From New-Hall, near Hallifax, 1. Aug. 1661.


MICROSCOPICAL OBSERVATIONS.
OBSERVAT. I. Of the Flea.
IT seems as big as a little Prawn or Shrimp, with a small head, but in it two
fair eyes globular and prominent of the circumference of a spangle; in the
midst of which you might (through the diaphanous Cornea.) see a round blackish
spot, which is the pupil or apple of the eye, beset round with a greenish
glistering circle, which is the Iris, (as vibrissant and glorious as a Cats
eye) most admirable to behold.

How critical is Nature in all her works! that to so small and contemptible an
Animal has given such an exquisite fabric of the eye, even to the distinction
of parts.

Had our famous Muffet but seen them, he would not have spoke so doubtfully as
he did: Oculos (says he, speaking of Flea's) habere, verisimile est, tum quod
suos eligunt recessus, tum quod appetente luce so subducunt. He has also a very
long neck, jemmar'd like the tail of a Lobstar, which he could nimbly move any
way; his head, body, and limbs also, be all of blackish armour-work, shining
and polished with jemmar's, most excellently contrived for the nimble motion of
all the parts: nature having armed him thus Cap-a-pe like a Curiazier in war,
that he might not be hurt by the great leaps he takes; to which purpose also he
has so excellent an eye, the better to look before he leap: to which add this
advantageous contrivance of the joints of his hinder legs which bend backwards
toward his belly, and the knees or flexure of his forelegs forwards (as in
most quadrupeds) that he might thereby take a better rise when he leaps. His
feet are slit into claws or talons, that he might the better stick to what he
lights upon: he has also two pointers before which grow out of the forehead,
by which he tryes and feels all objects, whether they be edible or no. His
neck, body, and limbs are also all beset with hairs and bristles, like so many
Turnpikes, as if his armor was palysado'd about by them. At his snout is fixed
a Proboscis, or hollow trunk or probe, by which he both punches the skin, and
sucks the blood through it, leaving that central spot in the middle of the
Flea-biting, where the probe entered.

One would wonder at the great strength lodged in so small a Receptacle, and
that he is not able only to carry his whole armor about him, but will frisk
and curvet so nimbly with it: Stick a large brass pin through his tail and he
will readily drag it away. I have seen a chain of gold (at Tredescants famous
reconditory of Novelties) of three hundred links, though not above an inch
long, both fastened to, and drawn away by a Flea. Such a like one it seems as
our Muffet tells that one Marcus an Englishman made. Nay hear what he says
further, Accepimus item a fide dignis, Pulicem sic Catena alligatum, Muffet, de
Insectis, lib. 2 cap. 28.
Currum aureum perfect suis numeris absolutum, nullo negotio traxisse, id quod
and Artificis industriam and suas ipsius vires multum commendat: Yea, we have
heard it credibly reported, says he, that a Flea has not only drawn a gold
Chain, but a golden Chariot also with all its harness and accoutrements fixed
to it, which did excellently set forth the Artifice of the Maker, and Strength
of the Drawer; so great is the mechanic power which Providence has immured
within these living walls of Jet.

OBSERVAT. II. The Be.
THe eye of a Be is of a protuberant oval figure, black and all foraminulous,
drilled full of innumerable holes like a Grater or Thimble; and, which is more
wonderful, we could plainly see, that the holes were all of a square figure
like an honeycomb, and stuck full of small hairs (like the pores in our skin)
and which (by blowing upon) you might see waft to and fro; all which neat
particularities were more palpably discovered in the eye of a great Humble-Bee.
Now these holes were not absolute perforations, but only dimples in their
crustaceous Tunica Cornea; which it seems is full of little pit-holes, like the
cap of a thimble: for we cut out the eye in a large Humble-Bee and Crecket,
and bared the shell or horney coat of the eye; and laying either the unequal or
concave side upwards (upon the object plate) I could easily perceive the little
holes or dimples formerly mentioned. So that, by the favor of our Microscope,
I have seen more in one hour then that famous Bee-master Aristomachus did in
his fifty years contemplation of those Laborious Insects.

If you divide the Be (or Humble-Bee especially) near the neck, you shall,
without help of the glass, see the heart beat most lively, which is a white
pulsing vesicle. The stings in all Bees are hollow and tubulous (like a
Shoomaker's-punch) so that when they prick the flesh, they do also, through
that channel, transfuse the poison into it: For if you take a Be, Wasp, or
Humble-Bee especially, and gently squeeze her tail, so that you may see the
sting, you shall perceive a drop of diaphanous liquor at the very end of it,
which if you wipe off, you shall distinctly see it renewed again, that humor
passing down the Cavity into the end thereof. But if you would see their
Commonwealth, Laws, Customs, Military Discipline, and their skill in Tacticks
and Architecture, then read our English Butler, an experimental and not
Theoretical writer on that subject.

OBSERVAT. III. The Common Fly.
IT is a very pleasant Insect to behold: her body is as it were from head to
tail studded with silver and black Armor, stuck all over with great black
Bristles, like Porcupine quills, set all in parallel order, with their ends
pointing all toward the tail; her wings look like a Sea-fan with black thick
ribs or fibers, dispersed and branched through them, which are webb'd between
with a thin membrane or film, like a slice of Muscovy-glasse: She has a small
head which she can move or turn any way: She has six legs, but goes only but
upon four; the two foremost she makes use of instead of hands, with which you
may often see her wipe her mouth and nose, and take up any thing to eat. The
other four legs are cloven and armed with little clea's or tallons (like a
Catamount) by which she lays hold on the rugosities and asperities of all
bodies she walks over, even to the supportance of her self, though with her
back downwards and perpendicularly invers'd to the Horizon. To which purpose
also the wisdom of Nature has endued her with another singular Artifice, and
that is a fuzzy kind of substance like little sponges, with which she has
lined the soles of her feet, which substance is always repleated with a whitish
viscous liquor* which she can at pleasure squeeze out, and so sodder and
be-glew her self to the plain she walks on, which otherways her gravity would
hinder (were it not for this contrivance) especially when she walks in those
inverted positions.

But of all things her eyes are most remarkable, being exceeding large, ovally
protuberant and most neatly dimpled with innumerable little cavities like a
small grater or thimble, through which seeming perforations you may see a faint
reddish color (which is the blood in the eyes, for if you prick a pin through
the eye, you shall find more blood there, then in all the rest of her body.)
The like foraminulous perforations or trelliced eyes are in all Flies, more
conspicuously in Carnivorous or Flesh-Flyes, in the Stercorary or Yellow Flies
that feed upon Cow Dung: The like eyes I have also found in diverse other
Insects, as the Shepherd-flye or Spinster-flye, which Muffet calls Opilionum
Muscam; also in Cantharides or French-Flyes; also in all sorts of Scarabees,
black and spotted; also in all sorts of Moth-flyes, called by Muffet,
Phalaenae-papiliones; also in the May-Fly, Butter-flyes, Scorpion-tail'd-fly,
Twinges, and Earwigs; most clearly in the sloe-black eye of the Crecket, and in
the large eye of the Dragon-fly or Adderbolt. Many more observables there are
in Common Flies, as their Vivacity; for, when they appear desperate and quite
forsaken of their forms, by virtue of the Sun or warm ashes they will be
revoked into life, and perform its functions again.

Had Domitian thus busied himself in the Contemplation of this Animal, it had
been an employment, not sometimes unworthy of Caesar. Muffet, lib. de Insectis,
cap. 12.
For, to conclude with Muffet; Dei vero virtutem quam valide animalcula ista,
parum sane valida, demonstrant? Contemplare enim vel minimum muscilionem, and
quomodo in Tantillo Corpore, pedes, alas, oculos, promuscidem, aliaque membra,
omni filo minora, concinne adaptavit Altissimus, edissere!

OBSERVAT. IV. The Gray, or Horse-Fly.
HEr eye is an incomparable pleasant spectacle: it is of a semisphaeroidal
figure; black and waved, or rather indented all over with a pure
Emerauld-green, so that it looks like green silk Irish-stitch, drawn upon a
black ground, and all latticed or chequered with dimples like Common Flies,
which makes the Indentures look more pleasantly: Her body looks like silver in
frost-work, only fringed all over with white silk: Her legs all joynted and
knotted like the plant called Equisetum or Horse-tayl, and all hairy and slit
at the ends into two toes, both which are lined with two white sponges or
fuzballs as is pre-observ'd in Common Flies. After her head is cut off, you
shall most fairly see (just at the setting on of her neck) a pulsing particle
(which certainly is the heart) to beat for half an hour most orderly and neatly
through the skin.

OBSERVAT. V. The Butter-Fly.
THis Animal might well deserve our Observation without the assistance of a
Microscope; for who does not admire the variegated diversity of colors in her
expansed wings? which do not only out-vye the Peacock in all his pride, but
does as far out-go the stripped bravery of the Tulip, as that did Solomon in all
his glory: But view them in the Microscope, and you may see the very streaks of
the Celestial pencil that drew them. For the wings of the Butterfly seem like
a great plume of feathers, with a glystering splendor exceeding pleasant to
behold, especially if the wings be stripped with several colors: yea that small
meal and dust of their wings (which sticks to your fingers when you catch them)
is all small little feathers, which grow out of their wings; and you may
plainly see the twills by which they stick to the wings, and the holes in the
wings, out of which they were plucked. Nature having imp'd her wings (for her
better flight) with those plumeous excrescences; which shows how vastly Dr.
Brown in his Vulgar Errors.
they were mistaken, that held this mealy dust to be an exudation of atoms out
of their wings.

Her eye is large and globular (but somewhat flattish) white like Alablaster,
diced or bespeck'd here and there with black spots (like checkered Marble) all
foraminous, both the white and black parts of it. I mean in a white Butterfly,
for in a red-wing'd Butterfly, her eye is all black and full of perforations as
in a Common Fly.

The Probe (which you see lies in her mouth in spiral contorsions, wound up
like a spring, or like the twining tendrils of the Vine, and which you may with
a pin draw out to its full length) seems to be hollow, and supplies the office
both of Mouth and Tongue: for you shall see it (if cut out and laid on the
object-plate) to wind and coyl it self up like a Spring, and then open again a
long time together, and to have a transparent kind of hollownesse quite
throughout. Nature having made it of a considerable length (when extended) that
she might reach her nourishment, else the length of her legs would hinder the
stooping of her head: She has also fitted it with that spiral or cochleary
contrivance, that so being drawn up into an Helix, and retracted into the
mouth, it might be no hinderance to her flight.

OBSERVAT. VI. A Louse.
SHe appears the bigness of a large Crecket, the body diaphanous and
transparent, with three legs on either side, and two horns in the snout, all
transparent and of Gauntlet-work, having here and there hairs and bristles; her
feet likewise are slit into toes. Her two eyes were like two black beads,
gogled and protuberant, standing somewhat backwards on the side of her head
behind her horns: She is blackish about the shoulders; if she be laid on her
back, you may perceive her body to be of Escallop'd protuberances, diaphanous
also, very handsome to behold. In this supine position of hers, there are two
bloody darkish spots discernable, the greater in the midst of her body, and the
lesser toward her tail. In the Center of the middle spot there is a white Film
or Bladder, which continually contracts and dilates its self upwards and
downwards from the head toward the tail; and always after every pulse of this
white particle or vesicle, then follows the pulse of the great dark bloody
spot, in which, or over which, the vesicle seems to swim. This we observed two
or three hours together, as long as the Louse lived; and this motion of Systole
and Diastole is most palpably seen, when the Louse grows feeble and weak. I
pricked the white vesicle with a small needle and let out a little drop of
blood; and then viewing her again in the Microscope, we could not perceive any
life or motion after.

In a greater Louse you might see this pulsation of her heart through her back
also; but the white film or vesicle you cannot see till she be turned with her
belly upwards.

The lower dark spot (which is the lesser toward the tail) Dr. Harvey probably
conjectures to be the excrements in the guts of the Louse, there reposited just
before exclusion.

Hear how neatly Sir Theodore Mayhern delivers his Observation of this Animal,
In Epistola dedicatoria, Muffeti de Insectis.
taken in a puny Microscope; Pediculorum oculos prominentes (Open Conspicilii)
cernes, and Cornua, and Crenatum Corporis Ambitum, totam substantiam Diaphanam,
per quam Cordis and Sanguinis tanquam in Euripo indesinenter fluctuantis Motum.

OBSERVAT. VII. A Wood-Louse, or Wood-Mite.
THere is a little white Animal (which you shall find usually running over the
leaves and covers of books, and in rotten wood) which in Shape and Color is
like a Louse, only it has a swift motion, and runs by starts or stages; you
may kill it with a very little touch with your finger: This Animal being
fastened to the object-plate, by a little spattle, looks like polished silver,
her whole body cased in Annulary circles, all full of silver hairs, especially
toward her tail, with six legs, three on each side, whose extremities are
armed with two black tallons, which you might see to move distinctly of
themselves: Two long moveable horns were fastened to her head, but reversed and
pointing backwards toward her tail, with little branches and twigs (like
Bezanteliers) springing out of them. She has two pointers also before, like a
pair of pincers, which she moved laterally, all full of hairs, and two round
knobs at the ends of them. Her eyes are very protuberant, and globular, of a
pure golden color, most admirable to behold, especially when varnished with a
full light, and most neatly latticed or mashed like a net (as has been
pre-observ'd in other Insects.) And she seemed to have this peculiar Artifice,
that she can put out or draw in her eye at her pleasure; so that sometimes we
could see them far more prominent then at others; and sometimes again the one
eye more then the other: Insomuch that in one of our Critical Observations, I
could see more then a hemisphere of the eye at once; so that what the Processus
Ciliares does to our eyes, either in retracting or protruding the Crystalline
Humor (for helping the sight) the same does the Optic nerve (it seems) to the
whole Globe or Bulk of their eyes.

OBSERVAT. VIII. The House-Spider.
NOw let us see what we can discover in Ovid's Lydian-Spinstresse, that proud
Madam which Pallas, for her Rivalship, transformed into the Spider; which has
not only the Character of Aristotle, but of Solomon himself, for a wise and
prudent Animal, and therefore a fit Residentiary in the Court of Kings.

Of Domestic Spiders there are two sorts; one with longer legs and a little
body, and the other contrariwise.

The first eminent thing we found in these House-Spiders, were their eyes,
which in some were four, in some six, and in some eight, according to the
proportion of their bulk, and longity of their legs. These eyes are placed all
in the forefront of their head (which is round, and without any neck) all
diaphanous and transparent, like a Locket of Diamonds, or a Set of round
Crystal-Beads: so that well might Muffet say of those Philosophers that held
them blind, Sane coecutiunt illi summo meridie, qui videre ipsas non vident
neque intelligunt: Far better might he have said it, if his eyes had had the
assistance of our Microscope.

Neither wonder, why Providence should be so Anomalous in this Animal more then
in any other we know of ( Argus his head being fixed to Arachne's shoulders.)
For, first: Since they wanting a neck cannot move their head, it is requisite
that defect should be supplied by the multiplicity of eyes. Secondly: Since
they were to live by catching so nimble a prey as a Fly is, they ought to see
her every way, and to take her per saltum (as they do) without any motion of
their head to discover her; which motion would have scared away so timorous an
Insect.

They have a very puffy light body of an Oval figure, covered with a sleek thin
skin: which they change once a month, says Muffet; though I hardly believe
they cast their spoils so often.

Their skin is not pellucid, for I could never discover any pulsing particle
within them: She has eight legs, four on each side, split into small oblong
fingers at the ends, by which she makes her curious Web-work Both body and
limbs is all stuck over with small silver hairs, which the very air will waft
to and fro, as you may see in the Microscope.

OBSERVAT. IX. The little white Field-Spider with short legs.
THere is a little white short-leg'd Spider (which you shall find plentifully
amongst new Hey, or in a sweating Hey-mough) which is a glorious spectacle to
behold; for her Body is like white Amber imboss'd all over with black Knobs,
out of every one of which grow bristles or prickles like whin-pricks perfectly
taper-grown. And (which is most admirable) we could most distinctly see six, in
some eight eyes, ranged in this order; the innermost least, and the outermost
greatest, of a very quick and lively transparency or fulgour, like Eagle's
eyes; every Eye has a pale yellow circle, which encompasseth a violet-blew
Pupil, most clear and most admirable, but not perforated at all. Letting her
lie on the object-plate for half an hour together, we perceived her Eyes all of
them to grow less and less, and a whitish kind of film or socket, by degrees,
to cover part of them: I cut her in the midst at first, and so laid only her
head with the upper part of her body, on the object-plate.

OBSERVAT. X. The Field Spider with long Legs.
THis Spider was a very pleasant spectacle: having cut off her legs, and laid
her flat with her belly upon the object-plate, I perceived a round knob erected
perpendicularly upon the top of her back, which proved to be her head (though
at first I could not persuade my self into that belief;) for in it were fixed
two jett-black protuberant (but not foraminulous) eyes, on either side one,
which by diligent Inspection we found to be of different parts, with a very
black smooth pupil in the midst of either of them, more protuberant than the
rest of the circumambient matter, which was of a coarser grain, browner and
more rugged than the prominent Pupil.

She had before, two claws (at a manifest distance from her head) just like a
Crab's claws, with two black tips, like the Chely's in Crabs, which I could
distinctly see to open and shutt (exactly like those in a Scorpion) which were
indented, or made* Saw-wise on the inside (the better to keep fast what she had
once laid hold on.)

There is a Field-Spider of a russet color and long legs, of the same shape
and figure.

The head and eyes in all Spiders are contrived with great variety.

OBSERVAT. XI. Another Field-Spider.
I Took a Field-Spider under a stone, 13. of June, with a bag of eggs fastened
to her tail, bigger than all the bulk of her body; I opened it, and saw
abundance of bluish eggs in it, which in the Microscope looked white and
round, like your counterfeit pearl, and I could most clearly see abundance of
very minute Spiders, newly hatched, no bigger, and just like Mites in Meal,
with white hairs and bristles, especially in their tail, creeping and crawling
amongst the eggs: The Nett-work of the Purse or Bag seemed all diaphanous; a
very pleasant spectacle, and of curious workmanship.

I then made the like Observation of a bag full of House-Spider-eggs, which are
round and white, just like white Poppy seed; and all things looked whitish, and
something Transparent therein also: but the youngling Spiders (that were either
hatching, or newly hatched) were far bigger then the former, and white as
Alablaster, but shaped like the Parent with five legs on each side (without
hairs or bristles) and not by far so active as the other. I could not see any
Heart beat in any of them all.

OBSERVAT. XII. Mites in Cheese.
THey appeared some bigger, some less; the biggest appeared equal to a Nutmeg;
in shape they seemed oval and obtus'd toward the tail: Their color resembled
that of Mother of pearl, or Common pearl, and reflected the light of the Sun in
some one point, according to their various positions, as pearl does: so that it
seems they are sheathed and crustaceous Animals (as Scarabees and such like
Insects are.) I could perfectly see the divisions of the head, neck, and body.
To the small end of the oval Body was fastened the head, very little in
proportion to the body, its mouth like that of a Mole, which it opened and
shutt; when opened, it appeared red within: The eyes also, like two little dark
spots, are discernable: Near to the head were four legs fastened, two on each
side; the legs were just like to those in a Louse, Jemmar'd and Transparent:
She has two little pointers at the snout; nay, you may see them sometimes, if
you happily take the advantage, like so many Ginny-Pigs, munching and chewing
the cud: About the head and tail are stuck long hairs or bristles: Some we
could see (as little, even in the Glass, as a Mustard Seed) yet perfectly
shaped and organized: We also saw diverse Atoms somewhat Transparent like eggs,
both in form and figure. Nay, in these moving Atoms, I could not only see the
long bristles formerly specified, but also the very hairs which grew out of
their legs, which legs themselves are smaller than the smallest hair our
naked eyes can discover. What rare Considerations might an Ingenious Speculator
take up here, even from this singular Experiment? of the strange and most
prodigious skilfulness of Nature in the fabric of so Minute an Animal (a
thousand whereof do not weigh one single grain, (for one seed of Tobacco is
bigger than any of them) and yet how many thousand parts of Matter must go to
make up this heterogeneous Contexture? For, besides the parts inservient to
Nutrition, Sensation, and Motion, how small and thin must the liquours be that
circulate through the pipes and vessels disseminated through those parts? nay,
How incomprehensibly subtle must the Animal-spirits be, that run to and fro in
Nerves included in such prodigiously little spindle-shank'd legs?

OBSERVAT. XIII. Mites in Malt-dust and Oatmeal-dust.
THey seem somewhat different from those of Cheese, formerly described, yet of
the same bulk, proportion, and color; only besett with more and longer white
bristles, especially in the tail: they are far more active and quick in motion
than those Inhabitants of Case-Bobby, some bigger, some lesser. Some we saw so
exceeding little (yet perfectly organized and shaped like the rest) that no
bristles nor hairs could be discerned, either because they had none, or else
(more probably) because the Glass failed in presenting them: for how small must
that hair be, think you, which (though so excessively augmented in the Glass)
yet seems as small as any hair imaginable? and upon an Animal too, whose whole
bulk to the bare eye is quite indiscernable.

If you besprinkle the Object-plate, upon which you view them, with a pretty
quantity of Oatmeal, you shall see what working and tugging these poor little
Animals make amongst it, running and scudding amongst it; under it, over it,
and into it, like Rabbits into their Burrows; and sometimes casting it and
heaving it up, (as Moles or Pioners do earth) and trolling to and fro with this
mealy dust (which seems something diaphanous) sticking to them, as if it were a
little world of Animals, busying themselves in running this way and that way,
and over one another backs; which is a spectacle very pleasant to behold.

OBSERVAT. XIV. Mites, bred amongst Figs.
THey are in color like other Mites, but bodyed and shaped like Scarabees,
with two little short horns at the snout, and above them two very long ones:
you may clearly see three legs on either side the body: they are more sluggish
and unweildy then Meal-mites are, and not bristled like them. Though I have
seen some amongst them also full of white bristles, and shaped like those in
Oatmeal: the like common (for so I may call them) Mites I have also found in
Hay, in the powder that falls off dried roots, etc.

OBSERVAT. XV. The Mites, in Jujubes and Sebesten's.
FRom Jejub's and Sebesten's, being long kept, there falls a brownish kind of
powder, which being laid upon the Object-plate, you shall discover in it small
whitish Mites, very little ones, and all besett with bristles and hairs round
over like a Hedghog, but not of so quick and lively a motion as the other Mites.

OBSERVAT. XVI. The red Mite, found on Spiders.
THere is a red Mite which you shall often find feeding upon Spiders; She is
bodied just like a Tortoise, with a little head and six long small legs, three
on each side: About the legs of the Field-Spider I have found many of these
Coral-Mites or Tortoises, and this thing I have observed of them, That they
cling exceeding close to the Animal whilst she is alive; but when dead, they
all fall off and creep away from her, as lice do from dying men, or other
vermin from an old rotten falling house.

OBSERVAT. XVII. The Mites or Lice found on Humble-Bees.
WIthin that yellow plush or furre of Humble-Bees you shall often find a little
whitish very nimbly-running Animal, which has the shape and form of a Mite in
the Microscope: I remember the Industrious Kircher says, he has found by his
Glasses Lice upon Fleas: Either our Fleas in England are not like theirs in
Italy for this property, or else I have never taken them in their Lousy
season: But I see no reason to the contrary, but both Fleas and Lice may have
other Lice that feed upon them, as they do upon us. For since the minutest
Animal that comes within the reach of our Microscope, is found to have a mouth,
stomach, and gutts, for Nutrition; and most, if not all, the Parenchymata for
Circulation and Separation of Excrements, there can be no doubt, but they have
also a continual perspiration and exudation through the habit of their body: Of
which excrement of the third and last Concoction, all these Vermin that pester
the outside of Animals, are generated.

OBSERVAT. XVIII. Pond. Mites.
THere are bred in most restagnant Waters, Pools and Fishponds, in June and
July, an innumerable company of little whitish Animals, which move up and down
the water with jerks and stops in their motion; in which Animals we could
discover two little horns and legs, but could never get to see it quick in the
Microscope: for as soon as ever it is taken out of the water, it is perfectly
dead. Neither may it seem strange to find these Animals in restagnant
fish-waters, since the very Ocean it self in some places (in summer time) is
full of Living creatures. For our western Navigators tell us, That in summer,
in the West-Indian Seas (about the Coasts of Virginia, Hispaniola, Jaimaca,
Cuba, etc. the Sea swarms with Maggots and Grubs, which in a little time will
so eat their very ships (as far as they draw water) that lie there at Anchor,
that they will be as brittle and as full of holes as a honeycomb, or a grater;
insomuch that we are forced to have them cased either with thin sheets of Lead,
or with Flax, Pitch and Tarr, to secure them from that danger.

Nay, not only the Water, but the very Air it self, may certainly at some
times and seasons be full of Living creatures; which must be, most probably,
when great putrefactions reign therein, as in the Plague-time especially.

Now it were well worth the Observation, if in such aerial Putrefactions any
kind of Living creatures could be discovered, which probably may be done by
Glasses: for I am sure in my long Telescope I can some days see a tremulous
Motion and Agitation of rolling fumes, and strong Atoms in the air, which I
cannot see of other days; of which I shall perchance more largely discourse in
my Telescopical Observations.

OBSERVAT. XIX. Whey-worms, called by some, Wheal-worms, or Hand-worms, or
Barrows.
THese smallest of Creatures (being accounted by Muffet as a Species and kind
of Mites, bred upon Animals, as the former sort are in Cheese, Meal, Wax,
rotten Wood, etc.) may very well be the subject of our next Observation.

In this small Animal you may see an oval reddish head, and therein a mouth or
prominent snout, armed with an Appendent Proboscis or Trunk, consisting of many
villous filaments in figure of a Cone, wherewith it perforates our skin, and
sucks the blood or Aqueous nutriment from the pustules it is bred near. Nay,
you may discover feet, laterally ranged on both sides, and many hairy tufts on
the tail, with asperities, rugosities, and protuberances in the skin. To behold
all which varieties of parts and organs in so minute a particle of Matter (as
this living Atom is), I know not whether it be more admirable to behold, or
incredible to believe without an Ocular Demonstration.

Certainly Scaliger and Muffet would have far more admired this almost
invisible sub-cutaneous Inhabitant, had they had the happiness to have seen it
in our Microscope. Hear their description, taken only by the Optics of
Nature, Muffet, Cap. 24. de Insect. lib. 2.
Syronibus nulla expressa forma, praeterquam globi; vix oculis capitur;
magnitudo est tam pusilla, ut non atomis Constare ipsum sed unum esse ex Atomis
Epicurus dixerit: ita sub cute habitat, ut, actis cuniculis, pruritum maximum
loso ingenerat, praecipue manibus: extractus acu, and super ungue positus,
movet se, si Solis etiam calore adjuvetur. Mirum est quomode tam pusilla
Bestiola, nullis quasi pedibus insidens, tam longes sub Cuticula sulcos peragat.

Our famous Mayhern (who had the advantage of an Ordinary Microscope) gives
this short, but very neat description of this poor Animal. Imo ipsi Acari,
(says he) prae exiguitate indivisibiles, ex cuniculis prope aquae lacum, In
Epistola Prefatoria, ad Muffet. de Insectis.
quos foderunt in cute, acu extracti and ungue impositi, caput rubrum, and
pedes quibus gradiuntur, ad solemn produnt. And therefore it is not to tell in
what a small particle of Matter, life may actually consist, and exercise all
the functions too, both of Vegetation, Sensation, and Motion: So that, Omnia
sunt Animarum plena, may have more of truth in it, than he could either think
or dream of that first pronounced it.

OBSERVAT. XX. The Gloworm or Glassworm.
HEr Eyes (which are two small black points or specks of jett) are pent-hous'd
under the broad flat cap or plate which covers her head; which obscure
situation, together with their exceeding exiguity, make them undiscernable to
common Spectators. Yet in the Microscope they appear very fair, like black
polished jett or marble, semi-globular, and all foraminulous, or full of small
but very curious perforations (as in Common Flies.) Her two horns are all
joynted and degree'd like the stops in the germination of some Plants, as
Hors-tail and Canes: Under which she has two other small horns or pointers, of
the same stuff and fashion. Take hold of her horns, and you may draw out her
eyes and cut them out, and so lay them on your object-plate and see them
distinctly. This is that Night-Animal with its Lanthorn in its tail; that
creeping-Star, which seems to outshine those of the Firmament, and to outvye
them too in this property especially; that whereas the Celestial Lights are
quite obscured by the interposition of a small cloud, this Terrestrial-Star is
more enlivened and enkindled thereby, whose pleasant fulgour no darkness is
able to eclipse.

OBSERVAT. XXI. Common Grasshoppers.
IN those Common Grasshoppers, both great and little, which are so frequent at
hay-time with us, there are some things remarkable. First, Their Eyes, which
like other Insects are foraminulous; nay, we have taken the Cornea or outward
Film of the Eye quite off, and cleansed it so from all the pulpous matter which
lay within it, that it was clear and diaphanous like a thin film of Sliffe or
Muscovy-glass, and then looking again on it in the Microscope, I could plainly
see it foraminulous as before.

You shall in all Grasshoppers see a green Film or Plate (like a Corslet) which
goes over the neck and shoulders, which if you lift up with a pin, you may see
their heart play, and beat very orderly for a long time together.

The like curious Lattice-work I have also observed in the crustaceous Cornea
of the Creckets Eye, which I have carefully separated from all the matter which
stuffed it within, which certainly is their Brain; as hereafter shall be made
more probable.

OBSERVAT. XXII. The Ant, Emmet or Pismire.
THis little Animal is that great Pattern of Industry and Frugality: To this
Schoolmaster did Solomon send his Sluggard, who in those virtues not only
excels all Insects, but most men. Other excellent Observables there are in so
small a fabric: As the Herculean strength of its body, that it is able to
carry its triple weight and bulk: The Agility of its limbs, that it runs so
swiftly: The equality of its Motion, that it trips so nimbly away without any
saliency or leaping, without any fits or starts in its Progression. Her head is
large and globular, with a prominent Snout: her eye is of a very fair black
color, round, globular, and prominent, of the bigness of a Pea, foraminulous
and latticed like that of other Insects: her mouth (in which you may see
something to move) is armed with a pair of pincers, which move laterally, and
are indented on the inside like a Saw, by which she bites, and better holds her
prey; and you may often see them carry their white oblong eggs in them for
better security.

OBSERVAT. XXIII. Of the little greenish Grasshopper or Locust, bred upon the
backside of green leaves, especially the leaves of Goosberries, Sweet-briar,
and golden Muosear, in April and beginning of May.
THis pretty Animal is a pleasant Object to look upon in our Glass, being of a
light Green, and in the full Sunshine shows exactly like green Cloth of Silver;
has two horns and four legs, two on each side: Her eyes are two such very
little black Atoms, that, unless to a very critical and smart eye, they are
indiscernable; yet if you advantageously place her, and view her with a full
light (transmitted through a Burning-glass (which artifice I sometimes use) you
shall fairly see them to be as bigg as two small black round Beads, and drilled
through also with innumerable perforations (as the eye in a Fly) which will try
the exquisiteness both of your Glass and Eye to behold.

OBSERVAT. XXIV. The yellow Locust.
THere is a pretty, but very little, white oblong Insect, which sticks to the
ribs and backside of Rosetree-leaves in August, which in the Microscope looks
of a pure white color, and diaphanous like Sugar Candy, with an Annular body
like a Wasp, with some e^ght hoops or rims, and conical or rush-grown toward
the tail, with six long legs, every leg composed of three joints, all besett
with short hairs, especially in the Annulary divisions and Interstices of her
body: Her eyes were very globular, protuberant, and large (as they are in all
young Animals) white, like two crystal Beads, and most neatly lattic'd, which I
could most clearly discern.

Below the eyes (as she lay upon her belly) was two crook'd horns, which bended
backwards toward her tail, and was fastened in two sockets at the roots; and,
as I thought, I sometimes see her eyes more protuberant than others, as if she
could thrust them out, and draw them in at pleasure, as we have formerly
observed in the Wood-Louse Observe. She has two pair of Bristles or hairs (like
Mustacho's) at the snout, one bending one way; and another, another. I could
discover no Mouth, though I turned her over and over. This puny Insect I have
observed to turn into a small yellow Locust, with two white wings longer than
the body, and to skip up and down the Rose-tree-leaves in August; and then
(when she was metamorphos'd into a Locust) I could discern no Mouth in the
Microscope, but only two pointers like a pair of closed Compasses in her
snout, which cannot be seen on her till she be winged, and then laid on the
object-plate with her belly upwards.

OBSERVAT. XXV. Of Cuckow-Spitt, and the little Insect bred therein, in May.
THat spumeous froth or dew (which here in the North we call Cuckoo Spittle,
and, in the South, Woodsear; and which is most frequently found in
Lavander-Beds, Horse mint, etc.) looks like a heap of glass-bubbles, or a knob'd
drinking-glass; in which you shall always find a little Grub, or Animal, which
in the Microscope seems a pretty golden-coloured Insect, with three legs on
each side; and two horns, and two round fair goggle-eyes of a duskish red
color, like polished Rubies; which you may also see latticed and perforated in
a clear light. Her tail is all jemmar'd with Annulary divisions, which at last
end in a stump, which she often draws up, or thrusts out, at her pleasure.

Muffet calls this Insect, Locustellam, or, a puny-Locust; and says, Muffet, de
Insect. Cap. 16. page 122.
That first it creeps, then leapeth, and at last flies. She has two blackish
claws, or pounces (at the ends of her feet,) which she can open and shut at her
pleasure: We could discover no mouth at all, but a long reddish Probe, between
the forelegs, through which, perchance, she sucked her froathy nourishment.

Now, what this spumeous matter is, and into what Animal this Insect is at last
shaped or transpeciated, are Doubts that as yet have found no clear and
experimental Decision.

That the Spattle is a froathy kind of dew that falls from the Air, I doubt
not, whatsoever my Lord Bacon say to the contrary. For, first; It is found upon
most, if not all, Plants whatsoever, but most copiously amongst our Whinns, or
prickly Broom; and generally about the joints and ramulous divisions, because
there it is best secured from the heat of the Sun, which licks it off the open
leaves, or else probably it is imbibed by the full grown and porous leaves of
Plants, as the Milldew, and other honey-Dews are.

Secondly, That it is the sole exudation and secrement of Plants, I cannot
believe: First, because it is never found upon their Second growth, nor in
Eddish: Secondly, How should an excrement of so many several Plants, still
breed one and the same Animal, when as we see that all Vegetables whatsoever
produce their several Insects (as Muffet in his 19. and 20. Chapters has
particularly enumerated.) I shall not deny but the Effluvium's that continually
perspire out of all Plants whatsoever, may advantage and promote the nutrition
of the little Insect that breeds therein.

For that all Vegetables have a constant perspiration, the continual dispersion
of their odor makes out; besides an experimental eviction I shall give you by
this singular Experiment: 23. of Feb. ( -- 61.) we weighed an Onyon exactly to
two ounces, two scruples and a half, and hanging it up till the 6. of May next
following (at which time it had sprouted out a long shoot) we then, upon a
re-ponderation of it, had lost near two drams of its former weight, which was
exhaled by insensible Transpiration.

OBSERVAT. XXVI. The Cow-Lady, or Spotted Scarabee.
IT is a very lively and nimble Animal: Cut off the head, and erect it
perpendicular upon the neck (which must be fastened to a bit of soft Wax) and
then you shall see those two little small black eyes it has, set upon a
little short neck (which is moveable within the former) either eye set between
three white plates, like polished Ivory (two little ones on the one side, and
one great one on the other) her eyes are also foraminulous, and curiously
lattic'd like those in a Fly formerly described. If you unsheath her body, and
take off her spotted short crustaceous wings, you shall find under them another
pair of filmy Tiffany long wings, like those of Flies, which lie folded up, and
cased within the former, of both which pair she makes use in flying; which
being removed, nothing remains to secure the bulk of the body but a thin tender
black skin, under which you might most lively see the pulsation of her Heart
for twelve or fourteen hours, after the head and neck was separated.

OBSERVAT. XXVII. The Water-Insect, or Water-Spider.
THere is a black crustaceous Insect with an Annular body, and six hairy legs,
which moves nimbly upon the water; the two foremost legs are shorter than the
rest by one half, and serve instead of hands to reach any thing to the mouth:
She has two hairy geniculated horns, knotted or joynted at several divisions
like Knot-grass, or Hors-tayl: Her body is like Frost-work in silver: Her eyes
black, globular, and foraminulous.

OBSERVAT. XXVIII. The Wasp-like Locust.
THere is a little small long black Insect, which you shall find creeping and
leaping amongst Pinks, Gillyflours, Rose-leaves, etc. which in the Microscope
has two fair long wings, and is bodied just like a Wasp (from whence I have
given her the name of the Wasp-Locust) with six or seven Annulary divisions, of
jett-black and yellow wings: She has two horns, made of five or six white and
black internodium's, very pretty to behold; either of them arising from a black
knobb'd root, with three black legs on either side, and two little black eyes,
and, as I ghessed, latticed; though what Art can present distinct parts in that
eye which is set in an Animal so small, that the whole bulk of it is no bigger
then a little bit of black thread, or hair. They are killed with the least
touch imaginable. I took them with a Pint point dipped in spattle, and so
glew'd them to the object-plate, as I do stronger Insects with a touch of
Turpentine.

OBSERVAT. XXIX. The Sycomore-Locust.
THere is a pretty little yellow Insect, which is bred, and feeds on the
Sycomore-leaves, which at first has no wings, but six legs and two horns, and
runs nimbly up and down: In the Glass, I could not only see its eyes, which
are red, globular, goggled and prominent; but also I could see them very
perfectly latticed. She had two horns, which at the ends were slit and
bi-furcated: I could, near her shoulders, see the stumps of her growing wings:
This at last is transpeciated into a Fly with two long wings; or rather a
Locust: it consists of Annulary Circles, and has hairs toward the tail.

OBSERVAT. XXX. Of the little white Eels or Snigs, in Vinegar or Aleger.
THey appear like small Silver-Eels, or little Snigs, and some of them as long
as my little finger, constantly wrigling and swimming to and fro with a quick,
smart, and restless motion. In which smallest of Animals these things are most
remarkable:

First, They are not to be found in all sorts of Vinegar nor Aleger, but only
in such, probably, as has arrived to some peculiar temper or putrefaction, of
which I can give you no Characteristical Signs; for, I have found them in all
sorts of Vinegar, both in the keenest and smartest, as well as in the weakest
and most watrish Vinegar; and in all these sorts, you shall sometimes find none
at all; and I have both found them, and also vainly sought them, in the former
Liquors, at al seasons and times of the year also.

Secondly, The manner and best way of observing them is, upon a plain piece of
white glass, whereon two or three drops of the said Liquors are laid; and so
laying that glass on the object-plate, and fitting your Microscope to it, you
may distinctly see them to play and swim in those little Ponds of Vinegar (for
so big every drop almost seems) to the very brink and banks of their fluid
element.

Thirdly, Nay you may see them (especially in old Aleger) with the bare eye, if
you put a little of it into a clear Venice-glass, especially into those pure
thin white bubbles, which they call Essence-glasses; you may then see an
infinite company of them swimming at the edges of the Liquor, nay and in the
body of it too, like so many shreds of the purest Dutch thread, as if the whole
Liquor was nothing else but a great shoal or mass of quick Eels or Hair-worms.

I have another advantageous way of discoverance of them to the bare eye also,
which is by putting a little of those Liquors into a little cylinder of white
glass, of a small bore and length, either sealed or closed up with cork and wax
at the one end: therein, if you invert this glass cylinder, and often turn it
topsy turvy, no Liquor will fall out, only a little bubble of air will always
pass and repass through the inverted Liquor, and one pretty thing I have herein
observed, that when this bubble has stood in the superior end of the glass
(and sometimes it would do so for a pretty while together before it broke) I
have seen some of those small Snigs or Animals on the top of it, crawling over
the smooth convexity of the bubble (like so many Eels over a Looking-glass)
without breaking through the tender cuticle and film of so brittle and thin a
substance.

Fourthly, That as the Liquor (dropped upon your object-plate) spends and dries
up, so you shall see those little Quicks to draw nearer and nearer together,
and grow feebler in their motion; and when all the Vinegar or Aleger is dried
away, then they lie all dead, twisted and complicated all together, like a knot
of Eels, and after a little time dry quite away to nothing.

Fifthly, Their heads and tails are smaller then the rest of their bodies;
which is best observed by the Microscope, when the Liquor wherein they swim is
almost spent and dried up, so that their motion thereby is rendered more feeble
and weak, or when they lie absolutely dead.

Sixthly, Another remarkable thing, is, their exceeding exiguity; for certainly
of all Animals they are the least that can be seen by the bare eye, which is
helped and advantaged also by the refraction of the water wherein they swim.

Seventhly, If you take a spoonful of the foresaid Vinegar and heat it over a
few coals, it presently destroys all the Quick's in it, so that you may see
them all stretched out at their full length, like a pencil chopped small, or
little bits of hairs swimming up and down the Liquor, which in a short time
will precipitate and all sink down to the bottom of the glass.

Nay these poor Vermin are not only slain by actual heat, but by a potential
one also: for, putting but a few drops of the Oil of Vitriol into an
Essence-glass full of that Vinegar, it also shortly destroyed them in the same
manner as the fire had done before.

Eighthly, Now though heat has that killing property, yet it seems that cold
has not: for I have taken a jar-glass full of the said Vinegar, and by
applying Snow and Salt to it, I have artificially frozen all the said Liquor
into a mass of Ice, (wherein all these Animals it seemed lay incrystalled)
though I could discover none of them in it (though I have taken the Icy-mass
out on purpose to look at it) so that now I gave them for gone for ever: yet
when I came again (about two or three hours after) to uncongeal the Liquor, by
keeping the glass in my warm hand, when the Vinegar was again returned to its
former liquidity, all my little Animals made their re-appearance, and danced
and frisked about as lively as ever. Nay I have exposed a jar-glass full of
this Vinegar all night to a keen Frost, and in the morning have thawed the Ice
again, and these little Vermin have appeared again and endured again that
strong and long Conglaciation without any manifest injury done to them; which
is both a pretty and a strange Experiment.

Ninthly, I have filled an essence-glass half with the said Vinegar, and half
with Oil (which floated on the Vinegar) in a distinct Region by it self, and I
have observed that in frosty weather when the Vinegar has been congealed, that
all the little Eels have run up into the super-incumbent oil to preserve
themselves there, and would not return till some warmth was applied to the
Vinegar again, and then they would always presently return down into their
native Liquor again.

Tenthly, Their motion is very remarkable, which is restless and constant, with
perpetual undulations and wavings, like Eels or Snakes; so that it seems, that
Animals that come nearest the classis of Plants, have the most restless motions.

Eleventhly, the innumerable number and complicated motion of these minute
Animals in Vinegar, may very neatly illustrate the Doctrine of the incomparable
Descartes, touching Fluidity: ( viz.) That the particles of all fluid bodies
are in a continual and restless motion, and therein consists the true nature of
fluidity: for by this ocular example, we see there may be an intestine restless
motion in a Liquor, notwithstanding that the unassisted eye can discover no
such matter, which likewise is evinced by Observe. 13. Of the Mites in Meal.

OBSERVAT. XXXI. Of the great Black Snail.
IN this slimy Animal (the slow-paced Engine of Nature) are very many rare and
excellent Observables. The first is his Eyes, which are four in number, (like
black atramentous Spots) fixed to the end of their horns; or rather to the ends
of those black filaments or optic nerves, which are sheathed in her horns
which she can retract or protrude, through the hollow trunck of her horns, as
she pleases.

If with your finger you take hold of the tip of her horn when fully extended,
and draw out this nervous filament, or then nimbly clip off the extremities of
her horns, you shall in the Microscope see those 2. black spots to be
semi-spherical eyes, like two large blew Beads: and we could afterward also,
when she re-extended the stump, clearly perceive it with the bare eye to be
tubulous and hollow. And therefore however, though the learned Doctor Brown (my
ever honored friend) has ranked this conceit of the Eyes of a Snail (and
especially their quadruplicity) amongst the Vulgar errors of the multitude;
yet through a good Microscope, he may easily see his own error, and Nature's
most admirable variety in the plurality, paucity, and anomalous Situation of
eyes, and the various fabric and motion of that excellent organ; as our
Observations will more particularly inform him.

If by a dextrous Dissection you would see the internal Fabric of this Animal,
there are many excellent things that will recompense your curiosity.

For first, you may find her Heart just over against that round hole near her
neck (which Doctor Harvey ingeniously conjectures to be the place of their
respiration; which hole you may observe to open and shut as she moves or stands
still, and out of which I have observed some salivous Matter to be evacuated.

We have observed her Heart to beat fairly for a quarter of an hour after her
dissection; afterward we took out her guts which were of a pure green color,
by reason of the thinness of their film, and transparency of the green juice of
herbs with which they were repleated.

They were all diaper'd or branched over with pure white Capillary little
veins, which (by help of the Microscope) we could discern to be hollow, with a
blackish kind of pith running through the midst of the smallest of them, which
doubtless was their nutrimental juice coagulated there, like the blood starkn'd
in the veins of dead Animals.

They are mouthed like a Hare or Rabbit, with four or six needle-teeth, like
those in Leeches.

Nay this poor Animal (how contemptible soever it may seem) has a whole Set
of the same parts and organs with other Animals, as Heart, Liver, Spleen,
Stomach, Guts, Mouth and Teeth, Veins and Arteries: Yea and a pair more of the
noblest of the Senses (the Eyes.)

Nay this Animal does autoptically evince us, that, as sanguineous and more
perfect Animals, have a circulation of their blood within them; so this more
ignoble creature has also a circulation of its nutritive humor, which is to
it as Blood is to other Animals.

Nay further (which is the best Remarkable of all) this juice has not only a
circular motion; but also the very Animal Spirits (by which she moves) seem to
have the like Circulation. For, if you observe her with the bare eye to creep
up the sides of a glass, you shall see a little stream of clouds, channel up
her belly from her tail to her head, which never return again the same way, but
probably go backwards again from the head down the back to the tail; and thus,
so long as she is in local motion they retain their circulation, which is a
pleasant spectacle. And more pleasant, if you let her creep upon the lower side
of your glass-object-plate, and so view that wavy Current of Spirits through
the Microscope; which handsome experiment does not only prove the Spirit's
circular motion, but also ocularly demonstrates that the Animal Spirits are the
Soul's immediate instrument in all Loco-motion.

Now if you reply that it is only the parts of her body, that moving by a kind
of undulation protrude one another forwards, as Palmer-worms (which we call
Wool-boys,) and some sort of Caterpillars do: To this I answer, that do but
intensly observe any one of the former spots or clouds, and you shall see it go
quite along from the tail to the head, keeping always an equal distance from
the precedent and subsequent spot: so that it is far more ingenious to believe
it to be a gale of Animal Spirits, that, moving from her head along her back to
her tail, and thence along her belly to her head again, is the cause of her
progressive motion.

OBSERVAT. XXII. Of Lampreys.
THe Lamprey has seven holes or cavities, on eiside three or four, and no
gills at all, as other fishes have; whence the common people, through ignorance
of these cavities, and their proper use in nature, have affirmed them to be
Eyes; an error so gross and palpable, that it needs not the Microscope to
refute it: For these holes or sluices do indeed supply the defect of gills, and
are assisted by the conduit in the head, for (like Cetaceous Animals) the
Lamprey has a fistula, spout or pipe, at the back part of the head, whereat
they spirt out water, so that both these cavities and the head-pipe together,
do very neatly supply the defect of gills, and execute their office of
receiving and ejecting water again.

These sluices and the fistula, shoot themselves slopewise, and not straight
forwards, into the cavity of her neck.

The Heart in this Animal is very strangely secured, and lies immured or
capsulated in a Cartilage, or grisly substance, which includes the Heart and
its Auricle, as the Scull or Pericranium does the Brains in other Animals; it
is of a horny and transparent substance, of an obtuse conical figure, cemented
and glewed as it were on all sides to the Pleura, or innermost skin of the
Thorax; the Cone or obtuse Tip of this Capsula, butts or shoots it self into
the basis of the Liver, which to give way thereunto has an oval cavity or
hollowness exactly fit to receive it.

In this Cartilaginous Pericardium, or purse of the heart, is likewise the
Auricle co-included, lying not upon the basis of the heart as in other Animals,
but laterally adjacent thereunto, insomuch that it being far more flaggy then
the heart, they seem to represent the right and left ventricle of the heart.
Yet is the Heart, not only more solid, but seated in the right side, and the
Auricle in the left.

If the Lamprey be laid upon her back, and you gently lift up with a probe, the
Heart and Auricle; you shall see a fine thin Membrane arise, which separates
the Heart from the Auricle, as the falx cerebri does separate the left side of
the brain from the right.

From this Auricle proceeds a little short Channel, which perforates this
separating Membrane, and brings the blood from the auricle into the heart, we
thrust a probe just under this Channel betwixt the Heart and the Auricle, to
see the blood pass from the Auricle into the Heart; for at every pulse of the
Auricle you might see the blood pass through this Channel into the heart; for
always, as the blood passed through it was blew, and, when empty, pale, and
transparent, that I could easily see the Probe through it.

Whilst I had the Probe in this position, with another Instrument and it
together, I quite stopped the Channel on purpose to hinder the blood from
coming into the heart, which thereupon grew very pale, and in a short time
ceased its motion; the Auricle in the interim swelled and was very red. I no
sooner opened the Channel to let the blood have a free passage as formerly, but
the heart began afresh to beat again.

We pricked the heart while it was in its motion with a large pin into the
cavity thereof, and at every systole or contraction, we plainly saw a drop of
blood squeezed and ejected out of that hole.

In this Animal, you may easily distinguish between the motion of the heart and
auricle, for there intercedes the time of a pulse twixt the motion of the
auricle and the heart; and the heart in every diastole is of a fair purple and
ruddy color, and in every systole pale and wan, as is observable in Frogs and
other Fishes also; where you may see the heart to shift colors by turns, as it
receives or ejects the blood in the performance of the circulation.

Now the reason of this Cartilaginous Capsula of the heart in this Creature,
might be its defect of bones and those costal ribs, which serve others to
secure the heart from all external violence; for, she wanting these, had not
Nature wisely secured and capsulated the heart in this gristle, it had been
subject to all external injuries, which might have hindered the motion, and
endangered the life of the Animal.

This horny Capsula, also served instead of a Diaphragm to part the lower
Venture from the Thorax.

The Lamprey likewise has no bones: for the spine or backbone, it has a
Cartilaginous flexible Tube or Channel, without any Vertebrae or Spondyls in
it, hollowed or tubulous from one end to the other; in which lay the Spinal
Marrow, which was of a serous, thin, and milky substance.

In some Lampreys, I have found the Liver (as Doctor Brown writes) of a pure
grass-green color, which remained and kept that tincture whilst the Animal
lived; but when I had cut it out of the Body, and laid it by, it presently
turned into a faint Olive-colour. Besides I have in the beginning of April cut
up many Lampreys, whose Livers were of no such color at all, but a dull
yellow, like that of Eels and other Fishes.

So that in this Animal, and Snakes also, you may distinctly see the Bloud's
Circulation.

OBSERVAT. XXXIII. Corns of Sand, Sugar, and Salt.
IT is worth an Hourglass of Time to behold the Crystal Sands that measure it;
for they all seem like Fragments of Crystal, or Alum, perfectly Tralucent, of
irregular polyhedrical figures, not any one globular; every Corn about the
bigness of a Nuttmeg, or a Walnutt: which from their unequal superficies
refracting and reflecting the Suns rays, seem here and there of Rainbow colors.

Being laid of a row or train, they seemed like a Cawsy of Crystal Stones, or
pure Alum Lumps: So that now we need not so much wonder with the Vulgar
Philosophers, how so clear and glorious a body as glass, should be made of so
durty, opace, and contemptible Materials, as Ashes and Sand; since now we are
taught by this Observation that Sand, and Salt which is in the Ashes, the two
prime Materials thereof, are of themselves so clear and transparent, before
they unite into that diaphanous Composition.

OBSERVAT. XXXIV. A small Atom of Quicksilver.
AN Atom of Quicksilver (no bigger then the smallest pins-head) seemed like a
globular Looking-glass) where (as in a Mirror) you might see all the
circumambient Bodies; the very Stancheons and Panes in the Glass-windows, did
most clearly and distinctly appear in it: and whereas, in most other Metals,
you may perceive holes, pores, and cavities; yet in none at all are
discoverable; the smallest Atom whereof, and such an one, as was to the bare
Eye, tantum non invisibile, was presented as big as a Rounseval-Pea, and
projecting a shade; Nay, two other Atoms of, which were casually laid on the
same plate, and were undiscernable to the bare eye, were fairly presented by
our Microscope.

OBSERVAT. XXXV. Mercurial Powders.
IN those Chemical preparations of Mercury, which they call Turbith-Mineral,
Mercurius Vitae, dulcis, sublimate, precipitate, and Mercury Cosmetical, you
may most plainly and distinctly see the globular Atoms of current and quick;
besprinkled all amongst those Powders, like so many little Stars in the
Firmament: which shows that those Chemical Preparations, are not near so purely
exalted and prepared, as they are presumed to be; nor the Mercury any way
transmuted, but merely by an Atomical Division rendered insensible.

That subtle and pure yellow Powder of Mercury, called Mercurius vitae, looked
like the Yolk of an Egg boiled hard and crumbled to a gross Powder: in it and
in that Meal-like Powder of Mercurius Cosmeticus, were globules of plainly
discernable.

OBSERVAT. XXXVI. Of the seven Terrestrial Planets, as the Chemists call them.
Viz. Gold, Silver, Steel, Copper, Quicksilver, Tin, Lead.


LOok at a polished piece of any of these Metals and you shall see them all
full of fissures, cavities, and asperities, and irregularities; but least of
all in Lead, which is the closest and most compact solid Body probably in the
world.

OBSERVAT. XXXVII. Ribbans of all sorts of Colors, Silk, Satin, Silver and
mixed.
IN the Silk Ribbans, you might plainly see the Contexture, how the Warp and
the Weft cross one another at right Angles; and how neatly they are platted,
just as in this Picture: In Satin Ribbans, one Warp crossed over three or four
Wefts, most lively and pleasant in Cloth of Silver, the Weft (being flat wired
Silver) that crosses the Warp, it makes a fine Chequered Representation.

OBSERVAT. XXXVIII. The small Dust, Powder, or Seeds of the lesser Moon-wort.
THat small pure yellow Meal or Dust, which you may shake off from ripe
Moon-wort, appears like a heap of little white round Bugles, or Seed Pearl, and
something transparent when the Sun shined, like to some other small Seeds, with
a fiber about every one of them like the semi-circular ribbe in a Pompion: So
that this Experiment has decided the old quarrel in Herbalism, Which is the
least of Seeds; for though Mustard Seed do carry the Vogue amongst the People,
yet its exiguity is to be respectively understood, of such Seeds as extend to
large productions; for we see that the Seeds of sweet Marjerom and wild Poppy,
are far less; and the Seeds of Tobacco so small that a thousand of them make
not above one single Grain in weight: yet must all give place to the
super-exiguity of this farinaceous Seed of Wort, which is indeed (...).

The exiguity and smalness whereof may very well be one of the Magnolia of
Nature, somewhat illustrating the great Work of the Creation, and vast
Production from Nothing.

OBSERVAT. XXXIX. The Seeds of Wall-Rue, or white Maydenhair.
TAke one of the Leafs of Wall-Rue, (which has the blackish scurff sticking to
the back side of it) and lay it upon the object-plate, and you shall see all
the Seeds look just like a set of black Buttons upon green Taffata; and every
Button or Seed compassed with a circle or ribbe, somewhat resembling a
Catterpillar: It has been the Opinion of old Herbarists, that the Capillary
Plants had no Seeds, which error did rise mee^ly from a popular inadvertency;
for though these Plants carry not their Seeds in, visible Husks, Pods, Spikes,
Fruits, etc. yet are they constantly to be found on the back side of their
Leafs.

OBSERVAT. XL. Of the Seeds of Strawberries.
It Is strange to see, what several ways Nature produces and secureth the
several Seeds of Plants; some are preserved in large Pulps, as the Seeds of all
pomiferous Plants. Others, besides the circum-involving Pulpe, are immured in
Shells, as all Stone-Fruit, etc. Others, in the lesser Pulp of their Berries,
as Mulberries, Rasberries, etc. But in Strawberries, Nature has put out the
Seeds, as if they were sproutings from the Pulp: for those small specks or
protuberances on the outside of the Strawberry, are the Seeds thereof, and in
the Microscope look not unlike the Strawberry; some reddish, yellowish, and
green colors, as the Strawberries themselves are.

OBSERVAT. XLI. Corn Poppy Seeds.
THey are none of them globular, nor of a smooth surface, but all like Kidneys
in form, and of the seeming bigness of Walnuts, and like an Honeycomb on the
surface, with regular Sides and Angles, making all of them pentagonal and
hexagonal areola's; and glistering in the Sunshine like Tissue, or the Foil on
the backside of a Looking-glass, as is presented in these two Figures. Some
other Seeds also looked not unlike them, as Henbane, Flower of Bristow, etc.

OBSERVAT. XLII. The small Dust or Powder on the Pendents of Lillies.
IN all our common Garden-Lillies (especially the Red and White) out of the
middle of the Flower grows a long style or poyntel, beset round about with
small chives, which are tipped with pendents, a single pendent on the head of
every Chivall pounced over with a small Dust or Powder, which will cleave to
and smut your fingers: this Powder (taken from the yellow Lilly) looks very
pleasantly in the Microscope, of a golden color, and somewhat diaphanous:
where you may see every Atom very distinctly to be of an Oval Figure, exactly
like some sort of Seeds: the Powder of the white Lilly pendents, looks of a
pure pale yellow, and like so many pieces of polished Amber.

OBSERVAT. XLIII. The Leafs of several Trees and Plants.
THe backside of a Rose-tree-Leaf, but especially of a sweet Brier Leaf, looks
diaper'd most excellently with silver.

The backside of the Leaf of English Mercury, called bonus Henricus, looks, as
if rough-cast with silver, and all the ribs are stuck full of round white
transparent Balls, like innumerable Grapes, or Oak Apples, or a Bracelet of
Crystal; and we could discover little footstalk in many of them, by which
they were fastened to the ribs and fibers of the Leaf, which is a very pleasant
Spectacle.

A Leaf of Rue looks all full of holes like an Honeycomb.

A Sage Leaf looks like a white Rugge, or Shagge, full of Knots, tassel'd all
with white silver Thrums, and one or two fine round Crystal beads or pendents,
as big as Peace, fastened to every Knot.

OBSERVAT. XLIV. Pink-pendents.
THe chives which grow out of red Pinks, and which are tipped with red
Pendents, besmeared over with a small Mealy Powder, look very pleasantly in the
Glass; for every Pendent looks like a red Taffata Cushionet, all beset and
sprinkled over with round white Beads, or Grumwel-seed.

OBSERVAT. XLV. Of Nettles.
LOok at the backside of a Nettle-Leaf, and you shall see it all full of
Needles, or rather long sharp transparent Pikes, and every Needle has a
Crystal pummel, so that it looks like a Sword-Cutler's Shop, full of glittering
drawn Swords, Tucks, and Daggers; so that here you may autoptically see the
Causes, as well as you have formerly felt the Effects, of their Netling.
Something like them, appear the Prickles on Borrage-Leafs and Stalks.

OBSERVAT. XLVI. Gilla Theophrasti.
IT looks pleasantly, like a diaphanous heap of Icycles or stiriated Niter; but
not altogether so regularly figured: but most of them are oblong particles,
angular, and pointed, which may perchance exstimulate the Stomach, (by its
netling pungency) like a heap of needles, and so promote its vomitory operation.

OBSERVAT. XLVII. A Nitt.
A Nitt is an Egg glewed by some viscous matter to the sides of the hair it
sticks to; it is Oval in shape, white in color, and full of transparent Liquor
or Gelly, and seems to be cased in a brittle Shell by the crackling it makes
'twixt your nails. In the same manner appears a Nitt in a Horse's hair: Muffet
will needs have it a quick, or rudely-shaped Animal. Thus discursive
Argumentation and Rational probabilities mislead men in the Wilderness of
Enquiry; but he that travels by the Clew, which his own sense and ocular
observation has spun out, is likeliest to trace the securest path, and go
furthest into the Maze and Labyrinth of Truth.

OBSERVAT. XLVIII. A Line drawn upon Paper.
AS these dioptrical Glasses, do heighten and illustrate the Works of Nature,
so do they on the other side, disparage and depretiate those of Art: For as
they show the incomparable exactness of the former, so do they discover the
flaws and deficiencies of the latter; for a right line either printed or drawn
never so neatly upon paper appears all ragged, indented, and discontinued by
the rugosities and seeming protuberances of the paper, in which likewise you
may see whole clouds, as it were, of rags, the primitive materials thereof.

I had a Rarity bestowed on me by Master Tailor (once a famous Scrivener in
these Parts) which is, The Lords Prayer and Creed writ in words at length, and
a Breviate also of the ten Commandments, and all couched (but distinctly writ)
in the compass of a single penny. In the Microscope you might read it all, as
if it were writ in Text hand, but all the Letters appeared (as we have observed
of the line) crooked and unhandsome; so Inartificial is Art when she is pinched
and streitned in her Workmanship.

OBSERVAT. XLIX. The Sparks of Flint and Steel.
TAke a good Steel and Flint, and strike fire over a white sheet of Paper, and
observe diligently where some eminent Spark falls; for there you shall find a
little dark spot or moat, no bigger then a pins point, which through our
Microscope did appear to be a perfectly round ball polished like Steel or
Glass, insomuch that I could see the Image of the Window, and the motion of my
hand reflected from it. What this polished Atom is, Master Hook has ingeniously
conjectured, viz. That it is a parcel of the Flint or Steel, or both; which by
so violent a percussion is made so glowing hot, that it is melted into glass:
for first, I observed that it was perfectly globular, and exactly like those
glassy Cindars, which are melted at the Iron-forges. Secondly, That it was none
of the Atoms of the Steel or Stone, grated off by Collision; for those you
might easily see were distinguishable from it; now that so little a stroke, and
so small a fire can vitrify, will be better understood by him that knows, how
small a heat at a Lamp-Furnace will melt Glass: I have small Capillary
Glass-Tubes, which will melt immediately like Wax, if you hold them but near
the flame of a common Candle, without any blast at all; by which Artifice I
make small Siphons, for the Trial of many notable Experiments, of which I have
treated at large in our Mercurial Experiments.

This further I shall add of Flint, that in it you shall see small Sparks of
Diamonds angular, and growing out of the Stone as out of a Mineral bed.

OBSERVAT. L. Of Hair.
WE slit a black Horse's Hair with a Rasor, and perceived it to be hollow, with
a white streak like pith in the middle of it; it seemed as big as a Rush, and
like a Rush slit length-wayes into two. They are none of them Cylindrical, but
angular and cornered, which you may even perceive by your fingers, by twirling
a Horse-hair in them: Now though Borrelius, and some of our Anatomists, as
Bartholin, Riolan, etc. say the like of the Hairs of a man's head, that they
also are hollow within, and angular and cornered without: yet I could never
perceive neither the one nor the other in any of the Microscopes I have seen,
though I have tried it in four excellent ones, the worst whereof I am confident
was better then that of Borrels: In all which, I could perceive nothing of an
Hair, but that it was like a thin horn something diaphanous (especially in the
full Sun) which diaphanity might perchance hinder the appearance both of its
cavity and angularity also: for I my self have little glass pipes of so little
a Cylinder, and so small a bore, that their hollowness to the bare eye is
utterly imperceptible.

And since the bristles and quils in other Animals are sensibly hollow, which
are analogous to the hairs in a man; I doubt not, but every one of our hairs is
hollow also, which though our Glasses (by reason of their transparency) cannot
present, yet it is palpably evinced by an odd Experiment in Poland, where
there is a disease (they call the Plica) which makes the very hairs of their
heads drop blood at the ends, and if cut any where, to drop blood there also;
which infallibly proves the tubulous cavity of them. Besides, we see the hairs
do grain and fork themselves, (when grown too long) which is a sign also of
their hollowness.

What, shall we judge them too small to be perforated by Nature? since we see
she has perforated Vessels within the Body, as small as hairs, as the Venae
Lacteae, and Lymphae-ducts; nay, since we see that Art can blow a glass hollow,
and yet as small as hair; and your Wire-drawers know, that if they take a short
piece of Wire, as thick as a quill, and drill it through, that then though they
draw it out to the smalness of a hair, yet will it still remain hollow quite
through in despite of their Wurdle: which is as great a Miracle in that Engine,
as that the like Wire once gilt, shall remain perfectly gilt all over, though
it be drawn five hundred yards longer than it was at first; which is an
experimental truth, and the daily practice of our Wire-drawers in London. So
that the conclusion of this Observation may be this, that every hair of our
head is as a little quill or horn, hollow and transparent. Which seems to be
further avouched also by the burning of hair; for there you may perceive the
same odor and smell, as of burnt horn; and the Chemists, as I remember, draw
out of hair a volatile Spirit, exactly like that of Hartshorn: both which
experiments do prove an homogeneity and similarity of their substance.

OBSERVAT. LI. Of Aromatical, Electrical, and Magnetical Effluxions.
SOme with a Magisterial Confidence do rant so high as to tell us, that there
are Glasses, which will represent not only the Aromatical and Electrical
Effluxions of Bodies, but even the subtle effluviums of the Lodestone it
self, whose Exspirations (says Doctor Highmore) some by the help of Glasses
have seen in the form of a Mist to flow from the Lodestone. This Experiment
indeed would be an incomparable Eviction of the Corporeity of Magnetical
Effluviums, and sensibly decide the Controversy 'twixt the Peripatetick and
Atomical Philosophers.

But I am sure he had better Eyes, or else better Glasses, or both, then ever I
saw, that performed so subtle an Experiment: For the best Glasses that ever I
saw, would not represent to me, the evaporations of Camphire (which spends it
self by continually effluviating its own Component Particles;) nay, I could
never see the grosser steams that continually perspire out of our own Bodies,
which you see will foil and besmear a polished Glass at any time; and which are
the fuliginous Eructations of that internal fire, that constantly burns within
us.

Indeed if our Diopticks could attain to that curiosity as to grind us such
Glasses, as would present the Effluviums of the Magnet, we might hazard at last
the discovery of Spiritualities themselves: however it would be of incomparable
use to our Modern Corpuscularian Philosophers, who have banished Qualities out
of the list of the Predicaments. And truly, as the Learned Doctor Brown has
it; The Doctrine of Effluxions, their penetrating Natures, their invisible
paths, and unsuspected effects, are very considerable: for (besides the
Magnetical One of the Earth) several Effusions there may be from diverse other
Bodies, which invisibly act their parts at any time, and perhaps through any
Medium: A part of Philosophy but yet in discovery; and will, I fear, prove the
last Leaf to be turned over in the Book of Nature.

Some Considerations, Corollaries, and Deductions, Anatomical, Physical, and
Optical, drawn from the former Experiments and Observations.
FIrst, Therefore, it is Ocularly manifest from the former Observations, that,
as perfect Animals have an incessant motion of their Heart, and Circulation of
their Blood (first discovered by the illustrious Doctor Harvey;) so in these
puny automata, and exsanguineous pieces of Nature, there is the same pulsing
Organ, and Circulation of their Nutritive Humor also: as is demonstrated by
OBSERVE. fourth, sixth, seventeenth, etc.

Nay, by OBSERVE. sixth, it is plain that a Louse is a Sanguineous Animal, and
has both an Heart and Auricles, the one manifestly preceding the pulse of the
other; and has a purple Liquor or Blood, which circulates in her (as the
Noblest sort of Animals have) which though it be only conspicuous in its
greatest bulk, at the heart, yet certainly it is carried up and down in
Circulatory Vessels; which Veins and Arteries are so exceeding little, that
both they and their Liquor are insensible: For certainly, if we can at a
Lamp-Furnace draw out such small Capillary Pipes of Glass that the reddest
Liquor in the World shall not be seen in them (which I have often tried and
done;) how much more curiously can Nature weave the Vessels of the Body; nay,
and bore them too with such a Drill, as the Art of man cannot excogitate:
Besides, we see, even in our own Eyes, that the Sanguineous Vessels that run
along the white of the eye (nay and probably into the diaphanous humors also)
are not discernable, but when they are preter-naturally distended in an
Ophthalmia, and so grow turgent and conspicuous.

To which we may add, that in most quick Fish, though you cut a piece of their
flesh off, yet will no blood be discernable, though they be sanguineous
Animals; but the blood is so divided by the minuteness of their Capillary
Vessels, or percribration through the habit of the Parts, that either it has
lost its redness, or our eyes are not able to discover its tincture.

Secondly, It is observable also from the former Experiments, that in these
minute Animals their nutritive Liquor never arises to the perfection of blood,
but continually as it were remains Chyle within them, for want of a higher heat
to dye it into that Spirituous Liquor: Nay, you shall observe in perfect
Sanguineous Animals a Circulation of an albugineous chylie-matter (before the
blood have a being) if you take Nature at the rise, and critically observe her
in her rudimental and obscure beginnings.

For view but an Egg, (after the second day's Incubation, and you shall see
the cicatricula in the Yolk, dilated to the breadth of a groat or sixpence
into transparent concentrical circles; in the Center whereof is a white Spot,
with small white threads, (which in futurity proves the Heart with its Veins
and arteries) but at present both its motion and circulation is undiscernable
to the bare eye, by reason of the feebleness thereof, and also because both the
Liquor and its Vessels were concolour to the white of the Eggs they swum in;
but the Heart does circulate this serous diaphanous Liquor, before (by a higher
heat) it be turned into blood.

And one thing here I am tempted to annex, which is a pretty and beneficial
Observation of the Microscope, and that is, That as soon as ever you can see
this red pulsing Particle appear (which Doctor Harvey conceited, not to be the
Heart, but one of its Auricles) you shall most distinctly see it, to be the
whole Heart with both Auricles and both Ventricles, the one manifestly
preceding the pulse of the other (which two motions the bare eye judges to be
Synchronical) and without any interloping perisystole at all: So admirable is
every Organ of this Machine of ours framed, that every part within us is
entirely made, when the whole Organ seems too little to have any parts at all.

Thirdly, It is peculiarly remarkable from Observation xxxi. That not only the
blood in perfect Animals, and the chyle in imperfect ones; but also the Animal
Spirits have a Circulation, which singular observation has often provoked and
entised our endeavors into a further enquiry after the Nature of these
Spirits, as to their Origin or Generation, their activity and motion, with some
other eminent properties belonging to them: we shall draw our thoughts
together, and so present them to your View: I will not say, that our discourse
hereon, shall pass for an un-controllable authentic Truth; it is all my
ambition if it attain but to the favorable reception of a rational Hypothesis
at last.

A Digression of the Animal Spirits.
FIrst, then, we have not those narrow conceptions of these subtle Spirits to
think that they are only included within the Bodies of Animals, or generated
(much less created) there, but we do believe that they are universally
diffused throughout all Bodies in the World, and that Nature at first created
this aetherial substance or subtle particles, and diffused them throughout the
Universe, to give fermentation and concretion to Minerals; vegetation and
maturation to Plants; life, sense, and motion to Animals; And indeed, to be the
main (though invisible) Agent in all Natures three Kingdoms Mineral, Vegetal,
and Animal.

And lest they should (because of their exceeding volatility and activity) be
of little or no use, Nature has immersed them in grosser matter, and
imprisoned them in several Bodies, with which she has intermixed them, the
better to curb the boundless activity of so thin and spirituous a substance,
and therefore the Spirits (of all compound Bodies especially) ought to be
considered under a triple notion:

Viz. Under the state of 1. Fixation. 2. Fusion. 3. Volatilization.


First of Fixation, when they are so complicated with the grosser Particles of
Matter, and locked therein so fast, that they can hardly be separated, and
dis-imprisoned as in Minerals, but most especially in Gold.

Secondly, The state of Fusion, I call that, when the Spirits by any kind of
help have so wrought themselves toward a Liberty, that they are in the middle
way to Volatility, as in half-concocted Minerals, fermenting Vapors or
Liquors, and half-ripned Fruits, etc.

Thirdly, The Spirits are in their third state of Volatility, when after a
colluctancy with the grosser Particles they have so subjugated and overcome
them, that they are just upon wings, and ready to fly away; as in Wine when it
is in the height of its fermentation, and in some part of our arterial blood
always. Now we observe that those Bodies that relax and open the grosser
composition of other Bodies, do presently create a fermentation; for, being
like so many Keys, they set the imprisoned Spirits at Liberty, which presently
fall on working, and by attenuating the grosser parts, separating the
Heterogeneous, volatilizing some, precipitating of others, digesting of others,
expelling of others, do at last mould it and work it to such a Body, as the
parts of it are fit to make up: In all which interval of time, there is a
palpable and sensible heat produced: Thus this Spirit being embowelled in the
Earth, and meeting there with convenient matter and adjuvant causes, does
proceed to produce Minerals, creating an actual heat, wheresoever it operates,
as in Alum or Copperase Mines, which being broken, exposed, and moistened, will
gather an actual heat, and produce much more of those Minerals, then else the
Mine would yield, as Agricola and Thurniseer do affirm, and is proved by common
experience.

The like is generally observed in Mines, as Agricola, Erastus, and ^ibanius,
etc. do affirm and avouch out of the daily experience of Mineral men, who
affirm, that in most places they find their Mines so hot, as they can hardly
touch them; although it is likely that, where they work for perfect Minerals,
the heat which was in fermentation whilst they were yet in breeding, is now
much abated, the Mineral being grown to their perfection, as the skilful and
excellent Doctor Jordan very well infers.

The like heat we observe constantly to be in our Cole-Pits: Nay, we sometimes
observe in our Brass-lumps (as our Colliers call them) which is a kind of
Marcasite, a very great heat; for being exposed to the moist Air, or sprinkled
with water, they will smoke and grow exceeding hot; and if they be laid up on a
heap and watered, they will turn into a glowing red hot fire, as I have seen
them my self.

And it was a Casualty once terrible to our Neighbor-town of Ealand; for
there, one Wilson a Patient of mine, having pil'd up many Cart-loads of these
Brass-lumps in a Barn of his, (for some secret purposes of his own) the Roof
letting rainwater fall copiously in amongst them, they all began to smoke, and
at last to take fire, and burnt like red hot Coals; so that the Town was in an
uproar about quenching of them; and one thing further I took special notice of
in this unlucky Experiment, that the Water which drained from the quenching of
them, left little pieces and Crystals of Copperase sticking all along to the
Piles of Grass, that grew in the Croft it run down.

Thus Antimony and Sublimate being mixed together, will grow so hot (the one
relaxing the fermenting spirit in the other) that they are not to be touched.

Thus in the Corrosion of Metals by Aqua fortis, what a strong heat is there
in the Liquor, and what a steam constantly evaporates during their
fermentation. In the Commixtion of Oil of Vitriol with Oil of Tartar per
deliquium, what a violent heat and effervescence do presently arise, besides a
sharp and acrimonious vapor that strikes our nostrils. Nay, and we see our
Subterraneous Damps do sometimes with intermixtion with the moist Air, grow to
that over-height of fermentation, that they fire of themselves and strike down
all before them.

Thus the Spirit of Niter mixed with Butter of Antimony, grows so hot, that it
is ready to rise in a flame.

Thus certainly do all Baths receive their heat from Mineral Vapors, or the
Minerals themselves, being in solutis Principiis, and so the fermenting Spirit
sets a playing in them, as the Learned Doctor Jordan did most rationally
conjecture.

This universal fermenting Spirit does not only play these feats in the
Mineral; but also operates in the same manner in the Vegetable Kingdom, which
we ocularly behold in the Artifice of Malt, where the Grains of Barley being
moistened with water, the parts are relaxed, the internal Spirits in them are
dilated, and put into action; and the superfluity of water being removed (which
might choke it) and the Barley being laid up in heaps, the fermentation and heat
presently appears, with a kind of vinous steam and effluviums which pass from
it, and therefore it shoots forth into Spires. Thus we see in wet-Hay, how the
spirits work not only to a heat, but (if they be not cooled and prevented by
Ventilation) they break out into a flame also; Nay, in all Vegetables there is
this constant Heat (though it be below our Sensation) as it is in some Fishes
and colder Animals also, and a constant steam and transpiration of particles,
as we have experimentally proved in our XXV. Observation.

And now let us pursue these Spirits into the Animal Kingdom, and we shall see
that they have the like effects and operations there also, as is formerly
observed; only, being there in greater plenty, and more purely refined, and in
a constant state of Fusion and Volatility, they work nobler effects.

Now the Spirits that are lodged in all the meats and drinks we receive, being
more or less fixed therein; What does the Soul, but (like an excellent Chemist)
in this internal Laboratory of Man, by a fermentation of our nourishment in the
stomach and guts, a filtration thereof through the Lacteae, a digestion in the
Heart, a Circulation and Rectification in the Veins and Arteries: what does
she, I say, by these several Physico-Chymical operations, but strive all this
while to unfix, exalt, and volatilize the Spirits contained in our nutriment,
that so they may be transmitted to the Brain, and its divarications, and in
that reconditory kept and reposited for her use and service.

So that these we now call Animal Spirits are the purest, subtlest, and most
volatile particles and activest Atoms of the blood, which by continual
pulsation of the Heart are carried with the blood by the carotidal Arteries up
into the Brain, and there by that lax and boggy substance are imbibed and
separated from the blood, and thence by the Spinal Marrow and Nerves
transmitted to all the parts of the Body.

Now as the Chyle is perfected in the stomach and guts, and their appendent
Vessels, the lacteal Veins; and as the blood is perfected in the Heart, and its
annexed Vessels, the Veins and Arteries: so the Animal Spirits are separated,
preserved, and perfected in the Brain, with its continued trunk and branches,
viz. the Spinal Marrow, Nerves, and Fibers, for the uses hereafter to be
declared.

Now the two former Liquors, the Chyle and the Blood (because of their grosser
liquidity) need to be conveyed in hollow Pipes and Channels ( viz. the Veins
and Arteries;) but the Spirits which is the quintessence of them both, can
easily pass by a swift filtration, through the Brain, Spinal Marrow, and
Nerves, Membranes, and Fibers, which are as it were the Cords, Sayls, and
Tackling, to move this Engine or Vessel we call the Body.

Nay, though we can give you no sensible eviction of it, Why may not all those
long filaments of which the substance of the Brain, Spinal Marrow, and Nerves
consists, be tubulous and hollow; so that the Animal-Spirits may be channelled
through them, as the blood through the Veins and Arteries? I am sure, we see by
Observation xxxi. and L. what infinitely small filaments and vessels there are
in Animals, and yet all tubulous and perforated; so that the sudden inflation
of all those capillary threads or pipes, may serve for Motion of the Body, and
the constant though flower filtration of the Spirits through their Coats and
Cylindrical Membranes may serve for Sensation. So that it seems, this Cottage
of Clay, with all its Furniture within it, was but made in subserviency to the
Animal Spirits; for the extraction, separation, and depuration of which, the
whole Body, and all the Organs and Utensils therein are but instrumentally
contrived, and preparatorily designed. Just as the Chemical Elaboratory with
all its Furnaces, Crucibles, Stills, Retorts, Cucurbits, Matrats, Bolt-heads,
Pelicans, etc. were made for no other end by the ingenious Chemist, than for
the extraction and depuration of his Spirits and Quintessences (which he draws
from those Bodies he deals with) in the obtainment of which he has come to the
ultimate design of his endeavors.

Now as in Minerals and Vegetables the colluctancy of these fermenting Spirits
with the grosser matter, does both create a constant heat and evaporation of
Atoms: So in Animals, the like is more eminently conspicuous, to wit the vital
heat, or calidum innatum, and those fuliginous effluviums which pass constantly
out of us by insensible transpiration; which Sanctorius has proved to exceed
the bulk and weight of all our sensible Evacuations whatsoever.

Having thus demonstrated how the Soul obtains these Spirits after her several
operations of Digestion, Chylification, Sanguification, Circulation, etc. the
like now let us see what use she makes of so precious a substance.

First, therefore we affirm, that this thin and spirituous matter, which is
called the Animal Spirits, is the immediate Instrument of the Soul, in all her
operations both of Sense and Motion. First, for sense, it is plain by what is
discovered in a Vertigo; for the Brain it self is not of such a fluid
substance, as to turn round, and make all objects to do so too; wherefore it is a
sign that the immediate corporeal instrument of conveying the images of things,
is the Spirits in the Brain. Secondly, That they are the chief Engine of Sight,
is plain; not only because the eye is full of these livid Spirits, but also
because dimness of sight comes from deficiency of them, though the parts of the
eye otherwise be entire enough, as in sick and old persons, and in those
troubled with an Amaurosis, or Gutta Serena. I had the last year a Patient, a
young Boy of seventeen years old, who fell casually stark blind of his right
eye; in which you could outwardly discover no fault at all (the Disease being
an Amaurosis, or obstruction of the Optic Nerve) for, that Nerve being by
successful means disobstructed and relaxed, so that the Animal Spirits were
able to flow done to the Retina again, he shortly after perfectly recovered his
sight again, without any relapse at all, to this present day. Thirdly, If you
cast a Ligature upon any Nerve, you destroy both the sense and motion of that
part whither that Nerve was propagated (as by that pleasant Experiment by tying
the recurrent Nerves in a living Dog, we have tried) till by relaxing the
Ligature the Spirits may have the freedom to channel into the Nerves again:
Which truth is also handsomely made out, by that ordinary example of a man's Leg
being asleep (as we call it) for by compression of the Nerves, the propagation
of the Spirits into the part is hindered; for, as sense and motion is restored,
you may feel something creep into the Leg, tingling and stinging like Pismires
(as Spigelius compares it) which is the return of the Animal Spirits into that
part again. Fourthly, That Spontaneous motion is performed by continuation of
the Animal Spirits, from the common Sensorium to the Muscle, (which is the
gross Engine of Motion) is sensibly evinced in dead Palsies, where one side is
taken away.

To all which add, the former Observation of the Spirits circumundulation when
the Snail at any time moved, and of their joint quiescency together.

Having now shown you how these Animal Spirits are generated in our Body, or,
to speak more properly, disimprisoned and separated from our nutriment, and so
from fixation, brought through Fusion to Volatilization; having also shown you
what use Nature makes of them in Sensation and Motion: let us screw our Enquiry
a little further, and see if we can discover how the Spirits move in the Brain
and Nerves, to perform the same operations. First, therefore, we affirm that a
lesser quantity and slower motion of the Spirits is required for Sensation,
than there is for Motion; for in this the Muscle swells that moves the part,
which is a plain Indication of a greater influx of Spirits directed thither; a
greater, I say, for I do not deny but there is required to sensation a moderate
quantity and diffusion of the Spirits into all the parts of the Body, else we
should always be benumbed and stupid (as when our Leg is asleep) by an
interception of the Spirits. Secondly, that their motion is slower in sensation
then motion; the former Experiment of the Snail does also manifest: whose
Animal Spirits never begin to undulate till she begin to move, whereas she is
sensible when they are in Quiescency, as you may, by pricking her with a
Needle, easily observe. Thirdly, in the return of the Spirits into the
stupefied Leg, we plainly perceive by the prickling, what a flow motion the
Spirits have. All which Phenomenon do seem to favor our former Conjecture,
that for Motion the Spirits move impetuously down the nervous filaments, (which
are hollow;) but for Sensation they only creep by a filtration down their
Coats and Membranes.

Now these Spirits being so subtle and dissipable, the Soul spends them every
day in using of them, and they being much spent, she can hardly move the Body
any longer: The sense whereof we call Lassitude; For certainly, as Doctor More
very ingeniously inferrs, if it were an immediate faculty of the Soul to
contribute Motion to any matter; I do not understand (that Faculty never
failing nor diminishing, no more than the Soul it self can fail or diminish)
that we should ever be weary.

Thus are the Phenomenon of Sense and Motion best salved, whilst we are awake;
now what happens when we sleep, is a matter of further enquiry: Some have
defined Sleep to be a migration of all the Spirits out of the Brain, into the
exterior parts of the Body; whereas by our former Observations, it may rather
seem to the contrary; that is, The retraction of the Spirits into the Brain, or
at least a restagnation of them in the nervous parts, does (till Nature being
recruited by a new supply and regeneration of them in the Brain) direct them
into the Spinal Marrow and Nerves, which being replenished with them again,
they run their current as before; so the whole Animal thereby is made capable
of feeling the Impulses of any external object whatever (which we call,
Walking) and during this Interval and Non-tearm of sensation (for so we may
without a Complement call Sleep) why may not the Soul be retracted, and wholly
intent upon, and busied about, her Vegetative and Plastical Operations? So that
when she has locked up the doors of this Laboratory the Body, she may be busy
in augmenting, repairing, and regenerating all the Organs and Utensils within,
and painting and plaistring the Walls without. This I am sure we observe to be
the greatest part of her obscure employment in the Womb, where the Embryo for
the most part sleeps, whilst the Soul is in full exercise of her Plastic and
Organo-Poietical Faculty.

Now these Animal Spirits being continually transmitted from the Brain, through
the Spinal Marrow, Nerves, Tendons, and Fibers, into all the parts of the Body
(especially whilst we are awaking) may, some of them at least, have a kind of
circulation; for those which perspire not, having lost their motion, may either
mix with the blood in habitu partium, or relapse into a kind of insipid phlegm,
as Chemical Spirits do, that are not purely rectified, and to be returned back
by the Lymphiducts again.

Lastly, I have but one paradoxical and extravagant Quaere to make, and that is
this; That since we have proved these Animal Spirits to be the ultimate result
of all the concoctions of the Body, the very top and perfection of all Nature's
operations, the purest and most aetherial particles of all Bodies in the World
whatsoever, (and so consequently of nearest alliance to Spiritualities) and the
sole and immediate instrument of all the Soul's operations here, even in statu
conjuncto (the Body and the Organs thereof, being but secondary and subservient
Instruments to the Spirits:) These things being thus premised, may it not be
probable enough that these Spirits in the other World, shall only be the
Soul's Vehicle and Habit, and indeed really that (...), mentioned by the
Apostle; by a vital reunion with which, it may supereminently out-act all that
ever she was able to do in this earthly Prison and heavy Cottage of the Body;
since also (which I may super-adde) those volatile Spirits (being freed by a
constant and perpetual dissipation from the Body) are diffused through this
great aetherial Ocean, as into their proper Element, ready to be united to the
Soul at the instant of her Separation.

Fourth Deduction.
FOurthly, The Physiologist also may gather something from the former
Observations, touching the nature of Colors; that they are indeed nothing but
the various modification of Light. For most, if not all, Bodies in their minute
particles (through which the Sun's Rays have more freedom to penetrate) seem
to lose their Colors, and grow diaphanous, as you may observe in the
Microscope.

Secondly, Is it not shrewdly probable, that since motion is the cause of
sight, (which is nothing else, but the impulse that the Luminous Atoms make
upon the Retina:) Is it not, I say, shrewdly probable, that Colors are nothing
else but a various modification of this motion, since we see that they are both
naturally and artificially made by light, to which we can imagine nothing to be
added or deducted to super-induce those fine Tinctures as in the Rainbow, the
Prisme, crystal Pendents, Glass-Globes filled full of water, and in those
arenulous Atoms in the former Experiment xxxiii. except some change in the
motion of the Luminous Atoms, which must necessarily follow from the
diversities of Objects and Mediums they either hit upon or pass through; and so
consequently do either accelerate or retardate the Solary Atoms in their
Dinetical and progressive Motion; whence arises both the diversity and variety
of all colors whatsoever, as that profoundest Master of Mechanics (
Descartes) has both subtly excogitated, and ingeniously illustrated by the
Prisme.

To which we shall add some further experimental Eviction:

First, If the Hole (through which the Species is transmitted into a dark room)
be covered with a leaf of Beaten Gold, it will not only look of a pure green
color, but all the light trajected through it will put on the same Tincture.

Secondly, If with a Prisme you strike the Rainbow-colours upon a wall, and
observing where a red is projected, you there place an Eye, the Spectator shall
judge it to be another color; because that the Solary Atoms, which shot
through the Prisme upon the wall, and there painted that color, being again
and again refracted by the Diaphanous Humors of the Eye, must needs, in all
reason, exchange their motion, and so consequently paint the Retina with
another color: both which Experiments show, that Color is nothing else but
the modification of Light, which by the alteration of its motion is dyed into
colors. The like Artificial alteration of the Colors may be made by
interposing a Burning-Glass 'twixt the Prisme and the Light, and 'twixt the
Prisme and the Paper.

But this Cartesian Theory of Colors we shall further make out by several
Experiments in the Extraction, Commixtion, and Transcoloration of Tinctures.
First therefore,

If into the Infusion of Violets you put some few drops of the oil of Tartar
per Deliquium, it will presently strike it into a green Tincture: now, if
instead of that oil you put in oil of Vitriol, it strikes it into a purple
Color: to which if you super-add some drops of Spirit of Hartshorn, it
strikes it green again.

Secondly, If into the Tincture of dried Roses (drawn in Hot-water with oil of
Vitriol after the usual manner) you drop a few drops of Spirit of Hartshorn,
or of Urine, or of oil of Tartar per Deliquium, it will presently strike the
red into a green Color; which by a super-addition of the oil of Vitriol, you
may re-tincture as before.

Thirdly, If into an Infusion of Copperose you shave a little Gall, it
presently puts on a Sable inky Color; into which if you put a few drops of the
Spirit or oil of Vitriol, it strikes out the Color immediately, and the water
becomes white again; to which if you super-add a few drops of oil of Tartar per
Deliquium, it re-denigrates it again.

Thus a Glass of the Sweet-Spaw-water also, upon the Infusion of Gall, turns
into a Claret-colour: but if you drop but a little of the said oil or spirit
into it, it presently eats out the Color, and the water returns to its
primitive clearness again.

Draw a faint Tincture of Brasil wood, bruised or rasped in lukewarm water,
filter it, and clarify it; then if you add a little sharp vinegar to a good
quantity of it, it will strike it into the exact color of good stale English
Beer, and it will partly have the smell of it also.

Secondly, If into another quantity of the said reddish Infusion you add a few
drops of the oil of Tartar per Deliquium, it will turn it to a pure purplish
red, like excellent Claret.

Thirdly, If into this Artificial Claret you drop a few drops of the oil of
Vitriol, it will turn it into a pale Amber color (like Sack as may be) which
with addition of fair water you may empale as you please. By which ingenious
commixtion of Spirits and Liquors did Floram Marchand, that famous
Water-Drinker, exhibit those rare tricks and curiosity's at London, of vomiting
all kind of Liquors at his mouth.

For, first; Before he mounts the Stage, he always drinks in his private
Chamber, fasting, a gill of the Decoction of Brasil; then making his
appearance, he presents you with a pail full of lukewarm water, and twelve or
thirteen glasses, some washed in vinegar, others with oil of Tartar, and oil of
Vitriol; then he drinks four and twenty glasses of the water, and carefully
taking up the glass which was washed with oil of Tartar, he vomits a reddish
liquor into it, which presently is brightned up and tinged into perfect and
lovely Claret.

After this first assay, he drinks six or seven glasses more (the better to
provoke his vomiting) as also the more to dilute and empale the Brasil
Decoction within him, and then he takes a glass rinsed in vinegar, and vomits
it full, which instantly, by its acidity is transcoloured into English Beer;
and vomiting also at the same time into another glass (which he washes in fair
water) he presents the Spectators with a glass of paler Claret, or Burgundian
wine; then drinking again as before, he picks out the glass washed with oil of
Vitriol, and vomiting a faint Brasil-water into it, it presently appears to be
Sack; and perchance if he washed the one half of the glass with spirit of Sack,
it would have a faint odor and flavor of that Wine also.

He then begins his Carouse again, and drinking fifteen or sixteen glasses,
till he has almost extinguished the strength and tincture of his Brasil water,
he then vomits into a Vineger-glass again, and that presents white Wine. At the
next disgorgement (when his stomach is full of nothing but clear water indeed
(which he has filled so, by the exceeding quantity of water which at every
interval he drinks) he then deludes the Spectators by vomiting Rose water,
Angelica water, and Cinnamon water into those glasses which have been formerly
washed with those Spirits. And thus was that famous Cheat performed, and indeed
acted with such a port and flowing grace, by that Italian Bravado, that he did
not only strike an Admiration into vulgar heads, and common Spectators, but
even into the judicious and more knowing part of men, who could not readily
find out the ingenuity of his knavery.

The Chemical Elaboratories likewise do teach us this Truth in Fumes and
Smoaks, as well as Liquors (which indeed are but rarefied and expaused
Liquors;) for Niter it self, though nothing a kin to redness does in
distillation yield bloud-red Fumes (called by the Chemists Salamanders-bloud)
which fall again into a Liquor which has nothing of red in it.

So Soot (though black) yet when it is pressed and forced up into an exhalation
by a strong fire, will fill the Receiver with Milk white Fumes; thus
Sall-Armoniack, and black Antimony, being equally mixed and gradually sublimed
in an Urinal, will exhibit a Scene of Colors, and will make a transition out
of one into another with a delectable variety.

By all which pleasant Observations, it palpably appears that the nature of
Colors consists in the free admission, transition, refraction, or reflection
of light, from the Objects discolored; For first, you see several Colors
introduced into Liquors by those Ingredients, that neither had nor could
communicate any such tincture. Secondly, it is as plain, that the minute
Particles and Atoms of those Bodies that were imbibed by the Liquors, and
filled up their smallest Cavities or Interstices, accordingly as they were
altered in their site, position, and motion; so were the Luminous Beams
variously transmitted, refracted, or reflected, and so consequently thence
resulted those several Scenes of Colors.

Thus when the Atoms wherewith the Liquor is fully impregnated do relax and
open themselves, that the light may fairly penetrate, then is the Liquor limpid
and clear; but if they draw up a little closer one to another, so that the
light be refracted, then is the Liquor yellow; if closer yet to a greater
refraction of the Light, then is the Liquor red: but if in this randezvouz they
draw up into a very close Body indeed, so that by reason of their contiguity,
both in rank and file, no light can be trajected through them; then opacity and
darkness arises: If the Rays cannot break the front of them, then is a
milky-Whiteness presented there.

The Fifth COROLLARY* Anatomical Considerations about the Eye.
OUr next Reflections shall be made upon the Eye, to admire as well as
contemplate Nature's variety in the constructure and conformation of so
excellent an Organ: The two Luminaries of our Microcosm, which see all other
things, cannot see themselves, nor discover the excellencies of their own
Fabric: Nature, that excellent Mistress of the Optics, seems to have run
through all the Conick Sections, in shaping and figuring its Parts; and
Dioptrical Artists have almost ground both their Brain and Tools in pieces, to
find out the Arches and Convexities of its prime parts, and are yet at a loss,
to find their true Figurations, whereby to advance the Fabric of their
Telescopes and Microscopes: which practical part of Optics is but yet in the
rise; but if it run on as successfully as it has begun, our Posterity may come
by Glasses to out-see the Sun, and Discover Bodies in the remote Universe, that
lie in Vortexes, beyond the reach of the great Luminary. At present let us be
content with what our Microscope demonstrates; and the former Observations, I
am sure, will give all ingenious persons great occasion, both to admire
Nature's Anomaly in the Fabric, as well as in the number of Eyes, which she
has given to several Animals: We see the Tunica Cornea in most Insects is full
of perforations, as if it were a Tunica Wea pinked full of Holes, and whereas
perfect Animals, have but one Aperture, these Insects have a thousand Pupils,
and so see a Hemisphere at once: and indeed it is worth our consideration to
think, that since their Eye is perfectly fixed, and can move no ways; it was
requisite to lattice that Window, and supply the defect of its Motion, with the
multiplicity of its Apertures, that so they might see at once what we can but
do at several times, our Eyes having the liberty and advantage to move every
way (like Balls in Sockets) which theirs have not.

Secondly, We observe no diaphanous parts in those lattic'd Eyes, since it is
probable, that the Horney Coat of the Eye serves also for a Pericranium for
their Brain: For, that the Brain of most Insects lies in their Eyes, seems to
me more than a probability. First, because in Flies, Butter-flies, Bees, etc.
you can find no other place in their Heads, wherein any matter analogous to the
Brain, can be lodged. Secondly, in the Eyes of those Insects you shall always
find great store of a pulpous substance, like to be Brain in those Creatures.
Thirdly, the Eyes in all Insects are very large, and seem disproportional to so
small Bodies, if intended for no other use than Vision. Fourthly, why may not
this lattic'd film of their Eye be their Tunica Retina, which as it is concave
in us, is unequal in them; and as it is made of the Brain in us, so it is in
them, and therefore lies contiguous to it, and may indeed be over-cast, by a
transparent Cornea, through which the Network of this interior film may thus
eminently appear; For certainly such Animals as have distinction of Senses, as
Seeing, Feeling, etc. must needs have an Animal-Sensation; an Animal, I say,
for I hold also a natural Sensation, which is performed without a Brain, and
such an one is discoverable even in Animals, and in our own Selves; for besides
the Animal-Sensation (whose original is in the Brain) the Stomach, Guts, and
the Parenchymata of the Body, yea and the Blood too has a natural Sensation of
what is good, and what is bad for them, as Doctor Harvey has excellently
proved, Lib. de Gener. and so some of the lowest rank of Animals (as the
Zoophyta and plant-Animals) may perchance be utterly devoid of Animal, and have
only a Natural Sensation; but this belongs to some Anatomical Observations I
have by me, where I may perchance prove that all Vegetables (as well as the
Sensitive and humble Plants) have this latter kind of Sensation, as well as
Animals.

But let us return to the Eye again, of which curious Organ I am tempted to say
much more; but that I have reserved that discourse as more proper for my
Telescopical Observations. Only for the present, to encourage the Lovers of
free Philosophy, and to let them see that even the greatest Oculists and
Dioptrical Writers, that the World ever saw, Kepler, Descartes, Schemar, and
Hugenius, have not yet discovered all Nature's Curiosities, even in that Organ;
I will here deliver one or two Optical Experiments: The first hints whereof, I
must ingeniously confess, I received from some Fragments and Papers of our
famous, and never to be forgotten Countryman, Master Gascoign of Midleton near
Leeds, who was unfortunately slain in the Royal Service for His late Majesty; a
Person he was of those strong Parts and Hopes, that not only we, but the whole
World of Learning suffered in the loss of him.

Take a fresh Eye, and, in a frosty Evening, place it with the Pupil upwards,
where it may be frozen through, then in the Morning you may cut it as you
please. If you cut it with a plain Parallel to the Optic Axis (which Section
Descartes thought impossible) then shall you see all the Parts, as he has
pictured them page 92. and each part will be very different in color, and
remain in their natural Site, which may be pricked forth in an oyled Paper: By
this trick also you shall find, that there is a double Crystalline humor, one
circum-included within the other; if you do but thaw the Crystalline you shall
see the outward will pill off from the inward: The right Figures of both which
Crystallines are monstrous difficult, if not impossible, to find out; hence it
follows that every Ray of incidence is seven times refracted in the Eye before
it reach the Retina, whatsoever Scheinar says to the contrary.

The second Experiment, is one of the ingenious Excogitations of M. Gascoign's,
and it is to delineate the prime parts of the Eye; after this manner: Having a
Glass and Table fitted to observe the Eye's spots, place an Eye with the Horny
Tunicle either upwards or downwards, between the inmost Glass and Table; so
near the Glass, as the Eye will almost fill up the compass of the Eye's Image,
then the representation of the Eye will be very large (proportionable to the
Eye's Image) upon the Table, and thus you may prick out the three Figures of
the Cornea, and the outward and inward Crystallines. Many other neat ways with
my Dioptrical Glasses can I take the Figures of the prime Parts of the Eye,
which shall be discovered in their fit places.

And now having done with the Fabric, the Observations lead us to the
Consideration of the Number and Plurality of Eyes, that Nature has afforded
some Creatures. I must confess though I have been very curious and critical in
observing; yet I could never find any Animal that was monocular, nor any that
had a multiplicity of Eyes, except Spiders, which indeed are so fair and
palpable that they are clearly to be seen by any man that wants not his own.
And though Argus has been held as prodigious a fiction as Polypheme, and a
plurality of Eyes in any Creature, as great a piece of monstrosity, as only a
single one; yet our glasses have refuted this Error (as Observat. viii. and
ix. will tell you:) so that the Works of Nature are various, and the several
ways, and manifold Organization of the Body, inscrutable; so that we had need
of all the advantages that Art can give us, to discover the more mysterious
Works of that divine Architectress; but especially, when she draws her self
into so narrow a Shop, and works in the retiring Room of so minute an Animal.

Lastly, Many more hints might be taken from the former Observations, to make
good the Atomical Hypothesis; which I am confident will receive from the
Microscope some further advantage and illustration, not only as to its first
universal matter, Atoms; but also, as to the necessary Attributes, or essential
Properties of them, as Motion, Figure, Magnitude, Order, and Disposition of
them in several Concretes of the World; especially if our Microscopes arise to
any higher perfection: and if we can but, by any artificial helps, get but a
glimpse of the smallest Truth, it is not to tell what a Fabric of Philosophy
may be raised from it; (for to conclude with that Patriark of Experimental
Philosophy, the Learned Lord Bacon, Sir Francis Bacon Not. History Exp. 91.
) The Eye of the Understanding, says he, is like the Eye of the Sense; for as
you may see great Objects through small Cranies or Levels; so you may see great
Axioms of Nature, through small and contemptible Instances and Experiments.

These are the few Experiments that my Time and Glass has as yet afforded me
an opportunity to make, which I hasten out into the World to stay the longing
thereof; But you may expect shortly from Doctor Wren, and Master Hook, two
Ingenious Members of the Royal Society at Gresham, the Cuts and Pictures drawn
at large, and to the very life of these and other Microscopical Representations.

The End of the Microscopical Observations.
EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY, In three Books. Containing New Experiments
Microscopical, Mercurial, Magnetical.
With some Deductions and probable Hypotheses raised from them, in Avouchment
and Illustration of the now famous ATOMICAL HYPOTHESIS.

By HENRY POWER, Dr. of Physic.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

Liber Secundus. Mercuriall Experiments. Begun Anno Domini 1653. By HENRY
POWER, Mae. Dr.

Itaque sperandum omnino est, esse adhuc in Naturae sinu, multa excellentis
usus Recondita; quae nullam cum jam Inventis Cognationem habent, aut
parallelismum, sed omnino sita sunt extra vias phantasiae, quae tamen adhuc
Inventa non sunt, quae proculdubio, per multos saeculorum circuitus and
ambages, and ipsa quandoque prodibunt.

Fr. Verulam, lib. 1. Novi Organi, sect. 109. The Second Book.
These Physico-Mechanical Experiments are of four sorts, Hydrargyral,
Hydraulical, Pneumatical, and Mixed.


Such things as are requisite for the trial of these Experiments, are 1. A
Quart at least of () Quicksilver. 2. Several Glass-Trunks, or Cylindrical
Glass-Tubes, some open at both ends, and some exactly closed; or (as they
phrase it) Hermetically sealed at the one end. All of several Lengths and
Bores. 3. A Glass-Tunnel or two, with wooden dishes and spoons, for filling of
the Glass-Tubes with Mercury. 4. You must have no Metalline Vtensils about you,
for fear they be spoiled with the Mercury. 5. Spread a Blanket or Carpet on the
ground when you try these Experiments, that so none of the Mercury may be lost,
but may be taken up again with wooden spoons. 6. You may have by you also
Glass-Syphons, Weather-Glasses of several right and crooked shapes, etc. the
more to advantage the Experiments.


MERCURIAL EXPERIMENTS.
CHAP. I.
Experiment 1.
TAke a Glass-Tube of above 29 inches in length, as AB, closed at the end B,
and open at A: fill it full of Quicksilver, and so close the end A, exactly
with the thumb (as with a stoppel;) then reverse it, and putting it and your
finger together into the wooden vessel D, filled about two inches deep with
Quicksilver, erect it perpendicularly therein; then drawing away your finger
from the orifice, your shall see a great part of the Quicksilver in the Tube to
make a quick and smart descent into the external Quicksilver in the vessel; and
after it has, by several vibrations up and down, found out a certain point or
degree, there to stand still and immovable: so that all the upper part of the
Tube (which the Mercury has deserted) viz. from E to B, will seem to be a
vacuity.

The first Inventor of this noble Experiment, was Torricellius the eminent
Mathematician, and deserved Successor to the famous Gallilaeo, to whom all the
Commonwealth of Learning are exceedingly oblieg'd, because thereby he has
excited the greatest modern Wits to higher and nobler Experiments.

In this Torricellian Experiment (for so we shall always hereafter call it)
let me give you notice of these rare Observables:

1. If the Tube be not longer then 29. inches, the Quicksilver will not at all
descend: this we have tried in several Tubes of 18, 21, and 26 inches long.

2. In Tubes of a greater length then 29. inches, the Quicksilver will descend.

3. The Quicksilver will not descend lower then 29. inches, or thereabouts;
that is, the Cylinder of Mercury in the Tube will always be 29. inches in
height above the superficies of the restagnant Mercury in the vessel.

4. The Quicksilver descends neither more nor less in Tubes of a greater or
lesser Bore, provided they exceed the length of 29. inches.

5. How long soever the Tube be, the Quicksilver will fall down to its wonted
pitch and stint of 29. inches or thereabouts; as we have tried in Tubes of 32,
35, 37, 45, and 50 inches in Longitude, and all of different Diameters and
Bores.

6. If you add any more Quicksilver to that in the vessel, then, that in the
Tube rises proportionally the higher: and contrariwise, if you take any
Quicksilver out of the vessel, that in the Tube descends lower; and so
consequently, the internal Quicksilver in the Tube keeps always the same
height of that in the vessel.

7. That you may with great facility move the Tube to and fro in the vessel'd
Quicksilver, but not draw it up toward the superficies of the external
Quicksilver in the vessel without some reluctance.

8. That if you tilt or incline the Glass-Tube, you shall see the Quicksilver
gradually to ascend till it almost totally fill the Tube, at which Angle of
Inclination the atletus or perpendicular will be equal to 29. inches, let the
Tube be of what length soever.

9. That upon removal of your finger from the orifice, you shall see the
Quicksilver to make a very Quick and Smart descent six inches at least below
the standard of its Altitude in the Glass of 45. inches long, and in others
more or less; and after a few vibrations up and down, to settle at its wonted
pitch and altitude of 29. inches, or thereabouts.

10. That if any thing, considerably hot or cold, be applied to the Superior
part of the Tube, the Quicksilver therein will more or less ascend or descend,
as the water in a Weather-glass, though with far feebler and more insensible
effects: So that any time of the year it will not much desert nor surmount the
determinate height and pitch aforesaid of 29. inches.

11. That this seeming vacuity in the Tube would be judged by any one that came
in at an adventure, to be nothing but such like illuminated air as this we
breathe in.

12. If you dip your thumb into the vessel'd Mercury, and close the orifice of
the Tube therein, and so gently reverse it, you shall see the Quicksilver in the
Tube to move more swiftly (though not without resistance, and ebullitions)
through that seeming vacuity; and the Mercury will pass with such shoggs
toward the depressed extreme of the Tube, as will make you apprehend that the
Tube will be either beaten out of your hand or broken: none of which Phenomenon
will appear, if you let in the outward air into the cavity unpossessed by the
Mercury. In which Interim of Motion, your thumb will be drawn and sucked into
the orifice of the Tube, not without some considerable pain.

13. If before the removal of your thumb you reimmerge it again into the
vessel'd Quicksilver as before, and then draw the Tube perpendicularly quite
out of the vessell'd Quicksilver, the Quicksilver in the Tube will rise to the
top of the Glass with such a violence as will endanger the knocking out of the
head of the Glass, and then the air will pass by a speedy ebullition through
the Quicksilver, and it will totally descend into the vessel. I once brake a
Glass-tube of near forty inches long, by plucking it suddenly out of the
vessel'd Mercury.

14. That you cannot so cautiously perform this Experiment in any Glass Tube
whatsoever, but some little Air will be seen in the top of the Tube, when
reversed, and before the removal of your Thumb, like the little Cap of Air in
the obtuse end of an Egg; so that if you incline the Tube to what Angle soever
(as in the eighth Observable aforesaid) the re-ascending Quicksilver will never
totally and exactly fill the Tube, but a little Cap of Air will still stand in
the top thereof.

15. That, use all the Artifice and Industry you can, you cannot so cautiously
fill the Tube, but that the Cylinder of Quicksilver will seem cragged and
itched, and never purely smooth and polished, (though your Glass be never so
smooth and dry, and your Quicksilver never so well purged) which interstices
are filled up with Particles of Air that lurk 'twixt the Contiguities of the
Glass and Quicksilver: and which after the descent of the Quicksilver do bubble
up, and shoot themselves little by little into that seeming vacuity (as you may
ocularly behold them) and doubtless are the occasion and hindrance why upon
inclination of the Tube (as in 8. Observe.) the Quicksilver cannot totally
replenish and fill the Tube again.

16. We filled a Tube of 27. inches with Quicksilver, and after inversion of it
into a Vessel of Quicksilver, as in the Torricellian-Experiment we perceived,
just upon retraction of the finger, the little Particles of Air which remained
lurking between the sides of the Tube and the Quicksilver, on the sudden to
become more visible, by a violent and rapid dilatation, flying out like so many
little Springs wound up, and then all at once set at Liberty.

17. If you immerge the Tube into Vessels of Quicksilver of several Capacities
and larger Surfaces, the descent of it will not alter.

18. Observe that the height of the Mercurial Cylinder, which here with us is
found to be 29. inches at the least (if you order the Tube handsomely in
filling of it) may seem greatly different from the French Observations, and
those of Foreign Experimenters, as Parricellius himself, Doctor Pascal,
Roberual, Doctor Pettit, and Pecquet, who all assign its Altitude to be but
about 27. inches. To this I shall only at present answer, that this difference
of the Mercurial Cylinder, may partly arise from the variations of the
Climates, the Air being more thin and hot then ours, partly from the difference
and altitude of the Atmosphere here and there, (as shall hereafter be made more
intelligible) and partly from the diversity of our measures and theirs, or from
the club and combination of all these causes joined together. To which I may
well super-add, the negligence or inconsideration of those that try this
Experiment; for you may alter the height of the Mercurial Cylinder, as you do
rudely or cautiously tunnel in the Quicksilver into the Tube; for I have some
time with exact caution, made it to rise to 30. inches in altitude from the
Surface of the restagnant Quicksilver in the Vessel. I set down 29. inches as
its determinate height, to which it will for the most mount, though you use but
a careless kind of carefulness in the management of the Experiment.

CHAP. II.
That in the superior part of the Tube there is no absolute Vacuity.

BEfore we proceed to any further Experiments, we will first canvass the Cause
of this Primitive one of Torricellius, which has given occasion of trying all
the rest; and then we will deliver our Hypothesis, which I hope will salve all
the strange appearances, not only in this, but in those stranger that follow.

Valerianus Magnus, and some others are so fond to believe this deserted
Cylinder to be an absolute Vacuity, which is not only non-philosophical, but
very ridiculous.

1. For, the Space deserted has both Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity,
therefore a Body; for the very nature of a Body consists only in extension,
which is the essential and unseparable property of all Bodies whatsoever.

2. Again we have the sensible eviction of our own eyes to confute this
Suppositional Vacuity; for we see the whole Space to be Luminous (as by Obser.)
Now Light must either be a Substance, or else how should it subsist (if a bare
Quality) in a Vacuity where there is nothing to support it?

3. Again, the Magnetical Efluxions of the Earth are diffused through that
seeming Vacuity, as per Experiment.

4. There is some Air also interspersed in that seeming Vacuity, which cannot
be expelled upon any inclination of the Tube whatsoever, as by Obser. is
manifest.

5. The most full Evidence against this pretended Vacuity is from the
returgenscency of the empty Bladder suspended in this Vacuity; for, how should
it be so full blown from nothing? as is by Exp. most incomparably evinced.

CHAP. III.
That it is not the Efluviums of Mercury that fill up that seeming Vacuity.

BEfore we come positively to declare, what it is that supplies this seeming
Vacuity, let us draw some negative Conclusions, and see if we can prove that it
is not supplied with any Spirits Mercurial, or Exhalations: and this we shall
most fully do by an ingenious Experiment borrowed from the Mechanical Wit of
Doctor Pascal, which shall pass for the second in the Bedroll of our
Experiments.

Doctor Pascal's Experiment 2.
THat the deserted part of the Tube, is not filled up with any Hydrargyral
emanations, may be thus evinced; because he has found the same Experiment to
succeed in water only, without any Quicksilver at all: for he took a Tube or
Lead-Pipe of 46. foot in length, made close at the one end in casting of it;
and having filled it full of water, and reversed it into a paile of water,
underneath about a foot deep, he found the water to fall within 32. foot of
that in the Vessel; so that the deserted part of the Pipe was 13. foot; so tall
a Cylinder of that Liquor, being it seems but aequi-ponderous to a Mercurial
Cylinder of 28. inches. Kircher and Birthius, it seems, also have tried the
like in a Lead-Pipe of a 100. foot long, and an inch diameter; into which at
the top was let in a short neck'd weather-glass, or bolt-head, and fastened so
to, that no Air could pierce the coement, that luted the Glass and Lead-Pipe
together, which Lead-Pipe at the bottom was also fitted with a Turn-cock,
which when it was once filled with water would keep it in till they had
reversed it into a Hogshead of water underneath; and then, by a turn of the
Cock letting out the water, it deserted the Bolt head, and superior part of
the Tube, wherein appeared this seeming Vacuity.

Experiment 3.
BUt for a further Confirmation of this Truth, let me subjoyn another
Experiment, (which shall here pass for our third) of the same Author's.

Take a Glass-Syringe or Squirt; of what length you please, exactly fitted with
a Squirt-staff; stop the mouth of your Syringe close with your finger, and so
drown it over head and ears with hand, and all, in a large Vessel of water;
then draw back the Squirt staff, and the Syringe will appear a Vacuity (which
will pain your finger by an Introsuction of it in at the Orifice;) but if then
you erect the Syringe perpendicular, and draw it all out of the water
(excepting that end closed by your finger) and then open the Orifice, you shall
see the water suddenly arise and fill the deserted Cavity of the Syringe.

Both which Experiments do sufficiently prove that this seeming Vacuity may be
exhibited without the help of any Quicksilver at all, and therefore this
imaginary Space in the Torricellian-Experiment aforesaid, cannot rationally be
supposed to be repleated with any Mercurial Effluviums.

CHAP. IV.
Experiment 4. That it is not Light only, which supplies this seeming Vacuity.
TAke the Barrel of a long Gun, about 4. foot long, and Bunging up the
Touchhole, fill it easily with Mercury, and reversing of it into the Vessel'd
Quicksilver, as before, you may measure it, to observe the determinate height
aforesaid, which you may easily perceive;

First, By the flushing out of the Quicksilver, upon removal of your finger
into the Vessel where the restagnant Quicksilver receives it:

Secondly, By the re-ascent of the Quicksilver upon tilting or plucking the Gun
quite out of the restagnant Mercury, as also by the forceable introsuction of
your finger, if you close the muzzle of the Barrel within the Vessel'd Mercury,
and so draw it out and reverse it, as also by the plucks and shogs it will give
in that action:

Thirdly, and most perceptibly, By the repletion of it with water, if you draw
the Tube gently out of the Quicksilver in the Vessel into a super-incumbent
region of water (which you first poured into the same Vessel:) for then if you
stop the Orifice with your finger, whilst it stands immersed in the region of
water, and so draw it out and reverse it, you shall perceive it full of water.

The like, no doubt, will succeed in Tubes of other Metals. Again, if Light
only (only I say, because we do not deny light to be there) fill up that
empty Cylinder, it would be certainly far more Luminous (as containing nothing
but the pure Solary Atoms) than the external medium and region of the Air about
it, which is confusedly intermixed both with airy magnetical and celestial
particles, besides the halituous effluviums of all Bodies whatsoever. But this
contrary to Observat.

CHAP. V.
That the evacuated Cylinder in the Tube, is not filled with Atmosphaerical Air
only.

BY Atmosphaerical Air, I understand such as we constantly breathe and live in,
and is a mixed Body of Luminous and Magnetical Effluviums, powdered with the
influential Atoms of Heaven from above, and the halituous Effluxions and
Aporrhoea's of this terraqueous Globe below: And that no such Air fills the
Superior Cavity of the Tube, take this Experiment to evince you.

Experiment 5.
HAving filled, closed, and reversed the Tube AB as before into the vessel'd
Quicksilver D, fill up the said Vessel with water about 2. inches deep, then
lifting the Tube gently, but perpendicularly out of the vessel'd Quicksilver
into the region of water, you shall see the Quicksilver and Water rise to the
top of the Glass, and after a short (but confused) intermixion the one with the
other, the Quicksilver will totally descend into the Vessel, and the water
arise and fill the whole Tube excepting a little cap of Air in the top of the
Tube, formerly hinted at in Obser. 14.

Now if that Air in the Tube was Homogeneous to this in the Atmosphaere, the
water would never rise to thrust it out of its proper place, or, if it did, it
could not squeese through the Body of the Tube; but we plainly see the rising
water does fill up the place (as likewise the Quicksilver does in the first
Experiment, where you tilt and incline it) till it come to that particle of
Air, which indeed is of the same nature with ours (and which we told you
formerly lurked 'twixt the Concave Surface of the Tube and the Cylinder of
Quicksilver) and that neither the rising water nor ascending Quicksilver, can
or does exterminate.

This Truth also is manifestly evinced from the twelfth Observable annexed to
the first Hydrargyral Experiment, which palpably shows that it is not common
Air which supplies that seeming Vacuity.

CHAP. VI.
HAving drawn the former negative Conclusions, and demonstrated, That it is not
Light only, not Mercurial Spirits, not Atmosphaerical Air, which is diffused
through that seeming Vacuity, it will be expected we should deliver something
positively, and demonstrate what it is.

Pecquet (who I think follows Roberuallius therein) ingeniously conceives, that
the whole mass of Air has a Spontaneous Eleter, or natural aptitude in it self
to dilate and expand it self upon the removal of all circumambient obstacles
(which he calls the Elastical motion of that Element) so that the particle of
Air may be understood to be as many little Springs, which if at liberty, and
not bound and squeesed up, will powerfully, strongly, and spontaneously dilate
and stretch out themselves, not only to fill up a large room, but to remove
great bodies: So that he compares this vast Element of Air, circumfused about
this terraqueous Globe, to a great heap of Wooll-fleeces or Sponges, piled one
upon another, the superior particles of the Air pressing the inferior, and
hindering their continual tendency to a self-dilatation; so that all the
particles of this Atmosphaere (especially the inferior sort) strive at all
times to expand and dilate themselves: and when the circumresistency of other
contiguous Bodies to them is removed, then they fly out into their desired
expansion (or at least will dilate so far as neighboring Obstacles will
permit:) Just like the Spring of a Watch (which if the String be broke,
presently flies out into its fullest expansion:) which Elastick motion in the
Air then ceases, when it comes to an aequilibration with those circumjacent
Bodies that resisted it.

That this is not only an Ingenious Hypothesis, but that there is much of
reality and truth in it, I think our following Experiment will to safety of
satisfaction demonstrate.

Only we differ from Pecquet in the strict notion he has of Rarefaction and
Condensation, which he supposes to be performed without either intromission or
exclusion of any other extraneous Body whatsoever. Now how Air or any other
Body should diminish or augment its Quantity (which is the most close and
essential Attribute to Bodies) without change of its own Substance, or at least
without a reception or exclusion of some other extrinsecal Body, either into,
or out of the Porosities thereof, sounds not only harsh to our ears, but is
besides an unintelligible difficulty.

Now though we cannot by Sensible and Mechanical Demonstration show how any new
Substance or Subtler matter (than Air is) which enters into the Tube to
replenish that seeming vacuity, and to fill up the aerial interstices (which
must needs be considerable in so great a self-dilation) yet we must
(considering the nature of rarefaction aforesaid) be forced to believe it: and
perhaps some happy Experimenter hereafter may come to give us a better then
this Speculative and Metaphysical Evidence of it.

That the hollow Cylinder in the Tube is not only filled up with the dilated
particles of Air, but also with a thin Aetherial Substance intermingled with
them:

1. Let us suppose therefore (at random if you please) that there is a thin
subtle aetherial substance diffused throughout the Universe; nay, which indeed,
by far the greatest thereof: in which all these Luminous and Opace Bodies (I
mean the Stars and Planets) with their Luminous and Vaporous Sphaeres
(continually effluviating from them) do swim at free and full Liberty.

2. Let us consider that this ether is of that Subtle and Penetrative Nature,
that like the Magnetical Effluviums, it shoots it self through all Bodies
whatsoever, whose small pores and interstices are supplied and filled up with
this aetherial Substance, as a Sponge with water.

3. Let us add to the former Considerations, that the Air has not only a
strong Elatery of its own (by which it presses continually upon the Earth, and
all Bodies circuminclosed by it) but it also ponderates, and is heavy, in its
own Atmosphaere.

But because I am resolved you shall take nothing upon the trust and reputation
of the best Author, take this Experiment to prove the Ayr's gravitation ( in
proprio Loco) as the vulgar Philosophy calls it.

Experiment 6.
TAke a Wind-gun (which new Artifice is now common) and weigh it exactly when
empty, then by plying the Pump-staff charge it soundly and weigh it again, and
you shall find it much heavier then before; yea, a large Bladder, full blown,
will weigh more then its self emptied, and manifest this inequality upon a
ticklish pair of Scales.

Now though this Experiment seems only to evince the gravitation of Air
condensed, yet it consequentially follows, that Air also in the Liberty of its
own Sphaere, is proportionally ponderous (though it is a difficult point
Mechanically to evince it, unless we were actually above the Atmosphaere, or in
a Vacuity to weigh it there in a thinner medium then here we are able to do;)
yet, if I mistake not, I have an Experiment in Banco which will give some
Mechanical Evidence of this great Mystery, which here, with all its
consequences, I shall deliver.

Experiment 7.
THe 6. of May, 1653. I took two Tubes, one of 45. inches, the other 35 in
length, and of different Diameters; and filling them both at the Bottom of
Hallifax-Hill, the Quicksilver in both came down to its wonted pitch of 29.
inches, thence going immediately to the top of the said Hill, and repeating the
Experiment again, we found it there to fall more then half an inch lower then
it did at the bottom or foot of the said Hill.

Pecquet relates, That Dr. Pascal himself tried this Experiment upon a Mountain
of 500 perches high, near Claramont, and he found Quicksilver there at the Hill
to descend lower by three inches, and somewhat more, then it did at the bottom;
so that, according to the Analogy and Proportion of both, and some other
considerable Circumstances, we might not only Mechanically find out the
Perpendicular height of our great Hill here at Hallifax, or any other Mountain
whatsoever, but venture notably at the height of the Atmosphaere it self.

For, to manage the Principles we have formerly laid down, First, The reason
why the Quicksilver descends at all in the first Experiment, is from its
exceeding gravity. Secondly, Why it falls no lower then 29. because a Cylinder
of that weight does just aequipoise the Elastick power of the Air without, and
therefore after a few vibrations up and down (as is Observable in all Statick
Experiments) they arrive at a Counterpoise.

But the reason now (as to our particular Mountain's Experiment) why the
Counterpoise should alter at the top from that at the bottom of the Hill, and
the descent of the Quicksilver be so unequal, is not so much from any
alteration in the Elastick power and virtue of that Air at the top, from that
at the bottom of the Hill; as from the variation of the gravity of the
Superincumbent Air: For, a longer, and so consequently, more weighty Column of
Air, presses upon the vessel'd Quicksilver at the bottom of the Mountain, and
so makes the Quicksilver in the Tube, rise higher than at the top of the
Mountain; which being so much nearer the top of the Atmosphaere, a lesser
weight of Superponderant Air makes a lesser quantity of Quicksilver arise in
the Tube: and so come the Mercurial Cylinders to vary in their Altitudes, viz.
from the natural Supergravitation of more or less of the Superincumbent
Atmosphaere. So that it is more than probable, that the higher one rises in the
Air, to try this Experiment, the Quicksilver in the Tube would fall down lower;
and if the Experiment could be tried at the top of the Atmosphaere, no
Quicksilver at all would remain in the Tube, but fall down to a level with that
in the vessel. I could wish that some of our Canary-Merchants would get this
Experiment tried at the top of the Pike of Teneriffe, which is deservedly famed
for the highest Hill in the world.

Object. 1. But I see you are ready to reply, and say, That the inequality of
the Mercurial Cylinder (in the Mountain-Experiment aforesaid) may every whit as
rationally be supposed to proceed from a change in the Elastick property of the
Air, which may be more vigorous at the bottom, and more faint and feeble at the
top of the Hill, and so force a greater or lesser quantity of Quicksilver up
into the Tube.

Object. 2. I know how harsh it sounds, That Air should gravitate in its own
Sphaere, and we, and all other Terrestrial Inhabitants, be insensible of it;
and that which augments the improbability, is, That Water we experimentally
know (which is a fluid and dissipable Body, as Air is) does not gravitate in
its own proper place; for if we dive never so deep, it is so far from depressing
of them lower, or weighing on them, that it is readier to buoy them up again:
And why should not we conclude the like of its next neighboring Element, the
Air?

To the first Objection, I answer, That though I should grant that there should
be some difference in the Elatery of some of the aerial particles from others,
yet to be so great in so small a distance as four or five furlongs, it is not so
easily credible.

I shall answer your Second Objection with this following (which may pass for
the 9.) Experiment.
FIll the Tube, as in the first Experiment, and drown both it and the vessel of
restagnant Quicksilver (by letting down all carefully with strings into a
Hogshead, or great Cistern of water) and you shall see that the deeper you
immerge the Tube, the higher still will the Quicksilver in the Tube arise. Let
the vessel of water be of a greater or lesser plane in the surface, it matters
not; because only those parts of water that hang perpendicularly over the
vessel'd Quicksilver do gravitate upon it: We drowned a Tube to 25. inches in
depth, above the Superficies of the vessel'd Quicksilver, and it raised the
Quicksilver in the Tube about 1 ^/4 above the stint of 29. inches, at which it
formerly stood; just according to the fore-observed proportion 'twixt the
weight of the Water and Quicksilver: a Cylinder of the former of 32. foot,
being but aequiponderant to a Cylinder of the latter of 29. inches.

Of which noble Experiment, we must confess, the first hint was given us, by
those acute and singularly accomplished Gentlemen of Townley-Hall in
Lancashire, who were as Judicious as Honorable Spectators of these our
Hydrargyral Experiments; and whose Mechanical Prognostics seldom failed, but
were still made good by the future event of the Experiments.

By which it most evincingly appears, that water does gravitate in its own
Sphaere (as they phrase it) which now we may retort upon the Second Objection,
and say, That if water do gravitate, then why not Air in their proper Sphaere?
both being fluid, dissipable, and co-neighbouring Elements; and so consequently
whether in Air or Water the Experiment be tried, this effect will follow, That
the deeper you immerge the Tube in either Element, the higher will the
Mercurial Cylinder rise: And contrariwise, As 32. foot of Superjacent water
would raise up a Mercurial Cylinder of 29. inches; So the same Cylinder of 29.
inches is raised by a Column of the height of the whole Atmosphaere it self.

But we may by a far more facile and cheaper Experiment evince the gravitation
of Water in its Sphaere, which is observable in the common Experiment of a
Siphon; through which, the water, by Suction, being first set on motion, it is
easily observable, that the flux in the extravasated leg of the Siphon, is at
first most strong; and proportionally decreases, as the water in the vessel
sinks lower and lower toward the bottom of that leg immerg'd in it: which
cannot proceed from any other cause imaginable, but from the Supergravitation
of the high parts of the water upon the lower, which being thereby more
strongly forced up the shorter leg of the Siphon, the flux thereby is stronger
in the longer; and so faints, as the bulk of the Superponderant continually
decreases.

CHAP. VII.
The Reasons of all those extravagant Phenomenon, which we observed in the
first Experiment of Torricellius.

1. BEcause the smaller weight of Quicksilver is not able to master the
Elastick pressure of the external Air.

2. Because then the Cylinder of Quicksilver Superponderates and overpowers
both the Ayr's Elastick virtue and gravity.

3. Because at that stint of 29. inches, the internal Cylinder of Quicksilver
comes to an aequilibration with the external Cylinder of Air, which presses
upon the vessel'd Quicksilver.

4. and 5. Because that in wider and longer Tubes there is at first included a
greater quantity of Quicksilver, it does more strongly overpower the Elastick
resistance of the Air, and so will come (though with more vehemence and
swiftness) to its wonted Altitude of 29. inches.

6. Because by Addition or Diminution of the vessel'd Quicksilver there is a
change in the Tube and Vessel, but not in the Mercurial Cylinder in the Tube;
for that always keeps at an equal Altitude from that in the Vessel.

7. Because the Mercurial Cylinder is very heavy, and Quicksilver in
Quicksilver moves as easily as a Bucket of water in the whole Well.

8. Because thereby there is only a change in the Tube, but not in the
Altitude of the Mercurial Cylinder; for in that Angle of Inclination, the
Perpendicular is still 29. inches.

9. Because the Quicksilver, by its long descent, having acquired a greater
motion than was requisite to bring it down to its determinate Altitude, cannot
suddenly stop there, but by several vibrations up and down, gradually comes
back to its wonted Altitude; as we see Pendents, which multiply their
undulations before they rest in their desired Perpendicularity.

10. Because the Atoms of Fire and Heat (which is alone) penetrating through
the Tube, do expand and dilate the aetherial Air in that seeming Vacuity, and
so consequently depresse the Mercurial Cylinder; or else, contrariwise, upon
the approach of cold, some aetherial Atoms pass out again through the Glass,
and so the Mercurial Cylinder mounts higher.

11. Because it is a Medium somewhat thinner than Air alone is; the reason of
your finger's exuction may be the Elastick pressure of the external Air,
without striving either to come in it self, or thrust any other Body into the
Tube; as also the Tendency of the aetherial Atoms within, to be a free and
proportional commixtion with Aerial particles without.

12. Because when the Continuity of the external and internal Quicksilver is
broke, the Mercurial Cylinder is by the Elastick pressure of the Air (which
then prevails) forced up into the top of the Tube; which done, then the
Quicksilver, by its gravity overpowring, the Atmosphaerical, or unexpanded Air,
falls down, and gives place to the lighter Body.

13. Because no Contiguity, it seems, in dry Bodies (how close soever) can
exclude the interveniency of Air.

Having in our last (9. Experiment) proved sufficiently the ponderosity of
Water, and its gravitation upon the external Quicksilver in the Vessel, we will
now come to show you likewise its gravitation upon the internal Quicksilver in
the Tube.

Experiment 10.
WE took such a like AB (as in the 1. Eperiment) near four foot in length, and
filled it full of Quicksilver, except a Segment (A of about 14. inches, which
we filled up with water;) then reversing the Tube, and holding it so long in
that posture, till the Quicksilver and Water had exchanged their places, we
then drowned it in the Vessel^d Quicksilver D, and there withdrawing our finger
(as in the 1. Experiment) the Quicksilver in the Tube descended an inch, and
more, lower than the ordinary stint, ( viz. within 2 inches of that in the
Vessel:) and this we tried in Glass-Tubes of 40. and 45. inches in Longitude:
So that the Tube will be replenished with three Cylinders ( viz.) of
Quicksilver, Water, and Air.

In which Experiment there are three or four remarkable Appearances, which
ought not to pass our Observation:

1. That after inversion of the Tube into the vessel'd Quicksilver, before you
draw away your finger from the Orifice, you may observe continual Bubbles of
Air to pass through the Water by an Ebullition, and so presently to create the
little Cap of Air, formerly observed (in our 14. Observe.) though in the interim
the Orifice A, be never so closely stopped.

2. That after the removal of your finger, and collapsion of the Mercury to, as
aforesaid, the volatile bubbles of Air still pass through the Region of Water
for a long time.

3. That if the Cylinder of Quicksilver, included in the Tube, be not above 29.
inches, besides that of the Water, no effect at all will follow.

4. That if the Cylinder of Quicksilver, included into the Tube, be but one
inch higher than its ordinary pitch, then, upon making the Experiment, it will
fall proportionally lower, according to the weight of the Supergravitating
Water.

This Experiment, with those considerable circumstances annexed to it, makes
the Water's gravitation more eminently appear: For, since 14. inches of Water
is almost aequiponderant to one inch of Quicksilver (as is evident by the
Statick Tables of Getaldi) and the Quicksilver in the Tube being depressed by
the Superincumbent Cylinder of Water of 14. inches, it follows, that it would
necessarily depress it one inch lower than the ordinary stint.

But unless the Cylinder of Quicksilver be so great, (or at least that of
Quicksilver and Water to be so powerful) as that it be able to overcome the
Elastick pressure of the Atmosphaere, no effect at all will follow, because
there can be no descent of either: and as for those Aerial Atoms which pass by
bubbles through the Body of the Water, they are those formerly observed for to
lurk 'twixt the Contiguity of the Quicksilver and Tube; nay, and perchance, and
in the Body of the Quicksilver and Water too, because they cease not after the
collapsion and descent of the Mercury.

Thus having Mechanically evinced the gravitation of those two fluid Elements,
both Water and Air, in their proper places and regions; we may come to make
good the second Part of our Hypothesis, which is the Air's Elastick virtue and
property. For the demonstrating of which, take this following Experiment.

Experiment 11.
FIll the Tube (as in the former Experiment) and let the Segment A of 14.
inches, which was formerly filled with Water, be only filled with Air; then,
after you have reversed it into the vessel'd Quicksilver D, and withdrawing
your finger, you shall see the Quicksilver in the Vessel so to fall, that it
came down 16. inches lower then its wonted and determinate Altitude: We filled
the same Tube, of 45. inches long, within two inches of the top, and then
reversing it, as before, it descended two inches below the ordinary stint.

We also tunnell'd into the Tube a Cylinder of Quicksilver, but of five inches
in Altitude (letting the Air supply the other Segment of 40. inches;) and
reversing it, as before, it fell down within two inches of the Quicksilver in
the Vessel.

Observe, that in these mixed Experiments of Air and Quicksilver, or Water and
Mercury, or all three together, that when you have reversed the Tube, you must
hold it close stopped so long perpendicular, till the several Bodies have
acquired their several respective and proper places.

To this Experiment likewise we must annex one considerable Phenomenon:

First, That before you withdraw your finger, you shall perceive the internal
Quicksilver in the Tube, to press so sensibly upon your finger, as if it would
force an entrance out, both before and after it was immerg'd in the Vessel'd
Quicksilver: which protrusion cannot possibly be supposed to proceed from any
other cause, but the Elatery of the included Air (for the pressure was far
greater than the natural gravity of the whole Tube of Quicksilver could make)
which (upon the removal of your finger) having got some Liberty to manifest it
self, it depells the Quicksilver so far below its determinate height: Hence it
appears, that Air, besides its gravity, has a nobler rarefactive faculty, by
which it forces the Quicksilver to so considerable a descent, whereas Water, by
its weight only (as is manifest in the precedent Experiment) and no innate
Elatery, did depel the Succumbent Quicksilver in the Tube.

But because the Ayr's Elatery is one of the chief parts of our Hypothesis, we
will not only make it good by one, but confirm it by many more succeeding
Experiments.

Experiment 12.
FIll any manner of Tube, not above 29. inches in Length, half with
Quicksilver, and half with Air, and then closing your Orifice with your finger,
and reversing it into Vessel'd Quicksilver, as in the former Experiments, you
shall (upon removal of your finger) see the Quicksilver fall an inch lower then
before, as being depell'd by the dilated Air; if then you pour water upon the
restagnant Quicksilver in the Vessel, to about one inch deep, and draw the Tube
out of the Quicksilver into the region of Water above, you shall see the
Quicksilver hastily to arise some inches in the Tube, and then the Water and it
confusedly to intermingle one with the other. Lastly, (the Quicksilver being
wholly descended into the Vessel) the Water will arise to fill the one half of
the Tube. This we tried in Glasses of 18, 21, and 27 inches in Length.

In the first it fell 1. inch, in the second it fell 3 inches, in the third 5
inches, and more, from the first point it stood at, before you immersed it in
the Vessel'd Mercury.

This Experiment drew me on to the trial of another: for I thought if
Quicksilver would descend with a quantity of Air included with it in Tubes
below the required pitch and Standard of 29. inches, then probably some such
like effect would follow in Water and Air (included in any of the longer sort
of Tubes) though much lower then 32. foot, which is found to be the Standard of
Water in its Ascent in Pumps and other Instruments (as is besides delivered in
Exper.)

Experiment 13.
WE therefore filled our Glass-Tubes of 45 inches, half with Water, and the
rest with Air, and afterward invers'd it into a pail of water, one or two
inches deep; the success was, that withdrawing your finger, as before, the
internal Water in the Tube, did shoot about two inches lower then before, and
with such like vibrations (though far shorter than those in Quicksilver)
Lastly, if you immersed the Tube one foot deep in the pail of water, the water
in the Tube would rise somewhat higher than before.

Note, that in these two last Experiments, the descent or fall of the
Quicksilver or Water, was most notable about the midst of the Tube, viz. when
it was equally filled with Air and Quicksilver, or Air and Water.

Which Experiments do not only make good what is formerly delivered of the
Ayr's Elastick pressure, but also it renders Doctor Pascal's Experiment, of the
descent of Water to 3^. foot, very creditable to those that want Instruments to
try it.

Experiment 14.
WE also tried that Experiment of Roberuallius, quoted by Pecquet, page 50. I
took one of those little Bladders that are in Fishes, (that in the little Fish,
called with us, a Graining, is best) and after it had been a few days dried, I
let out all the Air of it, and tied the mouth of it again so close, that no new
Air could re-enter; then I gently wet it on the out side, and dropped it down
to the bottom of the Tube, that it might the better stick there, and not be
buoyed up with the Quicksilver poured in upon it; then cautiously tunnelling in
the Quicksilver, and reversing the Tube, as in the first Experiment, we found
that after the Quicksilver was come down to its wonted pitch, the Fish-Bladder
was full blown, and did swim on the top of the Quicksilver; which, upon the
admission of the external Air, grew instantly flavid and empty again.

Now, what else is the reason of the Bladder's intumescences upon Collapsion of
the Quicksilver to its wonted Standard, but the Spontaneous Dilatation and
Elastick Rarefaction of that little remnant of Air, skulking in the rugosities
thereof; and then (upon removal of the circumpressing Quicksilver) expanding it
self in the Bladder, as well as that does in the Tube? The reason of its
flaccescency, upon admission of external Air, is, because then the Elater of
the external Air is so strong, that it forces the embladder'd Air into its
former extension and consistency again.

But hold; Before I pass from this Experiment, I must take Pecquet in hand,
who, upon confidence of this Experiment, insults highly over those that admit
not of his Rarefaction, but will introduce a new aetherial substance to
intermingle with the dilated Air to fill up this seeming Vacuity.

Object. 1. If any aetherial Substance penetrate the Glass-Tube, it rushes in
equally on all sides toward the Bladder, pendent in the Center; and so, in all
probability, would rather press and squeese the vesicle on all sides closer
together, than (by an opposite motion, and re-action upon it self) extend and
dilate it.

Object. 2. Again, Since it enters in so freely at the pores of the Bladder,
what should improfen it there? Since the pores, which gave it admittance, are
continually open, and manifest themselves so to be, when any external Air is
admitted into the Tube, for then it seems the ether flies out indeed, and the
Air is recondensed again into its natural and ordinary Consistence.

Object. 3. Again, If the Quicksilver descending do impel the ether through
the pores of the Glass, to help the dilated Air, in suppliance of that seeming
Vacuity; Why should not Quicksilver totally descend, and fill the whole Tube
with ether, and so, consequently, Quicksilver should descend in any Tube
(though lower than the ordinary stint of 29. inches) whatsoever contrary to
Experiment.

Object. 4. But if there be a Superaerial region of Ether, as much lighter and
subtiller than Air, as Air is then Water, How comes any part of it to be
diffused, or dispersed throughout our Elements? Or, if it be, Why should not
the aetherial particles fly all away to their proper Sphaere (or be rather
forced thither by the continual pressure of these heavier Bodies?) as we see no
Air will abide in Water, but is forced up into its proper region and Element
above it.

Solut. 1. We grant, that the ether pierces equally in on all sides of the
Tube, and so likewise on all sides of the Bladder (into which it would not have
entered) had there been no Air at all which had freely opened in its dilation to
receive the coming ether into its intimate recesses.

Solut. 2. Why the ether hits not out again (during the interim of the Ayr's
expansion) may be, because it has either changed its figure, or it and the
aerial particles may be in a new motion, which may not cease till overpowred by
the readmission of new Air. But what is the reason in a Bladder half-blown, and
held to the fire, or laid in warm ashes, the internal Air should rise and swell
up the Bladder, as in this Experiment? If you say, From the Atoms of Fire, or
Heat, which penetrate into the Bladder; the same Objection I then make to you,
(as he there to me) Why could they not hit out, as well as in, through the same
pores? The like may be said of the Air in a Weather-Glass, upon application of
any thing that is hot to the head of the Tube.

Solut. 3. Now, why the Quicksilver does not totally descend, we have told you,
is from the resistance of the Atmosphaerical Air, which forces up a Cylinder of
Quicksilver of that height of 28. inches; but as we have since declared, if the
Experiment could be made at the top of the Atmosphaere (which is not very high)
then it would totally descend, and the ether there would fill the whole Tube.

Solut. 4. It is every whit as probable, that aetherial Atoms may be
interspersedly diffused through all our Elements, as that Air may be, or the
Magnetical effluviums: the same we have made probable (by its being in Water
and Quicksilver) and the latter, no man (that knows any thing of Magnetical
Operations) doubts of.

Before we take our leave of these subtle and rare Experiments, I will give you
that ingenious, but very difficult Experiment of Auzotius, as quoted by
Pecquet, which shall bring up the rere in this Muster-role of our Experiments,
and which will confirm all we have formerly delivered.

Experiment 15. Of Auzotius.
TAke a long Tube, with a Head like a Weather-Glass, only open at both ends,
as A B, and with a Circular ledge at B (to tie a Bladder about) as also a
little pipe G, which opens into the Head thereof, reverse it, and into the
mouth of the Head let down a hollow Cube of wood or Ivory C, as large as the
Head will contain; which with its four corners may rest upon the neck of the
Glass (as in the Second Figure:) then take a small Cylinder of Glass, of above
28. inches, and set it in the middle of the Cube C, and close the mouth of the
Head B, and the pipe G with Bladders, so that no Air can get in; then stopping
the Orifice of the long Tube A, with your thumb, let another tunnel-in Mercury
at the top of the small Glass-tube F, which will first fill the Cube C, and
then running over, and falling down the Interstices, that the four Angles of
the Cube C makes with the neck of the Glass, shall at last come to fill both
Tubes: Lastly, closing the Orifice of the great Tube A into the Vessel'd
Quicksilver, and there withdrawing your finger, as in the former Experiments,
you shall see all the Quicksilver in the small Tube F B, to fall into the
Cubical Vessel C, (which being not able to contain it) it, together with all
the Quicksilver, in the head and neck of the great Glass-tube, will come down
to its wonted pitch E 29. inches of that in the Vessel.

Which shows, the descending Quicksilver perpetually observes its
Sandard-altitude from what height soever. But the great business is, If you
open the little pipe G, and let in any Air, you shall not only see it to depel
the Mercurial Cylinder A E, but to force up the Quicksilver out of the Cube C,
into the small Tube B F, to its wonted Altitude of 29. inches, and totally to
expel the Mercurial Cylinder E A out of the Tube: which ocularly demonstrates,
that it is the Atmosphaerical Air that (in the first Experiment) raises and
keeps up that Cylinder of Quicksilver in the Tube of 29. inches in Altitude, or
thereabouts.

CHAP. VIII.
Additional Experiments made at Townley-Hall, in the years 1660. and 1661. by
the advice and assistance of that Heroic and Worthy Gentleman, RICHARD
TOVVNLEY, Esqr. and those Ingenious Gentlemen Mr. JOHN, and Mr. CHARLES
TOVVNLEY, and Mr. GEORGE KEMP.

THe last year, 1660. came out that excellent Tractate of Experiments of Esqr.
Boyle's, with his Pneumatical Engine, or Ayr-pump, invented, and published by
him; wherein he has, by virtue of that rare Contrivance, outdone all that ever
possibly could be performed by our late Mercurial and Experimental
Philosophers: And, indeed, to give a true and deserved Character of that worthy
Production of his, I must needs say, I never read any Tractate in all my life,
wherein all things are so curiously and critically handled, the Experiments so
judiciously and accurately tried, and so heartily and intelligibly delivered. I
no sooner read it, but it rubbed up all my old dormant Notions, and gave me a
fresh view of all my former, and almost-forgotten, Mercurial Experiments. Nay,
it had not that effect only on me, but likewise it excited and stirred up the
noble Soul of my ever honored Friend, Mr. Townley, together with me, to
attempt these following Experiments.

Experiment 1.
WE took a long Glass-Tube, open at both ends, and put the one end into
Quicksilver about one inch deep; then at the upper end we poured in water by a
Tunnel: the effect was this, (as was presurmised) That the water rise up to a
Cylinder of 14. inches above the surface of the Quicksilver in the Vessel, but
then it would rise no higher, but brake through the restagnant Quicksilver in
the Vessel, and swum upon the top thereof, which is consonant to the Series and
Chain of our former Experiments: wherein it is proved, that one inch of
Quicksilver is aequiponderant to above one foot of Water; and therefore there
was reason that one inch of restagnant Quicksilver should support a Cylinder of
14. inches of Water, but no more. But as touching this proportion of Water and
Quicksilver, because we have formerly only given it to you upon trust from
Maximius Gletaldi, we will now give you an Experimental eviction of it.

Experiment 2.
WE filled a Glass-Vial (being first counterpoised with Mercury) and then
weighed it; afterward we weighed as much Water in a Glass-Vial, of a known
weight, as counterpoised the Quicksilver, and then measuring the water in the
Mercurial Vial aforesaid, we found it to contain near 14. times as much Water
as it did of Mercury.

Experiment 3.
WE filled a Tube with Quicksilver, as in the Torricellian-Experiment, wherein
much leisure and accurateness were used in filling the Tube, to make a polite
equal Mercurial Cylinder, and after immersion thereof into the Vessel'd
Quicksilver, we put both the Tube and Vessel into a frame made for that
purpose, and let it stand perpendicular therein for certain days together (
viz.) from the 15. March, to the 20. April after, to observe if it would vary
and alter its Standard, which we found it do considerably; for sometimes it was
half an inch higher or lower then the Mark and Standard we left it first at. I
think, according to the variation of the Atmosphaere in its temperature: and if
you observe strictly, you shall see that the Quicksilver in the Tube does never
precisely observe the same Standard not a day together, nay sometimes not an
hour.

Experiment 4.
AGain, we tried the Torricellian-Experiment aforesaid, in a Glas-sSyphon of 46
inches in length, and after immersion of both ends into two several vessels of
Quicksilver, the internal Quicksilver fell down to its wonted Standard of 29.
inches in both shanks of the Siphon: having applied warm clothes to the top of
the Siphon, the Quicksilver descended in either leg the breadth of two Barley
corns lower than the ordinary stint. We gently lifted one of the legs out of
the vessel'd Quicksilver, and then the Quicksilver in that leg rose violently
up, so that part of it passed over into the other shank: then having speedily
again drowned the aforesaid leg into the Vessel, we observed the Quicksilver in
both legs to have fallen much (upon the admission of that Air) and to stand in
both legs at an equal pitch and height, as it did again the Second time, upon
admission of a little more Air, though the Quicksilver then did not rise high
enough to pass over into the other shank as before.

Experiment 5.
WE took the same Siphon again (as before) and then only filled one of the legs
with Quicksilver, leaving the other full of Air; then stopping both Orifices,
reversed both shanks into two several Vessels of Quicksilver, as before; then
opening both Orifices, the effect was, That the Quicksilver fell in one Tube,
and new Quicksilver rose out of the other Vessel into the other Tube to an
equal Altitude.

Experiment 6.
WE filled a Tube (though with much difficulty) such an one as is here
described, with Quicksilver, then invers'd it into Quicksilver, as before: The
first effect was, It fell leisurably down out of the head H, and stood at D,
29. inches in perpendicular from the Quicksilver in the Vessel E.

The second effect was; Air being let in 'twixt C and B, the Quicksilver rose
from D, its former Standard, to A: So that from A to B, and C to E (for so far
as C it fell upon admission of Air) made up its wonted Standard again.

Experiment 7.
WE took a Glass-Cruet, with a small Spout, and filled it with Water, and
afterward luted the great mouth A, so that no Air could get in; then turned
the small Spout downwards, but no Water came out of the Cruet into the open
Air, inversing likewise the small Snout into Oil, no Water descended, nor Oil,
though a lighter Liquor, ascended; then filling the former Cruet with Milk,
though upon inversion of the Cruet none of it would fall out into the Air, yet
being inversed into Water, these two Liquors changed places, the Milk
descending in a little still stream, the Water ascending in the same manner in
two constant little streams, running Counter one to another; in the neck of the
Cruet we tinged the Water with Indico, the better to distinguish their streams.

Experiment 8.
WE filled the former Cruet with Quicksilver, and immersed the Snout into the
Water (having first well luted the mouth of the Vial) but no exchange of place
followed, unless by much shaking of the Quicksilver, you forced it little by
little out; and so either Water or Air passed up instead thereof.

CHAP. IX.
Experiment 9.
APril 27. (1661.) we tried the Torricellian-Experiment in the Porch at the new
Church in Pendle, (which stands upon a considerable height) the weather being
clear, fair, and moderate, about ten of the clock in the morning, the Tube
about 42. inches in length, which we filled with very much care and diligence,
to make a polite Mercurial Cylinder, and there we then found the Mercurial
Standard to be 28/4 inches.

We tried the same Experiment with the like accurateness, and in the same Tube,
at the Beakon upon the very top of Pendle-Hill, on the same day betwixt twelve
and one a clock, (the Air being there much colder then at bottom, or at new
Church aforesaid) though the Sky was as clear; and there the Mercurial Cylinder
was lower then before at New-Church, by a just inch, being fallen precisely to
27/4 inches.

About three a clock of the same day, the said trial was made (with all the
former circumstances) at Barlow, the lowest place (for convenience) near the
said Hill, much lower then the place of the first trial, the Air being very
much hotter then at the time of the first trial; and there the Cylinder of
Quicksilver was equal to that in the first trial ( viz) 28/4 inches. By which
it appears, That (if the Air at Barlow had remained of an equal temperature
with that of New-Church) the Quicksilver, in all probability, would have fallen
lower then the inch we observed.

Experiment 10.
AT the top of the said Hill, we put into the same Tube (which was divided into
102. equal divisions of spaces) as much Quicksilver, as being stopped and
inversed, the Air remaining in the top of the Tube, filled 50/15, or
thereabout, of the forementioned divisions, and the Quicksilver, the remaining
part of the Tube. The Tube being thus immersed, and the finger withdrawn, the
internal Air dilated so as to fill of the abovementioned parts 84/75. and there
remained in the Tube a Cylinder of Quicksilver containing in length 11/26
inches. We tried the same Experiment at the bottom of the said Hill, the Tubes
being filled, as above, and the Air 50/15. dilated to 83/8. and the Cylinder
was in height 11/78. inches.

Experiment II.
WE took another Tube, containing in length from the Superficies of the
external Quicksilver into which we immersed it (for so we measure all our
Lengths) about 26. inches, containing equal divisions of space, 31. and about
an half, represented here by AB, which we filled so with Quicksilver, that
being reversed and stopped at B, there remained 9. divisions filled with Air
from A to E: then the Quicksilver being left at liberty to fall down into a
dish underneath, it fell near to the mark 18 to l. So that the Air dilated,
filled the Space A l, containing of these divisions 17/8, and then the Cylinder
l B was in perpendicular height 13/86. inches.

We brought this Tube, with the same Mountain-Ayr in it, by the help of a long
Tube of wood, having a dish fastened to the open end of it, and both full of
Quicksilver, into which we put our Tube, AB, (which Instrument you have here
represented) and at the bottom of the Hill the Quicksilver rose up unto the
mark m, under the 17. division. So that the Air dilated, filled of the equal
parts 17/35, and the Quicksilver in B was in height 14/31. inches.

Then we put out this Mountain-Ayr, and let into the Tube the same quantity of
Valley-Ayr, which filled the part A E, containing also 9. of the equal
divisions aforesaid; and then the end of the Tube B opened the Air dilated to
the mark n. So that it contained 17/58. parts, and the Quicksilver in
perpendicular height, 14/2.

That you may at one glance behold all the varieties of these Dilatations of
Air, and height of the Mercurial Standard, I have supposed the line AB to
represent all the Tubes. AE still represents the Air left in them, AD the Air
dilated, BD the Quicksilver.

In the long Tube.
At the top of the Hill. At the bottom of it at Barlow. AE -- 50/15 -- 50/15
Equal parts of Spaces, Inches. AD -- 84/75 -- 83/8 BD -- 11/26 -- 11/78 In the
lesser Tube.
At the top of the Hill. At Barlow with Air. At Barlow with Valley-Ayr. AE -- 9
-- 9 -- 9 AD -- 17/8 -- 17/35 -- 17/58 BD -- 13/86 -- 14/31 -- 14/02

Now before we pass to any further Experiment, we think it fit to make and
denominate several considerable Spaces of the Tube in the Mercurial
Experiments, which will avoid both confusion and multiplicity of terms for the
future.

Let AB be the Tube in which Quicksilver (in case it were totally void of Air)
would stand in a perpendicular Cylinder above the Quicksilver in the Vessel
from B to C. So we shall call that line or space,

BC The Mercurial Standard.

But if in the Tube there be left as much external Air as would fill the Tube
from A to E, and that then the Quicksilver would fall from C to D, and the Air
be dilated to fill the space AD, then we shall call

BD -- The Mercury. CD -- The Mercurial Complement. AE -- The Air. ED -- The
Ayr's Dilatation. AD -- The Air Dilated.
Where note, That the measure of the Mercurial Standard, and Mercurial
Complement, are measured only by their perpendicular heights, over the Surface
of the restagnant Quicksilver in the Vessel: But Air, the Ayr's Dilatation, and
Air Dilated, by the Spaces they fill.

So that here is now four Proportionals, and by any three given, you may strike
out the fourth, by Conversion, Transposition, and Division of them. So that by
these Analogies you may prognosticate the effects, which follow in all
Mercurial Experiments, and predemonstrate them, by calculation, before the
senses give an Experimental thereof.

Experiment 12.
WE tried the Pascalian-Experiment in a Tin-Tube of 33. foot long, made of
several sheets of Tin, and closely soddered up with Peuter: To the upper end
whereof we fastened a long Glass-Tube, open at both ends; then, having soddered
up the lower end, we reared the Tube to a Turret at Townley-Hall, and filled it
with water; then closing the top of the Glass-Pipe, and immersing the other end
of the Tin-Tube into a cistern of water a foot deep, we opened the lower end,
and perceived the water to fall out of the Glass-Tube into the Tin, but how far
we could not tell, only we conjectured to be about the proportion given by
Doctor Pascal; viz that a Cylinder of water stood in a Tube about 32 foot high:
but presently our Glass-tube, at the juncture to the Tin, began to leak, and
let in Air; so we could make no further process in the Experiment: only one
thing we observed in filling of the Tube, that after the water which we
tunnelled in had gone down a pretty way into the Tube, part of it (by the
rebounding Air) was violently forced up again, and shot out at the upper end of
our Glass-tube two or three foot high into the open Air: Which Experiment may
be a caution to Pump-makers, and all Artificers that deal in Waterworks, that
they attempt not to draw water higher then 33 foot (its Standard-Altitude) left
they lose both their credit, cost, and pains in so unsuccessful a design. For I
remember in my Lady Bowls her new Water-work at Heath-Hall, near Wakefield,
where the Water is raised at least 16. yards high, the simple workman undertook
first to do it by a single Pump; but seeing his endeavors were frustrated, he
was forced to cut his Cylinder in two Pumps, and to raise it, first, eight
yards into a Leadcistern, and then by another Pump to raise it out of that
other, eight yards, into a cistern above.

CHAP. X.
NOw to salve all these Mercurial Phenomenon, as also those mixed Experiments
of Quicksilver and Water, Quicksilver and Air, Air and Water, in single and
double Tubes and Siphons of all Bores, diverse learned and ingenious Heads have
excogitated several neat, though different, Hypotheses: For, to omit the
whimsies of two Grandees, that is, Valerianus and Hobbs, which so grossly
Philosophize: the former affirming the deserted space in the Tube to be an
absolute Vacuity; the latter, to be replenished with this very Common Air which
we breathe in; which creeping up 'twixt the Contiguity of the Glass and
Quicksilver, fills up that conceited Vacuity. To omit these exorbitant
Conceits, I find two or three more intelligible and rational Hypotheses.

The first is of Roberual and Pecquet, of the Ayr's Elasticity and Gravitation,
which we have formerly embraced, only with this addition, That whereas they
will have Rarefaction and Condensation to be performed without any increase or
loss of quantity (which can never be conceived) we admit of an aetherial
Substance or Matter intromitted and excluded, the Bodies so changed as we
formerly explicated.

The second Hypothesis is of the Vacuist's; such, I mean, as, though they hold
this Spring of Air, yet in its dilation will admit of no ether or foreign
Substance to enter the pores thereof; but the particles, so dilated, to remain
so with interspersed Vacuities: and this opinion has many eminent Advocates
and Avouchers, Gassend, Doctor Ward, Doctor Charleton, etc.

The latest Novellist that has undertaken this Experimental Philosophy, is one
Linus, alias Hall, who has excogitated a new Principle of his own, whereby he
not only salves all the Phenomenon in the Torricellian-Experiments formerly
delivered; but also all those stranger Experiments discovered since by Gerricus
and Boyl's Pneumatical Engines. (His Principles he thus lays down.)

1. That there is an inseparability of Bodies, so that there can be no
Vacuities in rerum natura.

2. That the deserted Space of the Tube (in the Torricellian-Experiment) is
filled with a small film of Quicksilver, which being taken off the upper part
of it, is both extenuated and extended through that seeming Vacuity.

3. That by this extended film, or rope (as he calls it) of dilated
Quicksilver, the rest of the Quicksilver in the Tube is suspended, and kept up
from falling into the Vessel.

4. That this funicle, or rope, is exceedingly rarefied and extended by the
weight of the pendent Quicksilver, and will (upon removal of that violent Cause
which so holds it) re-contract it self into its former dimensions again, and so
draw up what Body soever it has hold of along with it; as the effluviums of an
Electrick upon its retreat, plucks up straws, or any other thing with it that
it is able to wield.

5. That Rarefaction or Condensation is performed without any increase or loss
of quantity in the Body so changed.

6. That this Extension of the film of Quicksilver, is not indefinite, but has
a certain limit, beyond which it will not be stretched; and therefore if the
Tube be of an exceeding great height, the Quicksilver will rather part with
another film, and extend that, and so a third, or fourth, till it come to the
Standard of 29. inches, where it rests; having not weight, nor power enough to
separate another film from it self.

Upon reliance on, and encouragement from these Principles, he undertakes all
difficulties, and engages with three great Experimental-Philosophers,
Torricellius, Schotus, and Boil, and resolves all the Phenomenon of their
Engines.

1. As first, Why the Quicksilver in the Tube, under 29. inches, descends not
at all? Because it sticks with its uppermost surface so close to the top of the
Tube, that there is not weight enough to break that adhaesion: the reason
whereof is, because there is nothing to succeed in the room of the descending
Quicksilver, and therefore it firmly sticks there, Ne daretur vacuum.

2. In longer Tubes it falls to that Standard, because then the greater weight
of the Quicksilver is able to break that linck of Contiguity or Adhaesion; and
therefore the uppermost surface of the Quicksilver being sliced off, is dilated
into a tenuous Column, or Funicle, which supplies that seeming Vacuity.

3. The reason why the internal Quicksilver in the Tube does ascend, upon
plucking the Tube out of the restagnant Quicksilver, is, Because then (some of
the Quicksilver in the Tube falling out) the Contiguity is not only broke, but
the Quicksilver in the Tube being made thereby lighter, the rope is able to
pluck it up; which it does by retracting and shrivelling it self up to the
smalness of its former dimension; and thus by no violent distention, but
spontaneous, you must perceive all the Experiments of the Weather Glass to be
performed by a tenuous Funicle of Air, and, in the Pascalian-Experiment, by a
rope of Water; and so of other Liquors, where this seeming Vacuity is created.
By this taste of Philosophy you may easily imagine how he salves all the
Mercurial Phenomenon, and those of the Pneumatical Engine.

The Arguments by which he strives to authenticate and make good his
Hypothesis, are these four Negative ones; by which he strives to impugn the
Doctrine of those that hold the Ayr's gravitation and Elasticity.

The first (which is the main and Herculean-Argument) is from the introsuction
of the finger, so observable in the Torricellian-Experiment: which, says he,
proceeds from something (that is at a stress) within the Tube, and from nothing
that is at a full and free Liberty without: this suction and attraction of the
finger he proves to be not only eminently sensible in Tubes above the Standard
(whether open at both ends, or closed at the one) but also in Tubes under the
Standard of 29. inches: for, says he, take a small Tube, under the Standard,
open at both ends, of 20. inches supposed in length, and fill it with
Quicksilver, stopping the lower Orifice with your thumb, then closing the upper
with your finger, and immerging the lower into restagnant Quicksilver (as in
the Torricellian-Experiment) you shall (says he) upon removal of your thumb
(though no Quicksilver fall out) feel a palpable suction of your finger, and
the Tube will stick so close to the pulp of your finger, that you may quite
lift it out of the Vessel, and carry it (with all the Quicksilver pendent in
it) up and down the room. Therefore (says he) the internal Cylinder of
Quicksilver in the Tube is not held up by the preponderant Air without; for, if
so, whence comes so strong a suction, and so firm an adhaesion of the Tube to
your finger? For if the external Air thrust the Quicksilver upwards, it can
never at the same time draw down the finger too.

His second Argument, That the standing Quicksilver in the Tube, is not held up
there by the external Air, is fetched also from another Experiment in the same
Tube: For (says he) fill the same Tube almost full of Quicksilver (leaving a
little space of Air within it) and then immerging it as before, you shall see
the Quicksilver to make a considerable descent in it, viz. as far as that
little Air could well be extended, also a strong introsuction of your finger as
before: From whence he thus argues; If the external Air cannot hold up 20.
inches of Quicksilver (as we here see;) How can it hold up 29. I pray you (as
in the Torricellian-Experiment?) This Experiment, as appears by our
Mercurial-Observations, we made many years ago.

His third Argument is from the Non-gravitation of the Mercurial Cylinder: For,
says he, the Quicksilver in that Station ( viz. after it has fallen to its old
Standard) is not all ponderous, as you may perceive by your finger to the
Orifice of the Tube; from whence, says he, it is plain, that the Quicksilver is
there suspended by that tenuous, but tenaceous, rope in the Tube.

His fourth Argument is from the difficulty of Suction of Quicksilver up a
Tube, open at both ends, of what length soever; through which, says he, water
is easily drawn up to the mouth: And why not Quicksilver? Since here is nothing
else required but the removal of the internal Cylinder of Air, which is easily
done (says he) by Suction, as is manifest by the ascension of water, but
cannot be performed in Quicksilver (which should as easily be thrust up (to 29.
inches at least) by the Superincumbent Atmosphaere) as the water which is
repugnant to Experience of the fire: he concludes, It Is not the external Air
that causes that effect, neither by its Elasticity, Gravitation, nor both.

Now for the Positive Arguments to avouch his Principles by, he has none at
all; only what he fetches a posteriori, from his commodious Solution of
Difficulties, and salving the Phenomenon better then others have done. For read
him through, and you shall see he hangs so like a Tumbler by this rope, that
swing him which way you will, you cannot get him off; though, I doubt not, but
we shall prove his cord to be a mere rope of sand, and of his own twisting; and
Reason will, Sampson-like, break it easily in pieces.

CHAP. XI.
A Confutation of this Funicular Hypothesis of Linus; by Henry Power, Mae. Dr.

Object. 1. IF you fill a Tube of 45. inches in length (as we have showed you
in Experiment 11.) except 15. inches (which let the Air supply) and invert it,
you shall perceive a greater protrusion of your finger by the erupturient
Quicksilver, than can possibly be imputed to the Supergravitation of the
Quicksilver included in the Tube: for, if the whole Tube be filled with
Quicksilver, and inverted, it shall not make such a forcible pressure upon your
finger (as that Cylinder of Quicksilver and Air does) which can be imputed to
no other cause, then the Elasticity of the included Air; which, striving to
dilate it self, detrudes the Quicksilver; and, when liberty is given, it forces
it down much lower than its ordinary Standard of 28. inches: which shows, that
there is no such thing as Attraction in the Air, but rather a contrary power of
Self-extending, and Dilatation. Now, I confess, this is but an Argument quoad
sensum, and therefore not so much to be insisted upon, because not Mechanically
demonstrable.

Object. 2. Again, this is observable in all Bodies, that are capable of
Extension, That still, as their Extension is augmented or increased, so must
the force or power be that extends them. As for example, in Ropes or Leather,
the first inch of their forced extension is performed by a lesser power then
the second inch would be, and that then the third, etc. Now in the third of
Boyle's Experiments, page 44. it is observed, That the Sucker is as easily
drawn down, when it is nearer to the bottom of the Pump, as when it is much
farther off; which is contrary to the nature of forced Extension, as is before
delivered.

Object. 3. Again, If (according to Linus) the Bladder's intumescency, in
Boyle's Engine, did proceed from the forced extension of the Air in the
Receiver; then the first evacuation of the Pump would extend the Bladder more
then the second, and that than the third etc. But the contrary is avouched by
his fourth Experiment, page 47. which proves against the Funicular Doctrine of
Linus, but neatly makes out the Elasticity of the embladder'd Air, which
gradually increases, as the debilitated Air in the Receiver gives room for its
expansion.

Object. 4. Again, Linus is refuted by the 19. Experiment in Boil, which is an
Experiment of a four-foot Tube, filled with water, and enclosed in the
Receiver; by which he found that the water, included in the Tube, did not at
all subside after several exsuctions, till the Elasticity of the included Air
was no longer able to support that Cylinder of water; but, according to Linus,
it should have subsided at the first exsuction, as well as the Quicksilver did
when the Torricellian-Experiment was included in the said Receiver.

Object. 5. According to Linus his Principles, the Mercurial Standard should be
the same at the top of any eminent Hill, that it is at the bottom, especially
if the Temperature of the Air be in both places alike; but this is contrary to
the Experiments we tried at Hallifax and Pendle-Hill (as you may see in
Experiment 7. page 19. also Experiment II. page 45.) where the coldness of the
Air was a disadvantage to our Experiments; and yet, for all that, you see how
considerably the Mercurial Standard did vary. Which Objection Linus has
ingeniously confessed to me himself (when once I had the happiness to see him)
that he cannot as yet answer.

Object. 6. Take a Glass-Tube above the Standard, but of a small Bore, (that
will not admit above a great Pea, or Cherry-stone) let it be closed at one end,
and fill this with Quicksilver (which you shall find no easy thing to do; for
I am sure we were a whole hour in filling one, and still were forced to thrust
the Quicksilver down into it with a small wire) then reverse it very gently
into a vessel of restagnant Quicksilver, and after it has come down to its
wonted Standard, you may lift the Tube out of the vessel, and carry it up and
down with the Quicksilver pendent in it; which will neither fall out, nor rise
up to the top, to fill up the reputed Vacuity. Now what says Linus to this?
Why does not his rope shrivel it self up, and pull up this Mercurial Cylinder
in this Tube, as well as in all others of a larger Bore?

Object. 7. Take a Glass-Syphon A B, and having filled both legs with
Quicksilver, open the longer into the vessel'd Quicksilver B; the effect is,
That the Quicksilver in the longer shank will fall down to C (its wonted
Standard;) but that in the short shank AD, being still close stopped with your
finger, will remain full.

Now (according to Linus) the funicle AC exercises the same power of pulling
the Mercurial Surface A as C: and according to the Principles of Mechanick's,
If CB be heavier than AD, it should pull over AD into the vessel B. And his
Answer (which you may read, page 74. is nothing to the purpose; for open the
short end of the Siphon into the vessel D, (according to his Salvo) no
Quicksilver should still rise, because it is still as closely adherent to the
vessel'd Quicksilver, as it was before, to my finger; and yet, upon Experiment
made, the Quicksilver will rise all out of the vessel D, and go over A, into
the vessel B.

Which Experiment, as it confuteth his, so it clearly avouches our Principles,
of the Elastical pressure of the external Air upon the surface of the
Quicksilver in the vessel D, which forces it up to A, and so over into the
vessel B.

Object. 8. We took an ordinary Weather-Glass (this 15. October. 1661.) AB, of
about two foot in Length, and carrying it to the bottom of Hallifax-Hill, the
water stood in the shank at C, ( viz.) 13. inches above the surface of the
water in the vessel B, thence carrying it thus fitted, immediately to the top
of the said Hill, the water fell down to the point D ( viz.) 1 inch lower than
it was at the bottom of the said Hill: which incomparably proves the natural
Elasticity of the Air.

For the internal Air AC, which was of the same power and extension with the
external at the bottom of the Hill, being carried to the top, did there
manifest a greater Elasticity then the Mountain-Ayr there did manifest
Pressure, and so extended it self further by CD, which it was not able to do at
the bottom, because the Valley-Ayr there was of equal force and resistance to
it: Which Experiment very neatly proves the Elasticity of the Air (which Linus
would abolish) as the Torricellian-Experiment; which being carried to the top
of the same Hill (differed an inch) did eminently prove the gravitation of the
Air.

Also about the end of January, 1661. we went again to the top of
Hallifax-Hill, with diverse Weather-Glasses of several Bores, Heads, and Shapes;
and found in them all a proportional descent of the Water, as in the former
Experiment at the top of the said Hill respectively to what it was at the
bottom, with this Observable, That in the greatest-Headed Weather-Glass (which
included most Air in it) the descent of the Water was greater, as being most
depressed, by the greatest quantity of the included Air.

CHAP. XII.
Experiments in Capillary Tubes and Siphons.

Experiment 1.
TAke a small Capillary Glass-pipe, or Tube, open at both ends; and dipping the
one extreme perpendicular into the water, you shall see the water spontaneously
arise to a competent height in the Tube, with a quick and smart ascent.

Note first, That the inside of the Pipe ought to be very clean, as well from
dust, and little bubbles, as films of water, which will remain in the Pipe,
when the water is blown, or sucked out of it.

Secondly, It must be perfectly dry from any other Liquors which will not
mingle with water, as Oil, etc.

Thirdly, If you moisten the Pipe first with water, before you try the
Experiment, the ascent of the water will be more quick and lively.

Fourthly, That not only Water, but Milk, Wine, Oil, and other Liquors, except
Quicksilver, will likewise rise to a certain height in the said Pipes.

Fifthly, After the Water has risen to its Standard-height, if you take it out
of the Liquor, it shall not fall out at all; if you invert the Pipe, the
included Cylinder of water will fall down also to the other extreme: also the
deeper you immerge it in the vessel of water, the higher still will it rise in
the Pipe, still keeping its Standard-Altitude above the surface of the water in
the vessel: also if you suck it above the Standard, it will still fall back to
its wonted Altitude.

Sixthly, That not only Water, but Milk, Wine, Oil, and all other Liquors,
will spontaneously arise in the said Pipes; but with this difference, That the
heavier the Liquors are, the lower their Standard is, and the slower is their
Ascent to it: thus you shall see Oil of Tartar will not rise, by one third, so
high as water; nor Oil of Vitriol by so high as it; which may alter more or
less, according to the goodness of the said Oils.

Seventhly, Now if you take out a Pipe (wherein in either of the said Oils has
first risen up to its wonted Standard) and immerge the end thereof into a
lighter Liquor (as water) you shall see the Oil fall gradually out into the
water, and the Pipe gradually fill with water, and arise to its own Standard;
which is higher a great deal than the Standard of either of the said Oils, as
is before delivered: the like will follow in Siphons.

Eighthly, The smaller Bore that your Tube is of, the higher will your Water
arise; yet we could never get it to arise to the height of 5. inches (as Mr.
Boil mentions) though we have attempted it in Tubes almost as small as Hairs,
or as Art could make them.

Ninthly, If the Tubes be of the Bore of an ordinary Quill, or bigger, no Water
at all will arise.

Tenthly, That little or no difference of the water's ascent in the former
Tubes is perceptible at the bottom, or top of our Hill.

Experiment 2.
BEnd one of these Tubes into a little Siphon (which you may do by putting it
into the flame of a Candle) and then putting the one extreme thereof into a
vessel of water, you shall see it presently fall a running on its own accord.
Observe,

1. That the perpendicular height of the flexure of the Siphon to the water's
Superficies, be shorter, or at least exceed not that Standard-height, unto
which the water would rise, were it a straight Pipe only.

2. That the pendent Shank hang not only lower then the water's Superficies,
but by such a determinate Length; for we have found, that if the pendent, or
extravasated Leg be shorter, or equal, or but a little lower then the
Superficies of the water in the vessel, no effect at all would follow; but the
pendent Leg would hang full of water, without any flux at all. Now what this
determinate length is, we conceive the pendent Shank must be longer from the
flexure then the Standard of the Liquor would reach; and then it will run as
other Siphons do which have a larger Bore: so that you see, the Mechanical
reason (which is so universally received by all men) why the pendent Leg in
Siphons must be longer than the other, to make the Liquor run out ( viz.)
because the greater weight of water in the pendent Leg, overpoises and sways
down that in the shorter, as in a pair of Skales; is not universally true in
all Siphons whatsoever.

3. If to the nose of the pendent Leg you apply a wet piece of Glass, the water
then will begin to come out of the Pipe, and run down to the lowermost edge of
the Glass; where, gathering it self into round bubbles, it would fall to the
ground: but then you must observe that the nose of the pendent Shank be lower
than the Surface of the water in the vessel.

Experiment 3.
LEt both Shanks of the Siphon be filled with water, so that the pendent Leg be
longer than the Superficies of the water (and yet not so long neither as to set
it on running) then to the nose of the pendent Leg apply a vessel of Milk, and
you shall see, that though the water would not break out of the Pipe into the
open Air (a medium far lighter, and more divisible than Milk;) yet it did run
out into the Milk, and one might see it purl up again without mingling with the
Milk, at a little darkish hole, like a Spring. Observe:

Experiment 4.
IF you lift the vessel of Milk (with the pendent Leg drowned in it) higher
toward the flexure of the Siphon, so that the Superficies of the Milk be
nearer the flexure of the Siphon than the Superficies of the Water, you shall
(after a considerable time) see the Milk rise up the pendent Leg, and to drive
back the Water; and having filled the whole Siphon, to fall a running into the
Water-vessel, with this difference to the former Experiment, That whereas the
Water in the former came to the top of the Milk, the Milk here sunk down to the
bottom of the Water, in a small stream like a curled white thread, and there
settled in a Region by it self.

Experiment 5.
NOw, contrariwise, if you lift the vessel of Water nearer the flexure of the
Siphon than the Superficies of the Milk is, then will the Water rise over the
Siphon and beat out the Milk, and fall a running, as in the third Experiment.
And thus you may at pleasure change your Scene, and make the Siphon fall a
running, either with Milk or Water: which is a pleasant spectacle to behold,
especially if the Water be tinged red with Scutchenel.

My Worthy and ever Honored Friend, Mr. Charles Townley, upon confidence of
these Experiments, thought he had discovered that great, and long sought-for
Rarity amongst the Mechanics (viz) A Perpetual Motion: For the demonstrating
of which, he devised this following Experiment.

Mr. Charles Townley his Experiment; from which, he would deduce a Perpetual
Motion.
LEt the Glass DEF be filled with two several Liquors, so as they may remain in
two distinct Regions, one above another, as AB, without the least mixture;
(which may be performed in Milk and Water, placing a broad piece of Cork, or
Bread, that will swim so upon the Milk, which must be the lower, as A, being
heavier than Water, that it may receive the force of the Water's fall when you
pour it upon the Milk:) this done, and the Cork or Bread being taken out, hang
the Siphon ACB, first filled with Milk, upon the stick DCE, so artificially,
that the longer end A may remain in the Region of Milk, and the shorter end B
in the Region of Water; with this caution, That the flexure of the Siphon C be
removed no higher from the Milk, than it would naturally ascend to, if the
Siphon was straight: Now (says Mr. Charles) Since in the former Experiment the
Water would rise over the top of the Siphon, and drive back the Milk; and
afterward rise to the top thereof, and there swim aloft: why here in the
Siphon ACB, the like should not follow, ( viz.) the Water at B drive the Milk,
(which is supposed first to fill the Siphon) back to C, then to A, where
issuing out of the Pipe (as it did in the former Experiment) it would ascend to
its proper Region of Water again, and so continue in a Circular Motion
perpetually.

Now however this same Problem of M. Charles might seem probable in the Theory,
yet it will prove more than most difficult (if not impossible) in the Practice.
For,

1. We filled the Glass DEF, half full of Milk, and half full of Water, as AB;
then hanging the Siphon (first filled with Milk) so artificially on the stick
DE, so that the longer Shank might reach the Milk A, and the shorter might open
into the Superincumbent Region of Water B, we observed this effect, That the
Milk did for a small time run out of the Orifice B, and seemed to fall into the
inferior Region of Milk; but at last the Milk (or at least the serous or more
watrish parts thereof) so intermixed with the Water (which we could discern by
the whiteness and opacity of the Water) that the flux was quite stifled.

2. Contrary to Mr. Charles his Prognostics, the Water did not rise up the
short Shank, and drive back the Milk, but quietly permitted the Milk to drill
through it; though I know it was not material which way the flux was performed,
provided it would have been perpetual.

The Experiment failing in these two Liquors, we attempted the same again in
other two Liquors (which we were sure would not mix;) and to that purpose we
filled the aforesaid Glass with Oil of Tartar per deliquium, and Spirit of
Wine, which we tinged yellow with Saffron, the better to distinguish the
Liquors; and then adapting the Siphon, as before, we wished for a happy event
in the Experiment. But Experience (which ought to be the Mistress of wise men
as well as fools) showed us the quite contrary; for the Siphon would not run at
all, but continued full, which we afterward conjectured to proceed from the
Heterogeneity of the two Liquors* so that the Oil of Tartar would not break out
into the Spirit of Wine, no more than Milk or Water will do into the open Air,
where the pendent Shank is shorter than the Standard-height of those two
Liquors. So that, it seems, to effect this Experiment indeed, two such Liquors
must be found out, as are in some wise Homogeneous, and of a Congruity, and the
one considerably lighter than the other, which is tantum non impossible. For
besides the former Liquors, we have tried Oil and Water, and no Motion at all
was perceived, for the same reason of incongruity formerly delivered.

But these, and a hundred more Experiments of this nature are every day
excogitated and tried by our Noble Society of Gresham-Colledge, which in a
little time will be improved into far nobler Consequences and Theories, than
can possibly be done by the single Endeavors of any Person whatsoever.

The End of the Mercurial Experiments.
EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY. The Third Book. Containing Experiments Magnetical:
With a Confutation of GRANDAMICVS.

Amicus, Plato;

Amicus, Aristoteles;

Grandis Amicus, Grandamicus:

Sed, Magis Amica, Veritas.

By HENRY POWER, Dr. of Physic.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

A CONFUTATION OF GRANDAMICVS HIS MAGNETICAL TRACTATE, DE IMMOBILITATE TERRAE.
The Third Book.
CHAP. I.
THe three great Demonstrations and Magnetical Discoveries that this Author so
gloriously pretends to, are

1. A Magnetical Demonstration of the Earth's Immobility.

2. An universal Meridian Magnetically demonstrated.

3. A Magnetical discovery of Longitudes, or something equivalent thereunto.

In the canvassing of these three great Discoveries, we shall invert the order,
and begin with the last first. But before we can conveniently fasten upon these
three main pillars of his Book, there are three other considerable Errors of
his, first to be removed; which, though they lie more obscure and removed from
our sight, and buried, as it were, under ground; yet indeed are they the Basis
and Foundation upon which his magnificent Structure is built: And they are
these Positions following:

1. That the virtue of the Magnet, and all Magnetic Bodies, is purely
immaterial, and a bare simple Quality.

2. That it proceeds intrinsecally from the proper form of the Loadstone; as he
has delivered, Cap. 3. Page 48.

3. That all the World, and consequently all the Bodies therein, were made, by
the Divine Providence, for the use of us and our habitation, this Globe of
Earths which he has fixed in the Center of the World, and constituted us Lords
and Masters of all the Universe. Grand. Page 50.

CHAP. II.
Of the Corporeal Effluviums of the Loadstone.

DOctor Highmore tells us, That the Magnetical Exspirations of the Loadstone
may be discovered by the help of Glasses, and be seen in the form of a mist, to
flow from the Loadstone: This, indeed, would be an incomparable eviction of the
Corporeity of Magneticall Effluviums, and sensibly decide the Controversy
under Consideration. But I am sure he had either better Eyes, or else better
Glasses than ever I saw (though I have looked through as good as England
affords) and the best of them all was as far from presenting these subtle
Emanations, that they would never exhibit to me those grosser, and far more
material, Effluviums, from Electrical and Aromatical Bodies: Nay, not the
Evaporations of Camphire, which spends it self by continually Effluviating its
own component Particles: Nay, I could never see the grosser steams, that
continually transpire out of our own Bodies, and are the fuliginous Eructations
of that internal Fire which constantly burns within us. Indeed, if our
Dioptricks could attain to that Curiosity, as to grind us such Glasses as would
present the Effluviums of the Magnet; we might hope to discover all Epicurus
his Atoms, Descartes his Globuli aetherii, and all those insensible Corpuscles
which daily produce such Considerable effects in the generation and corruption
of Bodies about us: Nay, might not such Microscopes hazard the discovery of the
Aerial Genii, and present even Spiritualities themselves to our view? But
though both our Natural and Artificial Eyes fail in this performance, yet have
we another more Intrinsic Eye, that will yet discover their materiality, and
that is the piercing Eye of Reason. For,

1. That the Magnetical Emissions and Fluors, are not bare Qualities, but
indeed Corporeal Atoms, is deducible from hence; That this virtue decays in
progress of Time (as all Odours do) and is totally destroyed by Fire in a few
minutes, and is capable of Rarity and Density, whence it is more potent near at
hand than further off: all which are the proper and incommunicable Attributes
of Bodies.

2. Again, it is further evinced by some Parallel and Analogical effects of
Electrical with Magnetical Bodies, that they both work by Corporeal Effluviums;
for a well polished stick of hard Wax (immediately after frication) will almost
as vigorously move the Directory Needle, as the Loadstone it self; only there
is (amongst others) these considerable differences 'twixt these Eminent Bodies,
that the Effluviums of the one, (as being more Gross and Corporeal) are
intercepted by any medium; but Magnetical Effluviums are hindered (because of
their exceeding tenuity) by the interposition of no Body whatsoever. Secondly,
Whereas Electrical fluors do presently recoyl by short straight lines to their
Bodies again, Magnetical Atoms do not so; but do wheel about, and, by a
Vortical motion, do make their return unto the Loadstone again, as Descartes
has excellently declared.

CHAP. III.
That the Magnetical Effluviums do not proceed intrinsecally from the Stone,
but are certain extrinsecal particles, which approaching to the Stone, and
finding congruous pores and inlets therein, are channel'd through it; and
having acquired a Motion thereby, do continue their Current so far, till being
repulsed by the ambient Air, they recoyl again, and return in a Vortical
Motion, and so continue their revolution for ever, through the Body of the
Magnet.

Argument 1.

THis seems probable, first, from this, That if a Magnet it self be made red
hot in the fire, it not only amits the Magnetical vigor it had in it self
before, but acquires a new one, according to the positional Laws in its
Refrigeration; so that by inverting the Extremes (as it came out of the fire)
you may alter the Poles thereof (at pleasure,) nay, you may change the Polarity
of many feeble Stones, by a long Position, in a contrary posture to that which
it naturally affects. Both which Experiments seem to show, That the Magnetical
Effluviums are not Innate and Congenial to the Stone, but proceed ab
extrinseco, etc. therefore do impregnate the Stone again, upon their
readmission; or do change its Polarity, as the more powerful streams of Atoms
do prevail. The like Experiment (if it could be tried) would doubtless hold
good in the great Magnet of the Earth; for the Terrella we see in all other
Phenomenon, is avouched by her Mother-Earth.

Argument 2. The said Argument we may assume from a certain Section of the
Stone; for if you divide the Magnet through a meridian, or Saw of a Segment,
parallel to the Axis, the former Axis and Poles will quite vanish away; and
each Segment, by this division, will acquire a new Axis of its own: which
shows, That the external Magnetical Fluors, which passed through the Stone, all
in one continued stream before, now pass by several currents through both
Stones, and so create a new Axis and Poles in either.

Argument 3. Is from the disponent or directive faculty (as they call it) of
the Stone; for to say, This Polary direction proceeds from it self, is to put a
Soul, or Intelligence, at least, into the Stone; which must turn it about (as
Angels are fained to do the Celestial Orbs:) How much more credible is it,
That the stream of Atoms from without, by beating upon the Stone, do turn it to
and fro, till they have laid it in such a Position as is fittest for them to
run through it, as a stream of water turns a hollow trunk of wood, or a long
stick, till it come to lie parallel to its current.

Argument 4. Is from the different effects proceeding from all Effluxions that
come from all other Bodies, besides Magnetical, as Electrical, Odoriferous,
etc. for all Bodies that effluviate intrinsecally from themselves, their
exspirations fly quite away into the open Air, and never make any return again
to the Body from whence they proceeded, so that in time they do not only spend
their quintessential and finer particles, but even their whole bulk and
substance, as is Ocularly manifest in Camphire: Now it is not so in Magnetical
Bodies, whose exspirations are continual and permanent, because they return in
Circumgyrations to their Bodies again.

Argument 5. If the Magnetic rays proceeded intrinsecally from the Stone,
there is most reason they should proceed from the Center, the Stone being all
of an uniform Substance; as the Luminous rays do from the Body of the Sun,
and as Odours do from their Original; and so there would be no Poles, nor
Inclinations of Magnets more in one Latitude than in another: But now since
there are two Poles, where the Current of Effluxions are strongest, it is a
sign the Magnetical Fluors coming from without, do strike a stream in at one
Pole; and finding the grain and bait of the Stone, to lie fit for their
Tranation, do channel through to the opposite part of the Stone, and so
continue their Current in the Air, so far, till they are resisted and forced to
recoyl by a double whirlpool-motion round about into the Magnet again.

Argument 6. That the Magnetic Fluors proceed not intrinsecally from the
Stone, to cause the Self-Direction in the Magnet, is further evident from this
new Experiment: Take a wedge of Iron (which the Smiths call Puncheons) and
heating it red-hot, you shall, according to the Laws in its refrigeration,
endue it with a polary verticity, as has been praeobserved by all Magnetic
Writers: But that which will heighten the Experiment further, is, That though
it has but acquired a feeble virtue by its refrigeration, yet if you take it
up cold, and with a few smart strokes of a great Mall, or Hammer, you beat the
one end of it, setting the other against some hard resisting matter, as Stone,
Brass, Iron, or hard Wood, you shall thereby give it a most powerful
Magnetisme, so that it will then as actively move the Needle, at a good
distance, as the Loadstone it self: Now, say I, by those percussions you did so
open and relax the pores in the Iron-wedge, that the Magnetical Atoms could
then enter in, with a full Carriere, which before they could not; and having
once got so free a passage, they will maintein the Current ever after.

Argument 7. Since a constant, steady, and polary direction of parts is only
observable in Bodies Magnetical, we have reason to think and believe, that
these Magnetical Effluvia (which are the cause of this peculiar direction) are
not only transmitted and channel'd through the Earth, but through many other
Celestial Bodies also, as, and, perchance, the rest of the Planets yea and
Fixed Stars too, as by Telescopical Observations is now made very manifest in
those Bodies that swim within our Planetary Systeme.

Argument 8. Take a Rod of Iron (or a Puncheon) as before; heat it red-hot, and
according to the Laws in its refrigeration, you may endue this or that Extreme
with whether polarity you please; now afterward by striking it with a Hammer
in the same posture that it was cooled in, you may much advance and invigorate
its Magnetical virtue, as we have formerly declared: But now the main
Observable of all, is, That after both the reception of the virtue by
convenient refrigeration, as also the augmentation of it by percussion, you may
by inverting and repercussing the Extremes, alter the polarity of the Iron at
your pleasure; and then, which is stranger, that if you strike the Iron in the
middle 'twixt the two Extremes, it will destroy its formerly acquired Magnetism.

Argument 9. If you bore with a Wimble in any hard piece of wood, till you heat
it soundly, you will communicate to it a strong Verticity, insomuch that it
will nimbly turn a Magnetical Needle; but if with a dril of Iron or Steel you
bore a piece of Brass or Iron till you heat it well, it will acquire so strong
a Magnetism thereby, that it will not only turn an equilibrated Needle, but
vigorously attract, and lift up a small Needle: and I have observed the small
filings and shavings which fall out of the Drill-hole, to stick to the point of
the Drill, as if it had been to a Magnet it self; which shows, that the
Magnetical Atoms did more easily by far enter into the Drill or Wimble, when
the parts thereof were heat and set in Motion, than before.

Which still seems to make out, That the Magnetical Atoms rather enter into,
than proceed from those Bodies we call Magnetical, as the reaching soul of the
renowned Descartes has happily supposed.

CHAP. IV.
That the World was not made Primarily, nor Solely for the use of Man, nor in
subserviency unto Him and his Faculties.

AS I would not derogate from the Greatness and Eminency of Man (as being a
very Noble Creature;) so I would not have him arrogate too much to himself: For
though it may be a pious, and morally good conception, To think that the whole
world was made for him, yet I am sure it is no real and Physical Truth.

For first, How many glorious Bodies of vast Bulks, and immense Distances, have
appeared, nay, and may yet appear to future ages (as Comets and New Stars)
which are now gone and vanished again, which no mortal man ever understood the
reasons and causes of, nor received no good nor evil, either before or since
their appearances? Nay, How many such Comets may have been near the Sun, whose
first rise, continuation, and disappearance may have been made in six months
time, of which (by reason of the Sun's vicinity to them) we could never see nor
know any thing? Who can be so irrational, as to think that those innumerable
company of Stars (with which the Via Lactea is powdered) and many other parts of
Heaven are thronged (as the Pleiades) in which very Subconstellation I have
seen above 20. Stars of a considerable Magnitude, and lesser ones innumerable,
also the Hyades, the Stellae Nebulosae, etc. were ever made for the use of Us
and our Earth, since they are at that immense distance, and invisible to our
eyes; and had remained eternally so, had not the incomparable invention of
Telescopes relieved our eyesight herein? Nay, to come nearer, Who can imagine
that any of the primary Planets were wholly designed for the service of Us and
our Earth; whereas, if most of them were plucked out of the Heavens, we should
no more feel the want of them, than the Country Swain that already knows of no
such Wanderers? What then must we think of the Secondary Planets, as the
Circum-Saturnian, and the four Jovialists, which are not only indiscernable by
us, and therefore were never designed for our use, but also have their peculiar
Motion about their Primary Planets (which they orderly and punctually attend)
which shows other ends that God and Nature has designed them for, to wit, to be
as wholly Subservient to their Central Planets of Saturn and Jupiter, as the
Moon is to us? Lastly, Who is there that knows not the vast disproportion
'twixt this Speck of Earth, and the immense Heavens, how that it is less than
the smallest Mote or Atom, which we see to hover and play in the Sun's beams,
in comparison of the Fixed Stars? So that if one stood but in the Firmament, it
could never be seen at all; and if it were annihilated, would never be missed,
being so small and inconsiderable a portion of the Creation: Nay, our Modern
Philosophers have found, That not only the Earth, but the whole Orbis Magnus
(which is the Earth's Annual Circle it describes about the Sun) is but a Point,
in regard of the immense distance of the Fixed Stars. Nay, the Noble and
Elastical Soul of Descartes, that has stretched it self yet a pin higher, has
done the Heavens and Upper World more right yet, as to the Magnificent vastness
of its Expansion, and has shown us that every Fixed Star is a Sun, and is set
in the Center of a Vortex, or Planetary System, as ours is, and that they are
as far remote one off another, as ours is off them; and that all our whole
Planetary Vortex shrinks almost into nothing, if compared to those innumerable
Systems above us. What are we then but like so many Ants or Pismires, that toil
upon this Molehill, and could appear no otherwise at distance, but as those
poor Animals, the Mites, do to us through a good Microscope, in a piece of
Cheese?

Let us not therefore pride our selves too much in the Lordship of the whole
Universe, it is more, I am sure, than we could challenge from our Creator, that
he has made us such Noble Creatures as we are, that he has given us such a
large Inheritance, as the whole Globe of the Earth, that he has Subjugated all
things therein to our use and service; and lastly, that he has endued our
Souls with such spiritual and prying faculties, that we can attempt and reach
at the Superior and more mysterious works of his Creation, and therein to
admire those things we are not capable to understand. As for the Earth being
the Center of the World, it is now an opinion so generally exploded, that I need
not trouble you nor my self with it. And, indeed, what need I take pains to
refute that which is but gratis dictum, and which he neither has, nor all the
Peripateticks in the world can ever prove. Let us first see him do that, and
then you shall see what I am able to say to it.

CHAP. V.
ANd now I come to his three great Inventions; and the first shall be of
Longitudes. To find the Longitude of any place, or some thing aequipollent
thereunto, is easily done (says he) from these three Data; that is,

The Angle of Magnetical Inclination. Magnetical Variation. Elevation of the
Pole.


As for Example: At Rouen in France, The Angle of

North-Easting Variation of the Compass is 2 gr. 30'

The Angle of Septentrional Inclination is 72 gr.

The Elevation of the North Pole there, is 49 gr.

Grandamicus his Consequence from hence.

Now it is impossible (says he) that these three Angles should be the same in
any other determinate point of the Earth, but at our City at Rouen.

To which we Reply,

First, That he runs upon a false Assumption; viz. That the Angle of Variation
it self is perpetually the same in the same place of the Earth, which is false;
For Mr. Burrows, Ann. Dom. 1580. made an exact Observation of the Needle's
Variation toward the East at Lime-House, near London, and found it to amount
to no less than 11 gr. 15, and afterward, Ann. Dom. 1622. Mr. Gunter, at the
same place, observed it to be diminished to only 6 gr. and 13. And Gildebrand,
Ann. Dom. 1634. in the same place found it to come yet lower, and not to exceed
4 gr. 6 min. So that in process of time it is very probable it will come to an
exact Meridionality, and, perchance veer as much on the other side of the
Meridian Line ( viz) Westwards, as it has done of this.

Doctor Croone, my Worthy and most Ingenious Friend, writes me word, that in
June last, 1661. the Magnetical Variation at London, was found to be by the
best Observation 45 30 Westwards: so that it seems it has past the Meridian
already. And of this mystery of the Variation of the Variation, Grandamicus
himself was not ignorant; but because it would spoil his glorious Invention, he
therefore unhandsomly and unworthily asperses our English Observations, with
Ignorance, Error, and Incertitude, cap. 4. page 73.

Whereas the Observators nominated, were of that Knowledge and Perspicacity in
the Mathematics, that I am sure it is a Credit to Grandamicus to be inferior
to any of them. But we shall now tell him, That not only the English, but his
own Contrymen have found out this truth. So that the like decrease of the
Needle's Variation has been observed at Paris by Mersennus, and at Aix by
Gassendus: So then this Angle of Variation being quite fallible, and always
variable, his other two Angles will prove nothing at all; for they are the same
in the same Latitude or Parallel round about the Earth.

2. But granting him his three Data: I say, in the opposite point of the Globe
(that is Antipodes to Rouen) all these three Angles are the same.

If you reply, and say, That though the Angles of Variation and Inclination be
the same, yet they will be pointed out by the opposite points of the Directory
and Inclinatory Needles. To which we Counter-reply, That the same point of the
Needle that pointed at the Northpole here, will there point at the South-pole;
therefore he can have no evidence of the Needle of Variation, as is manifest by
carrying the Needle from the one Pole of the Terrella to the other.

And for the Inclinatory Needle, we see what a ticklish thing it is to make
exactly, and though it be poized by a good Artificer, yet will it miss one or
more Degrees in hitting the true point of Inclination, which would be a
considerable Error, to a Land-Traveller at least.

3. For the Profit and Utility of this Invention, it is none at all: for to a
Traveller that sails in one and the same Parallel (which he may do many a
thousand miles) the Angles of Inclination and Elevation will remain the same
with those at the Port from whence he set Sail; and though the Angle of
Variation did alter (as he would have it) yet my Mariner can tell nothing at
all thereby, but only thus, That he is not at Rouen; but how far he is gone
from it, either East or West, he knows not at all; unless he foreknew the
Angles of Variation in every Longitude, which is yet unknown: and if they were
all now known, yet were it of little or no use or benefit, because in process
of time the Variation it self varies, as we have pre-observed.

CHAP. VI.
ANd now we come to his Second great Invention, with which he thunders against
the Copernicans, and that is his great Magnetical Experiment to avouch the
Earth's Immobability.

To this Experiment therefore drawn from the perpendicular position of the
Magnet, we answer, That the reason why the Terrella does wheel about, and
direct certain parts of its Equator, to certain and determinate points of the
Horizon, is, Because it is overpowered by the Magnetical Effluxions of the
Earth; which, as a greater Magnet, does violently reduce it to that Situation,
which probably is the same that those Aequatorial parts had in their Mineral
Beds: And therefore this great Argument against the Dinetical Motion of the
Earth, is no Argument at all, unless that he could prove to us that the
Terrella could play this trick; it were removed out of the sphaere of the
Earth's Magnetisme, which is beyond his Philosophy ever to demonstrate.

2. Again, If this Motion of the Magnet did proceed from an Intrinsecal
Tendency that it has of its own, to bring all its parts to their right and
determinate points, there to remain in a perfect Stability, then would those
parts constantly affect this (and no other) Situation, howsoever the Loadstone
was posited (provided it be at Liberty to move it self to its desired
position.) But this is false; For, in Grandamicus his Experiment, if you invert
the Poles of the Magnet, and set the North Pole in the Zenith, and the South in
the Nadir, you shall see the Stone to Counterchange its Situation, and those
aequatorial parts of the Magnet, which before respected the East, shall now
wheel about, and fix themselves in the West; and the Northern parts turn to the
South: which shows, That the Stone does not Tack about from an intrinsecal
principle and form of its own, but is turned by the extrinsecal Effluxions of
the whole Earth; or rather by the stream of those Magnetical Atoms, that strike
not only through the Axis of the Earth, but also through the Body of every
petty Loadstone, accordingly as they are best received by the Grain or Bait of
the said Stone.

And now I am engaged in this Magnetic Discourse, I must tell you that I think
our famous Gilbert has drawn a more prevalent Argument from this Magnetical
Philosophy, to prove the Earth's Motion by, than Grandamicus has done to
destroy it; for since it is demonstrated of late, that all the whole Earth is
nothing but a great and Globular Loadstone, and that all the Circles of the
Armillary Sphaere, are really, truly, and naturally inhaerent in the Earth, by
virtue of the transcurrent Atoms, How can we conclude otherwise but with
Gilbert? Quis in posterum eum de facto moveri dubitabit, quum ei omnia ad motum
plane requisita, dedit natura; i. e. figuram rotundam, pendulam in medio Fluido
positionem, and omnes terminos motui Circulari inservientes, polos nempe,
aequatorem, meridianos and polares circulos, and parallelos?

Lastly, As for his Universal Meridian, it is likewise deduced from his Anti-
Copernican Experiment of the Loadstone swimming in a Boat, with its Poles
vertically erected: For (says he,) Since the Stone being Horizontally-placed,
does not show the true Meridian, but with an Angle of Variation, in most, if
not in all places of the Earth, if you set it with its Axis perpendicular as
before, it will (after some undulations to and fro) rest quietly, with certain
parts facing the Meridian; which points must be exactly marked, and through
them a Circle drawn round about the Stone; by help of which, you may strike a
true Meridian-Line, when and where you please.

Now, though we grant this Experiment to be true, and, probably, to hold good
in all Longitudes and Latitudes; yet he that shall perpend* how many ticklish
Curiosities, and nice Circumstances there are to perform this Experiment
exactly, will find the Invention only pleasing in the Theory, but not in the
Practice: For, 1. It is very difficult to place the Terrella in an exact
perpendicular; 2. When it is so, it is as difficult to keep it invariable under
the same Zenith; 3. Most difficult to draw an exact Meridian-Line from it: Not
to mention how hard a thing it is; first, to find the two Polary points in a
Globe-Loadstone; also to keep the Boat in a Fluctuation, parallel to the
Horizon.

The end of Magnetical Experiments.
Subterraneous Experiments: OR, OBSERVATIONS About COLE-MINES.

BY HENRY POWER, Mae. Dr.

A The Cole-pit.

B The Vent-pit.

CC The Sow, that drains all the heads from water.

DDD, etc. The Vent-head, not above two yards broad.

EEEE The Lateral Heads, which are not above two yards broad.

FFF The pricked lines, the Thurl-vent; that is, a Vent driven through the
lateral heads.

GGGG Is Walls or Pillars of the whole Cole-Bed remaining (which with us is not
above two foot thick) to hinder the roof of the pit for falling.

The Roof and Seat is the Top and Bottom of the Works, wherein they get Coals,
which is about two foot or more distant the one from the other.



Experiment 1.
AT the top of the Cole-pit we took the Weather-Glass AB, whose shank EB was
about 2 foot long, of a small bore, and the Head AE 2 ^/^ inches in Diameter;
and heating the Head thereof, and immerging it presently in the Glass full of
water B; the water, after a competent time, rose up to the point C; where we
let it stand for a while, till we saw that the External and Internal Air were
come to the same Temper and Elasticity.

Then carrying the Weather-Glass (so prepared) in a Scoop down to the bottom of
the Cole-pit (which was not above 35. yards deep) there the Water in the
Weather-Glass did rise up to the point D, viz. very near 3. Inches higher than
its former Standard C.

Experiment 2.
THe sixth day of November, 1662. we repeated the same Experiment, as before,
in a pit of 68. yards deep, and there we found, that at the bottom of the said
pit the water in the Weather-Glasse, did rise very near four inches higher than
the point C: viz. one inch higher than the point D to F. Now we observed, that
in carrying down of the said Glass in a Scoop from the top to the middle of the
Pit, there the water did not rise so much as it did from the middle to the
bottom, by half an inch; so that it seems the rise of the water was not
proportional to the Glasse's descent in the Pit.

Experiment 3.
WE took a very good armed Loadstone, of an Oval figure (whose poles lay in the
long Diameter) and at the top of the Coal-pit we loaded the North Pole of it
with the greatest weight it was able to carry, even to a Scruple; then taking
the Stone down to the bottom of the pit, and hanging on the same weight again,
we could perceive no difference in the power of the Stone at the one place from
the other; for it would neither lift more nor less there, than above: though to
try this Experiment precisely, and to minute weights, is very ticklish; for the
same Stone in any place will sometimes lift a little more, and sometimes a
little less.

Experiment 4.
WE took a thread of 68. yards long (which is as long as the deepest pit is
with us) and fastening a Brass lump of an exact pound weight to it, we
counterpoiz'd both it and the thread with a weight in the other Scale; then
fastening the other end of the thread to one of the Scales, we let down the
pendent weight near to the bottom, and there we found it to weigh lighter by an
ounce at least than it did at the top of the said pit.

We had tried this with a Bladder full of water, and other substances also, but
that our thread by often untwining broke it self.

Experiment 5.
THe Collyers tell us, That if a Pistol be shot off in a head remote from the
eye of a pit, it will give but a little report, or rather a sudden thump, like
a Gun shot off at a great distance; but if it be discharged at the eye of the
pit in the bottom, it will make a greater noise than if shot off above-ground.
But these Experiments are of a dangerous trial in our pits, and the Collyers
dare not attempt them by reason of the craziness of the roof of their works,
which often falls in of its own accord without any Concussion at all.

Every Cole-pit has its Vent-pit dug down at a competent distance from it,
as 50. or 80. paces one from another.

They dig a Vault underground from one pit to another (which they call the
Vent-pit) that the Air may have a free passage from the one pit to the other;
so that both pits with that Subterraneous intercourse, or vault, do exactly
represent a Siphon invers'd. Now the Air always has a Motion, and runs in a
stream from one pit to the other; for if the Air should have no Motion (or
Vent, as they call it) but Restagnate, then they could not work in the pits.

It is not requisite that the Vent-pit should be as deep as the Cole-pit.

Now the Vent, or Current, of Subterraneous Air is sometimes one way, and
sometimes another; sometimes from the Vent-pit to the Cole-pit, and sometimes
contrariwise (as the Winds (above ground) do alter;) and also weaker and
stronger at sometimes than at others: and sometimes the Vent plays so weakly,
that they cannot work for want of Ventilation.

Then to gather Vent (as they call it) they straiten the Vault, and wall part
of it up; so that the Air (which before run in a large stream) being now
crowded into a lesser channel, and forced to pass through a narrower room,
gathers in strength, and runs more swiftly.

Now it is observed, that the Subterraneous Air is always warm, and in the
coldest weather, the warmest; so that it never freezes in that pit, out of
which the Vent plays.

Of Damps.
THere are three sorts of Damps, or rather three degrees of the same Damp; Viz.
The Common. Viz. The Suffocating. Viz. The Fiery.


The Common Damp is that Subterraneous Steam, or Exhalation, which coming out
of the Earth, restagnates in the heads and undergroundy-cavities, and hinders
their Candles for burning, so that they cannot work.

1. If they incline their Candle downwards, toward their seat, it is observed,
it will abide in the longer, and not sweal away, and stifle it self with too
much tallow, as it would do above-ground.

2. Though this Damp be so great, as it extinguishes the Candle, yet they can
abide in it without Suffocation. Also the heavy vapor will restagnate there,
and is not able to rise.

3. This Damp is sometimes generated by the Effluviums and Perspirations that
come out of their own Bodies that work, if they sweat much; and if the Candle
be within the sphaere of those Effluviums, it will extinguish it as the former;
as the Collyers observe that pass from one head to another that is working in
another head.

This Damp is sometimes on the one side of the heads and not on the other; and
for the most part it runs all along the roof, so that a Candle will burn, if
set upon the seat: but if you lift it up into the superincumbent Region of
Damp-vapours, it will be immediately extinguished.

Now besides the playing of the Vent, they sometimes are necessitated to keep
constant fires underground, to purify and ventilate the Air: Sometimes the
running of the Scoops (when they begin to work) will set it into Motion:
Sometimes, if the Damp draw toward the eye of the pit, then they set it into
Motion by throwing down of Cole-sacks.

Of the Suffocating Damp.
THe Suffocating or Choking Damp is a more pernicious Exhalation, or else a
higher degree of the former; into which no man is able to enter, but presently
he is stifled and dies. And it is observed, that the Bodies of those (which are
so slain) do swell, and are puffed up exceedingly, as if poisoned. This Damp is
seldom here in our pits; but if it be, then the first person that is let down
into it, is presently killed: so that afterward they try, by letting down
dogs, when it is removed, and fit to enter into; and most-part by letting down
of lighted Candles, which will be extinguished by the Damp in the bottom of the
pit, if any Damp be restagnant there.

Of the Fiery Damp.
THe Fiery Damp is of all others the most dangerous, but is never seen in our
pits, though in pits at Leeds, which is not above 12. miles off, as also in the
Lancashire pits, and Newcastle pits, I have heard much of it.

It is a Vapor, or Exhalation, which comes out of the Mineral, or out of the
clifts in the Mineral, and it sometimes comes out Fired, and sometimes in the
form of a Smoke, which afterward fires of its own accord, and then forces its
way with that vehemence and activity, that it drives all away before it, and
kills without mercy; insomuch that I have heard, that not many years ago, three
men in Newcastle-pits were so shattered with it, that their very limbs were
severed.

This Fiery Meteor is observed to run all along the roof of the pit, so that if
the Collyers have the fortune to see it issuing out, there is no way to secure
themselves, but to lie flat along to the seat of the pit, and so do sometimes
escape so great a danger. Sometimes it has taken its way up at the pit-eye, or
shaft, with such vehemence, that it has thrown the Turn quite away from the
mouth of the pit, which is a Cylinder of wood of a great weight, and has burnt
and sindg'd the Rope, as black as Lightning does Trees.

This is that Meteor, certainly, that Paracelsus calls the Coruscation of
Metals, which, he says, is a sign of Metals in that place; and, doubtless, is
it that occasions Earthquakes, whenever it happens in any quantity, and can
have no Vent.

The end of Subterraneous Experiments.
The Conclusion.
To the generous VIRTUOSI, and Lovers of Experimental Philosophy.
CErtainly this World was made not only to be Inhabited, but Studied and
Contemplated by Man; and, How few are there in the World that perform this
homage due to their Creator? Who, though he has disclaimed all Brutal, yet
still accepts of a Rational Sacrifice; it is a Tribute we ought to pay him for
being men, for it is Reason that transpeciates our Natures, and makes us little
lower than the Angels: Without the right management of this Faculty, we do not
so much in our kind as Beasts do in theirs, who justly obey the prescript of
their Natures, and live up to the height of that instinct that Providence has
given them. But, alas, How many Souls are there, that never come to act beyond
that of the gazing-Monarch's? Humanum paucis vivit genus. There is a world of
People indeed, and but a few Men in it; mankind is but preserved in a few
Individuals; the greatest part of Humanity is lost in Earth, and their Souls so
fixed in that grosser moity of themselves (their Bodies) that nothing can
volatilize them, and set their Reasons at Liberty. The numerous Rabble that
seem to have the Signatures of Man in their faces, are Brutes in their
understanding, and have nothing of the nobler part that should denominate their
Essences; it is by the favor of a Metaphor we call them Men, for at the best
they are but Des-Cartes's Automata, or Aristotle's (...), but the moving
frames, and Zanies of men, and have nothing but their outsides to justify
their titles to Rationality.

Pugs and Baboons may claim a Traduction from Adam as well as these, and have
as great a share of Reason to justify their Parentage.

But it is not this numerous piece of Monstrosity (the Multitude only) that
are enemies to themselves and Learning; there is a company of men amongst the
Philosophers themselves, a sort of Notional heads, whose ignorance (though
varnished over with a little squabling Sophistry) is as great and invincible as
the former. These are they that daily stuff our Libraries with their
Philosophical Romances, and glut the Press with their Canting Loquacities. For,
instead of solid and Experimental Philosophy, it has been held accomplishment
enough to graduate a Student, if he could but stiffly wrangle out a vexatious
dispute of some odd Peripatetick qualities, or the like; which (if translated
into English) signified no more than a Heat 'twixt two Oyster-wives in
Billings-gate: Nay, these crimes have not only stained the Common, but there
are spots also to be seen even in the Purple Gowns of Learning. For it has
been a great fault, and, indeed, a solemn piece of Folly, even amongst the
Professors and nobler sort of Philosophers, That when they have arrived to a
competent height in any Art or Science, if any difficulty do arise that their
Art cannot presently reach unto, they instantly pronounce it a thing impossible
to be done; which inconsiderable and rash censure and forestallment of their
endeavors, does not only stifle their own further Enquiries, but also hangs,
to all succeeding ages, as a Scar-crow to affright them for ever approaching
that difficulty. Hence it is, that most Arts and Sciences are branded at this
day with some such ignominious Impossibility.

Thus came they to upbraid Chemistry with the Altahest, and Philosophers-Stone;
Geography, with Longitudes; Geometry, with the Quadrature of a Circle;
Stereometry, with the Duplication of the Cube; Trigonometry, with the
Trisection of an Angle; Algebra, with the Aequation of three discontinued
Numbers; Mechanics, with a Perpetual Motion; and our own Profession, with the
incurability of Cancers and Quartans. Nay, the Spring and Nepetides in Natural
Philosophy, the Doctrine of Comets in Astronomy, the Terra Incognita in
Geography, the Heart's Motion in Anatomy, the Forming of Conick Sections in
Dioptricks, the Various Variation in Magnetical Philosophy, are accounted as
insuperable difficulties as the former, whose Causes (they say) defy all
Humane Industry ever to discover them.

But besides this Intestine war, and civil dissension that is 'twixt men of the
same denomination and principles, there is one more general Impediment, which
is an Authentic discouragement to the promotion of the Arts and Sciences, and
that is, The Universal Exclamation of the World's decay and approximation to
its period; That both the great and little World have long since passed the
Meridian, and, That the Faculties of the one do fade and decay, as well as the
Fabrics and Materials of the other; which though it be a Conceit that has
possessed all ages past, as nearly as ours, yet the Clamor was never so high
as it is now: Something, therefore, I shall here offer, that will abate and
qualify the rigor of this Conception.

An Essay, to prove the World's Duration, from the slow motion of the Sun's
Apogaeum, or the Earth's Aphelion.
FIrst, We take for granted, from the Scripture-Account, that the World is
about 5000. years old.

Secondly, We take it for granted, that the Sun's Apegaeum was at the Creation
set in the first point of Aries; for which you will anon see prevalent reasons.

Thirdly, From Astronomical Observation it is now found, that the Sun's Apogaeum
is about the sixth degree of Cancer.

Fourthly, By intervals of Observation it is likewise found, That the Motion of
the Sun's Apogaeum, in 100. years, is 1 gr. 42 33, which by retrocalculation
will point out the time of the World's Nativity to be about 5000. years ago,
which very handsomely draws nigh to the Scripture-Account, as the famous
Longomontanus has ingeniously observed.

Now in all likelihood, he that made this great Automaton of the world, will
not destroy it, till the slowest Motion therein has made one Revolution.

For would it not even in a common Watchmaker (that has made a curious Watch
for some Gentleman or other, to show him the rarity of his Art) be great
indiscretion, and a most imprudent act, and argue also a dislike of his own
work, to pluck the said Watch in pieces before every wheel therein had made one
revolution at least? Now the Apogaeum (if it move equally, as it has hitherto
done) will not perfect one Revolution under 20000. years, whereof there is but
one Quadrant yet spent, and 15000. years are yet to come.

Besides, What reason is there that God should respect the one Hemisphaere of
the Earth, more than the other? For, take the Sun's Apogaeum now as it is, and
the North Hemisphaere of the Earth has eight days more of the Sun's company
than the South Hemisphaere has (as is plain to every one's Observation) for it
is eight days more from the Vernal to the Autumnal Aequinox, then it is from
the Autumnal to the Vernal again; which inequality will be repaid to our
Antoeci in one Revolution of the Sun's Apogaeum: for 5000. years hence, both
Hemisphaeres will equally enjoy the Sun's illuminating presence; and 5000.
years after that, the Southern Hemisphaere will have the eight supernumerary
days transferred to them; and then at the period of the last 5000. years, both
Hemisphaeres will be equilibrated again: Therefore, in all reason, those
Southern Inhabitants may expect, and we must grant one Revolution of the Sun's
Apogaeum, at least, (which is 15000. years) yet to come, to balance our
felicities in this world; and who knows, but it may be continued many more
Revolutions?

Thus much for the Macrocosm: Now what decay there is in the Microcosm, we must
be both Parties and Judges; and how far our Modern Wits have outdone the
Ancient Sages, the parallel 'twixt the few Inventions of the one, and the rare
Discoveries of the other, will easily determine. But the Learned Hackwell's
Apology shall be mine at present, for not treating any further of this Subject;
he having long since performed that Task, to the conviction of Prejudice it
self.

Besides this Catholic one, there are other Remora's yet in the way, that have
been accessory hindrances to the advancement of Learning, and that is, A
diffidence and desperation of most men (nay even of those of more discerning
faculties) of ever reaching to any eminent Invention; and an inveterate conceit
they are possessed with of the old Maxim, That Nil dictum, quod non prius
dictum: by which despondency of mind, they have not only stifled the
blossoming of the Tree of Knowledge in themselves, but also have nipp'd the
very Buds and Sproutings of it in others, by blazing about the old and
uncomfortable Aphorism of our Hippocrates, of Nature's obscurity, the Life's
brevity, the Senses fallacity, and the Judgement's infirmity.

Had the winged Souls of our modern Hero's been lime-twig'd with such ignoble
conceptions as these, they had never flown up to those rare Inventions with
which they have so enriched our latter days; we had wanted the useful
Inventions of Guns, Printing, Navigation, Paper, and Sugar; we had wanted
Decimal and Symbolical Arithmetic, the Analytical Algebra, the Magnetical
Philosophy, the Logarithms, the Hydrargyral Experiments, the glorious
Inventions of Dioptrick Glasses, Wind-guns, and the Noble Boyle's Pneumatick
Engine.

Nay, what strangers had we been at home, and within the circle of our own
selves? We had yet never known the Mesenterical and Thoracical Lacteae, the
Blood's Circulation, the Lymphiducts, and other admirable Curiosities in this
fabric of our Selves.

All which incomparable Inventions do not only solicit, but, methinks, should
inflame our endeavors to attempt even Impossibilities, and to make the world
know There are not difficulties enough, in Philosophy, for a vigorous and
active Reason: It Is a Noble resolution to begin there where all the world has
ended; and an Heroic attempt to salve those difficulties (which former
Philosophers accounted impossibilities) though but in an Ingenious Hypothesis:
And, certainly, there is no Truth so abstruse, nor so far elevated out of our
reach, but man's wit may raise Engines to Scale and Conquer it: Though
Democritus his pit be never so deep, yet by a long Sorites of Observations, and
chain of Deductions, we may at last fathom it, and catch hold of Truth that
has so long sit forlorn at bottom thereof.

But these are Reaches that are beyond all those of the Stagyrite's Retinue,
the Solutions of all those former Difficulties are reserved for you (most Noble
Souls, the true Lovers of Free, and Experimental Philosophy) to gratify
Posterity withal.

You are the enlarged and Elastical Souls of the world, who, removing all
former rubbish, and prejudicial resistances, do make way for the Springy
Intellect to fly out into its desired Expansion. When I seriously contemplate
the freedom of your Spirits, the excellency of your Principles, the vast reach
of your Designs, to unriddle all Nature; methinks, you have done more than men
already, and may be well placed in a rank Specifically different from the rest
of grovelling Humanity.

And this is the Age wherein all men's Souls are in a kind of fermentation, and
the spirit of Wisdom and Learning begins to mount and free it self from those
drossie and terrene Impediments wherewith it has been so long clogged, and
from the insipid phlegm and Caput Mortuum of useless Notions, in which it has
endured so violent and long a fixation.

This is the Age wherein (methinks) Philosophy comes in with a Springtide;
and the Peripateticks may as well hope to stop the Current of the Tide, or
(with Xerxes) to fetter the Ocean, as hinder the overflowing of free
Philosophy: Methinks, I see how all the old Rubbish must be thrown away, and
the rotten Buildings be overthrown, and carried away with so powerful an
Inundation. These are the days that must lay a new Foundation of a more
magnificent Philosophy, never to be overthrown: that will Empirically and
Sensibly canvass the Phenomenon of Nature, deducing the Causes of things from
such Originals in Nature, as we observe are producible by Art, and the
infallible demonstration of Mechanics: and certainly, this is the way, and no
other, to build a true and permanent Philosophy: For Art, being the Imitation
of Nature (or, Nature at Second-Hand) it is but a sensible expression of
Effects, dependent on the same (though more remote Causes;) and therefore the
works of the one, must prove the most reasonable discoveries of the other. And
to speak yet more close to the point, I think it is no Rhetorication to say,
That all things are Artificial; for Nature it self is nothing else but the Art
of God. Then, certainly, to find the various turnings, and mysterious process
of this divine Art, in the management of this great Machine of the World, must
needs be the proper Office of only the Experimental and Mechanical
Philosopher. For the old Dogmatists and Notional Speculators, that only gazed
at the visible effects and last Resultances of things, understood no more of
Nature, than a rude Countrey-fellow does of the Internal Fabric of a Watch,
that only sees the Index and Horary Circle, and perchance hears the Clock and
Alarm strike in it: But he that will give a satisfactory Account of those
Phenomenon, must be an Artificer indeed, and one well skilled in the Wheelwork
and Internal Contrivance of such Anatomical Engines.

FINIS.
Errata.
In the Preface, read Daring, instead of Darling Art. p. 6. l. 5. Opilionem. p.
11. l. 18. Bulbe. p. 21. l. 26. strange Atoms. p. 27. l. 17. Observat. 7. p.
29. l. 27. add sound. l. 28. add found it had lost. p. 31. l. 14. rings. p.
47. l. 9. Moon wort. and l. 13. of all things. p. 49. l. 17. chive, all. p. 51.
l. 6. like. p. 68. l. 10. lucid. and l. 21. down. p. 70. l. 28. dele (does.)
and l. 29. does direct. p. 71. l. 22. and so. p. 72. l. 4. And indeed and
reality. p. 78. l. 20. of that. p. 81. l. 17. Sun's spots. and l. 21. Sun's
image. p. 82. l. 25. dele (But.) p. 91. l. 6. off. and l. 14 Cathetus. p. 93.
l. 2. etch'd. l. 30. Torricellius. p 94. l. 2. their Air. p. 99. l. 13. this
is. ibid. Observe. 11. Experiment 1. p. 101. l. 9. Elater. l. 12. particles. p.
102. l. 6. Experiments will to satiety. l. 21. dele (which) p. 103. l 2. is by
far the greatest part thereof. p. 108. l. 26. superponderant water. p. 110. l.
12. all one. l. 24. at a free. p. 111. l. 7. such a like Tube. p. 112. l. 5.
too. l. ult. dele ( And) p. 114. l. 26. the orifice. p. 117. l. 1.
Intumescency. l. 25. Imprison. p. 122. l. 20. About. l. penult. Marinus
Ghetaldi. p. 128. l. 26. being opened. p. 129. l. 11. with Mountain Air. p.
130. l. ult. Experimental Eviction. p. 132. l. 26. in the. p. 135. l. 7.
Conceive. l. 12. of his Philosophy. p. 137. l. 15. dele (of the fire) and read,
therefore. p. 168. l. 16. if it.


