THE Power of VVitchcraft, BEING A most strange but true Relation of the most
miraculous and wonderful deliverance of one Mr. William Harrison, of Cambden in
the County of Gloucester, Steward to the Lady Nowel.

Who was supposed to have been murdered by his own Servant, and his Servants
Mother and Brother: But to the amazement of all people that live near the said
place, the truth is now brought to light; and Mr. Harrison after above two
years absence is returned into his own Country and place of abode in Cambden.

The manner how he was bewitched away, and the manner of his safe return back
again into his own Country you shall hear in this following Discourse.

London printed for Charles Tyus at the three Bibles on London Bridge. 1662.

THE Power of VVitchcraft, BEING A most strange but true Relation of the most
miraculons and wonderful Deliverance of one Mr. William Harrison of Cambden in
the County of Gloucester, Steward to the Lady Nowell.
THat the Lord has been pleased wonderfully to show forth his power to sinful
man, it does every day appear unto us; there is not a month nor week, nay we
may say a day in the year in which the mighty works of the Lord are not vistbly
apparent unto us. But that which I have now to relate unto you is most
wonderful, nay I may say a most amazing providence as ever man or woman ever
heard in this Kingdom, it may be truly said to be a discovery of Witchcraft;
and that the Lord does sometimes suffer wicked people to have power over others
in bewitching them the Scriptures hold forth, for we read of Saul that he went
to the Witch of Ender, 1 Samuel 28. verse. 6. And in several places of Scripture
it does evidently make clear unto us, That the Lord has suffered Witches and
Sorcerers, and such like people in a Nation.

But I shall not stand to give you any examples of old; but come to the matter
intended which is as follows.

It was not much above two years since their dwelt at Cambden in Gloucester
shire one Master William Harrison a Gentleman of good credit and estimation in
the place where he dwelt. This Master Harrison aforesaid was Steward to the
honorable Lady the Lady Nowel whose place of dwelling was at Cambden also. In
this place there was also a widow woman whose name was Perry, who had two sons;
Master Harrison looking upon the woman as an honest poor woman, took one of her
Sons from her, and brought him up at length to become one of his Household
Servants. This Boy being grown up to be a lusty Fellow, observing his Master
oftentimes to bring home great sums of money which he received for rent, being
Steward to the Lady aforesaid: what does this wicked fellow do but presently
fell to contrive how he might become Master of some of those sums of money
which he observed his Master so often to bring home.

It was not long but this fellow with his mother (who as it now appears was a
Witch) with his other Brother did determine to set upon this Gentleman, as he
should come along upon the road to his habitation to take what money he had
from him, and there was an opportunity fell out so that they had an occasion to
put their wicked determinations into practice, as you shall hear; The Gentleman
was coming home, and being not many miles from his intended iourneys end, this
Widow Perry and her two sons met Mr. Harrison, who they no sooner espied, but
they knocked him down and robbed him, and cast him into a pit whereout they
dug stones. He did not long remain there, as you will hear by the sequel.
But Mr. Harrison not coming home according to his usual custom, his Wife and
Family were much troubled at it: Great search after some few days were made for
him, but all to little purpose, for there was no tidings of him, but every one
concluded that he was murdered upon the rode. It was not long before the Lord
had brought to light this strange accident; for this widow Perry and her two
Sons were suspected of the robbery, and they were all three forthwith
apprehended, and at the Assizes at Gloucester about two years since, they were
arraigned, condemned and executed for the supposed murder of Master Harrison.

The place of their execution was on Broadway hills in the fight of Cambden
where a Gibbet was erected, the mother and one of her Sons were hanged and
buried under the Gibbet, the other Son, who was Servant to Mr. Harrison was
hanged in chains on the Gibbet, where part of him remains to be seen at this
day.

At the time of their Execution they would not confess what they had done with
Master Harrison; but said that he was not dead, but ere seven years were half
over they should see Master Harrison again.

Now attend to this following Discourse, and you shall hear in what a condition
Master Harrison was left in. This Widow Perry by her wicked Conjuration had
power on Master Harrison, for no sooner had they knocked him down, and taken
what he had from him, but they threw him into a pit; He had not lain long but
he began to come to himself, and he apprehended where he was, but before he was
come to himself fully, he was in a moment conveyed to the Sea side, and from
thence in a very short time he was conveyed to a rock standing in the Sea on
the coast of Turkey, where he remained the space of four days bare headed, his
hat being left near Cambden, where they first had knocked him down.

After his four days abode there, there came by a Turkish ship which took him
in, and brought him to Turkey, and there sold him. His Master that bought him
was by profession a Chyrurgeon, who asked his new bought Servant what he could
do, he answered his Master that then was, that he had skill in Gardening and
could distill Herbs, in which employment he was entertained in; and he so well
behaved himself that he gained a great deal of love from his Master during his
life.

He had not lived there above two years or thereabouts, but it pleased God his
Master dyed, who out of the respect he did bear to Master Harrison, his
Servant, he gave him a piece of plate, and bade him make use thereof for his
Transportation into his own Country, which he did.

After this it was not long but he heard of a Turkey Merchant bound for
Portugal, for the which piece of plate he had his passage to Portugal, where it
was not long but he safely arrived, and is now since that come safely into his
own Native Country, England, and is come to his own dwelling house at Cambden,
to the no little astonishment and wonderful amazement of all his Friends and
Relations, nay of all the Country round.

It is matter of great amazement to all people that such a thing should be
wrought by Witchcraft; but the truth of this is not to be disputed, for there
are thousands of people that can witness and testify the truth hereof.

Now friends, having related to you the truth of the whole matter, here is
great matter of wonder and astenishment to all people, to see the wonderful
deliverance which the Lord has bestowed upon this Gentleman, and no question
but he will and does acknowledge the Lords mercy to him; We may also observe
here how the Lord both bring punishment upon such wicked livers as this Woman
and her two Sons were, you may look but into the 22. of Exodus 18. there it is
said, thou shall not suffer a witch to live, and here we may see how just the
Lord was in his dealing to these vile and wicked livers, for soon after they
had committed the wicked fact on such a faithful friend as this Mr. Harrison
was, who out of love and pity did bring up this Boy, and kept him as we may say
as his own, the Lord was pleased to bring them to this sad end and deserved
punishment, and I wish that it may prove a warning to all others that practice
such divelish and horrid Witthcrafts.

In the 5. of Micah and the 12. verse, the Lord has promised there, that he
will cut off Witthcrafts, and there shall be no more Soothsayers, the Lord will
not be worse then his word, but he will bring all such wicked offenders to
shameful ends, he will not only punish them here, but hrreafter, for Witches
and Wizards or fortunetellers and the like, they are such as sell their souls
to the Devil to do mischief, and though the Lord let them alone for a season to
go on in their wicked ways, yet let them knew that there will a reckoning day
come, when they shall pay dearly for all their folly.

O that this notable example of Gods Justice, might be a warning piece unto all
of us, of what condition soever we be, and this wonderful example of mercy to
Mr. Harrison might be always fresh in our memory. Surely we may judge the Lord
dealt by him as he did by Job, when the Lord gave Satan leave to do what he
would with him, only touch not his life (says God) as we may read in the
first Chapter of the Book of Job. So the Lord would not suffer this wicked
woman to do any hurt to his person, that is, to his life, as we now may see:
Although every one thought that he had been murdered, the Lord can and the
Lord will restrain the power of the wicked, they shall not always have their
will, though he does give them power, yet does put a restraint upon them; and
they cannot go any further then he will give them leave.

What matter of encouragement is here to all that love the Lord, the Lord may
and does suffer Satan the great Enemy of mankind to tempt his people, and he
does sometimes let the wicked prevail, so far as to have some power of them,
that is to do some mischief either to their bodies or estates and the like, but
they cannot hurt their soul for the Lord takes care of that, and he will
preserve them, in spite of all the Devils in Hell.

I shall now come to a conclusion; only I shall desire every one that bears
this truth, to consider of the power of the Lord, and of the great mercy the
Lord has to bestow on them that deftre sincerely to serve him, and I shall
desire all that hear of this to consider of it, and to be careful of their
ways, and to be watthful, for your adversary the Devil walks about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, a Christian had need to be wakeful in
sinful times, for it may be the occasion of any of us, to be often abroad, we
had need to be careful of our selves, especially our souls, for that may fall
out in a moment to us, which we nor any of our Relations little thought of.

The Devil is a very busy adversary, and is always a contriving and plotting
to do mischief to Gods people, where he can set any at work, he will promise
great rewards to them, we read in the Scripture that he tempted our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, all this will I give thee says he, if thou will fall down and
worship me, but he could make no approach upon Christ, but upon poor sinful
man, he does too too often prevail, he strives all he can to make a Christian
forsake the ways of God, it is Satan's chief design and aim to tempt a Christian
to make him think evil of the ways of God, that so at length he may bring them
to himself, and this thou may assure thy self of, that if thou make a
contract with the Devil, as all such wicked creatures do, as go by the name of
Witches or Conjurers and the like, though thou do reign in thy wicked ways
for many months or years, yet know for a certain that the Devil that set thee
en work will pay thee thy wages,

Therefore now to make an end, I wish that this Example of Mercy and Justice
may be a seasonable warningpiece to us all, and that it may make every one that
hears of it extol the goodness of the Lord in so miraculously preserving the
life of this Gentleman: And on the other side we have great cause to admire at
this strange Providence, that the Lord would bring such wicked offenders to
such a deserved punishment.

The Lord grant that we may live always to the praise of his holy Name while we
live in the World, that when our time is finished in this life, we may inherit
a Crown of Glory in the life which is to come.

FINIS.

