A LETTER From TANGIER, To a Friend in LONDON. Describing the Causes, Manner
and Time, of the Demolishing of TANGIER, November the Fifth, in the Year 1683.
SIR,
THis is the last Letter you must expect from this Place, where I have
continued ever since the last Detachment from the Regiments of Guards in
London. I have not failed to give you the best Account I could, from time to
time, of our several Engagements with the Moors, and their Daily Incursions
upon us. Since the last Ambassador, Ben Haddu Otter, went over from hence into
England, we Enjoyed some Liberty of Traffic and Commerce amongst 'em. But
since his Return from thence, the Treacherous Moors falling from the Traffic
and Articles of the Peace proposed in England, they began to Renew their old
Pranks, appearing in Parties within view of the Garrison, driving their Cattle
within a Mile of Charles's Fort, to tempt out the Soldiers to the Booty, where
these Devils, like so many Rabbits covered in the Sands, or so many Snakes and
Poisoned Adders, underneath the long Grass, with their Venomous Darts, spitting
Fire at their Mouths, lay in Ambuscade ready to Devour us.

Our Noble and Valiant Governor, Colonel Kirk, finding they began to Renew
their old Cheat, made Complaint to the Ambassador at Fess, upon which an
Interview was appointed, between the Alcade of Fess, and the Governor, to
continue the Peace, but the Governor did not think it safe to venture his
Person any more amongst them, finding them so uncertain, and forward to Renew
their old Insolences.

This taking no Effect, (to prevent further Bloodshed,) it was Consulted about
the Demolishing of Tangier, as the best Expedient to save His Majesty the
Expense of Lives and Money. While this was Debated by His Majesty and Council,
in England, our Prayers were, that it might take Effect, and that we might
rather Live to see Tangier in a Fire, then not to see our own Country; for
there are but few of us here, but had rather see a Roast Capon, or Pigg, in
Smithfield, then the best Booty in Africa. All the Talk, and all our Hopes,
was, That Tangier that cost us so Dear, should be Demolished; when according to
our Wish* on the Third of September Arrived here the Right Honorable the Lord
Dartmouth, with his Fleet, who was so well Entertained by the Town, that what
between our Bonfires, and great Shot, you would think our Troy was in a Flame
already.

The next Day being Entertained very Splendidly by the Governor. All the Town
being Summoned together, he signified His Majesty's Pleasure, in a most Learned
and Comfortable Speech, for the Demolishing of Tangier; That none should
sustain Loss thereby, but that every one that had any Houses or Tenements
there, according to the Value, they should (being certified by the
Commissionors appointed for that use,) have Reprisals made in England. I cannot
tell whether our Canon the Day before, or our Shouts to Day, made the greater
Noise. Every one was pleased with the Change, but more with the Reprisals,
being gladder to have the Liberty of a Subject, and a free Estate in England,
then an old Musty Prison, or Hospital, in Tangier. I wish mine would fall in
Whigland-Square, for the convenience of my Wife and Children. It is impossible
to Express our Joys, which continued all that Night with Bumpers and Bonfires,
the Canons playing in the Air, like Rockets, and the Foot-Soldiers with their
Muskets, were our Squibs and Serpents. The Bells rung themselves out of the
Steeples, you could not hear above Two in all the Town. They had hardly
patience to stay till next Morning, when all Hands went to work upon the Mold,
which came up much faster then it went on, and with less Charges, being Blown
up from the very Foundation. Then we fell to work with the Houses on the upper
End of the Town, next the Town-Wall, having Removed the People, with their
Goods and Movables, on Shipboard.

When this part of the Town was Blown up, there was a Party of the Moors,
about Ten Thousand, within Two Miles of the Walls, which were totally Routed,
by the strangeness of the Surprise. They run Seven Miles forward, as if Hell
had burst open, and the Devil himself had been at their Heels, before they
looked about, either Horse or Man; for, either some of the Stones or Timber
fell amongst them, or the greatness of the Noise, Scared them away; there has
not one of them since appeared within view of the Garrison. We have had by this
means, time to select and gather all the best of our Stone and Timber, or any
thing that is worth preserving, which we have Sold to the Spaniards on the
other side of the Streights. We are now Undermineing the outward Walls, the
Castle and Citadel, which the Governor has Ordered to be Blown up all
together, on the Fifth of November, for one solemn Bonfire. But of this I shall
give you the Account upon my Arrival there, which Happiness to see England once
more, is so much Desired by

Your Loving Friend, to see you, M. Poseley.

LONDON, Printed for J. Smith. 1683.


