THE Animadverter Animadverted: Or, Brief Observations On Animadversions.

Published By Thomas Harlackenden, Esquire.

Entitled, Animadversions on several Material Passages in a Book Written by
Sir NATHANAEL POVVEL, Baronet.

By the same Author.

Veritas non querit Angulos. LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1663.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN Earl of Thanet Island, AND THOMAS Lord CVLPEPER,
Baron of THORSWAY.
My Lords,
I Presume it seems as strange to your Lordships, as to my self and others,
that those Animadversions (composed of so many mistakes and errors, and larded
throughout with such malicious aspersions and surmises) should be published in
the name of Thomas Harlackenden, Esquire; a Gentleman of Worth and Quality, and
recommended to your Honors Patronage, whose Noble and heroic Spirits, have
ever showed much aversness from all proceedings which endeavor to wound the
reputation of a good cause Controverted, through the sides of the Assertors.

I shall not trouble your Lordships with the repetition of them, but annex
hereunto a List of those Gentlemen's Names, who concurred with me in those times
and actions, whereunto the Animadverter takes offense; not doubting but their
known Integrities and Judgments, will abundantly vindicate my Reputation
therein, being Persons of too great Judgment, to be deluded with shadows
only, and too much fidelity to betray their Trust, and sacrifice their
Consciences to advance any man's particular Interest: Neither will I trouble
your Lordships, by relating with what diligence those Animadversions were
dispersed at Allington Court, and at the late Session of Sewers, amongst the
Commissioners and Jurors, at and before such time as they were impanelled; the
consequence whereof I leave to your Lordships consideration, upon that which
ensued; but will briefly state the matters in difference between us, and for
satisfaction therein, refer your Lordships, partly to my former Treatises, and
partly to that which follows.

1. The principal matters in difference are briefly these. First, whither the
late drowned lands, being recovered thirty years since, having formerly spent
twenty years time, and twenty thousand pounds fruitlesly in hopes of recovery,
at the disproportions of twelve pence per Acre, drowned lands, and four pence
per Acre Summer lands, shall be scotted at the same disproportions, during the
continuance of the Indraught in Wittersham Level; the continuance thereof being
necessary for both their preservations, and no future advantage thereby given
to the late drowned lands, then to the late sommer-lands.

Whereunto I answer, that it is acknow ledged by the Animadverter, fol. 54.
That when the Articles were agreed upon between the Committees for the upper
Levels and Wittersham, dated the 18th of February, 9 Car. 1. The upper Levels
were drained, which occasioned those Articles; from which your Lordships may
observe, That Wittersham Indraught, was not of absolute necessity to the
recovery of the drowned lands, other then to procure the concurrence of the
owners of the sommer-lands, and others, for whose preservation the same was of
absolute necessity, as the Animadverters Grandfather has often declared, (and
after attested under his hand, not many weeks before he died) which your
Lordships may peruse in my Remonstrance, toward the end thereof, fol. 6.

And further, The decaying sommer-lands, notwithstanding their many years
preservation by the three first Indraughts at Peening, Ebony, and Woodruff,
grew afterward into further decay; so that in the year, 1630. the Channel of
the River of Rother, was so much swerved and decayed, as that all the lands
sewing thereunto, viz. Romney Marsh, Walland Marsh, etc. all which lie some
miles nearer the sea then the upper Levels, were in danger to lose their Sewer,
much more the decaying sommer-lands, which lie further from the fall, as is
manifested by the transactions of the Lords Bailiffs and Jurates of Romney
Marsh, the Commissioners for Walland Marsh, and the Commissioners for the upper
Level, and are declared in my Remonstrance, fol. 13, 14. All which makes it
evident, That since the year 1633. (the late drowned lands being then perfectly
drained as they now are) both the late decaying lands, and late drowned lands,
have been only preserved by the said Works, and Indraught, and no further
advantage thereby given to the late drowned lands, then to the late decaying
lands. And now do your Lordships judge, by what Rules of Sewers, Law or
Conscience, the late drowned lands shall be further taxed at twelve pence per
Acre, (lesser measure) and the late decaying lands at four pence per Acre
(larger measure) for the continuance of Wittersham Indraught; by means whereof
the whole Rents and Profits of all, or a considerable part of the late drowned
lands, as they have been for fifty years past, so may be for fifty years to
come, swallowed up in charge of Scotts, and the inheritance of those lands,
sacrificed for the preservation of those decaying sommer-lands, which during
all that time, have, and will thereby yield to the Owners thereof, eighteen or
twenty shillings per Acre, clear yearly profit above all charge of Scotts, so
that it had been much better for the Owners of the late drowned lands, if the
recovery of their lands had never been attempted.

2. The second matter in difference, is, Whether by the Law or Rule of Sewers,
Sherley Moor shall enjoy a larger measure of 18. or 20. foot to the Pole, and
all the other Levels but 16. foot being now all under one Commission.

I Answer, That this disproportion of measure, is without President or Example;
contrary to all Rules of Sewers, and contrary to the Statute or Ordinance, De
Terris Mensurandis; and therefore the Animadverter endeavors to support it
with a pretended previous Agreement, made between the Owners of Sherley Moor,
and those of the other Levels, before their conjunction in one Commission, viz.
That Sherley Moor was to continue that disproportion of measure, and of
scotting at twelve pence per Acre drowned, and four pence per Acre
sommer-lands. Whereunto I answer, That this Agreement was never insisted on,
nor objected at the Reference made to the four learned Lawyers in 1627. howbeit
Sir Edward Hales Knight and Baronet, deceased, was then present, (who is
pretended to be Party to such Agreement) as appears by the case then drawn up,
which is set forth in my Remonstrance, fol. 17. and which was given in evidence
by the Owners of the sommer-lands, to the Jurors, at the late Session of Sewers
holden at Tenterden. And for that I find that the Animadverter fol. 23. has
set forth the decretal part (as he terms it) of the decree made the 26th of May
1626. And fol. 16 has set down part of the Preamble of a Decree, made the 19th
of September, 1650. I shall present to your Lordships both these Decrees at
large, that your Lordships may the better judge of the Animadverters candid
Quotations and Inferences, mentioned in the remainder of his Animadversions,
upon which I have not at this time leisure to give your Lordships particular
observations.

At a Session of Sewers holden at Northiam, in the County of Sussex, the 26th.
of May in the second year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, etc.
before Sr. Nicholas Tufton, Sr. Isaac Sidley, Knights and Baronets, Sr. John
Wildigos, Sr. Ralph Bosvile, Sr. Alexander Culpeper, Sr. Humphry Tufton,
Knights, Robert Foster, John Theobald, John Porter, William Culpeper, Thomas
Dike, Esquires. Peter Courthope, William White, Gentlemen. By virtue of his
Majesty's Commission to us and others Directed, bearing date the first day of
June, in the first year of his Majesty's Reign, in manner and form following,
viz.
FOrasmuch as at this present Session of Sewers, as well by Petition and
Certificate of several persons absent, as by complaint of diverse persons
present, and justly proved, the deep drowned lands, lying in East Maitham, West
Maitham, Newenden, Sandherst, Bodiham, Enburst, Northiam and Beckey, have
heretofore been scotted and taxed, to pay more money then the said lands are
now, or then were worth to be let by the year, or more then the Feesimple or
Inheritance thereof can be sold for, and yet neither do nor can receive any
profit, or very little, not proportionable to the Charge by the said works, for
which the said scotts are imposed, whereby many Owners of the said Lands are
much decayed and hindered, and no Tenants can be procured to occupy the said
Lands, by reason of the greatness of the scotts, and many fatherless children
left unprovided for; Of all which the Commissioners now present, by their own
knowledge and view, are sufficiently assured; and therefore, accordingly as is
petitioned, think fit it be reformed, and the said inconveniences hereafter
prevented, and the exceeding great scotts, and little profits accrewing
thereby, to the Owners and Occupiers of the lands in the said Levels, which may
in time to come be avoided; The said Commissioners therefore do now Order and
Decree, That the said lands shall not be from henceforth scotted or taxed, to
pay any scotts or taxes of money to be herefter imposed or set upon all or any
of the said lands in the said Levels, more than the Annual value or Rent of
the same, are or may be let for, and that rateably to the profit to be received
by the work, for which the said scotts are to be taxed and assessed (except
such scotts only as shall hereafter be set and imposed for, or concerning
apparent inundations, to the utter loss of the whole Level, or greater part
thereof.

Sealed and subscribed by Nicholas Tufton. Isaac Sedley. Alex. Culpeper. Will.
Culpeper. Ra. Bosvile. J. Wildigos. H. Tufion. Rob. Foster. John Theobald. John
Porter. Thomas Dike. Peter Courthope. William White.


A Session of Sewers holden at Robertsbridge, in the Parish of Salehurst, in
the County of Sussex, upon Thursday the 19th day of September, Anno Dom. 1650.
Whereas at a Session of Sewers holden at Cranbrook, the 7th day of August, in
the 8th year of the Reign of the late King James of England, etc. sufficient
Jurors of the respective Counties of Kent and Sussex, did present; That there
were then within the limits of the Commission of Sewers, for the works upon the
River of Rother, three thousand Acres (by estimation) of Marsh lands, which
were drowned, and yielded no benefit to the Owners thereof, and two thousand
Acres of Marsh land, or thereabouts, which were usually drowned in the winter,
and dry most part of the summer; but in iminent danger to be likewise drowned
and lost, if some speedy course of preservation were not taken. And further
presented, That for the payment and charge of all such works as were then
propounded, as well for the recovery of the said drowned lands, as preservation
of the said decaying lands, they though fit that the said drowned lands should
be scotted at twelve pence the Acre, and the said decaying lands at four pence
the Acre, or after the same proportion to every greater or lesser tax: All
which was assented unto by the Commissioners then present, and Decreed
accordingly. And afterward as well to recover the said drowned lands, as to
preserve the said decaying lands, three several Indraughts were successively
made, viz. Ebony, Peening, and Woodruff, and the whole charge and burden
thereof taxed and paid, after the rates of twelve pence the Acre drowned lands,
and four pence the Acre sommer-lands; and whereas after seventeen years charge
and experience of the said works, it appeared that the drowned lands had paid
thereunto above ten pounds by the Acre, and received no benefit thereby, but
continued in their drowned and lost condition, and that the said decaying lands
received the sole benefit thereof, having been preserved from further decay.
And whereas at a Session of Sewers holden at Sandherst, the 18th day of
September, 1627. sufficient Jurors of the respective Counties, did amongst
other things present, That the beforementioned decaying lands, scotted at four
pence by the Acre, had received and enjoyed much more benefit by the said
works, then the drowned lands scotted at twelve pence by the Acre, and that the
great charge of the lands scotted at twelve pence the Acre, considered with the
small profit received thereby, it was most necessary and requisite, that from
thenceforth all the said Marsh-lands, as well sommer-lands as wet lands, should
be taxed at one and the same rate by the Acre, and by one and the same
admeasurement, toward the cleansing and preserving of the Channel, and all
other payments and disbursements, for the general works whatsoever; And whereas
in pursuance thereof, and of an Award then after made by four learned Lawyers,
to whom the determination of the differences arising from such disproportions
of scotting, was referred by consent of all parties, It was Ordered and Decreed
at a Session of Sewers holden at Tenterden the 11th day of March then
following, by the principal Owners of the said decaying lands, and other
Commissioners then present, That all scots then after to be granted for the
general works upon the said River of Rother, should be granted and paid equally
by the Acre, as well for the sommer-lands and dry lands, as for the drowned and
wet lands; which equality of scotting continued accordingly for some years
after; All which notwithstanding (the great Charge and Burden of the Works and
Indraught in Wittersham Level) have been taxed and paid at the former and
unequal rates of twelve pence and four pence per Acre, and have cost the said
drowned lands, though hereby drained and recovered, much more then the
Inheritance thereof can now be sold for, to the very great prejudice of all,
and utter undoing of many of the Owners of those lands. For prevention of the
like inconveniences for the future, and for that all the lands asoresaid do now
enjoy as much benefit and security by the said work, as they are capable to
receive thereby, so that no part thereof can now properly be termed or scotted
as drowned lands; and for that both the present and intended works upon the
said River, are, and tend only for preservation of all the said lands, and upon
consideration and debate of several Views taken of the said Marsh-lands, and
the Reports thereupon made by the respective Commissioners Ordered thereunto,
And upon consideration of several presentiments of Jurors in that behalf made,
And upon debate of the Petition this day exhibited by several Owners and
Farmers of Marsh-lands sormerly scotted as sommer-lands, It is Ordered and
Decreed, That all scots and taxes hereafter to be granted or taxed for the
general works upon the said River of Rother, and for all Indraught, Rents, and
other general charges and payments whatsoever incident thereunto, That the
Marsh-lands lying above Hacksden Bridge in Dixter Fleet, and in the Levels of
Mensham, Ewherst, and Bodiham, shall be scotted and taxed at one third part of
the highest sum, that any other lands shall be scotted or taxed at, and not
at any higher or greater rate, That the lands lying in Appledore, Redhill, and
Stone, shall be scotted and taxed at one half part of the highest sum that
any other lands shall be scotted or taxed at, That the lands lying in the
common Brook of Newenden, and in the Level of Peening, shall be scotted and
taxed at two third parts of the highest sum that any other lands shall be
scotted or taxed at, And that all the other lands lying within the limits of
the Commission aforesaid, heretofore scotted to the works upon the said River,
shall be scotted and taxed at one full third part more then any other the lands
before mentioned shall be scotted and taxed at, and not at any higher or
greater rate, any Decree or Order heretofore made at any Session of Sewers held
for the works upon the said River of Rether, to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding; And in pursuance thereof, it is now further Ordered and
Decreed, That one scot of eight pence the Acre for all the lands lying above
Hacksden Bridge in Dixter Fleer, and in the Levels of Mencham, Ewherst, and
Bodiham; of twelve pence the Acre for all the lands lying in Reabill,
Appledore, and Stone; of one shilling four pence the Acre for all the lands
lying in the Commom Brook of Newenden, and in the Level of Peening; and of two
shillings the Acre for all the other lands lying within the limits of the said
Commission heretofore scotted to the works upon the said River of Rother, shall
be paid unto Mr John Baker, at his house in Tenterden, upon Tuesday the 31. day
of December next, and in default thereof, to forfeit and pay the doubles and
wanes according to the custom of Romney Marsh.

Thomas Culpeper. John Foul. John Mun. Richard Bowen. Thomas Dike. John
Busbridge. Nathaniel Powell. Richard Kilbury.


And Sir Edward Hales after the alteration of the former disproportions of
scots of twelve pence and four pence, never alleged any such previous
agreement; but contrariwise in the presence of Sir Thomas Culpeper, Sir John
Henden, John Austen, Esquire, my Self, and others, when we met together in
London, to state the matters in difference touching the proportions of scots,
did declare himself well satisfied with the Rates of scots then agreed upon,
(which were after decreed) and further expressed great content, that the said
difference was reconciled in so amicable a manner, and upon such indifferent
proportions; as by the testimony of a witness without exception, then present,
and yet living, can be made appear. The proportions of scots then agreed were
put in writing, viz.

We whose Names are hereunto subscribed, Commissioners and Owners principally
Interessed in the Marsh-lands, commonly called and known by the name of the
Upper Levels; For the final ending all differences between us, concerning the
proportion of scots, do for our selves Consent and Agree, that the lands now
scotted at twelve pence the Acre, be reduced unto ten pence the Acre, that the
lands now scotted at four pence the Acre, be raised to six pence the Acre; and
that the lands scotted at eight pence the Acre, and that the lands now scotted
at six pence the Acre, be continued at the same rates; and that all scots,
which hereafter shall be granted, shall be taxed according to this proportion.

Edward Hales. John Austen. William Cage. Edmond Gibbon. Thomas Culpeper.
Robert Cordell. Thomas Peirs. Nathaniel Powell. Thank. Frewen.


The Subscribers were Owners of the greatest part of the said Levels, which was
afterward Decreed accordingly, and those proportions continued until the late
Session at Tenterden.

And further; This pretended previous Agreement being objected at a Session of
Sewers holden at Cranbrook, the 15th of April, 1650. Sir Thomas Culpeper, who
at the time of such conjunction in Commission, was an active Commissioner for
the Interest of the sommer-lands, (not then having any drowned lands) and was
chosen by the Owners of the sommer-lands, to attend the said Referrees in 1627.
and must have known of that pretended Agreement, if any such had been, denied
that he ever knew of any such Agreement. And further made several answers to
that Objection, which are set forth in my Summary Relation, sol. 27, 30. which
I have also inserted herein for your Lordships full satisfaction, desiring your
Lordships by the way to observe, That howbeit the Animadverter has borrowed
that Objection (and others) thence, he does not in his Animadversions take
notice of many of the answers there made to the same.

The Arguments were these.

1. First, they alleged, That Sherley Moor, and Ebonie were formerly governed
by distinct Commissions from the other Levels, and would never have consented
to be put into one Commission, and joined in the charge of the Works with the
drowned lands, if it had not been first agreed at what proportion each should
be Scotted, viz. the Sommer-lands at four pence, and the drowned lands at
twelve pence the Acre.

To which it was answered, That if by agreement they meant the opinion and
consent of the Commissioners, as the conditions of the Lands at that time were,
There is no Question it was so; but if they intended, that there was any
agreement in the nature of a Contract between party and party, that was not
granted, neither was there any Record or Evidence, nor so much as the Preamble
of a Decree to prove ir, which no man will easily believe could have been
omitted in a Business of such concernment, if any such Agreement had been made;
neither is it probable to be conjectured, that after those Levels were joined
in one Commission, the Commissioners would have impannelled a Jury to enquire
and present what Works were fit to be done, and after what proportions the
several Levels ought to be Scotted thereunto, and have had so many meetings,
and spent so much time (from April 1609. till October 1613) before the same was
determined, if it had been agreed, as was alleged. But admit there were any
such Agreement, yet by the Reference made to the four learned Lawyers
aforesaid, the Award by them made, and confirmation thereof by Decree 11 March,
1627. (as is before expressed) the same was absolutely made void.

2. Secondly, it was alleged, that Sherley Moor, Ebomy, and the rest of the
Sommer-lands, did continue their ancient Channel, and did not sew through
Wittersham Level, as the drowned lands did, and that the carrying of the River
of Rother through Wittersham, and making the Low lands thereof an Indraught,
was only in the interest of the drowned lands; and therefore that there was no
reason that the Sommer-lands should be taxed at an equal rate with the drowned
lands, toward that great Rent and Work of charge.

To this it was answered, That although Sherley Moor, and the rest of the
Sommer-lands did not all carry their waters through Wittersham Level, a
considerable proportion of them did, viz. The Levels of Farnhil, Dombarn,
Wittersham, and others; and that the making the low Lands of Wittersham, an
Indraught was the only means, which preserved the ancient Channel for sewing
any part of them; that only having procured them that great fall by which
their lands have not only been preserved, but perfectly cured.

And it was further answered, That the making the Low lands of Wittersham an
Indraught (which alone had occasioned so great charge) was not in the interest
of the drowned lands, but wholly in the interest of the Sommer-lands, to
procure them the fall and sewer which they now enjoy; for it was evident upon
several breaches of Knel's Dam wall, that the Owners of the drowned lands might
have drained them by carrying their waters that way only, without letting of
the Sea into Wittersham, which they often endeavored; but the Owners of the
Sommer-lands from time to time opposed them, and that the drowned lands were
drained several years before those Works were finished, or the Sea let into the
said Indraught, by the breach in Knells Damm Wall in the year 1633.

3. Thirdly, it was alleged, That Sherley Moor and Ebonie could at a cheaper
rate by other ways have sewed and secured their lands, then by joining with the
other Levels; but by what ways that was they did not show.

In answer whereunto, It was said, that this might have been more truly urged
by the Owners of the drowned lands, If the Owners of the Sommer-lands would
have permitted them to carry their waters through Wittersham Level, without
making the low lands there an Indraught, before such time as the Channel was so
swerved as that the fresh waters could not come down to keep open their
Out-fall, or at any time after.

And it was further answered, That in 1609. when the Levels of Sherley Moor,
Ebony and Newenden were first joined in one Commission, the Sommer-lands were
in a decaying condition and apparent danger to become drowned and lost lands;
That afterward several Works were undertaken, which cost the Owners of the
drowned lands above 30000 l. And those Works proved altogether fruitless for
the Recovery of the drowned lands, and served only for the present preservation
of the Sommer-lands; yet so as they fell again into decay, and were in danger
to become drowned and lost lands, before such time as the Sea was let into
Wittersham Indraught: So that at a Session of Sewers holden at Hawkhurst the
21. of January 1632. more then Thirty Jurors of the respective Counties of Kent
and Sussex did Present, That there then were within the limits of the
Commission for the Upper Levels 3000 Acres or thereabouts of Marsh lands that
then were usually drowned a great part of the year, and yielded little profit
or benefit to the Owners thereof, And also 2000 Acres of Marsh land which then
were good Sommer-land, and were dry most part of the year, but decaying, and in
danger to be lost and drowned; And that they did then conceive and verily
believe, that the best way and means to regain the 3000 acres of drowned lands,
and to preserve the said decaying lands, was by taking the Low-lands of
Wittersham Level, and making and employing the same for an Indraught. The
charge whereof has further cost the Owners of the drowned lands near 100000 l.
so that indifferent men will hardly be persuaded without a Mathematical
Demonstration, that the Sommer-lands could have found a cheaper way to preserve
and secure themselves then by joining with the other Levels.

4. Fourthly, they urged, That when that great and chargeable Work of carrying
the River of Rother through Wittersham Level was undertaken, the Owners of the
Sommer-lands would never have joined therein: But that it was again agreed,
that the lands should be scotted at 12 pence and 4 pence, as they were before
the Reference, and Award made by Sir Edward Littleton, Sir John Glanvil, Sir
Ralph Whitfield, and Sergeant Clerk.

To this it was answered, That no such Agreement was either produced in writing
or proved per Testes; nor was it probable that the Owners of the drowned lands
would ever have agreed or submitted to be scotted after the former unequal
rates of 12 pence and 4 pence, had not the said Reference, and Award, with the
Decree of Confirmation thereof made the 11. of March 1627. been concealed from
them after the deaths of Nicolas Earl of Thanet, Mr Dike, Mr Foul, and other
principally interessed in the drowned lands, who often protested against
bringing the lands again to the former unequal rate of Scotts.

And further, That as there was no general consent of the Commissioners; so the
same was never publicly propounded to the Owners of the drowned lands for
their Assent thereunto; and all impartial men are of opinion, that the Owners
of the Sommer-lands had not then so much confidence either of the Justice, or
Honor thereof, as to acquaint any one of the Owners of the drowned lands (not
interessed in the Sommer-lands) how the Business of Scotting was settled in
1627. and then demand his consent to bring the scotts to the former
disproportions of 12 d. and 4 d. after they had spent above 30000 l. which
wholly redounded to the benefit of the Sommer-lands; and considering that when
the Award and Decree beforementioned were made, that the Sommer-lands and
drowned lands should be scotted alike, there were then no Works in hand or
propounded for recovery or mending of the drowned lands; and then for them to
Award or Decree that those lands which were not yearly worth one penny, should
be scotted at 12 pence the acre to every scott, for such Works only as tended
to the preservation of the Sommer-lands (worth 20 shillings per acre) had been
contrary to all equity and common reason; But only in regard it was then
intended, that if there should again any Works be undertaken, as well for
Recovery of the drowned lands as Preservation of the Sommer-lands, that they
should both join in an equal rate of scotts; and after all this how far it was
agreeable to equity or fair dealing for the Owners of the Sommer-lands to
reduce the scotts to the former disproportions for the Works and Indraught in
Wittersham Level, which were only necessary for the preservation of their
lands, was left to indifferent Judges.

Lastly, it was answered, That the Commissioners of Sewers (having so strong an
Adversary as the Sea) were to alter and make Decrees as the condition of the
lands and emergent occasions should from time to time require, that they have
no power to tie their own hands by such Agreement as is alleged, nor can be
bound by any other power then that by which they have their power, an Act of
Parliament.

5. Fifthly they urged, That the Works for the Recovery of the drowned lands
were not perfected; and therefore the Arguments used for equal scotting of the
lands for Preservation, were not of force till the Works were finished. And
they did instance in the Charge bestowed upon Blackwall, and the new laying of
the Sluice which formerly lay at Thorney Wall.

To which it was answered, That both by the Letter, Intention, and Equity of
the beforementioned Award, and Decree thereupon made, the whole Charge of the
Works and Indraught in Wittersham Level should have been born at an equal rate
of Scotts, and much more all future Works, if any remained unperfected.

It was further answered, That Nature it self had forced her way for Recovery
of the drowned lands several years before the Works were perfected, and the Sea
let into the Indraught, and that Blackwall was made upon the Presentment of
Jurors and Reports of Commissioners, after Views taken for Information of the
Commissioners, as well to preserve the Upper Levels from being surrounded with
Salt water, which daily increased upon them as in hopes to recover 600 acres of
land for which there was a great Rent paid to the Owners thereof by the Upper
Levels, and for preservation of the other High-lands of Wittersham; and as for
the new laying of the Sluice at Thorney Wall, they were not so well advised to
instance upon that, being only for the preservation of Sherley Moor, and the
other Sommer-lands, and the Interest of the drowned lands not at all concerned
therein.

6. Sixthly they showed, That there was a Debt owing by the Country, the
greatest part whereof had been due diverse years: And therefore no Reason that
the Sommer-lands should be equally scotted with the drowned lands toward the
payment of that Debt.

To that it was answered, That such Debt did grow due long since 1627. and was
not the twentieth part of that charge which since that time should have been
born at an equal rate of scotts in performance of the Award and Decree
beforementioned.

It was further answered, That no part of that Debt did grow by Works done for
the Recovery of the drowned lands, those lands being perfectly drained many
years before, but was contracted by means of the Sea (which was first let the
Low-lands of Wittersham, chiefly in the Interest of the Sommer-lands) his
breaking into a great part of the High-lands of Wittersham, whereby there has
near 1400 l. per Annum been added to the great Rent which the Country formerly
paid, and by making new inset Walls of a very great charge to preserve the
other high Lands there from being drowned in like manner. And if the drowned
lands should continue scotted at these unequal rates till that debt were paid,
it were the same to the Owners of the drowned lands, as if they should be so
scotted for ever; For at the proportions they are now scotted, the whole Rent
of their lands does hardly pay the yearly charge that lies upon them, and
consequently can never wear out the debt.

7. Seventhly, They excepted against the Referrees, that they having already
declared themselves in the Report, should sit as Judges, and give their votes
therein.

To which it was answered, That certainly they were not the more like to be
partial, or any way unfit to sit as Judges; for having taken pains to view the
lands in the several Levels, and by all ways and means to inform themselves of
the merits of the Cause, no more then in the Parliament, the Committees of any
Bill, or other Business, are thought the less fit to give their Voices, for
having first debated, digested, and reported the Cause to the House. This
Exception therefore seemed somewhat strange, it being the first that ever was
known to any there to be taken of that kind; and those Gentlemen themselves
having often been Referrees, and given their Votes in the same Cause.

8. Eighthly they urged, That the sommer-lands were only to be preserved, and
were then as much worth to be let by the year, as now they are. The deep
drowned lands being nothing worth, were to be recovered, and preserved, and
therefore no reason they should be Scotted at equal rates.

This was consented to be true at such time as the first joint Commission was
taken out for all the said Levels; and upon these grounds the Commissioners did
then think it equal, and accordingly decreed, that the Sommer-lands should be
scotted but after the rate of sour pence, the deep drowned lands after twelve
pence the Acre to every scott; but now, that the deep drowned lands were many
years since recovered, and become fully as safe from future decay as the
Sommer-lands, that such recovery has cost the Owners of those lands more then
double the value of the Inheritance of them, the Sommer-lands having been all
that time preserved, and the Owners of them receiving yearly sixteen or
eighteen shillings the Acre above all scotts; now that the heavy charge lying
upon those lands, is only for preservation, wherein Sherley Moor, and the rest
of the late decaying Summer lands are more then equally interessed with them,
and for whose preservation the Sea was necessarily let into Wittersham Level,
which has produced this great charge; now for them to be continued at the
former unequal rates of twelve pence, and four pence, whereby the deep drowned
lands, though drained of water, are still drowned in charge, paying more in
Scotts then their yearly Rent amounts unto, this seemed very unequal to all
the Commissioners not interessed.

9. They alleged, that they had little or no benefit by the Works, nor the
yearly Rents of their lands thereby improved; that by the words of the Statute,
all lands are to be scotted according to the benefit they receive; and
therefore since the benefit was little, the scots might not be great.

To this it was answered, That about forty years since, when the general Works
were first undertaken, and the Levels of Sherley Moor, and Ebony joined in one
Commission with the rest, the Preamble in every Decree recites, that there were
so many Acres of land drowned Winter and Summer, so many Acres, viz. Sherley
Moor, and the rest, which were drowned in the Winter, and dry in the Summer,
but in danger of further decay, and to become drowned and lost lands;

Lastly, The first general Works which were undertaken after such conjunction
of all the said Levels in one Commission, were the Indraughts at Peening and
Ebony, which were undertaken upon Presentment of Jurors and Views of
Commissioners; and the Decree for the said Works, is extant upon Record
(whereof the Animadverter had a Copy long since) bearing date the 17o August
13. Iac. In which Decree, nor in any subsequent Decree, there is not any
mention made of any such previous Agreement, which without all doubt would not
have been omitted, if any such had been, the same being of such consequence to
Posterity. And now do your Lordships judge of the Animadverters confidence, and
groundless asserting that Agreement, both in the Epistle Dedicatory, and
Animadversions.

And in Case any such Agreement had been, the same extended only to Sherley
Moore; and then I know not why all the other lands within the limits of the
Commission, should not be equally scotted for their preservation, according to
the Custom of Romney Marsh, so much urged at the late Session, as caused the
Jurors to alter their exhibited presentment; Or if notwithstanding the said
Custom, the same sommer-lands in Farnhill, Dombarn, Wittersham, and Kentchill
(which cannot pretend to any such Agreement, being included within the
Commission for the Upper Levels, before the conjunction with Sherley Moor)
shall continue scotted at four pence per Acre, and the late drowned lands at
twelve pence per Acre (which enjoy only the benefit of preservation, as the
other lands do) but that then the disproportion of scots between the late
drowned lands tendered by the Jurors, in concurrence with the Opinion of the
two Lord Chief Justices, touching the casualties and uncerteinties of lands,
ought to have been established; which I submit to your Lordships judgments.

3. The third matter in difference, is, Whether the Marsh-lands in Redhill,
Appledore, and Stone, shall be discharged from bearing any part of the charge
of the said Indraught, their common Outfall to the Sea, which was many years
since in apparent danger to be lost, having thereby been restored and preserved.

In Answer whereunto, I must first let your Lordships know, That by the Law and
Rule of Sewers, All lands sewing into a Common Outfall, which is maintained at
a general Charge, ought to contribute thereunto, and cannot be exempted from
the charge thereof in Toto, if they may in Tanto.

That those lands have received benefit by the Works and Indraughts in
Wittersham Level, is demonstrated, For that Walland Marsh, whose waters issue
into the same Channel 4 or 5 miles nearer the Sea, then most of those lands,
and consequently had a greater fall, and better Sewer, have received benefit
thereby, and do contribute to the charge thereof; which by Agreement with the
Upper Levels, they were not to do until such time as their Sewer was bettered
by the said Works, and are to contribute during the continuance thereof, and
not after. And further, the Animadverter, fol. 55. has set forth a Presentment
of Jurors, pretended to be made in August, 1635. whereby it was presented (as
he alleges) That if the sea were not speedily let into the Low-lands of
Wittersham, it would be prejudicial to the Sewers of all the lands that sewed
into the River of Rother. And I likewise desire your Lordships to observe, That
this supposed Presentment was at such time, when Sir Walter Roberts, and other
Owners of the drowned lands, opposed the letting of the sea into Wittersham
Indraught; at most of which transactions I was present, and viewed the then
desperate decay of the Sewer of the sommer-lands, which issued their water by
Thorney Sluice, howbeit the late drowned lands were then perfectly drained. And
by the presentment of the late Jurors it appears, That the preservation of the
Outfall at Thorney Sluice is necessary for the well sewing of the same lands in
Redhill, Appledore, and Stone, yet they are thereby exempted from bearing any
part of the charge of Wittersham Indraught, whereby that Outfall is, and for
many years has been preserved. And your Lordships by perusing the Decree
herein set forth, may observe the fair and civil respect which the then
Commissioners showed unto the Owners of those lands.

A Session of Sewers holden at Sandhurst, on Thursday the third day of
September, 1646.
WHereas at the Session of Sewers holden at Tenterden, the 27th day of May,
1645. William Pix, Gent. and others his fellow-Jurors, did present, That there
are by estimation, a 1000 Acres of high Marsh-lands, lying within the limits of
the said Commission, which have received benefit and security by the works upon
the River of Rother, and have not yet been scotted thereunto. They did think
fit the same should be admeasured and scotted for the future, ratably with the
lands in Sherley Moor, as sommer-lands, unto all general works upon the River
of Rother. And whereas at the Session of Sewers holden at Tenterden, the 10th
day of June 1645. it was Ordered and Decreed, That William Powel Gent. should
write unto Sir Edward Hales, Knight and Baronet; to the heirs of Sir Walter
Covert; to the Dean and Chapter of Christ Church Cant, and George Chewte Esquire or
the Tenants of their lands, sewing into the River of Rother, or Channel of
Appledore, to show cause at the next Sessions of Sewers, to be holden at
Tenterden on Thursday the second day of September next, Why their said lands
that have not paid scots to the works upon the said River of Rother, should not
from thenceforth be scotted and taxed thereunto, proportionable to the benefit
or security they have, or should receive thereby, and according to the before
recited presentment, by the Jury in that behalf made; And whereas the said
William Powell did send accordingly; And whereas at the Sessions of Sewers,
holden at Tenterden the second day Of September, 1645. it was alleged, by Sir
Cheyney Culpeper, Knight, on the behalf of himself and others, That when the
Owners of Sherley Moor, and Newenden Level, with others, did join in one
Commission, it was then generally agreed on, That the said high Marsh-lands
should be exempted from all general scots toward the said works. And forasmuch
as the said Agreement was not then produced, it was therefore Ordered and
Decreed, That the said parties should have time given them to produce the said
agreement, till the next General Sessions of Sewers, to be holden at Tenterden
in Whitson week. And whereas at the Sessions of Sewers, holden at Tenterden the
26th day of May, 1646, the aforesaid Agreement was not produced, but further
day was desired for the same. And that it was then Ordered and Decreed, That
further Order should be given to the said parties to produce the same, or such
reason as should be adjudged sufficient for exemption of the said lands, until
this present Sessions; And whereas at this present Sessions now holden, the
aforesaid Agreement was not produced, nor any sufficient reason showed for
exemption. Upon serious and due consideration of the premises, by the
Commissioners now present, It is now Ordered and Decreed, That the aforesaid
lands from henceforth, be scotted and ta^ed to the general works upon the River
of Rother, in such proportion as in the presentment is set forth, viz.
according to the proportion of Sherley Moor, at four pence per Acre; And that
Mr. Thomas Huckstep, and Stephen Curtis, jointly and severally, be
Water-Bayliffs of the said lands, to be admeasured with a 16 foot and a half
pole, and charged in the Scot-book accordingly.

Subscribed by Tho. Peirs. Tho. Bromfield. Peter Farnden. Samuel Curtis. George
Iackson. John Henden. John Foul. John Austen. Thomas. Collins. Thomas Jorden.
John Busbridge. Roger Shoyswel. William Boys. Natha. Powel.


4. The fourth matter in difference, is, Whether lands formerly drowned, and
paid equally for their recovery, being recovered, part of those lands are worth
25. s. per Acre, other part of them but 15. s. per Acre, (by reason of
casualties) shall continue equally scotted for works of preservation only, when
as their respective benefits thereby, are so different and disproportionate?

In answer whereunto, I presume to let your Lordships know, That by the Queries
and Answers thereunto, subscribed by the two Lord Chief Justices, set forth in
my Summary Relation, fol. 23. (which may be an adequate Rule in the
proportioning of all scots) it appears, That by the Law, Casualties, and
Incertainties of profit by the works, are to be considered in the proportioning
of scots upon those lands, with other of better condition.

That there are such Casualties, Incertainties, and difference in values
between some of the late drowned lands, appeared to the late Jurors upon their
View, was proved unto them upon Oath, and will be further proved by several
Testimonies when thereunto required. But it being objected, That by the Custom
of Romney Marsh, all lands (good and bad) pay equally for maintenance of
Dymchurch Wall, which is for their preservation. The Jurors who had before
tendered their presentment, That those Casual lands should pay and be taxed at
two third parts, and no more, which the other drowned lands of the better
condition, withdrew the same, and after presented all the said drowned lands to
be equally scotted. And yet notwithstanding the said custom, did present the
sommer-lands to be taxed but at one third part with the late drowned lands,
when as all the said lands (as appears by the same Presentment) have
preservation only by the said works; which I refer to your Lordships
consideration.

My Lords,

I shall not trouble your Lordships, nor my Self, with a reply to all the
fallacies, Errors and mistakes, set forth in those Animadversions, but shall
only make some Observations upon two or three of them, that your Lordships may
the better judge of the rest.

First, the Animadverter tells your Lordships, sol. 67. That all scots granted
between March, 1627. and September, 1633. were granted according to the Decree
of the 11th of March, 1627. and inferrs, that the same Decree was not smothered
or concealed, for that it was confirmed depending the Treaty with the
Committees of Wittersham Level, and yet with confidence affirms in several
places of his Animadversions, That it was not then intended that the Works and
Indraught in Wittersham Level, (then in Treaty) should be borne at an equal
rate of scots, according to the said Decree, whereas if it had been otherwise
intended, that Decree of Confirmation had been vain and superfluous. And your
Lordships may be pleased to take notice, That such Decree of Confirmation, was
made before the decease of Thomas Dike, Esquire, who signed that Decree of the
11th of March; was privy and party to all the proceedings which induced the
same, so that it could not then be concealed. But Mr. Dike dying in the year,
1632. having survived Nicholas, late Earl of Thanet, Laurence Peirs, John
Bromfield, Esquires, and several other Owners of the drowned lands, who were
likewise privy to those proceedings, and leaving all their Heirs very young,
and wholly ignorant thereof, The said Decree of the 11th of March, was never
afterward Confirmed, but so far smothered and concealed, as that when those
Decrees of the 5th of September, 1633. the 27th of October, 1637. the 4th of
June, 1639. and the 3d of June, 1640. were signed by the Commissioners then
present, by which the scots were again reduced to the disproportions of twelve
pence and four pence, I was present also, and often perused all the Records and
Decrees brought to any of those Sessions; yet by such perusal of them, or by
any debate or discourse of the Commissioners, could never discover that Decree
of the 11th of March, or the Decree for Confirmation thereof, till many years
after, when Sir Thomas Culpeper, the Animadverters Grandfather, acquainted me
therewith; And further, the said Sir Thomas Culpeper, then whom no man was more
active for the Interest of the sommer-lands, nor better acquainted with the
transactions of those times, affirmed publicly at a Session of Sewers in the
presence of near thirty Commissioners, That the Owners of the sommer-lands had
not then when the scots were so reduced to the former disproportions of twelve
pence and four pence, so much confidence of the Justice or Honor thereof, as
to acquaint any one Owner of the drowned lands not interessed in the
sommer-lands, how the business of scotting was settled in March 1627. and then
demand his consent for reducing them to the former disproportions.

And your Lordships may be pleased to take notice of another fallacy set forth
in the Epistle Dedicatory, and several places of the Animadversions, viz. That
in the year, 1637. by Decree of Sewers, with the full and free consent of the
Commissioners and Owners, as well for the Interest of the sommer-lands, as the
drowned lands, all things relating to the said Works and Rates of scotting the
lands toward the charge thereof, were unanimously agreed to, and confirmed,
and the Rates of twelve pence the Acre for the drowned lands, and four pence
the Acre for the sommer-lands, for all works in Wittersham Level, and one
yearly scot of twelve pence the Acre, for the Sluice and Works upon the old
Channel; O monstrum, horrendum; For were that Decree printed with the
Animadversions, it would therein have clearly appeared to your Lordships, That
neither the Sluice, or Works in the old Channel, are once mentioned, or so much
as intimated in any part of that large Decree; and that those words (full and
free consent of the Owners, etc.) have no relation or influence to the granting
or proportioning of scots (as is pretended) for discharge of the Works, Rents,
and other Charges occasioned by the said Indraught; but those scots are granted
and proportioned by a Decree distinct from the other Decrees, and without any
such Preface of full and free consent, etc. And Sir Thomas Culpeper who was
party to, and present at the making of that Decree, declared (as before is set
forth) what full and free consent was given thereunto by the Owners of the
drowned lands; And your Lordships may further take notice, That the proportion
of scotting was before that time, reduced to twelve pence and four pence, by
Decree of Sewers made the 5th of September, 1633. wherein there are not any
words of full and free consent, nor is it pretended by the Animadverter, that
there are any such: And further, that of nine Commissioners who signed that
Decree of 1637, only one of them (and he was wholly ignorant of the said
Decree of 1627.) had any Interest in the drowned lands, other then such who had
likewise such interest in the summer lands, as those disproportions were for
their advantage; That the Decree of the 5th of September, 1633. was signed by
ten Commissioners, of whom one only had such interest in the drowned lands, as
rendered those disproportions to his disadvantage; That of eight Commissioners
who signed the Decree of June the 4th 1639. there was not any one of them but
had a benefit by those disproportions, and six of them were not at all
interessed in the drowned lands; And that of twelve Commissioners, who signed
the Decree of June the 4th 1640. there were only three that had any Interest
in the drowned lands, of whom Mr. Gibbon and my Self, were two, (neither of us
then having any knowledge of the Decree of March, 1627.) the third was the late
Lord Culpeper, who I believe was then likewise ignorant of that Decree; nor can
the Animadverter make it appear that he knew thereof; but howsoever, his
Interest in the sommer-lands was such, as that those disproportions redownded
to his Lordships benefit. Neither can I find upon perusal of the Decrees, That
at any Session of Sewers holden for the said Levels, from, 1632. till 1645.
there were ever three Commissions present, who had not such Interest in the
sommer-lands, (if Owners) but that those disproportions accrued to their
profit, the Owners of the sommer-lands had so wisely provided for their
Interest at the renewing of that Commission, which for your Lordships
satisfaction therein, will fully appear to your Lordships, by perusing the
Commissioners names, empowered by the Commission of those times which I have
hereunto annexed, most of whom with their Interests and Relations, are well
known to your Lordships, viz.

Thomas Lord Coventry, L. Keeper, etc. Philip Earl of Pemb. and Mountgom, etc.
Theophilus Earl of Suss. Warden, etc. Edward Earl of Dorset, Chamb. etc. Robert
Earl of Leicester Mildmay Earl of Westmorland Thomas Earl of Winchelsea John
Earl of Thannet Henry Lord Abergavenay Francis Lord Dear Sir Henry Vane,
Knight, Treasu. etc. Sir Joh. Finch, Knight, Chief Just. etc. Sir Edward
Henden, Knight, one of the Barons, etc. Sir George Fane, Knight Sir Thomas
Pelham, Baronet Sir John Shelley, Knight and Baronet Sir John Baker, Baronet.
Sir Henry Sedley, Baronet Knts and Baronets
Sir Rog. Twisden Sir Edward Hales Sir Walter Roberts Sir Joh. Sidley of
Wroatham Sir Edw. Deering
Sir Michael Livesey, Baronet Sir Thomas Peirs, Baronet Sir Ralph Whitfield,
Knight, one of the Kings Sergeants at Law Sir Geo. Saadis, Knight of the Bathe
Sir Henry Guilford Sir Francis Barnham Sir Thomas Hendly Sir Peter Hayman Sir
Alexander Culpeper of Sedgbury Sir Humphry Tufion Sir Robert Darrell. Sir
Thomas Parker Sir Robert Filmer Sir John Honywood Sir Thomas Culpeper Sir
Thomas Springate Sir John Culpeper. Sir John Hales Sir Robert Honywood Sir
Anthony St. Ledger Sir Robert Honywood younger Sir Cheney Culpeper, Knight Sir
Robert Foster, Sergeant at Law The Dean of Canterbury for the time being Samuel
Short Thomas Covert John Mun Robert Burnham Anthony St. Ledger William Clarke
Robert Wildigos Edward Chute Norton Knachbull Lawrence Ashburnham William Cage
Ralph Freak John Henden William Boys Edward Partheridge Thomas Fludd John Fag
John Thetcher John Alford John Argall Richard Porter Robert Moyle Nicholas Took
Henry Crisp John Theobald Nicholas St. John Thomas Dike Martin Shepherd William
Culpeper Thomas Godfrey William White Thankful Frewen George Curtis, Esquires
Q. The Mayors of Rye, Winchelsea, and Tenterden, for the time being Thomas
Short Robert Curtis Edmund Gibbon Joseph Butcher Richard Donnton Edward Finch
Shemaiah Setherst Nicholas Knight John Meers Edward Masters of Woodchurch
Thomas Scot John Foul Nathaniel Powell Richard Coberham Robert Bindlos,
Gentlemen Q. The Expenditor of Romney Marsh. Q. The Expenditor of the five
Waterings Q. The Bailiffs and Expenditor of Walland Marsh
Out of which number the Animadverter, fol. 44. has selected 26 Commissioners,
whom he conceived (but of a false conception) were for the Interest of the
drowned lands, viz.

Nicholas late E. of Thanet. John Lord Tufton. Sir John Shelley. Sir Walter
Roberts. Sir John Wildegoss. Sir Ralph Bosvile. Sir Ale. Culpeper. Sir John
Foul. Sir John Culpeper. William Shelley. Robert Foster. John Culpeper. Edward
Bromfield William Boys. Thomas Dike. William Culpeper. Ralph Bufkin. Thomas
Sands. Richard Porter. Peter Courthope. William White. Thankful Frewen. Edmond
Gibbon. Richard Downton. William Muddle. Joseph Benbridge.
In Answer whereunto, I must acquaint your Lordships, That Nicholas Earl of
Thanet, and Thomas Dike, Esquire, were dead before this Commission issued,
which ushered in the great oppression which after fell upon the Owners of the
drowned lands; That Sir Ralph Bosvile, and Richard Porter, were wholly
interessed in the sommer-lands; That Sir John Foul, and Sir John Culpeper, had
such Interest in the sommer-lands, as that it was for their advantage to reduce
the scots unto the disproportions of twelve pence and four pence; That fourteen
of those 26 Commissioners, had not then any lands in the said Level, and may
not be said to be more for the interest of the drowned lands, then
sommer-lands; And that it cannot be made to appear, that at any one time,
during the continuance of that Commission, there appeared at any Session of
Sewers, more then three Commissioners of such Interest in the drowned lands, as
rendered those disproportions prejudicial unto them. And now do your Lordships
judge, whether the scots were in the year 1633. reduced to twelve pence per
Acre drowned lands, and four pence per Acre sommer-lands, by the full and free
consent of the Owners of the drowned lands, or by the Power and Influence which
the Owners of the sommer-lands had in that Commission. And I desire your
Lordships to observe, How that the Animadverter does often affirm, That the
scots were reduced to those disproportions, by the full and free consent of the
Owners of the drowned lands, and as often, That it was in pursuance of the
pretended previous Agreement. Of which Agreement it seems the Grandchildren
have better knowledge then their Grandfathers had, whom they pretend to be
parties thereunto. From whose example the present Owners of the sommer-lands,
have for several years past, (as is well known to your Lordships) endeavored
to procure a Commission for the said Levels, with the like advantages. From
what has been declared, your Lordships may Collect what full and free consent
there was of the Owners of the drowned lands, for alteration of the manner of
scotting, so solemnly settled in 1627. by Award, Consent, and Decree of Sewers,
and which continued till the year 1633. and by the express words and intendment
of that Decree, (which is set down in my remonstrance, fol. 26.) was to be
continued for all future works.

Which notwithstanding, the Animadverter, fol. 35. with great confidence
affirms, That the four learned Lawers, who made that Award did not intend that
the same should always remain in full force for the equality of scots, in case
the Commissioners, as well for the drowned lands as sommer-lands, upon new
undertakings without the limits of their own Commission, should agree amongst
themselves, and upon that occasion settle other and more equal (though
different) proportions according to the advantage that the drowned lands and
sommer-lands respectively, should have by these works; And also notwithstanding
a set meeting of Commissioners for Romney Marsh, Walland Marsh, Wittersham
Level, and the Upper Levels at Ashford, September the 18th 1629. and of some of
them at several other times to consult and agree, At what proportion the new
works then proposed to be done in Wittersham, should be paid and borne, and
Agreements thereupon made accordingly.

To which I answer, That the Animadverter has supposed a Case (when there was
never any such) and then takes it for granted; and has in the same manner
proceeded in most of his Arguments set down in his Animadversions, which your
Lordships will easily discover on your considerate perusal of them, though my
time nor occasions will not permit me to delineate them to your Lordships. And
I further answer, That neither by the Articles with Wittersham Level, nor at
the meeting of the Commissioners for Romney Marsh, Walland Marsh, etc. in
September, 1629. nor at any other time was it propounded, much less agreed, at
what Rates and Proportions the Upper Levels should be taxed or scotted for the
Works and Indraught in Wittersham Level; Nor was the same the business of any
of those meetings, which were only to consider in what manner the intended
works were to be proceeded in, and what contribution Romney Marsh and Walland
Marsh, should pay toward the same, which were agreed upon accordingly: Nor
does the Animadverter make it appear by the Preamble of any Decree, or by any
other writing, or by any discourse or conference, That any Owner of the drowned
lands, not interessed in the sommer-lands, who knew of the said Decree of the
11th of March, ever assented, (which is the Agreement controverted, and which
the Animadverter would Incognito crowd into other Agreements, whereunto this
has no reference) much less formally agreed to for himself, and others of the
same interest, That for the Works and Indraught in Wittersham Level, the scots
should be again reduced to the former disproportions of twelve pence and four
pence: Nor that the same was otherwise effected, then by such advantage of
Commissioners, and other means before herein declared.

And I further answer, That no man can believe that the four learned Lawyers
who made that Award, or the Commissioners who Decreed the same, intended that
such equality of scots should extend only to the works then in being, if he
consider that the matters in difference between the Owners of the drowned lands
and sommer-lands being referred unto them, they did upon hearing both parties,
draw up the Case with the Queries arising from the same, whereunto both Parties
assented; one of those Queries being thus, viz. If the Indraught in Woodruff be
left off and not used, and other new works of Recovery and Preservation
undertaken, how and by what Rates the Rent shall be paid, and the charge of
such Works, borne hereafter by the Decrees aforesaid? Thereupon an Award was
made, and Decreed by several Commissioners interessed in the sommer-lands, That
all scots to be granted for all Works thereafter to be done, should be granted
and paid equally, as well for the sommer-lands, as drowned lands.

And further, That there were then no works on foot, (as the Animadverter does
acknowledge in his Epistle Dedicatory, and elsewhere) which either did or could
be pretended to drain the drowned lands, or better their condition, and then
for them to Award and Decree, That those lands which were not yearly worth one
penny the Acre, should be scotted at twelve pence per Acre to every scot, for
such works only as tended to the preservation of the sommer-lands (worth twenty
shillings per Acre) had been contrary to all Equity and common Reason, if it
had not been then intended, that if there should then after any works be
undertaken, as well for the recovery of the drowned lands, as preservation of
the sommer-lands, that they should both join in an equal rate of scots,
according to the said Award and Decree thereupon made, and with the full and
free consent of the Owners of the sommer-lands. And thus much Sir Thomas
Culpeper, the Animadverters Grandfather, not many weeks before he died,
attested under his hand, who being a Party that submitted unto that Award, and
joined in the Decree for Confirmation thereof, could not but know the intent
and scope thereof much better then his Grandson, the Animadverter. And the
Animadverter further informs your Lordships, of the good Natures of the Owners
of the drowned lands; who notwithstanding that they then made it appear, that
they would have preserved themselves at far easier rates then they had done
since their conjunction with the drowned lands, yet they condescended to pay
toward those remaining works, equally Acre for Acre with the drowned lands,
and so continued to do till 1633. Of their good Natures therein, I leave to the
Judgment of your Lordships abundant Charity, upon consideration of the
Premises; but I desire your Lordships to take notice, that the Animadverter
does not at all declare or mention by what ways or means the same was feazable;
and that Sir Thomas Culpeper, who was then upon the Place, tells your
Lordships, that indifferent men can hardly be persuaded without a Mathematical
Demonstration, that those decaying lands could have found a cheaper way to
preserve and secure themselves, then by joining with the other Levels.

As to that part of the Animadverters Objection, That the Works and Indraught
in Wittersham Level, are out of the limits of the Commission for the Upper
Levels, and concerned Romney Marsh and Walland Marsh, as well as the Upper
Levels, and therefore not intended by the Award and Decree thereupon made to be
borne at an equal rate of scots.

I further Answer, That the Works and Indraught then being at Woodruff, were
likewise out of the Commission for the Upper Levels, viz. In Walland Marsh, and
did concern the Sewers of Romney Marsh and Walland Marsh, as the Works and
Indraught in Wittersham now do; and therefore it could not otherwise be
intended, but that the Charge thereof was to be borne at an equal rate of scots.

As to that scandalous aspersion which the Animadverter fol. 65. has cast upon
the Commissioners and Jurors in 1644. I answer, That not any one of these
Jurors was at such time as he was impanelled, Owner of any lands within the
limits of the Commission, as they then severally affirmed upon examination
before the Commissioners, and as then appeared by the Scot-book for that year
then produced for better discovery thereof; but upon what Grounds or Mistakes
some persons joined in that Petition (as Captain Kedwell, and others) who were
neither Owners nor Farmers of any of the lands therein mentioned, I know not.

And as to that other malicious Insinuation, touching the Clark of the Sewers,
and the defacing and withdrawing of Records, I answer; That if any such have
been, the Animadverter if he know thereof, ought to prosecute the Offenders: I
know some Records are missing, which made against the Interest of the
sommer-lands (if produced) which I could never see or procure; and that the
present Clerk, who was sometime my menial servant, was chosen Clerk but in
1652. and the proceedings whereat the Animadverter takes most offense, were
several years before, when Mr. William Powell, a well-wisher to the
sommer-lands, being Farmer unto a considerable part thereof, and Tenant unto
Sir Edward Hales, was Clerk of the Sewers.

My Lords,

I have neither time or opportunity to make particular Answers to the many
malicious Surmises and Calumnies, cast upon S. N. P. by the Animadverter, in
every page of those Animadversions, who the better to blast and invalidate
whatever should be by him produced or urged, does not take notice of his
Grandfather, or any of his Reasons or Arguments, who was an Actor in all those
transactions which passed at such time when I was wholly a stranger to those
Levels, and often declared them, with the Grounds and Reasons of them, but with
oblique reflections insinuates them as my Fancies and Constructions, grounded
only upon ipse dixit. I desire your Lordships to call to mind, That Sir Thomas
Culpeper, who was the Dean and Chapters Tenant to the High-lands in Appledore
about forty years, and knew best what benefit and security those lands had
received and enjoyed by those works, did join (with other Commissioners) in
several Decrees, whereby those lands are scotted to the Works and Indraught in
Wittersham Level.

My Lords,

I have hereunto annexed the late presentment of the Jurors at Tenterden, with
the Decrees thereupon made, and some Observations upon both, which I refer to
your Lordships consideration.

At a Session of Sewers, holden at Tenterden in the County of Kent, the 16th
day of June, in the 15th year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles
the second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
King, Defender of the Faith, etc. Anno Dom. 1663. Before Sir Edward Hales
Baronet, Sir John Covert, Knight and Baronet, Sir Charles Shelley, Sir
Nathaniel Powel, Sir Thomas Peirs, Baronets, Sir Anthony Ancher, Sir George
Choute, Knights, George Porter, Thomas Herlackenden, Edward Hales, John Marten,
Thomas Lake, John Middleton, John Horsmonden, Samuel Boys, Ralph Bufkin,
Esquires, William Levet. and William Hawes, Gent. By Virtue of his Majesty's
Commission, bearing date the 15th day of August in the 14th year of his said
Majesty's Reign.
Imprimis,

IT is Ordered and Decreed, that the Expenditor of the Upper Levels shall out
of the first moneys he receives for the Countries use, pay and discharge unto
Mr Wooddall, such Arrears of Tithes, as is due to him from the Upper Levels.

Also it is Ordered and Decreed, that the Presentment of the Jurors of Kent and
Sussex, Impanelled by us for inquiry, be entered in this book as follows,; and
that all scots now and for the future, be granted accordingly.

KENT and SUSSEX.
The Presentment of the Jurors of enquiry, for the Counties of Kent and Sussex,
before the Commissioners of Sewers, at their Sessions holden at Tenterden, the
16th day of June, 1663. 15 Caroli 2. upon such evidence as was then offered
unto us, and upon our own view with mature deliberation thereupon had.
Imprimis,

1. WE Present, that for the preservation of the three thousand Acres of
drowned lands, and the two thousand Acres of the sommer-lands within the Upper
Levels, That the said sommer-lands be scotted at one third part, in reference
or relation to all such scots as shall hereafter be imposed upon the drowned
lands, to the Works and Rents of Wittersham, as formerly has been done.

Item,

2. We Present, That the lands called by the name of the High-lands, containing
222 Acres, or thereabouts, and 350 Acres or thereabouts, lying in Redhill and
Appledore, and also 426 Acres, or thereabouts, lying in the Parish of Stone,
containing in the whole by estimation, a thousand Acres or thereabouts, not
formerly scotted till the year 1645. ought not to be scotted to the Rents and
Works of Wittersham, for that it appears to us, they receive no benefit by the
same.

Item,

3. We Present, and our Opinion is, That the old admeasurement of the lands
lying in Sherley Moor, according to the larger Acre, ought to be scotted as
formerly, and no otherwise.

Item,

4. We Present the Gutts of Redding, Redhill, and Ebony, lately have been, and
still continue very much annoyed by the slubb brought in by the sea into the
Channel of Rother, whereby the said Channel is very much swerved through the
decay of the Sluice in Thorney Wall, to the great detriment of those Levels in
not well sewing their waters, and dreyning their lands; And our opinion is,
That the said Sewers in short time, will be utterly lost, unless some expedient
way be found for the scouring the Channel in the River of Rother, either by
erecting the said Sluice at Thorney Wall, or otherwise as your wisdoms shall
think fit. And further, That if any new work or works shall be shortly
attempted for the purposes aforesaid, that all the lands, drowned lands and
sommer-lands, containing in the whole about five thousand Acres, and all the
thousand Acres in the High lands at the lower end of Sherley Moor, Redhill,
Appledore, and Stone, may be scotted at an equal rate for the cleansing the
River of Rother, and not otherwise.

Thomas Lambert. William Andrew. Zouch Brockman. Edward Simonds. William
Randolph. John Crips. Stephen Pook. William Brewer. William Delawn. George
Swan. Henry Friar John Bull. Joseph Newington. John Moyle. Henry Oxenden. John
Bodnam. Robert Drayner. Thomas Midmor. Walter Roberts.
Item, For the payment of the Rents of Wittersham Level, and for doing the
works in the said Level, it is according to the Presentment of a Jury, this day
made, Ordered and Decreed, That there shall be levied eleven scots, each of
them of four pence the Acre for all the lands anciently called or reputed
sommer-lands, and eleven scots, each of them of twelve pence the Acre, for all
the lands anciently called or reputed to be drowned lands, lying between Vdiham
Oak, and Oxney Ferry, and usually before the year 1645. scotted to the works
upon the River of Rother, to be paid by the Owners and Occupiers of the said
lands respectively. All which eleven scots are hereby granted, and are to be
paid to Mr. William Ward, at the house of James Nash in Newenden, in manner
following, viz. Four of the said scots the 25th of July next, four of the said
scots the 15th of August next, and three scots residue of the said eleven
scots, the 15th of September next. And it is further Ordered and Decreed, That
notice shall be given for the payment of the said eleven scots, at all such
Parish Churches, as has heretofore been usually accustomed; And if any person
or persons Taxed or Scotted as aforesaid, shall make default of payment of
their said scots, or any of them, or any part of them, that then he or they so
making default, shall forfeit and pay the doubles and wanes of their said
scots, according to the custom of Romney Marsh, to be Levied by the several
and respective Bailiffs of the Upper Levels, by distress and sale of the Goods
and Chattels to be taken upon the lands of him or them so scotted, making
default. And if there be no sufficient distress to be had and taken upon the
Marshes so scotted, or chargeable with the payment of the said scots
respectively. That then the said scots shall be Levied upon the Goods and
Chattels of the several persons so making default, by distress and sale of
their Goods and Chattels as aforesaid, wheresoever there shall be sufficient
distress found for the Levying thereof.

Item, For the cleansing of the old Channel between Farnhill and Oxney Ferry,
and mending and arming of the walls of Stone Level, and Appledore Level, it is
also according to the aforesaid Presentment, Ordered and Decreed, That there
shall be one scot Levied of six pence the Acre, upon all the scottable lands
lying between Udiham Oak, and Oxney Ferry, as well those lands usually scotted
to the works upon the River of Rother, before the year 1645. as all others at
any time since scotted thereunto; And also upon all the lands in Appledore to
the foot of the Windmil hill there, and upon all the lands in the Level of
Stone, to be paid to Mr. William Ward, at the house of James Nash in Newenden,
upon the last day of July next ensuing. And it is further Ordered and Decreed,
That notice shall be given for the payment of the said Scot, at all such Parish
Churches as has heretofore been usually accustomed; And if any person or
persons Taxed or Scotted as aforesaid, shall make default of payment of their
said Scot, or any part thereof, That then he or they so making default, shall
forfeit and pay the doubles and wanes of their said Scot, according to the
custom of Romney Marsh, to be Levied by the several and respective Bailiffs of
the Upper Levels, by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels, to be taken
upon the lands of him or them so scotted, making default; And if there be no
sufficient distress to be had and taken upon the Marshes so scotted, or
chargeable with the payment of the said Scot respectively, That then the said
Scot shall be Levied upon the Goods and Chattels of the several persons so
making default, by distress and sale of their Goods and Chattels, as aforesaid,
wheresoever there shall be sufficient distress found for the Levying thereof.

Item, It is Ordered and Decreed, That the Expenditor of the Upper Levels,
shall take care of the works in Wittersham Level, and make such provision of
materials, as shall be needful for the same.

Also it is Ordered and desired, that Sir George Choute Knight, Thomas
Herlackenden, and John Marten Esquires, or any two of them, will take the care
and oversight of cleansing the old Channel between Farnhill and Oxney Ferry,
and mending and arming of the walls of Stone Level and Appledore lands, and
give direction for the doing thereof as they shall find necessary; and the
Expenditor is out of the Scot granted for the purpose aforesaid, to satisfy
and pay such sums of money as shall be by them directed to be expended for
the purposes aforesaid.

Item, It is Ordered and Decreed, That there shall be a Session of Sewers
holden for the Upper Levels at the sign of the star in Maidstone, upon the
first day of September next ensuing, in case the Assize for the County of Kent
be not holden before that time; And in case the said Assizes be holden before
the said first day of September, that then there shall be a Session of Sewers
holden for the said Levels, at the place aforesaid, the second day after the
said Assizes shall begin.

Also it is Ordered and Decreed, That there shall not be at any time hereafter,
any more moneys expended in the arming of the walls in Redhill, Appledore, and
Stone, then the scots arising, and to be paid out of those respective Levels
shall amount unto.

Item, It is Ordered and desired, That Sir Edward Hales, Baronet, Sir George
Choute, Knight, Thomas Herlackenden, Edward Hales, John Marten, Thomas Lake,
John Horsmonden, Samuel Boys, and Ralph Bufkin, Esquires, or any three or more
of them, would be pleased to meet at the sign of the Kings Head in Cranbrook,
upon the 16th day of July next ensuing, and to examine and cast up the accounts
of Mr. William Ward Expenditor for the Upper Levels, and to certify the same
at the next Session of Sewers.

Edward Hales. An ho. Ancher. George Choute. George Porter. Edward Hales. John
Horsmonden. John Covert. Tho. Herlackenden. John Midleton.


My Lords,

If those Jurors had taken a view of the lands in Sherley Moor, Redhill and
Appledore, (howbeit there fell much rain about that time) they would have found
them to be welsewing lands; and that all the sommer-lands in Sherley Moor and
elsewhere, other then part of Ebony Level, (which have fall enough into the
Channel to do the same) issue their waters, together with the drowned lands,
through the Indraught in Wittersham Level, and then I presume would not (upon
mature deliberation) have found any reason why the late sommer-lands should be
scotted for their preservation, but at one third part with the late drowned
lands, unto the said Works and Indraught, whereby they equally enjoy
preservation, the sommer-lands being of equal yearly value with the best of the
drowned lands, and of much more, then a considerable part of them.

And they might likewise then have seen, That the High-lands in Sherley Moor,
Redhill, and Appledore, issue their waters between Redding Gutt and Keet Gutt,
one of them lying on the East, the other on the West of them, viz. above and
belove them, upon the same Channel, and must have benefit of sewer, as those
lands have which sew their waters through Redding and Keet Gutts, and
contribute to the charge of the said Works and Indraught, for the benefit they
receive thereby; and then I presume, that they would not have presented, That
it did not appear unto them, that the High-lands in Sherley Moor, Redhill, and
Appledore, (issuing their waters between Redding and Keet Gutts as aforesaid)
received any benefit by the said Works and Indraught, much less have presented
(upon mature deliberation) that those lands ought not to be scotted unto the
said Works and Indraught, for that it appears unto them, that they receive no
benefit thereby, especially when it after appears in the fourth Clause of their
presentment, That the maintaining of the Outfall into the old Channel, is
necessary for the well sewing of those High-lands.

And further, had those Jurors been conversant or acquainted with matters of
Sewers, they could not upon mature deliberation have presented, That for repair
of the Sluice at Thorney Wall, and cleansing the slub out of the Channel there,
that all the lands, drowned lands and sommer-lands, containing about 5000
Acres, and the 1000 Acres of High-lands, shall be equally scotted to the Charge
thereof, when as it appeared unto them upon their View, and is apparent to
every eye upon the Place, that no part of the drowned lands, nor the twentieth
part of the sommer-lands, sew any of their waters by that Sluice or Channel; and
therefore by the Law and Rule of Sewers, are not to be scotted thereunto; or
had they well understood what operations and effects Groyns and Obstructions
make in a salt Channel, they would not have presented, That the decay of that
Sluice, was the cause that the slubb swerved the Channel, but would have
presented, That the Groyns, Bridges, and Obstructions made in the Channel, had
caused the same, and that it were fit to have them removed.

That those Groynes and Obstructions, have caused the Channel to swerve, has
appeared upon several Views of the Commissioners,. And it is further manifested
by several Decrees (which are hereunto annexed) made by Commissioners, most of
them being interessed in the sommer-lands; and had been removed, if the limits
of Walland Marsh had not been unduly enlarged to Oxney Ferry, (which prevented
the same) As your Lordships may well remember.

My Lords,

I believe those Jurors to be men of integrity, and such as will not act
contrary to their Consciences; But they are men, and may err in their
Judgments through miss-Conusance or miss-Information, therefore I hope it may
be said without offense, that there are errors in their Presentiments.

As to the Decrees which are made according to those Presentiments, I shall not
mention them, for that your Lordships may judge of them by what has been
already declared; Only your Lordships may take notice, That the Commissioners
have not only charged all those lands for cleansing the said Channel as is
presented, but have further charged them toward the mending and arming the
Walls in Stone and Appledore Levels, which were at first made, and have ever
since been maintained, as all the other Walls of the Upper Levels are, at the
particular Charge of the respective Owners.

My Lords,

I have quitted my Interest in the Levels, and have taken this trouble upon me
for Vindication of the Truth, and to beget a right Understanding of the Matters
in Difference, in the Parties concerned, that Peace and Unity may ensue
thereupon, which is the Chief aim of,

My Lords, Your Honors obliged and humble Servant, Nathaneel Powel.
July the 10th 1663.

