A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL Of the Reverend Mr. THOMAS GRAY, Late Vicar of Dedham
in Essex; PREACHED In the Parish Church of Dedham, Febr. the 2d. 1691/2.

With a short Account of his LIFE.

By JOSEPH POWELL, A. M. Rector of St. Mary on the Wall, in Colchester.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill, 1692.

St. LUKE CHAP. ii. VER. 29. Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace.


IT is related in the Sacred History, 1 King. 19.4.
of the great Prophet Elijah, that he was perfectly cloyed with Life, and
prayed for a dismission; he went a days Journey into the Wilderness, and came
and sat down under a Juniper Tree; and he requested for himself that he might
die, and said, It is enough now, O Lord, take away my Life; for I am not better
than my Fathers. This looks like a Fit of Melancholy, occasioned by a
Reflection on the unsuccessfulness of his Ministry, and the rage of Jezabel
against him; and seems rather to be mentioned as an Instance of the
Imperfections that stick to the best of Men in this Life, than to be proposed
for our Imitation, or to be drawn into Example by us. Job 7.16.
The like Account the Holy Books give us of another Man, very Eminent for his
Piety in the Age he lived in; that he loathed Life, and was very desirous an
end might be put to it. The Objection against this Example also is, that Holy
Job breaks forth into this Expression in the anguish and vexation of his
Spirit; and that it was the mere effect of the pressure of that load of
Troubles and Evils under which he labored: Neither can this be denied; for the
Holy Man seems hereupon, both to ground, and to excuse his desire of Death, as
will be easily discerned by any, who will be at the pains to consult that
Chapter; of which give me leave to give you a short Paraphrase, so far as
concerns this his Complaint of Life, and earnest desire of Death. Let me ask
you, says he to his Friends, these Questions; Is not Death appointed by the
Sovereign Lord of the World to every Man? And does not Man spin out his short
Life on Earth in trouble and toil, like an Hireling his Day? And does not such
an one, wearied out with the Work and Labor of the day, naturally desire the
approach of the Night to give him ease and refreshment? And is not this my
Case, or rather, is not my Case much worse? For both day and night are alike
uneasy to me; you cannot but be sensible into how miserable a State I am
fallen; you who have seen my former Prosperity (unless you have quite put off
Humanity it self) must pity my present Condition; and (which is to me a very
sad Consideration) you are never like to see it better; for I shall enjoy no
more good in this Life; my Body is already overrun with Worms, and I am become
loathsome while I live; and you cannot but be sensible how very difficult I find
it to maintain my Temper of Mind in this Condition. Since therefore God has
assigned Death as the End of all these Miseries; can you blame me, that I pray
God to hasten it? I know that it is my Duty to refer my self wholly to God's
wise disposal of me; but assure your selves, if God would give me leave to make
my own choice, I would much rather desire to die than to live: And I cannot but
look upon this desire as proceeding from Wisdom, and a right Judgment of
things. But notwithstanding the special Circumstances attending both these
Cases, there seems to be something in the Requests of those great Men, very
agreeable to the desires of the best Men, whilst under these, wisest, and most
composed Thoughts, and the happiest and most promising Advantages of Life. A
due Reflection upon the Vanity of Humane Life in its best State, with a
steadfast Faith of a future happy State, to succeed the determination of the
short Period of our days here on Earth, are enough to dispose us, not to be
over fond of living any very long time here; and, with submission to the Will
and Providence of God, very cheerfully to receive our Dismission, when ever it
shall be sent us. We so sensibly find, that there is no perfect Happiness to be
met with on Earth, that nothing needs to be said to confirm our Experience; nor
are we ignorant of the result of dying, and the Rewards that befall the
Righteous; when once this Difficulty is overcome. Happiness is the thing that
all humane Nature is reaching at; and who would die struglingly and with
reluctance, whilst under the vigorous expectation of that great Declaration and
Assurance given by our Religion? Rev. 14.13. And I heard a Voice from Heaven,
saying unto me Write, from henceforth, i. e. from the very time of their
Deaths, blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord; yea says the Spirit (which
denotes the undoubted certainty of the thing) that they may rest from their
Labors, and their Works do follow them. The Scriptures therefore have given us
other Instances less liable to these Exceptions; and which represent the desire
of Death, not as a rash, unadvised, impatient, or melancholy Request, but as
the effect of great Piety, high Seize in Virtue and Goodness, and a very
lively sense of a future World; disposing those, who have thus raised
themselves above this World, and enlarged their Minds by the Principles of
Religion, easily to part with all things here below; and to be under Wise, and
Pious, and Devout Desires of Death and Dissolution. Such is the Instance of the
great Apostle, who expresses his longing to be gone; Phil. 1.21.
and concludes peremptorily, that it was much for his Advantage to die; and
though he was content to live, this was upon no other score, but his being
useful and serviceable to others: And he Pronounces this, as the common Desire
of all the Apostles, and very proper to be embraced by all Wise and Pious
Christians. 2 Cor. 5.1.
We know that if the earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
building of God, an house not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens. For in
this, q. d. for this Reason, we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon
with our House, which is from Heaven. And to mention no more, this was the Case
of good old Simeon, a Just and Devout Man, as the Evangelist gives his
Character, who had lived in the Faith and Hope of Israel, the expectation of
the Messiah to come; and by the Account given of him, seems for some time to
have been waiting, both for the fulfilling of this Hope; and for his own
Dissolution. For he had received a Revelation, that he should not die till the
Messiah should come, and he see him: In submission therefore to the Will of
God, and in expectation of this Promise, he still lived, not fond of Life, but
cheerfully waiting for Death, as the End of his Troubles here on Earth, and the
beginning of a new and better Life; and coming into the Temple at the time that
Jesus was presented to the Lord, according to the Custom of the Law, he took
the Child up in his Arms, and publicly declared, that this was the Messiah so
long promised; and the Revelation of his seeing him in the Flesh being
fulfilled to him, he now expresses his hearty and earnest desire to be gathered
to his Fathers in the Words of my Text.

Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace.

From which I might fairly Discourse these Two things.

I. That it is very becoming a Wise Man, and especially a Pious Christian, to
be very indifferent to Life, and to know when he has had enough of it; yea, to
be weary of the World, and to be very willing to have his Dismission.

II. That it is a very desirable thing to depart this Life in peace.

I shall consider only the First Particular, and before I enter upon the
Argument, I must set these following Bounds and Limitations to it.

1. This is to be understood with great deference to the Wisdom and Providence
of God, so as to show no impatience of Life.

2. With respect to the Benefit and Advantage of others, for whose sake a Wise
and Good Man, who is very willing to die, may also be willing to live; yea,
upon this account he may be desirous to live: when otherwise, and for his own
sake, he would make it his choice to die.

3. This desire of Death is never to be divided from a firm persuasion of Mind,
that whatever God orders to us, be it Life, or Death, is, for that reason,
best; and therefore it is rather to be understood, as a desire, that God would
then take us out of this World, when, to his Infinite Wisdom, it shall appear
to be most for our, and the Advantage of others, who depend upon us, or we have
any relation to.

1. This is to be understood with great deference to the Wisdom and Providence
of God, so as to show no impatience of Life. We are in this World like Soldiers
in an Army, assigned by their General to their several Posts; which would be
direct Disobedience, proceeding from Sedition, Mutiny, or Cowardice, to desert,
without leave: And from what Cause soever it proceeds, it is highly punishable.
Such a Post is humane Life; which must not be abandoned without permission, and
till the Providence of God discharge us. We must not be so weary of Life, or
fond of Death, as voluntarily to forsake the one, and hasten the other by our
own acts, or any means used upon our selves. This, I am aware, has of old been
accounted a true Instance of a Roman Spirit of Magnanimity, and Greatness of
Mind, for Men to dispatch themselves; and thereby put a period to those Evils
they were not able to bear: Thus the brave Cato slew himself, not being able to
bear Caesar's Victories, nor to endure to think of falling into the Conqueror's
Hands. Thus Paulus Aemilius replied to Perseus, when he so meanly supplicated
him that he might not be led in Triumph, That it had been, and was still in his
own Power to prevent this Disgrace; and that it was the true mark of a Coward
to have a Remedy at hand, and not to dare to use it. But as such actions as
these are utterly inconsistent with a steady Belief of God's Wise Government of
the World; and, particularly, with the Principles of Christianity; so neither
are they Instances of that Greatness of Mind they pretend to; they are rather
plain Evidences of Pusillanimity, and Vileness of Mind; in that Men cannot bear
Evils, as becomes Philosophers, and especially Christians; but are prevailed
upon basely and meanly to fly from them; as St. Austin excellently argues in
that noble Book of his, of tho City of God; where he maintains, that a
voluntary Death is no Argument of Greatness of Mind.

2. It must be understood with respect to the Benefit and Advantage of others;
for whose sake, a wise and good Man, who is willing to die, may also be willing
to live; yea, upon this account, be desirous to live, when otherwise, and for
his own sake, he would make it his choice to die.

That which causes other Men to desire their Lives, is a good reason to
themselves to desire to live; at least, to be so well content with this, as not
to be weary of Life. When a Man is of more than ordinary Use and Benefit to the
Commonwealth, or the Church of God, or in the Place where he lives, or when he
has a numerous Family, and many young Children, who are growing up as Plants
for the next Age; who receive a mighty Benefit by his careful Provision for
them, by his Instruction, by his Example, and by a great Diligence and Care
used in their Education; and when, by the course of Nature, he might yet have
lived many Years: In such cases it is very reasonable for others to desire the
Lives of such Men: Sometimes the scarcity of such Men, and the circumstances of
the time, when their Help and Assistance is like to be, in a special manner,
beneficial to the World, renders it reasonable to be very earnest in asking of
God, their Lives: And those are also good Reasons why they themselves should
desire to live; living to the benefit of others, and so as to be useful in our
Generations, being one great End of Life; and a considerable Reason why it is
desirable. And this was the very case of St. Paul, which put him to such a
struggle with himself, which to desire. In respect of himself, it was past all
dispute, that Death was most desirable; but in regard to those, to whom his
Ministry was serviceable, he was content to bear Life a little longer. Phil.
1.23.
I am in a strait, says he, betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ, which is far better; nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you.

3. This desire of Death is never to be divided from a firm persuasion of Mind,
that whatever God orders to us, be it Life, or Death, is, for that Reason,
best: And therefore is rather to be understood as a desire, that God would then
take us out of this World; when, to his Infinite Wisdom, it shall appear to be
most for our own, and the Advantage of others, who depend upon us, or we have
any relation to. This is that great Principle, which alone can carry us
cheerfully through this World, and dispose us to submit freely, not only to the
variety of Changes we meet with in it; but also to our great Change; and
neither impatiently to expect it, nor yet to be startled at it, when it comes.
In our very judgment, as Epictetus speaks, more to consent to that, which God
would have, than what our own Inclinations lead us to: To desire and wish just
so, as God does: We may mistake (and so may our Friends too, in their Opinion
of things) when we imagine, that had we lived longer, we could have been very
useful to the World; and done a great deal of good in it. God is the best Judge
of this; and he is the Wise Disposer of our Lives. It Is sufficient for us, that
we have done what good we could while we did live. We may be troubled for our
Family, and Relations, for our little Children, and some special Friends, who
enjoyed a visible Advantage by our continuance amongst them. We may be
concerned to consider how hard it is like to be with our Oss-spring, and how
many shocks they may endure after our departure. But, do we remember that we
leave them to the Care of that Waking and Merciful Providence, of which we our
selves have had so large an Experience all our Days. We may be wretchedly out,
and often are so in our foreboding of Events. Their being deprived of our Help,
and Assistance, and Provision, renders them the more immediate Objects of
Divine Providence; and it has been often seen, that Children, whom their
Parents feared they had left in had Circumstances, have in a wonderful manner,
been better provided for when their Parents have been taken away from them,
than probably they would have been, had they continued with them; that
Reflection, which the Holy Psalmist makes upon his own Life, being frequently
verified in the Posterity of good Men: Psalm 27.10.
When my father and mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up Again, we may
think, that hitherto we have made but low seize in Virtue, and Goodness;
but could we have lived a little longer, we should have been mighty Proficients
in Christ's School; we could have got a much greater Conquest over the World,
and our selves; we could have enobled our Minds with more fixed and lasting
Habits of Virtue; and, if God would be pleased to continue our Lives, we should
be much fitter for Heaven some few Years hence, than we are at present. But in
this also we may be as much mistaken, as in our other Thoughts. Have we
considered that our Virtue, in this World, will always be very imperfect? Have
we weighed what our Danger is, as long as we live here? Do we know, if we live
longer, what future Temptations we may meet with? or can we tell what Influence
they may have upon us? or be sure that they shall not prevail over us? And what
do we think of that Declaration of the Prophet, which holds good under the
Gospel Covenant: Ezekiel. 18.24.
When the righteous man forsakes his righteousness, and commits iniquity,
and does as the wicked does, his righteousness that he has done, shall not be
mentioned: In his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he
sins, in that shall he die. It suffices, that at present we walk sincerely,
and with Integrity, in the way of God's Commandments; and that we heartily, and
universally comply with our Duty, though in much weakness, and encompast with
many infirmities: The rest is to be left entirely to the Wisdom of God: And
when he calls us out of the World, we may hope, and (in as much as all things
are ordered by Infinite Wisdom, and God's Goodness is over all his Works) have
reason to believe, that this is the most fitting time for us to die in, and
best also for those, who belong to us, and for the World in general. Having
fixed these Bounds to it, I now proceed to the Argument it self, viz.

That it is very becoming a wise Man, and especially a Pious Christian, to be
very indifferent to Life, and to know when he has had enough of it; yea, to be
weary of the World; and to be very willing to have his Dismission. Many
Considerations offer themselves for the evincing the Truth of this Proposition;
some respect a wise Man barely considered as such; others concern him as he is
a Christian. I shall name some few of both sorts: Those that respect a wise Man
barely considered as such, are these following: I. A just and impartial
Reflection upon the state of humane Nature. II. A Consideration of the future
Contingencies of Life. III. A view of Death, with respect to the Good and Evil
of Life. IV. That universal Law, That all, who are born, must die.


1. A just and impartial Reflection upon the state of humane Nature. That this
is very Deplorable, has been the loud Complaint of all the Ages of the World;
which has been made by the wisest Men, who have most narrowly considered Man's
Condition in all his various Circumstances: And though there are many Goods in
Life, which are not morosely, and with sullenness to be despised; yea, it is an
Instance of great Folly to rank them in the number of indifferent things; yet
it has been generally agreed, that the Evils of Life do much over-balance the
Good: And though perhaps this is not so, in respect of every individual Man;
for some are in very happy outward Circumstances in respect of others: Yet, if
we consider how it fares with the generality, (which we must do, in duly
examining the Case of humane Nature) upon this view, there is no great doubt to
be made, but the Observation will be found to be as true as it is common, and
it is a Wise Man's part, not barely to consider his own present Circumstances,
but to enquire how it goes with other Men; since (humane Nature being common to
all) whatever any other Man's Condition is, he cannot tell how soon his may be
the same. When thou art lifted up with admiration of thy self, for the Pomp
wherein thou appearest to the World, cast thy Eyes downwards upon those who are
clothed in Rags, and want the Necessaries of Life: When thou art wandering,
says the Philosopher, at Xerxes crossing the Ocean with his mighty Navy; think
of those Wretches who are digging through Mount Athos, who are forced to their
Labor with Blows, and Blood mingled with their Sweat; call to mind that they
had their Ears and Noses cut off, because the Bridge was broken down by the
violence of the Waves; and consider what secret Reflections they make upon
their sad Circumstances.

It Is enough to cause a Wise Man readily to embrace Death, Job 3.17.
to consider only Job's Description of the Grave: There the wicked cease from
troubling; there the weary are at rest. There the prisoners rest together, they
hear not the voice of the oppressor.

2. A Consideration of the future Contingencies of humane Life. These are
without Number, and yet the daily expectation of every Wise Man, who has
considered, what is represented by the Emblem of the Wheel, constant change and
vicissitude in the Life of Man. We are, suppose, very Rich; but do we know how
long we shall be so? and may we not, ere we are aware, be as Poor; Riches make
themselves wings, Prove. 23.5.
they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven, so says the Wisest of Men. We are at
present in perfect health, brisk and lively, and full of vigor; but may not
our Constitution soon be broken, and we cast upon a Bed of Sickness, grapling
with Pains, or crying out under extreme Torture. We enjoy Liberty, and have a
quiet Possession of the Blessings of Life; but is it impossible that ever we
should fall under the Yoke of some of the mighty Nimrods of the World, the
Hunters of Mankind? Job 7.15.
When, as Job expresses it, we should choose strangling rather than Life. i. e.
If we were at our own dispose, the worst of Deaths would be far more desirable
than such a Life. When Xerxes viewing his numerous Army, bemoaned it, that
within a little more than half an Age there would not be a Man of them left
alive; one of his Captains replied, Sir, Let not this trouble you, for they are
like to endure so great fatigue, and so many hardships, that the greater number
will, in all probability, wish themselves dead, a long time before they shall
be so happy as to die. And thus the Roman Orator, comparing the Great Pompey's
Sickness at Naples, where he had like to have died, with his last End,
concludes, That it had been much better for this Great Man to have died, when
he had the Command of the Arms of Rome, and was the darling of the World; for
this had prevented the Bloody War with Caesar; the loss of his Army; his flying
with Disgrace; his being slain by one of his own Servants; the presenting his
Head to his Father-in-Law; his Children turning Fugitive, and the Consiscation
of his Estate, but he had dyed in Honor, and never known any of these Evils:
neither himself nor his Family. And upon this account was that wise saying of
Solon to Croesus, who had cause enough afterward to remember and acknowledge
the Truth of it, That he must first see him die before he judged of his
Happiness; it being a Point of the Grecian Wisdom, to account no Man happy
before his Death.

3. A view of Death, with respect to the Good and Evil of this Life. It Is true,
Death deprives us of all those, which are properly called the Goods of Life:
But, as these are not over Considerable, so it is our present want of them that
renders them of any Consideration at all: If we did not need them, their
absence would be no injury to us in this Life; the true Notion of Riches, being
a sufficiency to answer our Conveniences; beyond which all is but mere
imagination, and attended with the increase of trouble. Since therefore Death
puts us in Circumstances, that we cannot want them, and perfectly takes away
their use, what trouble can it be that it removes us from them. To look upon it
as a very uncomfortable thing, to be cast into Circumstances, where we cannot
use these Goods, is to be so drowned in sensuality, that we are thereby become
fit for nothing beyond this World, and hardly fit for this. But then Death
takes us also from the Evils of Life, which are more in Number than the Goods,
and much over-balance them, in respect, at least to the generality of Mankind.
A bare enumeration of the Evils of Life, does sufficiently, in Tully's Opinion,
commend Death, which puts an end to them. He tells us of one, who writing a
Book in the praise of Death, did therein only describe the Calamities of humane
Life: On this Account Death has been sometimes interpreted as a Reward for
Eminent Piety. The very Heathens seemed to have looked upon it under this
Notion. Thus when those who built the Magnificent Temple of Apollo, prayed that
what was best for Man, might befall them, the third day after they were found
dead; which was reckoned upon as a Reward of their Piety. Agreeably to this,
Isaiah 57.1.
the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the Death of Good Josias, says, He was taken
away from the Evil to come.

4. The Universal Law upon humane Nature, that all who are born must die. It
has ever been accounted a great part of Wisdom, to bring our Minds quietly to
comport with what is not in our Power to avoid. By this Consideration we bear
up under all the disasters of Life; this brings us into Temper, when we have
royl'd our selves never so much, upon the death of our nearest Relations, or
dearest Friends: And the same Thought ought, in common Discretion, to bring us
at least, patiently to submit to our own Deaths, whenever they come. This is
the great Argument that runs through all the Books of the Moralists: A Pilate,
says Plutarch, cannot in a Storm command the Billows, or calm the Winds; or, by
Hectoring, cause the Storm to cease; he at last therefore commits himself to
its Fury; pulls down all his Sails by the Board, and expects the sinking of the
Leaky Vessel; and thus must we, when Life grows painful and uneasy, and Death
approaches, wait our Dissolution, according to the Common Law of Nature; since
that which is unavoidable, ought to disturb us as little as is possible. This
is the Principal Argument of all Seneca's Books of the Brevity of Life, and the
Tranquillity of the Mind, and his Discourses of Providence, That it is a very
unbecoming thing to struggle with the Laws of Fate, and not to be carried
willingly, whither we must go whether we will or no. But far greater reason
have we for this, who are taught, what a Virtue it is, and how capable of
Reward, cheerfully to submit to the Wisdom of God, in disposing of our Lives;
and these are such Arguments, as are proper to induce a Wise Man not to be over
fond of Life, and to know when he has enough of it; and, at least, quietly and
calmly to entertain the Message of Death, when it is sent to him. But then a
Pious Christian has Arguments beyond all these, to do not only thus much, but a
great deal more; to be perfectly above any fondness for Life, and to rejoice at
the Thoughts of his Dissolution; and, with submission to the Will and
Providence of God, heartily to desire his Dismission; and they are these
following.

I. A General Consideration of the Religion we Profess, which has chiefly a
respect to a future World. II. Our Knowledge that the Sting of Death is pulled
out. III. The Thoughts of being absolutely and perfectly freed from Sin. IV.
The enlargement of our Faculties and Perfection of our Virtue. V. The immediate
Possession of Happiness at Death. VI. The Completion of this in Body and Soul
at the General Judgment.
1. A General Consideration of the Religion we Profess, which has chiefly a
respect to a future World. The Christian Religion Promises us very little or
nothing that respects merely this present Life: In this it differs from God's
Ancient Covenant with the Jews, that it secures us of nothing of this World
absolutely, but requires us to refer all things to God's Wisdom and Providence
to appoint them to us, as they shall best tend to the making us wise and good;
and to the sitting of us for what we are designed in another World. Hence
Christ's Kingdom is said not to be of this World: hence we are directed to look
upon our selves as Pilgrims and Strangers on this Earth; John 13.36. Heb.
11.13. 1 Pet. 2.11. Heb. 13.14. Phil. 3.20.
that we are put in Mind, that we have here no continuing City; and are
exhorted to be in the continual search after one that is to come; that we are
counseled to Set our Affections on things above, and not on things on the
earth; to have our Conversation in another World: That is, to behave our selves
as those who expect a Portion and an Interest there; and if we consider a great
number of the Gospel Precepts, and weigh those high degrees of Virtue they
oblige us to; and to deny our selves in a great many Instances, which are very
hard and difficult, and yet not altogether necessary for this World; yea
sometimes to hate and despise this World, and to choose the greatest Evils of
Life; together with those Duties of over-looking our own Advantage for the
greater Benefit of others; of doing Good for Evil, of wasting our Spirits, and
laying out the Strength and Vigor of our Days, in doing good to Mankind; we
cannot but conclude, that these Rules have a respect to some future World; and
that they are designed to raise us up to such a Temper of Mind, as may prepare
us for something God has intended us for, when there shall be an end of this
Life of Man upon Earth. Neither can we possibly have any doubt of this, who
believe the Christian Revelation; the Promises whereof have so direct a
reference to a Future State of things. This Faith was the great support to the
Primitive Christians, under those hard Circumstances they were in: Their
Thoughts were six'd upon such Promises as these, Revel. 3.5.21. -- 21.7. --
22.5.
Him that overcomes will I cloth in white raiment, and I will not blot out
his name out of the Book of Life; and I will confess him before my Father, and
he shall sit down with me in my Throne, even as I have overcome, and am set
down with my Father in his Throne; and he shall inherit all things, and he
shall reign with me for ever and ever. Hence it was, that they were such great
Instances of Virtue, such Bright and Shining Lights to the World, such Glorious
Examples of a mighty Zeal for God, of an ardent Piety and Devotion, of the most
heroic Goodness, the most enlarged Charity; an exemplary Patience, and a very
entire Resignation of themselves to the Will of God. Hence it was that they so
readily parted with their Lives, and so willingly chose to die, to the
amazement of the Heathen World; who observed of them, that it was the belief of
a Life after this, that was the Cause of all this Courage and Resolution; who
therefore would not sometimes suffer them to be buried, but burnt their Bodies,
and dispersed their Ashes; foolishly thinking, that this would abate their Hope
of a Resurrection. Now if this be the great thing that the Christian
Institution teaches us, That this World is not our home, but that we live here
expectants of one to come; What great reason have we to be fond of this Life?
Or who can blame any Man for desiring and courting Death upon these Principles?
What is related of Trismegistus when he died, whether ever said by him or no,
does very well become a dying Christian, expressing his future Hopes and
Expectations. I have hitherto lived an Exile from my Country, but now I am
going safely thither; I am returning to that Blessed City, whither we cannot
pass, without taking Death in our way.

2. The having the Sting of Death pulled out for us. Death must be allowed to
be very terrible to a wicked Man; for when he dies, His hope perishes, Prove.
11.7.
his expectation is utterly cut off. There Is an end of all that, in which he
has placed his Confidence; the Man who has Calculated all his Projects, and
designs merely for this World, must needs be strangely surprised, when the
Message is brought him, that God requires his Soul, and that he must give up
his Account, and his Stewardship (for so the Scripture calls this Life) is at
an end: But the loss of his present Enjoyments is not all; he goes out of this
World in a State of Guilt, and is haled to the Divine Tribunal, and there
Sentenced to a Punishment, we know little more of, than this, That it is
certainly a very Terrible one; and probably greater than we can at present
conceive it to be; It Is far otherwise with the Good Man; he parts with nothing
that is overvaluable to him, having never engaged his Affections to what he
always knew, was to be left in a few days; and he goes out of the World with
his Sins Pardoned, and delivered from the Threatenings annexed to the Law; and
this is that pulling out the Sting of Death, which we owe to the Merits and
Satisfaction of our Blessed Savior; in Consideration of which, a Christian may
look on Death as a hurtless thing, whose wounding Power is taken away, as St.
Paul tells us in that Triumphal Song, 1 Cor. 15.55. O Death where is thy Sting?
O Grave where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of
Sin is the Law; but thanks be to God, who gives us the Victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

3. The Thoughts of being absolutely and perfectly freed from Sin.

All the Evils and Miseries of this Life put together, are not half so much a
Burden to a Pious Christian, as the sharp Contest that is kept up within him,
betwixt the Flesh and the Spirit: The struggle betwixt the Principles of Grace
and those of a Corrupt Nature; and the Advantage which the Devil, and
Temptations, and his own Evil Inclinations, not perfectly subdued, often get of
him, through the Remainders of Sin in him. These are Matters of his daily
Sorrow; and Repentance, and Humiliation; and he often Trembles for those Sins
he has fallen into, though long since; and which yet he hopes he has truly
Repented of, and to his very last Breath, continues to work out his Salvation
with fear: And though he uses all Diligence, Heb 6.11.
according to the Apostle's Advice, to reach to the full assurance of hope unto
the end; yet he confiders that this is a Modest and Humble sort of Assurance,
which the Apostle speaks of, and so very well consistent with some Fear. Now
Death is desirable by a sincere Christian on this Account, that it sets him
above all his Troubles and his Fears: It puts him into a State where the Devil
shall have no further Advantage against him, where this struggling betwixt
Grace and Nature shall perfectly cease, where he shall no more dishonor God,
nor blemish his own Nature; nor have so much as the Sins of Infirmity to lament
and bewail, but shall live in a perfect freedom from those Moral Evils, which
created so much uneasiness to him, and so often put him in hazard in this Life.

4. The Enlargement of our Faculties, and Perfection of our Virtue.

How short Humane Knowledge is, they best understand who have spent the longest
Time, and used the greatest Pains in improving it; they who know almost
nothing, may perhaps esteem themselves very great Clerks: If by chance they
light upon a thing, which every one does not know, they presently have a very
great Opinion of their own Understanding; and (like the Son of Syrach's
Description of a Fool, That he travelleth with a word) are very big, to let
other Men see how very wise they are, of a sudden, grown; whilst those, who
know the most things knowable in this State, have very different Thoughts of
themselves; and, though they avoid such a Skepticism, as to doubt of every
thing; yet are they very sensible how many things there are which they know
not, and how far they are from perfectly understanding very Common things: So
also a little Pharisaick Piety makes a very fine show, and a mighty noise and
bluster in the World: They who are got no further than this empty Form of
Godliness, are highly opiniated of themselves, and apt to despise all others as
mere Sons of the Earth, not worth regarding: Whereas a truly Pious Christian,
is always a Humble Christian; he has a very mean Opinion of himself, and is
very ready to entertain a good one of other Men; he is sensible of the
Imperfection of his Virtue, and what low Degrees of it he has attained to; and
his greatest Comfort is grounded upon his Sincerity; and that he hopes and
trusts, that his Heart is right toward God. Now who would be fond of this
Life, which is so dark and so imperfect a State? Who would not be willing to
die, that expects the enlargement of his Knowledge upon his Dissolution,
extending to a clear view of all the Works of God, and looking into the
Secrets, and unfolding the Mysteries of Providence, to the near Contemplation
of the Divine Nature, seeing God as he is, and comprehending his Perfections,
as much as Angels do, and to the Fathoming the Wonders of our Redemption by
Christ Jesus; things so far out of the reach of our Understandings in this
World; where also he shall arrive at Degrees of Virtue infinitely above what he
is ever capable of coming to here: And, in one word, shall be, in all things,
like unto the Angels of God which are in Heaven; and how happy may he conceive
himself then to be? who considers, that he owes the chief pleasure of his
present Life, to the small Seize he has been able to make in Wisdom and
Goodness.

5. The immediate Possession of Happiness at Death.

Indeed if all Pious Christians (some few only excepted) were to enter
immediately upon Death, into a Place of the most exquisite Torment, differing
very little from Hell, saving in the infinite duration of it, and there to
abide, none knows how long, even to the Day of the Great Judgment, some of
them; it would be very unreasonable for any Man to desire Death, unless it were
by Martyrdom, by which he might escape this Purgatory Fire; and the thought of
dying would be the most dreadful one that a Man could have in his whole Life:
But this is a mere Fiction, brought into the Church by Ignorance and
Superstition, and maintained for Reasons well known; and has no Foundation
neither in Scripture or Primitive Antiquity; defended by some, even of the
Roman Communion, only as some other Doctrines are, because Decreed in Councils,
and so not to be let go, for fear of shaking a Pretense, that is not to be
parted with. The Scripture is, in this Point, very clear and express, and
assures us, that immediately upon Death, there is an admission to Bliss. To
day, says our Savior to the Thief on the Cross, shall thou be with me in
paradise. Luke 23.43. Phil. 3.23.
And St. Paul mentions his being with Christ, as an immediate consequence of
his Departure. These are so plain Proofs, that, to evade the force of them,
they must be exempt Cases; and the Thief, and St. Paul, and some few more,
never went to Purgatory. But this shift signifies little, for the Scripture
speaks of all that die in the Lord; that is, in the Faith and Obedience of the
Gospel, as being at rest; which is a Jewish Idiom, and imports a state of
Bliss. And St. Paul takes notice, that living here, keeps us from Christ, and
therefore assigns this as a Reason, why we should be willing and desirous to
leave this World, that we might go to Christ: 2 Cor. 5.6, 8.
Knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord:
We are therefore confident and willing, rather to be absent from the body, and
to be present with the Lord.

6. The completion of this Happiness in Body and Soul at the General Judgment.

Though good Men are admitted to immediate Happiness at Death, yet not to a
full Participation of it, or to all that Happiness God has designed them, by
way of Reward: This is reserved for that Great Day, so often made mention of in
the Holy Books, when Christ, Matthew. 25.31.
to whom the Judgment of the World is committed, shall come in the Glory of his
Father, in Triumph, and with great Splendour, attended with an innumerable Host
of Angels, Acts 1.11. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
to render to every Man according to his Works. Then shall those who sleep in
the Dust awake, and the Dead shall be called out of their Graves, by the Voice
of the Son of Man, and the Sound of the last Trump. These Bodies of ours shall
then be raised up from Mortality, and Corruption, to an Immortal and
Incorruptible State; A wonderful thing, to be effected by that Power alone,
which first made all things out of nothing: A Truth knowable only by
Revelation, and received by Faith; and being united to their proper Souls,
together with them, who shall then be found alive, and remaining on the Earth,
we shall be caught up in the Clouds, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord. This is
that great Day, the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 4.8.
when Crowns shall be put upon the Heads of all the Faithful; even all those
who love his appearing. This is the Day, when the whole World shall have its
last Period and Consummation; when Death it self shall be Eternally destroyed;
and God's Kingdom shall be set up over all, Revel. 20.14.
and his Saints shall Reign with him for ever and ever. And these I take to be
good Reasons for every Pious Christian to be indifferent to Life, and very
willing, with submission to God's Wisdom in Disposing of him, to have his
Dismission.

Now the Use of this Doctrine, is,

1. To endeavor to reduce it to Practice. I mean to carry our selves, with all
that indifferency toward this World, and Life, and present state of Things,
which becomes wife Men, and good Christians. We cannot dispose of Events: What
belongs to us, is to be content with that Portion, whatever it is, that
Providence allots us, and to manage every thing to the best advantage, and to
take care that what befalls us, without our leave, may not disturb us. It is not
worth the while, for gaining the World, to do any thing, not only, which is
plainly Unjust; but any thing, that is Uncharitable, Mean, Pitiful, or Base:
And what we possess fairly, and honestly, it is Wisdom so to use, as not to
abuse it; 1 Cor. 7.11.
remembering, as the Apostle speaks, That the Fashion of this World passes
away: Neither to be over anxious and sollicitous about it, nor to suffer our
whole Life to be eat up with the Cares and Concerns of it, nor so to set our
Hearts and Affections upon it, as that it should ever prove horribly
troublesome, and uneasy to us to part with it: To avoid that Error, our
Savior corrected in Martha, To be always Carking about things little and
needless; and with her wiser Sister, to be careful to secure to our selves that
better part, Luke 10.40, 41, 42.
those virtuous Dispositions and Habits of the Mind, which shall never be taken
away from us. To consider this World as only of present Use; and when the time
comes, that this Use is to cease, to take our leaves of it, as a thing we are
no further concerned in. If we enjoy the Good of Life, to receive it
Thankfully, and manage it with Discretion, and so as it may turn to our
Advantage hereafter. If we have our share in the Evils of Life, to bear these
with Moderation, and Patience, as expecting better things to come. And, as to
Life it self, neither to be Prodigal, nor Niggardly of it; to esteem it neither
above, nor below its just Value; to take care to preserve it, as far as becomes
a wise Man; and yet to be ready to part with it upon a good account; to prefer
the keeping the Integrity of our Minds and a good Conscience before it; but yet
to choose to die, though a violent and immature Death, rather than do an ill
thing to prolong Life; the doing of which is a far greater Evil, than Death can
be to a good Man.

2. In order to this, it ought to be our great and main endeavor, to live up
to the height of the Principles of that Religion we profess. Plutarch tells us
of one, who leading a very loose life, consulted the Oracle, Whether ever he
should live any better; to which the Answer was, That it should be better with
him after he was dead. Not long after this he dies; but while they were
carrying him forth to be buried, of a sudden, he Revives, and comes to himself:
But it was almost incredible, what a Change there was in the course of his
Life; he became one of the most Pious and Verthous Men of his Age, and being
asked, by his Friends, the Reason of this great Change, he gave them this
account of it, That no sooner was his Soul parted from his Body, but he found a
mighty confusion in himself, which he could not compare to any thing better,
than the Pilot of a Ship being flung from the Helm, by the force of a Storm,
into the vast Ocean; after this, rising up, as it were above Water, and
recovering himself from this Confusion, he thought he felt himself alive, and,
looking round him, he saw all things clearly; but very different sights they
were, from what he had ever beheld in this World: Amongst other things, he saw
a numerous Company of Souls, in very different states; some in mighty
Transports of Joys, others in Miseries inexpressible: Some of these latter,
whom he thought he knew, he endeavored to have approached and discoursed them;
but they seemed to be like Persons frighted and bereaved of their Senses, in a
deep Consternation flying from him, and wholly avoiding him: At last he meets
with a certain Kinsman of his, who had been for some time dead, who calls him
by his Name, and gives him a large Account of that State, and carries him
about, and makes him an Eye Witness of the several Conditions of separate
Souls; but withal tells him, That he was not in the Number of the Dead, but by
permission only was come hither, and must return again to his Body. Whilst he
stood trembling at what he had seen, a certain Woman, admirable for her Form,
took him by the Hand, and bad him keep in Remembrance these things. The Moral
of this Story instructs us, what influence a direct view of another World is
fitted to have upon us; and what then may not be expected from us, who have so
full and clear a Revelation of it, and of the several States of Men, when
arrived there? Let us then walk by this Faith, and have our Eyes fixed upon the
Recompense of a future Reward. Let us remember, that the great design of our
Religion is to Train us up for Heaven; and that all the great things it has
promised, are to be accomplished and perfected in a future World: Let us look
upon our selves as only passing through this, and traveling home to our
Fathers House, whither our Forerunner is already gone, and where Mansions of
Glory are prepared for us; such Weights of Glory, as the Apostle did not know
how to express, exceeding Eternal weights of Glory: Let us often converse with
that World, the World of Angels and Blessed Spirits; a World of perfect
Knowledge and Virtue, of Goodness and Charity; a Region of Pure and Spotless
Light, where God himself has his peculiar Throne; where there is no need of the
Sun, nor of the Moon to shine in it; Rev. 21.21.
for the Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. Let
our Hearts be much there where our chief Treasure is, where our consummated
Happiness lies; so shall we be able to preserve a Wise and Pious Indifferency
to this World and Life, so shall we take care to live as usefully, and do as
much good as we can in the World; so shall we always keep our selves in an
actual Preparation for Death; and, whenever it comes, being born up by the
strength of our Faith and Hope in God, and in his Promises, we shall cheatfully
take up this Pious Hymn of good Old Simeon, and say,

Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace.

I am sensible I have been too long upon this Subject, in regard there is
another I know you will expect I should speak something to: But if I beg a
little of your Patience, I know not when I shall do this again; and I am pretty
well assured, never upon so sad an Occasion. I am well aware how liable
Discourses of this Nature are to Censure and Exception: But in this Auditory,
upon the present Occasion, I am above these fears. It is allowed by all, that
there is a just Praise due to those who have raised themselves above a common
Level: I do not mean in amassing together a more than ordinary heap of Riches,
the Portion as commonly of Fools as of the Wise, and at least equally reached
by Good and Bad Men; but in those Gifts of true Wisdom and real Goodness, the
greatest God has given to Men; by which there seems to be as great a difference
amongst Men, as betwixt Man and the Beasts, or as betwixt some Men of exalted
Virtue and the Angels above: For while some are raised up to a Divine Likeness,
others have almost quite defaced the Image of God in themselves, and are sunk a
vast way below the Dignity of Humane Nature, into Ignorance, Folly, Immorality,
and downright Brutishness: Such who have been thus distinguished from others in
their Lives, ought to be so in their Deaths too; and not to go out of the World
without a more than ordinary notice taken of them: It Is fit that their Wisdom
and Virtue, which rendered them so useful while they lived, should be proposed
to the World as an Example, and for the imitation of such as survive them. This
has been the Practice of all Nations, to have Orations of Praise, at the
Interment of such who lived usefully in their Generations. The Scripture
mentions it as an Act of Honor done to the Righteous at their Deaths, and
seems very plainly to recommend it in those Promises to the Good Man, 2 Chronicles.
32.33.
That his Name shall be had in remembrance, and his Memory be blessed. The
Practice of the Christian Church in this Point is so well known, that I shall
not spend time needlessly to insist on it. Supported by this Authority, I will
venture to draw a short Character of your Deceased Pastor. He was a Man of a
very large Understanding, of a quick and ready Apprehension, and had a very
happy way of expressing himself, which, as far as these are mere Natural
Endowments, do, by no means, seem to be given by God to all Men alike; and
would tempt to believe, that the difference in Men does not wholly arise from
the Disposition of Bodily Organs or Education, or any the like Causes, but that
there is really an inequality in their Original make. These natural Endowments
were cultivated by a happy Education, and an early Acquaintance with all that
School Learning, which is so necessary a Foundation for rendering a Man useful
in any considerable Post in Church or State: He was called very early out, to
be a Labourer in God's Vineyard; an Employment (though some perhaps may imagine
little of difficulty in it, and that the Clergy, of all other Men, live most at
ease) that requires a mighty Pains, to be able to discharge it wisely and
usefully; which perhaps the Apostle intimates, when he calls it Laboring in
the Word and Doctrine. 1 Timothy 5.17.
Our Deceased Brother was so apprehensive of this at his first coming among
you, where his constant Task was to preach three times a Week; besides the
Monthly Preparation Sermon for the Sacrament, and many other occasional
Sermons; that to be able to give a good Account of his Ministry to God, to his
own Conscience, and to Wise Men; to approve himself a Workman that needed not
to be ashamed, 2 Timothy 2.15.
rightly dividing the word of Truth; and that as becomes the Man of God, he
might be perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17.
thoroughly furnished to every good work, as the Apostle exhorts Timothy; that
is as a Teacher or Preacher of the Gospel, by the Study of the Scripture, be
furnished for all turns, and enabled to discharge his whole Duty toward the
Souls of his Flock, as Dr. Hammond has Paraphrased those Words; he fell upon
that excessive hard Study, which broke an excellent Constitution of Body, and
so impaired his Health, that he was never able to recover it; and though he was
in a while sensible of this, and often admonished by his Friends to remit that
Rigor, yet his Circumstances partly necessitated him to continue it; and
besides, by Use and Custom, it was become so pleasant a Diversion, that he
seemed to think the Improvements hereby made to himself, to be an abundant
Recompense for the Infirmities it brought along with it; and, as Tully
preferred the living one Day according to the Precepts of Philosophy, to a
vicious Immortality; so our Deceased Brother had a far greater Inclination to
improve his Knowledge, and to live usefully, though but a few years, than to
arrive at an extreme old Age, with no other Sign upon him that he had lived
long, but what might be discovered, as Seneca speaks, in Wrinkles and Gray
Hairs. This I have particular Reason to observe, inasmuch, as when I have been
discoursing with him, which was frequently, of giving himself a little case,
and calling in one to his Assistance, his constant Answer was to this Effect,
That his Life could not be better wasted than in a careful discharge of his
Ministry, and in doing all the Good he could; and let his Great Master call him
when he pleased, Happy was that Servant, whom his Lord, when he should come,
found so doing. In Consideration of this, his hard Study was not barely to
satisfy his Curiosity, or to please himself with his own Notions (though this
is both an Innocent and a very delightful Piece of Epicurism;) but to render
himself serviceable to others, to discharge his Office with Credit to Religion;
and to profit those in trust committed to his Care, he was a Constant,
Judicious and Profitable Preacher. In all his Discourses he Studiously avoided,
according to the Apostle's Advice, all useless Questions, which minister only
to strife; and by which (let the Preacher argue and defend either side of the
Question) none are made either the wiser or better Men. His chief Business was
to prosecute Practical Subjects, with the utmost force of Persuasion; well
knowing, that most Men understand their Duty, much better than they Practice
it; and that to stir up their Remembrance, and overruled their Wills, was one
great part of the Minister's Office. His main Endeavor was to speak good
Sense, and to deliver the most useful Truths in plain and easy Expressions;
and was often wont to say, That the Practical Doctrines of Christianity, were
so perfectly agreeable to natural Principles, that if they were fairly
represented, no Man would be found to make the least opposition to them; but
that the same Doctrine; might be so entangled with Controversy, under the show
of clearing them, that Men's Prejudices would still over-sway them, and every
Man would retain the Principles of his first Education; and that such
Discourses never turned to any Advantage of the Hearers, but served either to
Prejudice them against their Preachers, or to drive them into Heats and
Contentions among themselves, to the bane of Christian Practice. We are lately
told of a Noble Design, provided for in the Will of a very extraordinary Person
Deceased, that every year should be composed a few well Digested Sermons,
wherein should be set forth the Truth of the Christian Religion in General,
without descending to the Subdivisions among Christians: This is very agreeable
to what was the constant Design of your Deceased Pastor; whose chief Business
it was to represent Christianity, As a System of Truths, which ought to purify
the Hearts, and govern the Lives of those who Profess it; where the
Fundamentals of Christianity were in hazard, none showed a greater Zeal in
exhorting earnestly to contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints;
witness his many close Discourses against Popery in the late Reign: And, as he
apprehended there might be in time occasion for it, he was ready to show the
same Zeal against such Errors, as threaten utter Ruin to all Positive
Religion: But, in other Matters, he abhorred Bigotry; and knew how to pity the
weakness of Humane Understandings, and to allow for the Prejudices of
Education; and though no Man had a greater value for our Church Constitution,
nor could more heartily wish the Recovery of our Discipline; nor yet had a
truer, and righter Notion of Religion; yet he never cared, roughly to disturb
People, though in an Error; when he saw the Error did no hurt, and that they,
who were under it, did not pursue it, in any of its bad Consequences; but were
as careful to live Piously, and Virtuously, as those could be, who were in the
right: Yea, he would say, That, for some, whom he knew to be sincere
Christians, he thought it was better to let them alone in Innocent Mistakes;
and that there was Danger in going about to set them right; yet so far as he
could fairly do it, he always took care to rectify Men's Religious Notions, and
occasionally, and by the bye, rather to insinuate some Truths, than purposely
to set himself to Argue, and Defend them.

His Conduct, among his Parishioners, was such, as deserves Imitation by the
whole Order of the Clergy, in their several Places; and, perhaps, would do more
to prevent the growing of Schism, than all the Laws that could be contrived in
the Church's favor: His business was to keep up a good Understanding betwixt
himself and his Neighbors, and likewise among themselves. He was ready to
serve the meanest of them, upon all other occasions, as well as those
immediately relating to his Function. If there happened any breach, his Care
was to stop it in its first rise, well knowing how hard it is, ofttimes to do
it afterward. I might here mention some Offices of Public Benefit and
Advantage to this Town, which owed themselves chiefly to his Advice, Industry,
and Conduct: Particularly, the Settling an Industrious and Useful Schoolmaster
among you, and Recovering and Advancing the Credit and Reputation of your
Grammar School. This was his Behavior among you, and such a mutual Friendship
was hereby grown up into a Habit, betwixt him and his Flock, that he would
often say, If the Governors of the Church should think fit to Reward his hard
Labor, with some small Dignity in the Church, he would most thankfully accept
it; but he could never be in a place, where he should be capable of doing more
Good, or among a-People, that were more likely to receive Good from him; and
that therefore he could not tell how to entertain any Thoughts of leaving you,
as long as he lived. In all the other Relations he bore, which were those a of
Father, a Husband, a Son, and a Brother, I never knew any Man that discharged
these Obligations with greater Prudence, or more Exactness; with a wiser
Conduct, or a better Sense of Duty. He had a Capacity which reached almost all
sorts of Things, and a wonderful Dexterousness in Dispatch of Business; which
made him to be sought to by all the Neighborhood, and so often to be chosen an
Umpire in their Controversies; in all which, as his Care was to avoid
Intrenching upon any other Man's Profession, so he never sought any Advantage
to himself, but designed only doing Good, and obliging Mankind. His
Conversation was both Pleasant and Useful. He had, indeed, a sort of
Facetiousness, that was very natural to him, and perhaps is so to most Men of
free Thoughts; but it was Innocent, and when it had in it any thing of Design,
it was only to convey wise Notices of things in this way, where he knew not how
to come at Men's Understandings in any other. For my own part, I must say, that
being freed from the necessary Impertinencies of a mixed Conversation, I scarce
ever spent an Hour with him, in all the time of our Acquaintance, but with some
Advantage; and it is a Justice due to his Memory, to own that I have learnt
much from him. And, what I take to be a very high Accomplishment of human
Nature, an argument of a great and noble Mind, and not to be omitted in his
Character, is, That he was a Wise, a Faithful, and an Entire Friend. I had the
Happiness (and a great Happiness it was to my Life) to live in a perfect
Friendship with him, which, from our first entering into it, (being founded upon
no selfish Ends) never received any interruption; but grew up, and waxed
stronger, as all good Dispositions do, till they come into confirmed Habits.
Whether Friendship be dissolved by Death, on their part, who are gone into
another World, I cannot tell. This was one of the Contemplations, our deceased
Brother was entertaining himself with, a little before his Departure. He was
musing, as he told me, whether he should be able to do any kind Offices for his
Friends, whom he left on Earth: However, on their part, who survive, it is not
dissolved; for there cannot be a more tender Point, than the Name and Memory of
a dead Friend. But that which is above all other Endowments, either natural, or
acquired; and which therefore I reserved to be mentioned in the last place, was
his lively and vigorous Sense of Religion: He thoroughly understood the Design
of it, and was very sensible of those infinite Obligations we are under, to the
Goodness of God, for making so ample a Provision for our Happiness, as we see
done, in the Covenant of Grace in Christ Jesus; and for furnishing us with such
admirable Rules of Life; in the Practice of which Man's Happiness so plainly
lies, That our reaches in Virtue give us a very lively Sense of our future
Immortality. He was naturally of a very warm and quick Temper. Those who
conversed with him, and knew what a clear and exact Conduct he had of his Mind,
may perhaps smile at this; as those, who were acquainted with Socrates, and
knew his absolute and entire government of his Passions, did at the
Physiognomist's Character of him; but that wise Man vindicated his Art, and
assured his Friends, That the Man had judged truly of his natural Temper, which
was corrected by the Principles of Philosophy: And our deceased Friend would
confess, That it was not Nature, but Grace that had assisted him in this Work;
and that he had done nothing in it, without great Pains first taken with
himself. He was very careful of the Worship of God; and as he did all he could
to bring his Flock to a sense of Worship; being sirmly persuaded, that, unless
Men can be brought to this, That reformation of Manners, which is so heartily
desired, by all good Men, can never be effected; so he was very exact in
keeping up constant Devotion in his Family, and careful to impress a Sense of
it upon his own Children, and those other Youths he was pleased to take under
his Charge. He was a Man of great Charity, laying aside, notwithstanding his
large Family, a certain part of his Revenue, annually, for such uses. Many
instances of this I have been witness to, and some of his Charities have passed
through my Hands, with Directions, not to let the Receivers know who was their
Benefactor. He paid for the Teaching of Six poor Boys at your Reading School,
and gave as many Bibles Yearly, with the Name of DEDHAM, indorst; which you
only understood to be a Gift of one, who concealed his Name; but I now acquaint
you, That it was entirely his own Charity; and he has left it, under his Hand,
that Five Pounds be paid at your next Governors Feast, for Discharging the
Schooling of these Boys, and Furnishing them with their Bibles, for the Year
past. He had a mighty Sense, such a one as is not common, of the Wisdom of God,
in disposing of all Events: The Providence of God has been defended admirably
well, by many of the Philosophers: Christianity has helped us to further
Arguments in its Defense, by a clear Revelation of a future World, and a
Judgment to come; but they are two very different things, to acknowledge a
Providence, or plead for it; and practically to comply with it, and to bring
our very Understandings, to consent to every thing, as best, which God does.
This latter was what our deceased Brother, above all things, aimed at bringing
himself to. I will give you his Thoughts, in his own words, in a Letter, wrote
to me, some Months before his last Sickness. Whether a longer continuance in
this World be a Blessing, or no, neither you nor I can judge: For my own part,
I protest solemnly, I have received a Resignation to the Divine Will as a
Principle, from which I will never depart; and I am Laboring for nothing so
much as to bring my self to approve, in my own Inclinations, the Choices that
God shall make for me, whatever they be; and this I do, not only because I am
so perfectly satisfied, how much we owe that Obedience to that Government,
under which we are; and to the Perfections of that Being, that Administers it;
but because I can find no other Principle capable of ministering to my Quiet,
and of supporting my Mind: For, especially as my Thoughts are of my present
state, if it were not for the force of that, I could never call off my Mind
from attending to its apprehensions of Danger, so much, as to do my Duty, and
keep the Post, the great Disposer of things expects from me, and has placed me
in: But with this, notwithstanding all my sad Thoughts, I can eat, drink,
sleep, laugh, recreate my self, and enjoy my Friends; and not be uneasy to
them, blessed be God, for such Reasons as we have to leave all Events in his
Hand; and to hope they shall be merciful to us. For, by this Faith I live, and
upon the Stock of this I hope to acquit my self, at least to my own Eternal
Safety, when I die. This I take to have been the most inward Sense of his Soul,
which abode upon him to the last. For, in an interval, not long before his
Death, acquainting him with the hopes his Physicians gave us, his Reply was,
His Opinion was otherwise; and, indeed, said he, now that I am gone on so far,
unless God sees it best to appoint to me a longer Life, I do not think it worth
the while to go back. But having exceeded all tolerable Limits allowed to these
Occasions, I shall only leave with you, that were lately his Charge, the Advice
of the Apostle, Heb. 13.7. Remember them that have the rule over you; or,
rather, those that have had the rule over you. The word (...), though it
signifies any sort of Ruler, yet, in this place, it must be restrained to
Spiritual Governors, Pastors, and Teachers; those, who have spoken to you the
Word of the Lord; and that it must refer to them that are dead, I think may be
inferred from the latter words, where mention is made of their exitus, their
departure, or the ending of their Conversation. To remember such a deceased
Pastor, is to be thankful to God, that his Providence placed him over you; to
be sensible of your loss in being deprived of him; to think of him with Love
and Affection, and Honor to his Memory; frequently to reflect upon that wise
Counsel, those wholesome Instructions, that Pious Example, which you have often
heard from him, and long saw in him; and, above all, to continue in that good
state, in which he has left you, free from Schism in the Church, or Divisions
in your Town; living under a sense of Religion, and in Peace and Charity (which
has hitherto been your Character) with one another. If you fail in any of these
Points, besides that it will upbraid you with unprofitableness, under a painful
and useful Ministry long enjoyed; the Effects that will follow, may force you
to remember him, but without either Comfort or Advantage to your selves; and
perhaps to remember also my Words to you this Day. But to conclude all with the
Words of the Apostle; Beloved, Heb. 6.4.
we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, I
mean, that Promise rather your future Happiness, than any Mischief to befall
you, though we thus speak.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1692.
THirty Six Sermons, viz. 16 Ad Aulum. 6 Ad Clerum. 6 Ad Magistratum. 8 Ad
Populum. With a large Preface, by the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert
Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln. The Eighth Edition corrected and
amended. Whereunto is now added the Life of the Reverend and Learned Author.
Written by Isaac Walton. Folio.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gray, Late Vicar of Dedham
in Essex; Preached in the Parish Church of Dedham, Febr. the 2d. 1691/2. With a
short Account of his Life. By Joseph Powell, A. M. Rector of St. Mary on the
Wall, in Colchester.

A brief Exposition of the Church Catechism, with Proofs from Scripture. By
John Williams D. D. Rector of St. Mildred's Poultrey, and St. Mary Cole,
London. The Third Edition. 8o.

Tachygraphy; The most Exact and Compendious Method of Short and Swift Writing,
that has ever yet been published by any. Composed by Thomas Shelton, Author
and Professor of the said Art. Approved by both the Universities, 8o.

Zeiglographia: Or a New Art of Short writing never before published; more
Easy, Exact, Short, and Speedy than any heretofore. Invented and Composed by
Thomas Shelton, Author and Teacher of the said Art. Allowed by Authority, 8o.

Index Rhetoricus and Oratorius, Scholis, and Institutioni tenerioris aetatis
accomodatus, cui adjiciuntur formulae Oratoriae, and index Poeticus. Opera and
studio Thomae Farnabii. Editio Novissima prioribus emendatior, 12o.

Psalmorum Davidis Paraphrasis Poetica Georgii Buchanani Scoti: Argumentis ac
Melodiis explicata atque illustrata. Opera and Studio Nathanis Chytraei, 12o.


