THE POWER OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND To Examine the CHARTERS Of PARTICULAR
Corporations and Companies. Exemplified by the STATUTES and LAWS of this REALM.
THat the Kings of England have Power to Examine the Charters of Corporations,
may appearent by the following Discourse, which will manifestly make it
apparent, for if the Prince has Power on the forfeiture of the Charters and
Franchises of an Aggregate Corporation to seize on their Franchises and
Liberties, how then can it become a Question whether he cannot by the same
Authority examine the Charters of Particular Corporations and Companies? That
by the Laws of this Realm He can do the former is here illustrated, and
therefore His Power cannot be deficient in the later.

In Disquisition therefore of this Case,
WE shall Consider in the first place what a Corporation is.

A Corporation is either Sole, as Bishop, Parson, 39. H. 6.14. 7. E. 4.12. or
Aggregate, as Mayor and Commonalty.

A Corporation Aggregate is a Lawful Society of a certain Number of Men
Constituted by the King, with diverse Liberties and Privileges, 11 H. 7.27.
Fitz grant 30. Summa Hostiensis. Fol. 60.

All Corporations have their Origination and Essence from the King, otherwise
it is an Illegal Society, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom 9 H.
6.16. b. Lib. 10. Fol. 26.33. Inst. Part 3. Fol. 202. Lib. 8. Fol. 125.

One Corporation cannot make another by Usage or Prescription, 40 E. 3. Fol.
3.^9. Ass. 8. Brok. Corporation, n. 45.

Neither can ^^e King give License to any one to make a Corporation, Lib. 10.
Fol. 27. b. But one Corporation may be made out of another by the King, 9 E. 3.
Fol. 18.

The King may, if he pleases, make a limited Corporation, or a Corporation to
a special purpose, as to take and not to give, o^ Conditional to pay Rents,
etc. P. 11. Jac. en le Excheq. St. Saviors Case. 21 E. 4.59. 2 H. 7.13. Die.
Fol. 100. a. If the King grants Hominibus De Dale to be quit of Toll, they are
a Corporation to that purpose, 21 E. 4.55, 56.

The King grants Civibus de Norwico quod non ponantur in Juratis, etc. the
grant is good and makes them a Corporation, 21 E. 4.55, 56. 2 H. 13. 7 H. 4.44.

When a Corporation is rightly Created, all Incidents are tacit annexed to it,
Lib. 10. Fol. 30. b. St. Saviors Case.

If the King Creates a Corporation, and does not give any express Power in the
Letters Patent to make Laws or Ordinances, yet this Power is incident to the
Corporation, and is included in the very Act of Incorporating, as is also the
Power to Sue, to Purcase, and the like; but these Laws ought always to be
subject to the Laws of the Realm, as Subordinate to it, Heb. Rep. Fol. 285.
Therefore every Law made by any Corporation, ought to be, 1. Remedium Congruum,
a fit Remedy to redress the Mischief. 2. Bonae fidei and rationi Consonum,
Consonant to Justice and Right Reason. 3. Pro Communi utilitate Civium and
aliorum fidelium Domini Regis, for the Public Profit of the Citizens and other
the good Subjects of the King* and therefore Ordinances or Laws by them made
pro privato lucro, and not pro bono publico, for private Advantage, and not for
the public Good, are void. Lib. 5. M. 32. and 33. Eliz. BR. Chamberline de
Land. Case. Hob. Rep. Fol. 212. P. 14. Jac. Rot. 907. Norris and Stamp.

A Franchise or Liberty is a Royal Privilege in the Hands of a Subject, of
some Benefit, Power, or Freedom that Persons or Places have above others,
Crompt. Juris. Fol. 241.

Franchises are real or Personal.

Franchises Real are Privileges annexed and given by the King to some Place,
as County Palatines, Corporations, Lamb. E^ren. lib. 1. c. 9. Plowd. Fol. 123.
Crompt. Juris. 137.

Franchises Personal, which are granted by the King to some Person or Persons,
as Exemption from Juries, from Toll, 21 E. 4.55, 56.

All Franchises were Originally derived from the Crown, but now by continuance
of Time are Claimed and had in some Cases by Prescription, Inst. Part 1. Fol.
114. Lib. 9. Fol. 23. Boult. Part 1. Fol. 57. Part 2. Fol. 235. Mores Rep. c.
918.

If a Corporation Claims some Privileges by Charter, and others by
Prescription, and so couclude, Et eo Warranto utitur, it is good in Law, Mores
Rep. c. 443.

Amongst Franchises, some are more Royal, as the Franchises of Counties
Palatines, etc. Others less Royal, as Markets, Fairs, etc. Of these, some lie
in doing, as to make Justices of Peace, to Pardon Felonies, etc. Some lie in
having, as the Goods of Felons, of Fugitives, Wayses, Estrays, Die. Fol. 44.
Plowd. Com. Fol. 169. Others do lie in Discharge, as Exemption from Payment of
Subsidies, etc.

Henry the Sixth, by his Letters Patent, 20 H. 6. Granted to Corpus Christi
College in Oxon that they and their Successors, and their Tenants should be
discharged of Payment of Toll for Pontage and Passage in every Place within
England, and adjudged to be good, T. 43. Chapter B R. Enter Wood and Hawksel Rolls
Abr. Tit. Prerog. l. 2. Fol. 198.

The Isle of Guernsey, for Eight Years was discharged of all manner of Tolls,
Exactions, and Customs, Rot. Parl. 14. R. 2. n. 30.

Tenants in Ancient Demesnes are free and quit of all Tolls in Fairs and
Markets for all things concerning Husbandry and Sustenance, Inst. Part 4. Fol.
269. 21 E. 4.59.

Some Franchises may be Forfeited, 1. By a Non-User. Some, 2. By a Refuser. And
others, 3. By an Abuser, or Mis-user.

1. By Non-User, as those Franchises which are pro bono publico; and therefore
if one has a Leet to keep, and never keep it, or a Clerk of a Market, who
never attends his Office; these by Non-user are Forfeited.

The Non-user of a Fair or Market is no cause of Forfeiture, 2 H. 7. Fol. 11.
But the Non-pursuit or Arresting of Felons by him that has the Franchise, it
may cause a Forfeiture, 3 E. 1. c. 9. 39 H. 6.33, 34.

2. Refuser: The Abbot of Crowland had a Gaol, wherein diverse Men were
Imprisoned, and because he refused to deliver them, but detained some of them
who were Acquitted of Felony, after their Fees paid, the King seized the Gaol
for ever, 20 E. 4.6.

The King granted to the Abbot of St. Albans to have a Jail-deliver, and
diverse Persons were Committed to the Gaol for Felony, and because the Abbot
would not be at Cost to make Deliverance, he detained them in Prison long time
without making Lawful Deliverance, the Abbot had for that cause Forfeited his
Franchise, and that the same might be seized into the Kings Hands, 8 H. 4.18.
20 E. 4.6. Brok. Tit. Forfeiture. Inst. Part. 2. Fol. 43.

3. Abuser, or Mis-user. If a Corporation has Franchises, and Abuse or Mis-use
them, they may be Forfeited, Inst. Part 1. Fol. 183. The same Law, if they take
for Murage more than they ought to take by their Grant, West. 1. c. 31.

The Duke of Norfolk had the Office of Marischal of the Kings Bench; he made a
Deputy, who permitted the Prisoners to escape, adjudged that it was a
Forfeiture of the Office: But if the Duke had made a Grant for Life to J.S. and
he had permitted the Prisoners to escape, this had been no Forfeiture but for
the Life of J. S. For in the Case of the Deputy the Duke did remain Marischal,
and so Respondeat Superior; but in the other Case J.S. was Marischal for his
Life, and so shall Forfeit only his own Interest, 39 H. 6.33, 34.

Where an Office is granted to a Man, and he mis-use or do not his Office, this
is a cause of Forfeiture of it, Ibid.

When the Lord of a Franchise refuse to do a thing according to the Grant of
the Franchise, or does a thing against his Franchise, or mis-use his Franchise
by himself or Deputy, or non-use his Franchise, in all these Cases the
Franchise shall be seized: For when the King grants a Franchise, there is a
Condition in Law, that he should do Right to all Parties concerned, if not, the
Franchise shall be seized, 20 E. 4. Fol. 5, 6.

When one Franchise is incident to another of Common Right, then the Forfeiture
of the one is the Forfeiture of the other, as the Abuser of the Court of Pie
Powders may cause the Forfeiture of the Fair.

So when the Franchises are one of them Subordinate to another; but otherwise
when they are Absolute, or by several Titles or Patents, H. 17. Jac. B R.

If one has a Fair or Market for one day, and he keep it another day; as when
a Grant or Prescription be for Wednesday, and he keep it on Thursday, it is a
cause of Forfeiture. So when a Fair or Market is Granted to one for one day in
the Week, and he keep it two days; but in the last Case, the Forfeiture shall
be only of that he has Usurped, Cok. Lib. 9. Fol. 50.22. Ass. 34. Old n. b.
Fol. 157.

If a Man keeps a Fair or Market two days, and being Questioned by the King for
it, and claims both days by the Kings Grant, and it is afterward found that he
has Right but to one day by Prescription, and to another by Patent, and the
first is found against him, this will be no Forfeiture of the last, Lib. 9.
Fol. 50.

In some Cases for the Abuser of a Franchise one shall be Fined only, and not
Forfelt his Franchise. So for the Usurping of a Franchise, where none is, or of
more than is due; but to take less than is due, is no cause of Forfeiture,
Broke Tit. Forfeiture, n. 37.

14 H. 3. The Archbishop of Dublin was Fined Three Hundred Marks, for that he
did dis-forest a Forest of the Church, 2 H. 4.3. Lib. 11. Lyfords Case.

By an Ancient Record, in the Time of William the Conqueror, it does appear,
that the end of Erecting of Corporations, and making and establishing of Cities
and Towns Corporate, was, 1. Ad Consuetudines Regni and jus commune and
dignitates Coronae Conservand. for the conservation of the Dignities and
Preheminencies of the Crown, and the Laws of the Land. 2. Ad tuitionem gentium
and Populorum Regni, for Defense of the Kings Subjects, and for keeping the
Kings Peace in time of sudden Uproars. 3. Ad defensionem Regni, for Defense of
the Realm against outward and inward Hostility.

If a Corporation may be Forfeited.
A Corporation may be Forfeited: Corporations are called Liberties, Franchises,
as it does appear by the Writ of Non omittas propter aliquam libertatem,
Regist. 82. f. n.b. 74. a. and by that Name have been ousted. By the Surrender
of all Franchises and Liberties a Corporation is gone, Cokes Entries, Fol. 527.
Palm. Rep. Fol. 493.

Cives London petunt quod Rex vetit its concedere prestinum statum scilicet
Majororem and antiquas libertates, Rex non habet inde Consihum quia sunt in
bono statu ut sibi videtur, and hac vice statum non mutabit. Inter les
Petitions de Parliament 18 E. 3.1.

The Citizens of London Petition the King that he would be pleased to grant to
them their former state, that is to say, their Mayor and Ancient Liberties: The
King gave them this Answer, That he was not Advised to it, because they were in
a good state and condition, as it seemed to him, at pro hac vice, he would not
alter or change.

The City of Norwich and the Liberties thereof seized into the Kings Hands for
Burning of the Cathedral Church there, but afterward upon their Petition, and
Paying a great Fine, their Liberties were restored to them, 13 E. 1. Rot. Fin.
m. 10.

Quia Homines de Southampton verberaverunt and vulneraverunt usque ad morrem
Gilb. Canon, qui exequahatur praeceptum Regis in dicta villa, pro
transgressione villae Capta fuit villa ista in manum Regis and finem fecerunt,
and firmam suam exaltaverunt ad 20 l. per Annum. Rolls Abridgm. Part 2. Tit.
Prerog. Fol. 204.

Because the Men of Southampton did beat and Wound even to Death, Gilb. Canon,
who did Execute the Mandate of the King in that Town; for the Offense and
Transgression of the said Town, the said Town was seized into the Kings Hands,
and they paid a Fine, and their Fee-Farm Rent was advanced to 20 l. per Annum.

Mandatum est Guilielmo de Haverhall, The saurario Regis quod Civitas London
Capiatur in manum Regis, eo quod Cives ejusdem Civitatis non tenuerunt Hutesium
and clamorem Secundum Legem and consuetudinem Regni, Test Rege apud Wondestock
22 die Angusti. Rot. Claus. 30. H. 3. m. 5. Inst. Part 3. Fol. 118.

William de Haverhall, Treasurer of the King, is Commanded that the City of
London be seized into the Kings Hands, for that the Citizens of the said City
did not make Hue and Cry according to the Law and Custom of the Kingdom.

29 E. 3. the Liberties of the City of Oxford seized for a Riot, and part of
them granted to the University, which they do enjoy to this day. Rot. Claus. 29
E. 3. m. 9. And in the 32 H. 3. the Liberties of the City of Oxford were seized
into the Kings Hands, 32 H. 3. m. 18.

The Liberties of the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Commonalty of Cambridge were seized
into the Kings Hands, for that in the late Tumults and Uproars there, they and
other mis-doers did break up the Treasury of the University of Cambridge, and
thereout take and burned sundry the Charters, etc. of the said University; and
for that they compelled the Chancellor and Scholars of the said University,
under their Common Seal, to release to the said Mayor and Burgesses all manner
of Liberties, and also all Actions Real and Personal, and further to be bound
to them in great Sums of money. And the King did grant unto the Chancellor and
Scholars aforesaid within the said Town of Cambridge and Suburbs of the same,
diverse of the said Liberties; that is to say, the Assize, Conusance, and
Correction of Bread, all Weights, Measures, Regrators, and Fore-staliers, with
the Fines and Amercements of the same, Rot. Parl. 8 R. 2. n. 11. Inst. Part 4.
Fol. 228.

31 E. 1. The Liberties of the City of Winchester were seized, and after upon
their Petition and a Fine paid they were restored, 31 E. 1. Rot.

T. C. Jac. Rot. 3. The Liberties of Newmarket in Yorkshire seized, and part
of them never re-granted.

9 E. 1. The Liberties of the Corporation of Sandwich seized, and Judgment quod
amittant libertates.

Vide m. 18. E. 3. Rot. 62. B R. en. Talley Office.

Vide Rot. Claus. 15 E. 2. m. 2. Pat. Rot. 20 E. 2. m. 5. Claus. Rot. 16 R. 2.
m. 30. Cl. Rot. 22 H. 6. m. 21. m. 16. Carol. 1. where the Liberties of diverse
Towns were seized. Judgment given that the Liberties of the Town of Barkenstead
in Hartfordshire should be seized.

The Liberties of London seized for giving of false Judgment in the Hustings,
28 E. 3. c. 20. Punishments of the defaults of the City of London, and their
Franchises to be Forfeited upon their default.

Rex amovit custodem Hospital: de suo Patronatu quia male dispendit proficua
domus, 9 E. 3. Lib. 11. Magdalen College Case.

If a Bishop cut down all the Timber and Trees of his Bishopric, he is to be
Deposed as a Delapedator, 2 H. 4. Fol. 3. Lib. 11. Liffords Case.

The Colleges of the Templars, in the Reign of Philip the Fair of France, for
their Insolency, Oppression, and Misdemeanors were all Forfeited and seized
into the Kings Hands; the like was used against the Corporations and Societies
of the Jews, as well in France under Dagobert, Philip Augustus, and Philip the
Long, as afterward in Spain under Ferdinando King of Aragon and Castile,
Bodin. Repub. Lib. 3. Fol. 383. Kelway. 6 H. 8. Fol. 169, 170. Regist. 20.
Inst. Part 2. Fol. 432.

The Corporation or Community of the City of Corbeil in France was Forfeited
and seized into the Kings Hands. Bodin. Repub. Lib. 3. Fol. 373.

And therefore Offenses done by a Corporation Collegiately Assembled, the whole
Corporation is Punished by loss of their Privileges, or of the Right of their
Community. Bodid. Lib. 3. Fol. 373.

A Prohibition went to the Bishop of Norwich, and he Excommunicated the Party
that brought this Writ, thereupon an Action of the Case was brought against the
Bishop, and so set forth the whole Matter and it being found against the
Bishop, it was adjudged that his Temporalities should be seized until he
Absolved the Party, and satisfied the King for the Contempt, 21 E. 3. Rot. 46.

The Bishop of Duresm pretending that he had a Privilege that the Kings Writ
was not to come there, and because one brought it thither, he Imprisoned him,
and this being Proved by Information against him, it was adjudged that the
Bishop should pay a Fine to the King, and lose his Liberties. 31 E. 1. Rot. 18.
Crok. P. 8. Car. Fol. 253.

By the Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 12 Subscription is required of the Clergy, if they
refuse to Subscribe, the Parties are disabled, and ipso facto deprived, Inst.
Part 4. Fol. 324.

Disapidations is a fault for which the Incumbent may be deprived, 29 E.
3.16.20 H. 6.46.9 E. 4.34.

By the same Reason, if a Corporation does Abuse or Mis-use their Franchises,
they do lose them, for there is a Condition in Law annexed to them, that they
shall rightly use them, otherwise they shall be Forfeited.

If a Corporation may be Dissolved, then it may be Forfeited; but a Corporation
may be Dissolved, ergo, Forfeited; for the Liberties being seized into the
Kings Hands, they are Extinct.

Anno 34 H. 8. the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem, and diverse Monasteries
were Suppressed and Dissolved, and their Possessions vested in the Real and
Actual Possession of the King. When the Religious Persons of Abbeys or
Monasteries are detained, and they have lost their Habit, Rule, and Order, then
the Corporation is absolutely dissolved. Davyes Rep. 11. Case de Rroxies. Fol.
1. b.

If Lands be given to a Dean and Chapter, or to a Mayor and Commonalty, and to
their Successors, and after such Body Politic or Incorporate is Dissolved,
the Donor and his Heirs shall have again the Land, and shall not Escheat; and
the Reason is, because the Fee is vested in their Politic Capacity; and
therefore the Law does annex a Condition to every such Gift and Grant, that if
such Body Politic be Dissolved, the Donor shall re-enter, for that the cause
of the Gift fails, Inst. Part 1. Fol. 13. b. Brok. Corp. n. 78.

Object. But it may be Objected, that a Corporation aggregate is immortal,
invisible, and never dies, 39 H. 6.14. a. 21 E. 4.27.

Answ. It Is Answered, that a Corporation is Immortal not in Thesi, for we see
they have their ortus and occasus, but in Hypothesi, in respect of their
perpetual Succession, and because its presumed they will do no Act to Dissolve
them, or commit any Offense by which they may Forfeit their Right of Community.

If a Corporation consists of Brothers and Sisters, and afterward all the
Sisters are dead, all the Grants and Acts made by the Brothers are void, for
when the Holy Sisters are dead, it is no perfect Corporation, m. 37 Eliz. B R.
the Case inter Sergeant Lovelace and Manwood, Rolls Abridg. Fol. 514. But
suppose all the Brothers should likewise dye, where is the Immortality of the
Corporation?

Though a Corporation cannot be granted over or assigned to any Person or
Persons, yet it may be surrendered to the King; for a Corporation has its
Origination and Essence by the Charter of the King, by the surrender of their
Charter the Corporation is gone: For after surrender of their Charter, if they
use their Franchises, they are Usurpers upon the King; and if a Quo Warranto be
brought against them, what can they Plead, their Charter being surrendered? Must
they not submit to such a Fine as shall be imposed upon them?

If a Corporation may surrendered its Charter, it may by mis-user or abuser
Forfeit its Charter; and if the Charter by which they are Incorporated be
Forfeited, where is the Corporation? Is it not translated into Aristophanes
City in the Clouds, for now it is Invisible?

Object. But it may be Objected, that if a Corporation does surrender all its
Lands and Franchises unto the King, yet the Corporation does remain; for the
Dean and Chapter of Norwich, 2 E. 6. did surrender to the King their Church and
Possessions, and he Incorporated them by the Name of Dean and Chapter, etc.
Sanctae and individuae Trinitatis Norw. ex fundatione, E. 6. and re-granted to
them their Church and Possessions, by the Name of Dean, etc. omitting ex
fundatione Regis, E. 6. And it was adjudged the Ancient Corporation remained.

Answ. It Is Answered, That by their Incorporation of Henry the Eight, they were
to be Dean and Chapter of the Bishop of Norwich, and therefore to be of his
Council, to Advise with them about the determination of difficult Points and
Controversies of Religion; and also to give their consent to every Grant which
the Bishop should make to bind his Successor: For it was thought by Henry the
Eight not to be Reasonable to impose so great Confidence in any sole Person, as
to give him Power to bind his Successor, and therefore without the consent of
the Bishop, he having an Interest in them as a Corporation, to be his Counsel,
the Dean and Chapter, without the consent of the Bishop, could not surrender
their Corporation, but shall remain as long as the Bishopric continue, Lib. 3.
m. 40, 41. Eliz. Dean and Chapter de Norw. Case.

Object. Civitas London habeat omnes libertates suas antiquas and
consuetudines, Mag. Chapter c. 9.

The Liberties of the City of London for any Cause shall not be taken into the
Kings Hands, Rot. Parl. 1 E. 3. Authoritate Parliament, Inst. Part 4. Fol. 253.

Answ. That the City of London shall have its Ancient Franchises and Frank
Customs, it is Excellently Interpreted by our Ancient Authors, that the Citizens
of London shall have their Franchises of which they are seized by a Rightful
and Loyal Title of the Gifts, Grants, and Confirmations of the Kings, and which
they have not Forfeited by their Abuser or Mis-user, and that they have those
Franchises and Customs which are sufferable by Right, and not Repugnant to Law,
Inst. Part 2. Fol. 20. Mirror, Chapter 5.. 2. Fleta Lib. 2. c. 48. Plowd. Com. Fol.
40. And it does appear by the Authorities abovesaid, that for Abusion the
Franchises of the City of London may be seized: And whereas the Act 1 E. 3.
says, that the Liberties shall not for any cause be seized, etc. it must be
understood, that for any cause that is not reasonable, or at the Kings
Pleasure, they shall not be seized.

The Citizens of London were before and after the Conquest Governed by
Port-graves or Portgreeves until the Reign of King Richard the First, by whose
Charter they were Governed by two Bailiffs: But King Richard, the first Year of
his Reign, appointed them a Mayor, who continued therein until the Eight Year
of King John, and then King John appointed a Mayor, and because sometime the
Mayor appointed by the King was no Citizen of London, King John, the Tenth Year
of his Reign, Granted to the Citizens Liberty and Authority to chose a Mayor De
seipsis, Inst. Part 4. Fol. 255.

7 R. 2. it was Enacted that the Aldermen of London shall not from henceforth
be Yearly chosen, but shall remain till they be put out for Reasonable cause,
notwithstanding the Ordinance of Edward the Second and Edward the Third. So
that by this Act it does appear, that for Reasonable cause an Alderman might be
put out, Rot. Parl. 7 R. 2. n. 25.

So that by the Authorities abovesaid it does appear, that a Corporation is a
Franchise, and that a Franchise may be Forfeited, and by consequence a
Corporation.

3. If the Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens have done any Act in their Common
Council, whereby to Forfeit their Corporation and Franchises.

wherein we shall Enquire, 1. Whether the Quo Warranto be well brought against
the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens, etc. or ought not the same to have been
against particular Persons. 2. How far the Acts of the Common Council shall
bind the Corporation. 3. What those Acts were. 4. If they amount unto a
Forfeiture of the Franchises and Liberties.

1. It Is conceived that the Quo Warranto is well brought against the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of the City of London, without naming any Persons in
particular, for by that Name they ought to Plead and be Impleaded, etc.

An Action was brought against the Masters and Scholars of New College in C.
and well brought, 15 E. 4. Fol. 33. a.

Quo Warranto versus de Corporation de Maydenhead in Barkshire, quod Gardiani,
Pontenarii Burgenses and Communitas de villa de Maydenhead, for three Years
have used a Market with diverse Liberties. H. 17. Jac. B R. Rot. 106. in Coron.
Office. Palmer's Rep. Fol. 80.

An Action upon the Stat. of Winchester was brought against the Men Inhabitant
in Hundredo de Elthorn and Spelthorn, without naming any particular, and well
brought. T. 12. Jac. Fosters Case. Hutton Rep. Croke Part 2.187. Noys Rep. Fol.
21.

An Action versus Inhabitants in domidio Hundredi d' Waltham, and adjudged
good, T. 15. Jac. Rot. 2244. Constables Case. Brownl. Part 1. Fol. 156.

An Action was brought against Dean and Chapter, without Naming them by their
Names of Baptism; so if Dean and Chapter bring an Action, 21 E. 4.15.

An Action upon the Stat. of Winchester, and 27 Eliz. Versus homines
Inhabitants de D. Rastal. Entries, Fol. 406.

If the King grants Land in Fee Probis hominibus villae d' D. it is a good
Corporation; and so, if he grants Lands Burgensibus Civibus and Communitati, to
the Burgesses, Citizens, and Commonalty, they may sue and be sued by those
Names, and they may have an Action ad respondendum Probis hominibus,
Burgensibus Civibus, etc. 7 E. 4.14.

Where Mayor and Commonalty is sued, and all the Commoners appear in their
proper Persons, it is not good, for this is another Body; therefore the
Corporation ought to appear by Attorney by the Name of the Corporation, and not
in their proper Persons, 19 H. 6.8. Brok. Tit. Corporation, n. 28.

A Quo Warranto was brought against the Mayor and Bailiffs of Maydstone, T. 2.
Car. in B R. The Mayor and Bailiffs of Maydstone's Case. Poph. Rep. Fol. 180.

An Information against the Inhabitants of the Town and Borough of Denhigh in
the County of Denbigh, for Usurping diverse Franchises, etc. Cokes Entries, Tit.
Quo Warranto. Fol. 537. b.

2. So that if a Quo Warranto is well brought against Burgenses, Cives,
Inhabitants and Communitatem de villa, etc. be good a fortiori, this Quo
Warranto being brought against the Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of London.

2. The Burgesses of the Town of Tewksbury in the County of Gloucester, brought
an Action of Debt upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. c. 27. which has reference to
the Statute of Winchester, if Satisfaction be not made for the Robbery therein
mentioned, within fifteen days after Proclamation: The Action was given against
the Commonalties of the Forest of Dean, which are adjacent to the River of
Severn, and of the Hundreds of Bledstow and Westbury, and the Writ was,
Praecipe Communitati Ferestae de Deane and Hundredis de B. and W. Exception was
taken to the Writ, for the Writ ought to have been Praecipe Communitati
Forestae d' Deane and Hundredorum de B. W. according to the words of the
Statute of 8 H. 6. as one entire Commonalty, and yet the Writ was adjudged
good, for that it was to the same effect, 8 H. 6. c. 27.11 H. 6. Fol. 47. a.
Inst. Part 2. Fol. 570.

The next thing which falls into Consideration, is, How far the Acts of the
Common Council shall bind the Corporation.

1. The Acts of the Common Council shall bind the Corporation, for that Court
has some Resemblance of the High Court of Parliament, for it consists of two
Houses, the one of the Mayor and Aldermen, the other of such as be of the
Commons Assembly, Representing the Commonalty of London. In this Court they may
make Constitutions and Laws for Government of Trade and Traffic, for the
better Execution of the Laws and Statutes of the Nation, or pro bono Publico,
and for the good Government of the City, so those Constitutions and Laws be not
contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Nation: And being made by the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commonalty, do bind within the City of London and the Liberties
thereof. Inst. Part 4. Fol. 249. Lib. 5.62, 63. the Chamberlain's Case. Lib.
8.173. the Case of the City of London.

14 H. 8. It Is said, that the Dean and major part of the Chapter make the
Corporation, and their Act is the Act of the Corporation, although the others
do not agree to it, 14 H. 8. Fol. 9. So in the 21 E. 4.27.70. b. it is said, ubi
major pars ibi tota, 9. H. 6.32.

If the Major part of the Corporation does Imprison the Minor part until they
consent to do an Act, although they do not consent, yet the Act done by the
Major part shall bind all, and its the Act of the Corporation, 15 E. 4. Fol. 2.
And with this agrees Panormitan C. cum in cunctis; where it is said, Quod
authoritas and protestas Capituli consislit in majori part ejus, and sic totum
Capitulum facere dicitur quod major pars facit, Davyes Rep. Fol. 48.

Therefore I agree, that if the Minor part of a Corporation accept of a New
Charter, it shall not bind the Corporation, T. 13. Jac. Baggs Case Rolls, Rep.
Part 1. Fol. 224.

Yet in some Cases the Act of one, or of some few of the Corporation will bind
the rest: Did not the Corporation of Sandwich, for the Misdemeanour of John
Dennis, the then Mayor thereof, in a high Measure suffer, and being thereof
Convicted, was not the Judgment thereupon Quod Communitas amittat libertatem?

The Command of the Mayor only, to the Bailiff of the Corporation, to enter
into certain Lands for the Corporation, though it be without Deed, shall be
good, and bind the Corporation, 16 H. 7.2.

A Sum of 100 l. per Annum was due to the Mayor and Commonalty of Southampton
out of the Customs of the King, an Acquittance by the Mayor alone, because he
was the Head of the Corporation, was allowed by the Justices, and for that
there were shown many Prsidents of Acquittances by the Mayor made in times
past, 2 R. 3. Fol. 7.

An Action of Debt was brought against the Provost and Scholars of a College
in C. for that T. M. their late Provost and Predecessor of the Def. and the
Scholars by F. their Servant bought certain Goods to the value of 10 l. which
came to the use of the College: By the Justices it was agreed, that the
Contract was good, and shall be intended the Contract of the Provost only, and
the Name of Scholars is but surplusage, for the Contract of the Provost, and
for that it came to the Use of the College is sufficient, 5 E. 4.7. Brok.
Corporation, n. 53.

A Writ of Covenant was brought by the Mayor and Commonalty d' H. against the
Mayor and Commonalty of D. and declared that the Defendants by their Deed
Covenanted that the Planti^es should be Free of Murage, Pontage, Customs, and
Toll in D. of all those of H. and that they have unjustly taken Toll by certain
of their Burgesses of certain of the Burgesses of H. etc. adjudged that the
Prisal and taking by their common Minister, is a taking of the whole
Corporation, for it cannot reasonably be intended that the whole Community
could meet together to take Toll, and therefore it was adjudged a breach of the
Covenant; there is no mention made that he was their Minister by Specialty, Sub
communi sigillo Corporationis. 48 E. 3. Full. 17.

I do agree, that where there are Garden and Chaplin, Mayor and Commonalty,
Dean and Chapter, or the like, the Garden, Mayor, or Dean, solely cannot make a
Lease, nor discontinue, for it ought to be by the whole Corporation, and by
Deed, 21 E. 4.70. But if the King makes a Corporation consisting of Twelve Men,
to continue for ever in Succession, when any of them dye, that the rest may
chose others in their place, if three or four of them dye, yet all Acts done by
them shall be valid in Law, Rolls Abridgment Part 2. Fol. 514.

By which it does appear by what Acts a Corporation is bound, but when those
things are acted and done in the Common Council of the said City, being a Court
of Record, and which is Representative of all the Free Men and Citizens of the
City of London, they must in a more eminent degree bind the Corporation. We
shall Observe,

4. What those Acts were.

1. The said Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of the said City of London have
assumed an unlawful and unjust Power and Authority to Levy Money of the
Subjects of our Lord the King, to the proper Use of the said Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens assumed by color of the Laws or Ordinances by them in
Fact Ordained without any other Right, Title, or Authority; and in particular
in their Common Council Assembled, they did make and publish a certain Law by
them in Fact Enacted, for Levying several Sums of Money of all His Majesty's
Subjects and Liege People, as well Free as not Free men of the said City, and
of other Foreigners, at the Public Markets held within the City aforesaid,
coming thither to Sell their Victuals and Provisions.

2. That the said Mayor and Commonalty, and Citizens of the said City, in their
Common Council Assembled, without any Legal Authority, did assume upon
themselves to Censure and Judge our said Lord the King and the Prorogation of
the Parliament, and then and there being so Assembled in their Common Council,
did Vote and Ordain, that a certain Petition, under the Name of the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London in the Common Council Assembled,
should be exhibited to our said Lord the King, in which Petition there was
contained, that by the said Prorogation of the Parliament, the Prosecution of
the Public Justice of this Kingdom, and the making necessary Provision for His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects was obstructed: And they did Order the Imprinting
of the same, and caused the same to be Published and dispersed.

We shall enquire whether these Laws and Ordinances made by the Mayor and
Commonalty and Citizens of London be Warrantable by Law or not.

I do agree that they have Power to make Laws and Constitutions for the well
Government of the City, 22 Ass. Part 34.

But Ordinances which are contrary to the Public Good, which is the scope and
great End of all Laws (for Salus Populi est Suprema Lex) are injurious or
prejudicial to a multitude, and beneficial only to some particular Persons,
such Ordinances are repugnant to the Law of Reason (to which they ought to be
subordinate) and by consequence void: And most of the Ordinances and
Constitutions which by the Common Law have been adjudged void, as being
unreasonable, against common Right, or purely against Law, if their Nature and
Quality be considered, they have been found injurious to a multitude, and
prejudicial to the Commonwealth, and to have had their commencement and
continuance by Oppression and Extortion.

1. They have made a Constitution and Ordinance to Levy several great Sums of
Money, as well upon the said Citizens of London as Strangers which come to the
Markets of the said City with Victuals, etc.

These Sums of Money Levied by them could not be Levied for Toll, Pickage, or
Stallage, incident to their Markets, or due by Prescription (they do not
pretend it to be) but by an Arbitrary Power, without any Right and against Law
they have Levied the said Sums: Every Oppression against Law by color of any
Usurped Authority is a destruction within Magna Chart. c. 29. and it is the
worst of Oppressions that is done by color of Justice: If the King de novo
does grant a Fair or Market, Toll does not pass as incident to it without
special words. Kelloway, Fol. 138.145. 11 H. 6.19. 9 H. 6.45. T. 38. Eliz. Rot.
936. Heedy and Weldhouse. And the Reason is, because it is but a private Profit
against common Right.

If the King does grant a Market with Toll, if he does not appoint how much
shall be taken for Toll, the Grant is void: For when the King does create a
Market, and grant such things which may be chargeable to the Subject, the Law
presumes that the King granted it Pro bono publico, and the Subject had Quid
pro Quo, and greater benefit by it; But it is against all reason to give power
to any Subject to impose so much as he pleases upon another by Toll or other
Duty; and the rule is given, Lib. 11. f. 8. in the Case de Monopolies, that
every Grant and Grievance to the prejudice of the Subject is void, 13 H. 4.14,
15. Kelloway temps, E. 3.134. 30 E. 3.15.1. and expressly 9 H. 6.45. it is, That
in a Prescription for Toll, it ought to be set out how much had been used to be
taken for Toll, 11 H. 6.19. Book tit. Patent 11.12. When the King erects a
Court, he ought to appoint Officers, and not the Patentee; so that there be no
oppression or extortion, 14 E. 3.13, 14. In the 13 H. 4. the Commons complained
in Parliament, that an Office was erected for Measurage of Clothes and Canvas,
with a new Fee for the same by color of the Kings Letters Patents; and prayed,
that the said Letters Patent might be revoked: For the King could erect no
Office with new Fees to be taken of the people, who may not be so charged but
by Parliament. The Royal Answer of the King in Parliament was, That the
Statutes therefore provided should be observed: Rot. Parl. 13 H. 4. n. 43.13 H.
4. fol. 16, 17. King Edward the Third had granted to Robert Polcy a new Office
of Measuring Worsteads, with a new Fee: at the petition of the Commons it was
resolved in Parliament to be void, and afterward revoked as void by Authority
of Parliament: Rot. Parl. 22. E. 3. n. 31. Rot. Parl. 25. E. 3.

And by the Stat. 34 E. 1. all Burdens or Charges put upon the Subject by the
King, either to or for the King, or to or for any Subject, by the Kings
Letters Patent, or other Commandment or Order, is prohibited, unless it be by
common consent in Parliament: 1 Inst. Part. 2. fol. 534.

If the King cannot put or impose any Burden or Charge upon the Subject but by
their assent in Parliament; From whence do the Mayor and Commonalty and
Citizens of London derive their Power and Authority to set and impose such Sums
of Money? If from the King, that Power and Authority is against the 29 chapter of.
Mag and the Statute of 34 E. 1. If by Prescription, that Prescription is
against the said Statutes, and so void in Law: therefore it is an usurpation of
an unlimited Power, and contrary to Law and Justice, and a just cause of
forfeiture of their Corporation. And that which adds to the Superinjustice of
their actings, as they have imposed these sums of Money upon the Kings
Subjects, so they may at their wills and pleasure impose what greater sums of
Money they shall think fit.

Richard D'Wakyes did distrain William de Hay, for that he did hold of him
certain Lands apud Lin de faud by the service of 10 s. Et per tallagium ei
faciendum ad voluntatem ipsius Richardi, and quia ipsum Willielmum talliavit,
Anno Regis 9. una f^ vice ad 2 s and atia vice Anno 10 and 18 d. quod tallagium
ei a retro fuit pro praedictis 2 s. per Annum ipsum Willielmum distrinxit super
feodem suum pro praedictis arreragiis; Adjudged that the Tallage of 2 s. and 18
d. or any other sum uncertain: And because it was to be at the will and
pleasure of the said Richard D'Wakyes, 'twas against the Statute of 34 E. 1.
and so void: M. 11. E. 1. in Banco. Rot. 49. Sussex.

A Custom that the Lord of a Manor shall detain the Distress taken upon his
Demesnes until a Fine be paid unto him for the damage, at his will, is void.
Davys Rep. fo. 33. a. 2. H. 4.24. and because he is Judge in his own case, 5 H.
7. fo. 9.44 E. 3. fo. 19.

An Action of Trespass was brought for carrying away of certain Trees. The Def.
pleaded a Custom; that he, of the Tenants of the Manor, which first came to
the place when, etc. should have all the Windfalls there: Adjudged that this
Custom was void for the incertainty; and the reason given was, that that lies
not in Prescription, which lies in the will and pleasure of man; for the will
of man is uncertain: 14 E. 3. Fitz. Batt. 277.

And this Ordinance of the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens does not only
extend to his Majesty's Subjects within the City of London, but unto Forainers
and Strangers which shall come to their Markets within the said City; which is
not only against Law, but a very high breach of their trust which his Majesty
has reposed in them, and a misuser and abuser of their Franchises.

The Lord of a Manor prescribes to have of every man which breaks the Pound of
the Lord there 3 l. the Prescription is not good, because Strangers cannot be
bound by it, 21 H. 7.40. 11 H. 7. fo. 14. a. 21 H. 7. fo. 20.

And any Town may make a By-law amongst themselves, that no man there shall put
their Cattle within the Commons before Michaelmas upon pain of 20 s. adjudg'd
that that binds them, but no Strangers shall be bound by it, 20 H. 7.40. 11 H.
7. fo. 14. 21 H. 7. fo. 29.

And therefore that Ordinance or By-law made by the Guardians and the
Fellowship of Weavers of Newbury, That no person should use the Art of Weaving
within the said Town of Newbury except he had been an Apprentice to the Art
within the said Town, and had used it there by the space of five years before
the said Ordinance, or were admitted by the Guardian and Fellowship, upon the
pain of 20 s. a month, is void, because it excludes Strangers, though they have
served as an Apprentice for 7 years to the said Art: and because it did
restrain the Liberty of the Subject: Hol. rep. fo. 211, 212.

This Ordinance made by the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London in
their Common Council assembled, is against Law; it restrains the Kings Subjects
in their Liberties (which are their rightful Inheritance). Every one that comes
to their Markets with Victuals, etc. (without which they could not subsist)
must pay, etc. if not, they must be turned out, etc. Solve, aut abi: this is
pro privato lucro. But that Ordinance for carrying their Broad Cloth before
sale thereof to Blackwel-hall to be searched, was pro hono publico; and for
that reason did oblige Strangers that did not bring their Cloth to be searched,
lib. 5. Chamberlain of Londons Case.

Money cannot be raised or charged upon the Subject but by Act of Parliament.
If the King himself cannot do it, I am sure no Corporation can, having no
power, Authority or Jurisdiction, but what is originally derived from him. It Is
not the quantity of Money levied by them, but the manner of the raising of it
by a Legislative Power unjustly usurped in their Common Council. It was not the
quantity of the Ship Money, but the raising of it without a Parliament, which
was the Crime. Quos una culpa nectet, eos una poena plectet; and that must be
the Seizing of their Liberties.

A Man takes two pence for every Barrel of Beer which shall be Landed at a
certain place near to the Sea; this is not lawful, although it be upon his own
Land, for this is to Levy a new Custom, which he could not do Rolls Abridg.
tit. Praerogat. fol. 571.

An Information was against Morgan, for raising of two pence for every parcel
of Beer landed at Crockernepit in the County of Sommerset, near Bristol; he was
found guilty, was Fined one hundred Marks, and imprisoned by Judgment of Court
upon one of the Articles in Eire, That it shall not be lawful for any person to
raise a Tax, Rate, or Custom upon the Subjects of the King, though on their own
Land, P. 11. Car. 1. Rolls Abridg. Tit. Praerogat. fol. 571

2. The Contriving, Imprinting, and Publishing of the Petition to be presented
to his Majesty, containing much scandalous Matter in it, and Reflections upon
his Government.

I agree, it is lawful for any Subject to Petition to the King for redress in an
humble manner, when he finds himself grieved; for access to the Sovereign must
not be shut up in case of the Subjects distresses: but on the other side, it is
not permitted under color of a Petition and Refuge to the King, to make ill
Reflections on his Majesty and his Government.

If a Scandalous Letter be sent and delivered to a person who received it,
though the party which sent it did never publish it, yet it is punishable, for
the King and Commonwealth are interessed in it: for such Letters do tend to
the breach of the Peace, and to the stirring up Challenges and Quarrels; and
therefore the Means of such Evils, as well as the End, are to be prevented.
Hob. Rep. fol. 62. Barrow's Case.

If a Man Imports Books writ beyond Seas against the Kings Supremacy, knowing
the effect of them, and offer them to any Subjects, he is within the danger of
the Statute 5 Eliz. So of those that teach the Contents, and affirm it to be
good; the same of him that conveys the Books secretly to his Friends, to
persuade them to be of that opinion; the same of them that Print, and offer
such Books within the Nation. Die. fo. 282.

T. 6. Car. 1. An Information was Exhibited against Bonham Norton, his Son John
Norton, Lee May, Tho. Smith, etc. for contriving a Slanderous Petition to the
King, and for charging of the Lord Keeper with a Bribe for making of a Decree,
and they were Sentenced.

T. 6. Car. 1. Doctor Leighton was Sentenced for Making, Imprinting, and
Publishing of a detestable Book, containing in it Treasonable Matter against
the King, and inviting the Subjects to Rebellion.

Perkins was Sentenced to pay One thousand pounds, and Imprisonment during his
life, because he dispersed a Seditious Letter against the Loan of King Charles
the First; for the King sent to the Freeholders to lend to him Money. Huttons
rep. fo.

Veritas convitii non excusat convitiantem a poena.

Penry for publishing Scandalous Libels against the Church Government, was
Indicted, Arraigned, Attainted, and Executed, P. 35. Eliz. inter Placita
Coronae in Banco Regis. New Book of Entries, fo. 252.

Williams a Papist, and Barrister at Law, Indicted of High Treason, for writing
two Books, the one called Balaams Ass, and the other called Speculum Regale;
because he affirmed the King should dye before 1621. and for saying that
England was the Habitation of Devils; and that it is the abomination of
desolation: By all the Judges, it was High Treason at Common Law; for these
words import the End and the Destruction of the King and his Nations; and that
false Religion is there maintained; which is a motive to the people to
Rebellion. And although the Book was enclosed in a Box, sealed up, and conveyed
secretly to the King, and never published, yet he was Attained for
High Treason, and Executed at Charing Cross, P. 17. Williams of Essex Case.
Rolls rep. part. 2. f. 89.

In the time of Henry the Eighth, upon the Dissolution of the Monasteries,
there was a great Rebellion in the North of England; the Dean of Windsor being
told of it, said, The King had brought his Hogs to a fair Market; and a parson
hearing of it, said, Principibus obsta sero medicina paratur: because the words
of the Dean had an ill Reflection upon the Government, and of his Majesty's
Management of the Affairs of State, they were both Indicted of High Treason for
speaking the words, and were found guilty; and the Dean was attainted of
High Treason; but the Parson, because he was so ignorant (as many times
Ignorance is the best Sanctuary) that he did not know the difference between
Principiis and Principibus, he was Reprieved, and obtained his pardon of the
King.

Every Libel against a private person deserves severe punishment, for it
incites all of the Family, Kindred, and Society to revenge, and tends to
Quarrels: Verba movent litem, lis vulnera, vulnera Mortem; against a
Subordinate Magistrate, it is a greater offense, because it scandalizes the
Government; for Injuria crescit and decrescit secundum dignitatem personae. But
against the King, who is the Supreme Head of the Commonwealth, Pater Patriae,
it is a Crime of the first Magnitude.

And how fatal and pernicious the publishing of Scandals and Libels have been
to the Kings of England, and to their good Subjects, this Nation is very
sensible: 7 E. 1. the King sent Commissions to all the Counties of England, to
enquire de Spersoribus Rumorum: and 25 E. 1. Declaratio Regis missa fuit ad
omnes Comitatus Angliae, de Rege purgando de certis rumoribus iniquis contra
ipsum ortis, etc. Rot. Parl. 7 E. 1. M. 13. Rot. Patent. 25 E. 1. pars 2. M. 7.

A Declaration of the King was sent to all the Counties of England, to purge
him of certain false and unjust Rumors and Scandals raised against him.

Rex mandavit Majori and Vicecomit. London, Quod facta inquisitione de
sparsoribus rumorum and Seditionem in Civitate, ipsas caperent, and in Prisona
de Newgate detinerent: 20 E. 3. pars 1. M. 18. and 26.

The King Commands the Major and Sheriffs of London, that they make diligent
inquisition of the spreaders of False Reports and Sedition in the City, and
that they should seize upon them, and keep them in the prison of Newgate.

As for the Petition imprinted and published by the Major, Aldermen, and
Citizens, I hope it was acted by many of them out of a principle of Piety and
Loyalty, but must needs be looked upon as an action of no great discretion in
them, (to say no worse) for to make such ill reflections upon his Majesty, when
the King by his Oath is bound to do Justice, and Nulli Negavimus, is one of his
Royal Attributes.

Ob. But it has been said, That no acts bind beyond the Corporation, but such
as are done under their common Seal; therefore they cannot present a Clerk to a
Living, but by Deed sub Communi Sigillo, 13 H. 8 12. nor make a Surrender, 33
H. 6.17. 34 H. 6.21. nor assign Auditors, 4 H. 7.17. 7 H. 7.9. Et hujusmodi, so
their Laws and Constitutions made in their Common Council do not bind, because
they are not under their Common Seal.

Answ. Excellent Logic; he must be a rare Chemist that can Extract such a
Consequence from the Premises. The Common Council of the City is a Parliament
of the City; the Mayor is the King, the Aldermen the Peers, the Commonalty the
Commons; and what they there Enact and Ordain is upon Record; Jones Rep. Fol.
540. Therefore those Constitutions and Ordinances by them there made, being
Enacted in a Court of Record, if not Warrantable, make the more against them;
and what is then by them Enacted is of greater Force and Puissance than if it
had been under their Common Seal. If they appoint an Attorney at Law or Bailiff
in their Common Council, they may justify any Act which does belong to their
Office, Sans monstrans de fait, etc. for it is to the Use of the Corporation, 12
H. 7.25, 26. They certify their New Mayor Yearly in the Exchequer, because
it is entered on Record, 13 H. 8.22. vide lib. 10. l' Guardians 8. S. Saviors
Case. 14 H. 8.29. 12 E. 4.9, 10.

IV. If the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens have done any Act in their Common
Council, whereby to Forfeit their Corporation and Franchises.

Where a Franchise is absolute and entire, and has no dependence on another
Franchise, then if any incident to it be Forfeited, the whole Franchise is
Forfeited, 22 Ass. 34. Palmers Rep. Fol. 82. en l' Case d' Corporation d'
Maydenhead.

But the Corporation of London is a Franchise, Court d' Entries, Fol. 527.
Palmers Rep. Fol. 82. absolute and entire, and has no dependence on another
Franchise, therefore the Forfeiture of any incident to the Corporation of
London, is a Forfeiture of the Corporation.

To make Laws and Ordinances for the well Government of the Corporation is
incident to every Corporation, Hob. Rep. Fol. 211. But the Corporation of
London has abused and mis-used this Power, therefore they have Forfeited their
Power to make Laws and Ordinances, which is incident to their Corporation,
therefore they have Forfeited their Corporation; the abuse of the Court of
Pye-Powders, being incident to a Fair, is a Forfeiture of the Fair, 7 H. 4.44.
otherwise of Toll, because it is not incident to the Fair or Market, Palmer,
Ibid.

Object. There is a Stat. 7 R. 2. That the Citizens of London shall enjoy all
their whole Liberties whatsoever, with this clause, Licet usi non fuerint, vel
abusi fuerint, and notwithstanding any Statute to the contrary, 7 R. 2. n. 37.

Answ. This is no Act of Parliament, but an Act of Grace of the King in
Parliament.

For no assent of the Lords, etc. do appear, but only per dominum Regen^ and
Consilium suum, which must be intended his Privy Council, if it had been
otherwise, then Consilio Comitum Baronum, etc. as 35 E. 1. apud Carlioten Stat.
de Asportatis Religiosorum, etc.

^ut admitting it to be an Act of Parliament, it does only extend to (...)
Offenses and Crimes which they had committed or omitted, and not (...) ^^ose
that shall be committed or omitted by them de futuro: If otherwise, it would
have been against all Reason and Justice, and by consequence void; and that it
must be so, read the Kings Answer to the Petition of the Commons at large,
Jones Rep. Fol. 241.

And if we look into all the Statutes which confirm the Liberties of London,
viz. 14 E. 3. c. 1. which confirms all Reasonable Liberties. 2 H. 4. c. 1. the
Liberties which have been duly used. 3 H. 5. c. 1. all, except such as are
Repealed by the Common Law. 2 H. 6. c. 1. All Liberties well used, and not
Repealed by the Common Law: There is no Statute or Prescription Warrant any of
their Actions but only such as are consonant to Right, Reason, and Justice.

Qui Muragium ad villam clandendam gravius ceperint quam concessum fuerit per
Cha^tam Regis, perdant ex tunc gratiam suae concessionis and graviter
amerciantur. Fleta, lib. 2. c. 43.

They which shall take more Murage than is granted to them, shall lose the
Benefit of their Grant, and shall be grievously Amerced.

Le ley voet quo chescan perdera son Franchise que eo misuera, Mirror. c. 5.. 4.

The Law wills, that every one shall lose his Franchise which mis-use it.

And Bracton says, that Libertates possunt amitti per abusum vel non usum,
Bract. lib. 2. Fol. 56. lib. 3. Fol. 117.

And it is to be Observed, that where the Law says, that they shall lose their
Liberties or their Grant, it is to be understood of a Forfeiture of them for
ever, Inst. Part 2. Fol. 222.

How the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London have mis-used and abused
their Franchise by Levying of such Sums of Money, to the Oppression of His
Majesty's good Subjects, is submitted to the grave consideration of all Sober
and dis-interessed Persons.

A Leet was seized into the Kings Hands because they did take of the Offenders
against the Assize of Bread and Beer 2 s. when they had no Pillory nor Tumbrel,
Rastals Entries, Fol. 540.

In the Eires of the County of Cornwall, 30 E. 1. inter Placita Coronae and
infra Hundredum de Keryer, there was prescribed that in Holston Burgh they did
take, de novo, of every great Beast, viz. Ox, etc. as well of the Buyers as of
the Sellers, one penny, whereas they ought to take but one penny of the Buyer:
And that they take of Merchandises exceeding 12 d. of the Buyer, ob. and of the
Seller, ob. whereas they ought to take but ob. of the Buyer. Rolls Abridg. Part
2. Fol. 523.

The Justices in Eire did enquire of those which did take superfluous or undue
Tolls in Cities, Buroughs, or elsewhere against the common Usage of the
Kingdom, Cap. Itineris vet. Magna Charta.

It Is to be Observed, that if the Defendants in a Quo Warranto made default,
their Franchises were seized into the Hands of the King, and the King was to be
Answered all the Profits, and if they did not Replieve within the Eire, they
lost their Franchises for ever. Iten. Canc. 6 E. 2.7.

Ob. If the Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens of London have committed any
Offense, the particular Persons which have transgressed ought to be punished,
but the Corporation cannot, for no Trespass lie against a Corporation, 22 Ass.
67. Brok. Tit. Corp. n. 43. 15 E. 4.1. b. No Capias, no exigent against it,
neither can it be Imprisoned, 21 E. 4.69, 70. 45 E. 3.2, 3. Neither can a
Corporation be bound in a Statute or Recognizance, Moors Rep. 68.

Answ. His Majesty may proceed against them in their Politic capacity, and so
to a Forfeiture of their Corporation and Franchises; or in their Natural
capacities against any particular Persons of the Corporation which are
Offenders, and they shall be punished Secundum quantitatem and qualitatem
delucti; according to the quantity and quality of their Offense.

Non oppressus liberant, Qui liberos opprimunt. They will not free those which
are Oppressed, who Oppress those which are Free.
FINIS.

