TRUTHS RIGHT-SIDE TURNED UPWARDS. OR, The Armies Vindication against an
Aspersion of Rebellion and Tyranny cast upon them.

In several Books, Whereof one subscribed by diverse Ministers in the Province
of London; Another by Mr Geree, etc.

Not only clearing the case of the Army to be just; But retorting the force
of the Arguments of their Opposers upon themselves.

By WILLIAM POTTER.

Romans 2. 3. And think thou this, O man, that judge them which do such
things, and do the same; that thou shall escape the judgment of God?
LONDON, Printed by JAMES and JOSEPH MOXON, for WILLIAM LARNAR, and are to be
sold at his shop, at the Sign of the Black-moor, near Bishops-gate. MDCXLIX.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, And His General Council of Officers.
Right Honorable, and Honored Gentlemen,
HAving amongst many others, observed your constant proceedings; and being no
less convinced of the justness, than of the public safety that your successes
tend unto; It was a great burden to my spirit, that your Actions should be so
publicly and so foully misrepresented, as by many they have bin, especially of
late: Now fearing lest through the subtilty of our common enemy, the Devil, who
fails not to endeavor by strong delusions to deceive, if it were possible, the
very Elect: (Though I was informed and assured you undertook not so great a
work without strong prayers, hearts pliable to the light you should receive,
and sufficient premeditation) yet I say, fearing least any one of you (through
the strong Assaults of so many Temptations on every side, both Spiritual and
Temporal) should be in the least measure discouraged: And perceiving what a
flood of weighty Affairs are at once fallen upon your shoulders: I did humbly
beseech God (who for the most part makes use of weakest means) at this time to
enlarge my small Talent beyond its ordinary capacity, in the vindication of
you, against such more than ordinary aspersions (which nothing but the meeknes
of true Christians would enable men of your power and trust patiently to bear)
the justness of your proceedings being grounded upon Principles as clear, as
the faculty of human understanding can evince. Yet being much pressed for want
of time, I could only touch upon such general heads, as necessarily tend to
the true state of that act for which you are so highly and with such strong
presumption condemned: whereby (although finding that much more might have bin
said to your vindication therein; I was necessitated to cut my way shorter than
otherwise I should have bin willing. Thus humbly taking leave of your
Excellency, and your Honorable Council, I rest.

Happy if I may be in the least measure serviceable to Christ in his servants,
W. P.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
I Have observed, and found by much experience, how dangerous a thing it is to
judge of our fellow-Professors by the outside and color of their actions,
whose most sincere intentions God for the most part hides from the World, under
circumstances of very foul appearances; as if he meant to make the World
believe, that he has no true servants in the World; but that such as pretend
most to Godliness amongst us. are the veriest hypocrites, and are not ashamed
to own the vilest of Actions, under the notion of Religion: as to instance,
Abraham must do that out of Conscience, which the world no doubt looked upon as
the attempting to murder his Son. The Israelites take their farewell of the
Egyptians, carrying their treasure with them by a command from God, under a
pretense of borrowing it: A thing, though (all circumstances considered)
justifiable, yet of a foul appearance. And afterward they seem to overthrow
their own Doctrine against Images, by setting up a brazen serpent: and at
last, (as if God were at odds with himself, and angry that men should reverence
his own Ordinances) it must be broken to pieces. Jeremiah is put upon such a
message from God, for which he is accused of sedition. And when the Jewish
Religion began to be noted by the World, as the Orthodox Worship, Christ (as if
he affected nothing but Novelty) seems in their eyes to cut it up by the roots:
And (as if he liked not to be served long after one fashion) when once men
built upon his own Principles that which they called Catholic; he sends his
own servants to protest against it, (as in Luther and others:) And when his
Doctrine also became a little popular, you shall scarce find a Christian, but
under the new name of Puritan; And now it begins to be a Credit to be an old
Puritan, you shall scarce find any heat of true spiritual life, but amongst
them who are rayled against for the broaching of Heresy. By all which seeming
mutability, God testifies his constant prosecution of the same Design, viz. to
make Christ, who to the Greeks is foolishness, and to the Jews a stumbling
block; to his own Servants, the power and wisdom of God to salvation; which
being fitly applicable to the times where in we live, and the Act of the Army
which I have undertaken to vindicate; I thought it not amiss to make the
Observation thereof one part of my Discourse in preface thereunto. And so I rest

Thy fellow servants in Christ W. Potter.

TRUTHS RIGHT-SIDE TURNED UPWARDS. OR, The Armies Vindication against an
Aspersion of Rebellion and Tyranny cast upon them.
I Having read some Books inveighing against the Armies late removing some
Members of Parliament from sitting in the House; wherein they utterly mistake
the state of the present condition of affairs in the Kingdom in all their
Arguments; could do no less in duty, than humbly to propose my thoughts, in
vindication of them therein.

Those who dispute against them, do affirm these six things, viz.

First, That they have resisted Authority.

Secondly, Broken their Trust and Vows to God and Men.

Thirdly, Dissolved the Parliament.

Fourthly, Justified the King in that former something Parallel attempt of his.

Fifthly, Opened a gap to all Rebellion.

Sixthly, Acted without any warrant from holy Writ.

All which I conceive are grounded upon this one mistake, viz. By giving that
Authority to Governors which is the right of a Freeborn People, and only
justifies our taking up of Arms in Vindication thereof. That is, that the
Peoples Trustees, and not their Governors, should be Judges of their own Laws,
and consequently to remove their Rulers, if they will not keep themselves
within the bounds of their trust: which how it may be applied to justify the
present act of the Army, in regard this Parliament was chosen to be the sole
Judges thereof in the behalf of the People; And consequently the King who
attempted to offer them violence in the performance of this their Duty was so
justly condemned. How this Army in this particular can be justified, is the
scope I aim at.

In order to which, we may observe that before the King deserted his trust; the
Parliament (being the people) were in such a capacity, that they were the sole
Judges of what concerned the Peoples Freedoms, and therefore could not be said
to tyranize over the People. But since the King deserted the Parliament, they
became Governors themselves; and all Governors of a Free people, ought to
have their Wills regulated by the Peoples Trustees over whom they rule: which
as the case now stands, the Army having authority to do, did not in restraining
these members, act out of their Places and Callings: And to clear these
particulars, we shall handle them in this Order: Namely, to prove

1. What it is to be in a capacity to act tyrannically, and what not.

2. That before the Kings deserting the Parliament, they were not in a capacity
so to act.

3. That since the Kings deserting the Parliament, they are in a capacity so to
act.

4. That the Army have a lawful Authority to judge of, and restrain them from
so acting.

Which 4. being soundly proved, I doubt not but our Adversaries, such as are
ingenuous, will yield and confess, that God has overcome them, not only by
swords, but words; by strength, but truth; by might, but right.

And first, To be in a capacity to act tyrannically, is for rulers to be the
sole Judges of what they do or order, in reference to the government of the
people: because in this case, whatsoever they ordain, the people are in no
capacity to show their dislike: and consequently, if for their own private
advantage, or some other by-respect they take away the just due or Interest of
some other man or men, there is no power on earth to check or restrain them. On
the other side, when Rulers can make no Orders or Proceedings that are binding.
but those which the People (by their lawful Deputies) are in a capacity to
dis-avow and restrain, then Rulers are not in a capacity to act tyrannically.

2. Before the Kings deserting the Parliament, they were not in a capacity to
act tyrannically. For the Parliament were the people met together, to demand of
their Rulers what they thought meet for their own safety, and therefore were
not in a capacity to tyrannise over the people, because themselves were the
people, and not the Rulers, but were to return to their dwellings, and
themselves to be ruled by those Laws they demanded.

3. Since the Kings deserting the Parliament, they are in a capacity to act
tyrannically. For in his absence, they were by approbation of the people, to
take upon them to be Rulers: that is, to make Orders and Ordinances to govern
the People by. Now it is already proved, that for Rulers to be the sole Judges
of what they do or order in reference to the government of the People, is to be
in a capacity to act Tyrannically. Therefore since the Kings deserting the
Parliament, they are in a capacity so to act.

Or secondly, By giving Commission to Armies, they become the Governors of
those Armies; and by governing them, they govern the Kingdom: Now to govern a
Kingdom, especially by force of Arms, and to be the sole Judges of what they do
or order in reference to the Government thereof, is to be in a high capacity to
act tyrannically.

4. That the Armies which they raise, have a lawful Authority to judge of and
restrain them from so acting. For first, the People in Parliament are not
Governors, but as some of us are willing to acknowledge them so: For it is the
unquestionable right of a free people, not to be subject to any whether they
will or no. Indeed the Jews had sometime Governors appointed them by Divine
Authority; but we (as far as we enjoy our freedom) not without our own choice,
and therefore as we were free in choosing them to represent us as the people of
England, so we were as free in choosing whether we would allow them to be our
Governors; except we grant that the Kings deserting the Parliament, and their
undertaking to free us from tyranny, could entitle them to be our Governors,
though none of the people of the land had at all believed that they intended
it. Therefore the people in Parliament were not our Governors, but as some of
us were willing to own them so.

And that this is a truth, appears secondly, By the Parliaments declaring the
case, and therein appealing to the people to be their own Judges, whether they
would receive Commissions, and take up Arms under their Authority or no.

2. We never owned their authority in giving Commissions to us or any of us,
but as it gave them who received the Commissions for us, a lawful authority to
judge of and by the sword, or otherwise to restrain them in acting
tyrannically. For if they gave us or our deputies (whom we and they entrusted
to receive the sword to defend us) a Commission to oppose the Arbytrarie and
Tyrannical power of Governors, then they gave us in our said Deputies, a
Commission to oppose it in themselves; because in receiving their Commission,
we allow of them as Governors. Which although it might not be expressly
mentioned in their said Commissions, yet it is to be understood, because we had
no other reason to take up Arms against our former Governors, but to oppose
tyranny.

And secondly (as I have already showed) if those who in the capacity of Rulers
do make Ordinances, should also in the capacity of people have sole power to
judge of the justness of them, then they are invested with power both to make
Ordinances whereby to dispose of the public moneys for their own private use,
or otherwise dispose of our lives and estates, and also be the sole Judges of
the justness of so doing: and it is not tolerable that our taking up Arms
against tyranny, was to maintain such a tyrannical power. Wherefore it must
necessarily be allowed, that we never had owned their authority in giving
Commissions to us, or any of us, but as it gave them authority, who received
the Commissions for us, again to judge of, and restrain them in acting
tyrannically.

3. That thus to oppose, is the proper work of the Armies raised by them; they
being those who are entrusted with the sword. First, because none but they are
lawfully entrusted to use their endeavors for this end: and therefore if those
who have no commission to assert our Liberties, should (being of another
judgment) endeavor to oppose the Army in what they do according to their
Commission, they should oppose them acting according to their places and
callings to preserve the people, without any commission or authority: for to
oppose those that act by a lawful commission, is to rebel against Authority.

2. If both we as the people in Parliament, were willing to give them a
Commission to defend us the people of the land against the tyranny of
Governors; and also they (as willing to venture their lives in such our
defense) were willing to accept of this our deputation, as sufficient Authority
to bear them out in so doing: then though (now we see their acting) we do not
approve of their acting therein, yet if we resist them, we act as private men
against the Authority given them by all the people in Parliament; and after we
have engaged ourselves to allow them liberty in so acting, howsoever they
should act therein, we also break our trust and engagement if we deny it unto
them: Therefore to use the sword to oppose tyranny is their proper work, and
not ours. So that you see here are three reasons why we may not oppose them
herein.

First, None can show a Commission to oppose tyranny but the Army.

Secondly, We all entrusted them to use their best skill herein. Which one is
divided into two arguments.

1. That they who oppose them, oppose their private opinions against their own
authority in Parliament. And

2. Break their public engagement to the Parliament and Kingdom: which David
says we may not do, though the keeping thereof should be to our prejudice. Now
then, you see it proved, that it is not only the work to which they are called
lawfully: but so theirs, as none else may oppose, without opposing the
Authority of the whole Kingdom. Therefore the Armies raised by the Authority of
Parliament, have a lawful Authority to judge of, and restrain the same
Parliament (as they are not our selves or people, but our Governors) from
acting tyrannically.

And now I come to answer the six things before mentioned, alleged against
their proceedings herein.

Object. 1. That they have resisted Authority.

To which I answer, That I have proved they were so far from acting against
Authority, that they have acted herein according to their places and callings:
and it is impossible that men's very doing their duty should be the committing
of sin, or acting rebelliously. 2. I answer, That if the Members in Parliament,
as they are our Governors, have no Authority to act and persever in acting
things contrary to our liking, declared by our lawful Deputies; then in so
acting, they act that which they have no Authority to do: in which to oppose
them, is to oppose their wills only, not their Authority. 3. It might by the
same reason be proved that the Parliaments War is unlawful, because therein
they opposed the will of him that was their Governor. Therefore the A^my have
not resisted Authority.

Object. 2. That they having vowed, and being entrusted to maintain the
Privileges of Parliament) have broken their vow and trust herein.

Answ. The Privilege of Parliament is the privilege of the people, whereby
through their lawful Deputies they are authorized to oppose that which they
judge to be Tyranny in their Governors. But the Army (seeing they, and none
else have Commission to oppose Tyranny) are therefore the lawful Deputies
entrusted to oppose that which they judge Tyranny in their Governors:
Therefore they have performed (not broken) their trust and vows to God and men
in thus doing.

Object 3. They have dissolved the Parliament.

Answ. If the Parliament be now not in the capacity of a formal Parliament or
People, met to demand our liberties of our Governors, but as it were, a
Council of State, authorized (by means of them our lawful Deputies, taking up
Arms under their command) to be our Governors; then to remove such evil
Governors as by our lawful Deputies we judge tyrannical, is not to dissolve a
Parliament, nor yet to destroy, but regulate such a council of Governors, who
must needs (in this case) without such a removal, be in a capacity to destroy,
but not to save us; and by such a removal, are restored unto a capacity to rule
us safely. Now I say, if this be true, (all which is either clear of it self,
or already proved) then the Army have not by this act dissolved the Parliament,
nor yet the Government, but have done that, which if they had not done, this
Council would have bin not only useless, but destructive to us, and being
done, is restored unto a capacity to preserve us: whose preservation is the
only end of our fighting, and of their government.

Object. 4. That they justified the King in that former something Parallel
attempt of his.

Answ. They are parallel in nothing but this, that the Kings Act was in as high
a degree of breaking of trust, as the Armies was a keeping of trust; That the
Army without so acting, could not have performed their trust, I have already
proved; because they being in place of us the people, cannot be faithful to us,
but in removing such Governors they judge tyrannical. And that the King
without resisting the free Parliament or people of England, could not lightly
have broken his trust, is as clear; but sure I am, that by his attempt to
remove some of them out of the House, he did endeavor to over-aw the rest, and
so to make us all his creatures and slaves, by our own consent in Parliament,
is so evident, as it need not be proved: which is manifestly against his Oath
and Trust.

Object. 5. That they have opened a gap to all Rebellion.

Answ. For the lawful Deputies of the people not to be satisfied without a
timely removal of such as they judge tyrannical Governors; is so far from
opening a gap unto, that it shuts the door against Rebellion, which otherwise
they judge would ensue* For that is properly rebellion, which is acted against
the authority of the people in their lawful Deputies, upon any pretense
whatsoever.

Object 6. That they have acted without any warrant from holy writ.

Answ. He that turns the truth with the wrong side upwards, and in that posture
lays it to the rule of God word, must needs give a judgment quite contrary to
truth: For we have proved that instead of resisting our authority, they have
maintained our authority: instead of breaking their trust, they have performed
their trust: instead of justifying the Kings act, they have condemned it:
instead of opening a gap to rebellion, they have shut the door against it: and
consequently it follows, that instead of acting without warrant from holy Writ,
they have acted by authority from such Warrant. And now, not doubting all
honest Christians will see their error, and (as David) take their own sentence
to themselves unto whom it belongs, which they have urged with as much zeal as
we can press upon them; We are assured they will yield obedience unto lawful
Authority, which if others amongst them refuse to do, shall not God (to use his
own expression) laugh to see them taking such pains, thus to sentence
themselves, whilst they rejoice in conceit, that they have beaten his cause and
servants down to the ground? And shall not all the Saints say Amen? Even so be
it Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

