THE SPEECH Of the Right Honorable Henry Powle, Esquire SPEAKER OF THE House of
Commons: On Wednesday the First of May, 1689.

AT THE Passing of Two BILLS, ENTITLED, I. An Act for Raising Money by a
Poll, and otherwise, toward the Reducing of Ireland. II. An Act for preventing
Doubts and Questions concerning the Collecting the Public Revenue.


LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to the King and
Queen's most Excellent Majesty's. MDCLXXXIX.

THE SPEECH Of the Right Honorable Henry Powle, Esquire SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE of
COMMONS.
May it please Your Majesty,
THE Commons Assembled in this present Parliament have taken into their most
Serious Consideration the deplotable Condition of Ireland, where those Fatal
Counsels that did so long Govern the Affairs of these Kingdoms have so far
prevailed, that the Arms and Garrisons there have been taken from Your
Protestant Subjects, and put into the Hands of Irish Papist, and the English
Protestants that remain there left Naked and Defenseless in the Power of those
Enemies, which never yet showed them any Mercy when they had them at an
Advantage.

Nor is it the Strength of the Irish Natives only, animated with their Zeal for
Popery, and a longing Desire to free themselves from any Dependency upon the
Crown of England, that is likely to Create Your Majesty an Opposition there;
but they have likewise Cast themselves under the Protection of the French King,
who will without doubt Employ that Force, with which of late Years he has
Over-awed Europe, to Support those Your Rebellious Subjects, thereby, if
possible, to give Your Majesty a Diversion, from opposing in other Parts of the
World his Ambitious Designs of an Universal Monarchy.

The Commons therefore seeing so evident a Necessity of reducing that Kingdom
under Your Majesty's Obedience, and the great Expense Your Majesty must undergo
in Maintaining such a War, do now humbly Present to Your Majesty their Hearty
Assistance in a Poll-Bill, which they look upon as the most speedy and
effectual way of raising ready Money on this Occasion, Solemnly Engaging
themselves to supply Your Majesty with such further Aids, as may be
proportionable to the Charge of the War, as long as it shall continue.

Next to this, they have Considered of Your Majesty's Revenue, and the Charges
that are upon it, as also the Complaints against several Exactions which have
been Practiced in the late Collection; But these Matters requiring a longer
time to Examine, then they expected, they have Passed a short Bill for the
Continuance of it in the same State it now stands till Christmas next, within
which time they doubt not to prepare such an Establishment, as may fully supply
the Expenses of the Crown without Oppressing the People.

FINIS.

