A PRAYER UNTO THE GLORIOUS VIRGIN MARY Mother of God.

IHS
printer's or publisher's device

Printed, An Dom. 1675.

Permissu Superiorum.

WHosoever shall say devoutly these ensuing Prayers in honor of the most
Sacred passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and in the honor of his
most B. Mother the Virgin Mary, and continue the said Devotion for the space of
Thirty days, may hope mercifully to obtain his lawful Request, as has been
often experienced.

(...) devout and most Efficacious Prayer to the Virgin MARY.
EVer glorious and blessed Virgin Mary, Queen of Virgins, Mother of Mercy, Hope
and Comfort of all desolate Souls: Through that sword of grief which pierced
your heart, whilst your only Son Christ Jesus our Lord, suffered Death and
Ignominy on the Cross; Through his filial ^^nderness of purest Love in your
behalf, grieving in your grief, whilst from his Cross, he bequeathed you to the
protection and care of his Vica^ St. John; take pity, I beseech you, on my
Poverty and Wants, have compassion o^ my anxiety and cares, hel^ and comfort me
in all my Infirmities and miseries whatsoever. You are the Mother of mercies,
the sweet comfort of the afflicted and desolate, the only refuge of all needy
and Orphans. Cast then an eye of pity on the Tears of a miserable, forlorn
Wretch, and hear my Prayers, and seeing [for just punishment of my sins] I am
surrounde^ with many Evils, and much Anguish, unto whom shall I have Recourse,
or where can I be more securely sheltered, than under the Mantle of your
Mo^^erly protection, O Virgin Mary, my sweetest Lady, Mother of my Lord and
Savior jesus Christ, comfort and redress of our lost Nature. Lend therefore, I
beseech you, an ^ar of compassion and pity, ^o my humble Requests and Prayers;
I beg it, by those bowels of Mercy of your dearest Son; by that sweetness
wherewith he embraced our humane Nature, when deliberating with the two other
Divine Persons, and with secret power of the Holy Ghost your consent first
being by the Angel demanded and obtained] GOD BECAME MAN* and Nine Months
expired vouchsafing mercifully to visit the World with his gracious Presence,
came forth from the chaste enclosure of your Virginal Womb; I beg it by that
anguish of mind, which your aforesaid dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ endured
at Mount Olivet, beseeching his Heavenly Father to take away [if possible] that
bitter Chalice of his future Passion; by his three times repeated Prayer in the
Garden, and your mournful Steps, when with Tears you accompanied him to that
doleful spectacle of his Death and Sufferings; by his Whips, Scoffs, Cords,
Ignominies, false Accusations and unjust Condemnation; by that Garment gained
at a Cast at Dice, by his Tears, and Drops of bloody Sweat; by his silence and
patience, by his fear, sadness, and grief of Heart; by his Confusion and
Bashfulness, hanging naked on a Cross, in your presence, and in sight of the
whole World; by his Royal Head pierced with Thorns, and struck with a Reed; by
his Thirst and painful Potion of Vinegar and Gall; by that Lance that pierced
his Sacred Side, and by that Blood and Water, which flowing thence, did shower
on us plenty of mercy and grace; by those Nails struck into his Hands and Feet;
by that precious Soul, and sweet Spirit, which he (crying with a loud voice, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me) recommended to his Heavenly Father, and
with an inclined head, gave up the Ghost; saying, All is consummated, by the
rending of the Rocks, and tearing of the Vail of the Temple, by the Earth quake
and darkning of the Sun and Moon, by his mercy showed to the good Thief; by his
adorable Cross and bitter Passion; by his descent to Hell, and all those Souls
which he comforted with his glorious sight; by the joy, glory, and Victory of
his Holy Resurrection, appearing unto you, his Elect Virgin Mother, and to the
rest of his Disciples for forty days; by his admirable Ascension, when you all
beholding him, he was elevated into Heaven; by the Grace of the Holy Paraclet,
which he in fiery Tongues infused into the hearts of his Disciples, and by
their zeal inflamed the rest of the Univers by that last and dreadful day, when
he shall come to judge the living and the dead, and the world in fire; by all
the compassion he bore you in this life; by the ravishing sweetness of his
eyes; and by the ineffable joy you felt, being in his sight assumed into
Heaven; where, World without end, you live and rejoice in him: Comfort my
heart, and hear this my Prayer, for which I am your humble Suppliant. (Ask here
Devoutly whatsoever you please.) And as I am confident he can refuse nothing
unto you, and does honor you, so let me speedily, fully, and efficaciously
experience your Help and Comfort, according to the sweetness of your Motherly,
and of his Filial loving heart, who grants mercifully the request of all that
love him, and does the will of all that fear him. Wherefore O most B. V. Mary
(according to my present need in this, and in all other things whatsoever, for
the which I humbly invoke your Sacred Name and Assistance) obtain for me of
your dearest Son our Lord God, firm hope in the Catholic Faith, perfect
Charity, true Contrition of Heart, a Fountain of Tears, sincere Confession, and
refraining from Sin, condign Satisfaction, Love of God and my Neighbor,
contempt of the world, and true Patience, to suffer affronts, ignominies, and
(if need be) an approbrious Death, for Love of your Son our Redeemer Jesus
Christ. Obtain for me perseverance in good works, performance of my good
Purposes and Vows, Mortification of Self-will, Conversation pleasing unto you,
and in the last hour of my Life, a strong and true Repentance, and presence to
my self in Word and Mind, and a happy Death. Lastly, for the Souls of my
Parents, Brothers, Sisters, Benefactors alive and dead, obtain for us all, I
beseech you, Life everlasting. Amen.

Another short Prayer to the same.
HAil Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, Queen of Heaven, Gate of Paradise,
and Lady of the world. Thou art a singular pure Virgin. Thou were conceived
without Sin, conceivedst also, and brought forth without blemish, your Son
Jesus, the Creator and Redeemer of the world. All this do I believe
undoubtedly. Pray for me to Jesus your beloved Son, and free me from all Evil.
Amen.

A Devout Prayer to our Lord Jesus Christ.
GLory, Honor, and Praise be to our Lord Jesus Christ; may all the world adore
thee; Blessed be thy Holy Name, who for us Sinners vouchsafedst to be born of
an humble Virgin; and blessed be thine infinite Goodness, who diedst upon the
Cross for our Redemption.

O Jesus, Son of God, and Savior of Mankind, We beseech thee, have mercy on
us, and so dispose our Lives here by thy Grace, that we may hereafter rejoice
with thee for ever in thy Heavenly Kingdom. Amen.


