Presbyterial Government Described: OR, A Methodical Synopsis of it, As it is
Professed and Practiced in the CHURCH of SCOTLAND Gathered out of the
Confess^^ns of Faith, and other public Records of that CHURCH, (...) the
Nature and Principles of this Government, UNITY and PURITY may be preserved
in the CHURCH. By BRITANNUS PHILOPRESBYTER.

1 Cor: 14.40. Let all things be done Decently, and in Order. Bernard. Sup:
Cant: Ordo rebus and modum, and decorem, and perpetuitatem quoque tribuit.
Plutar: praecep: polit: Est pulcherrima and utilissima Disciplina dicto
audientem esse Rectoribus, etiamsi opibus and Gloria sint Inferiores. Senecae
Oedip: 110. Quicquid excessit modum, pendet instabili loco. Edinburgh, Printed
in the Year. 1695.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TAke here an Index of these Records out of which the substance of the ensuing
Description is gathered, Viz.

1 The Confession of Faith, and forms of Discipline used in the English
Congregation at Geneva, approven by the Church of Scotland. 2 The Confession of
Faith professed by the Protestants of Scotland, Anno 1560. Ratified in the
first Parliament of K: J: 6. and by Act. Assem: 1638. ss: 16. 3 The Books of
Discipline, approven by Act: Ass: Glasg: Apr: 24 1581 and ratified Act Ass:
1638: ss: 16. 4 The Acts of the General Assemblies of the Church of Scotland.
5 The Westminster Assemblies Propositions and Directory for Church Government
and Ordination of Ministers approven: Act: Ass: 1645. ss: 16. 6 The Westminster
Assemblies Confession of Faith, approven by the Church of Scotland, Act: Ass,
1647: ss. 23. and ratified 1 Parl: of K. W. and Q. M. June 7. 16^^
Datum Britannopoli Martij. 28: 1695.
Presbyterial Government described.
IN proposing a Scheme of Presbyterial Government, we intend not thereby to
carp or cavel at others, whose Light or Conscience swayes them to be of a
different Sentiment, but modestly to offer such a Plain Portraiture of it, as
it may conspicuously appear to be comely and venerable, at least not so black
and odious, as some immoderat Spirits are industriously employed to
misrepresent and traduce, following that devilish Maxim, fortiter calumniare,
aliquid adhaerebit. It is sufficiently known in the World, that there have been
clamorous contests and long continued virulent debates, about Church
Government, specially among us in Britain; The LORD send a healing Spirit, and
put a final Period to our dolorous dissentions, Amen.

The main difference in this point lies not so much anent the thing in general,
whether there should be Government in the Church, all sides accord that this
is necessary and clearly eno^gh determined in the Scriptures: But when they
compare Notes and Notio^^ about the particular Sp^^ies and, Form of Government,
here each Competitor party contends ta^quam pro aris and facis, that, that
Specific Model only which they severally conceive is according to the word of
GOD, should be applauded and universally acquiesced in.

In prosecution of what is proposed take the Complexion and Constitution of
Presbyterial Government, in these ensuing Theses or Articles gathered from
their own Authentic Records.

1. Article, GOD has a Church in the World Militant amidst many dangers and
difficulties which is principally under his own Inspection, Providence and
protection, and by His Revealed Will, is committed to the care Oeconomie and
defense of Civil Magistrates and Ecclesiastic Ministers, who conjunctly and
severally in their respective different Spheres, are to fulfill their several
Commissions, in the improvement and use of their several Talents of power,
Authority, etc. For his Glory, and the Good of his Espoused Church, as they
shall be answerable to Him in the day, o^ Accounts. 2 B: disc: p. 72, 73,
Assem: Cons: C: 23.

2. As no Society can subsist without Government Laws and Policy, and
consequently neither without persons regularly vested with Authority and power,
to make the same effectual for the Good and Emmolument of the Community, So
the Infinitely Wise and Good GOD, has copiously provided all things of the like
nature requisite for the pious and peaceable Communion of Saints, whose Laws
and constitutions being duly observed, the Church of GOD may be a comely, pure
and orderly society, State Politicians are for Laws and Government, that the
Common well and publict peace may be promoved and preserved, Military Men are
for their Martial Tacticks and severe Discipline in their Hosts and Armies, yea
every incorporation, be it of Merchants or the like, finds a necessity of Rule
and Order, and is there not a paritie of Reason, if not far more, why there
should be Good Government and Discipline in the Church which is the City of
GOD, who is not a GOD of confusion, but of Order, and has expressly enjoined
that all things be done decently and in order. Genev: form of Disc.

3. The Sacred Laws and Cannons which are to be the supreme Standard and Touch
stone of Ecclesiastic Acts and Decrees, are contained in the Scriptures, from
whence no sort of Church Courts or Officers are to recede ne vel latum unguem
in their Constitutions or Determinations, hence what ever bold Adventures any
persons or parties may make either in the Creation of new Officers, Ordinances
or Cannons in the Church, not agreeable and warranted by the Divine Scriptures,
they are ipso facto to be reputed cass and null, and to be abandoned the
Churches acceptance or Approbation, 2. B. disc, 72.74. K, I, Conf: Act: 21.
Ass: Conf: C: 1. Art. 6.10.

4. The Mediator CHRIST, is the sole Head and Monarch of the Church: and to him
does this peculiar Prerogative appertain, for he redeemed her with his blood,
and he only can actuate and inspire the Catholic Church into vital operations
by his ever flowing ^ening Influences, as being that Mystic Body of
Spiritually united Members, whereof He is the High and Holy Head, therefore all
power is given to Him in Heaven and Earth; [we speak not now of his Essential
Kingship or Regemie, but of His Mediatorial Supremacy] being delegated by the
Father, to employ the same for the use of the Church, but under CHRIST there is
no delegated, Vicarious, Subordinate Head of the Church, which is monstrous
for to imagine, as mischievous to admit, neither ought any to assume a
Legislative power of framing Laws or Cannons to be imposed upon his Subjects,
explain and execute his Laws and statutes, his authorized Officers may and must
according to the orders he has prescrived them, but it is cum periculo
capitis, as being a capital crime, if any proceed beyond his Limits. 2. B.
disc: 72, K. l. Conf: Ar: 17, Ass: Cons: C: 25.

5. From this Fountian of all power, is derived unto Church Officers, that
Power and Authority, in the Virtue whereof they may and ought to exercise
their Ministerial Functions, as GOD does call and post them in His Providence:
Hence the solemn Charges, Commands, Censures, etc. Which they execute and apply
are always and only in the Name and Authorritie of this their Lord and Master
and not only the (...) potestas, Right and Authority, for intermeddling ex
officio in sacred things, but also the (...) potentia, Abilities (...),
qualifyeing them for their Office comes from his favor and fullness.

6 As the Roman Catholic pretention of a visible vi^carious Monarch, is,
(...), to be abjured, neither can the Morrellian Democracie be received, which
cannot well avoid Anarchie and confusion, where all are promiscuously and
reciprocallie the Rulers and the Ruled: therefore these two extremes being both
quarrelable, Presbyterial Aristocracie, headed by the Mediator [the only
Monarch of the Church, as said is] seems to be that well tempered mode of
Government, most favored by the Scriptures, and if moderatly and wisely
mannadged by the Rulers of it; very probably may be entertained with more
Universal favor among men, Act: Ass: p: 107.

7. That Power which the Mediator has dispensed unto his Officers, is by his
will and Wisdom shared in such a Just paritie, as that they are all made Peers
in Power and Authority, none being Superior in Order, degree, or Jurisdiction
to another, but all subject and accountable to the Arch-Pastor, and Bishop of
Souls, whose Stewards, Servants and Ministers they are having and holding their
Commission alone from him: Whence all Despotick, or Lordly Magisterial Power
among Gospel Ministers, is utterly to be avoided and abandoned, as being not by
Divine disposition, but Human composition. Act: Ass: Dimd: 1580. 2. B: Disc:
72.74. Act. Ass: Dec: 8. 1638.

8. The Ordinary Office-bearers in the Church, which GOD has appointed to
continue to the end of the World [ extraordinary now ceasing] are Doctors,
Presbyters, and Deacons, Doctors are commonly ranked with the Preaching Elders,
Teaching, Preaching and Ruling pertaining to them both as they are qualified so
to labor, Doctors being likewise useful in Schools and Universities, for
training up Students of Theology. As for Presbyters or Elders, they are either
such as labor in the word and Doctrine, and also Rule, whom they call
promiscuously, Pastors, Ministers, or Bishops. Or such as only Rule, being
Members Constituent of Ecclesiastic Judicatories, concurring Authoritatively
with Ministers in matters of Rule and Discipline. To these they appropriate the
name of Ruling Elders; As for Deacons they have no Authority in Courts* but in
Counts they have, being concerned (...) in Church Collections and provisions
for the poor, and the like. Genev: form. j: B: Disc: 55.2. B: Disc: 74.77. Ass:
Direc: 3. etc. Act: Ass: 32.

9. The Tittle of Bishop mentioned in the Scripture, it is Identical, and of
the same latitude and import with Presbyter or Pastor, both as to the nature of
the Office designed by these different Synonymous Appellations, and as to the
Pastoral work, incumbent to those who are vested with the Office. 2 B: Dis:
76.86. Act. Ass: 1638.32.

10. The intermediate Ordinary way of Communicating and Participating the
Pastorial Power, and the exercise of it, is by the Election of the People,
either represented in the Eldership [who usually are their own choice] for
eviting the confusion of the Multitude, Or Virtually by every indevidual man,
through their consent, [having free access to dissent, if they produce any
relevant reasons, or weighty Objections, whereof the Presbytery is Judge
competent and ordinarie] which is the thing employed by (...) ^: ^: Streatching
out, or holding up the hand, as a sign of assent; And chiefly by the Imposition
of the bands of the Presbytrie, with Prayers and fastings, solemnly setting a
part, and Ordaining the man [chosen, called, tried, and found fit] to the work
of the Ministry, in general, as GOD shall clearly call him to employ his
Talents, and in particular to the Pastoral Charge of such a certain Flock,
whereunto he is orderly called and admitted, which Rite and action is called
(...) Genev: form: 2. B: Disc: 75.79, 81. Ass: Dic: 3.4. etc.

11. The Minister being thus settled, he must reside and labor among his
people for their Salvation and Edification by all Gospel means, and he cannot
at his own Arbitriment, relinquish his flock, or lay aside his Pastoral charge,
but is to be subject to the Presbytrie, and other Superior Courts to be
disposed of as they find cause and convenient, neither can any oothers directly
and Authoritatively exauterate or deprive him of his Pastoreal Power; But they
who have the Power to collate and ordain, who for clear and Onerous causes, may
Suspend for a certain time, or depose for ever; But as to what extent or
influence, a sentence of the Civil Magistrate may have per concomitantiam, we
will not meddle to define. Act: Ass. 1638.43.

12. This Pastoral Power is exerced and employed, either in the administration
of the word and Sacraments, and other pendicles of the Didactick part of their
work, wherein Ministers are to be instant, faithful and diligent, or in the
exercise of Discipline, which they are to manage with discretion, prudence and
Righteousness, both for the increase of Knowledge and Piety, and for the
curbing of vice, and reforming the flagitious. Ass: Dir: 3.4, 2. B: Dis: 76.

13. As to the execution of Discipline, and the Diatactick part of their work,
the several kinds of Courts, Supreme, and subordinate, in which preaching and
Ruling Elders are to govern, they are either parochial Sessions, Classical
Presbytries, provincical Synods, or National Assemblies, and [if it could be
conveniently obtained] an Oecumenick or General Council: A Parochial Session,
is the ordained Minister of the place, together with the Ruling Elders, and if
the Minister have a Colleague, they moderate in their Session per vices, the
Moderator having no negative voice, a Classical Presbytrie is made up of the
parishes of a lesser presinct than a Province, and both unto a Presbytrie, and
a provincial synod (made up of several Presbytries) each Minister within the
respective bounds comes with one Ruling Elder with him, whom their several
Sessions choose and think most fit. A National Assembly, is only made up of
chosen commissionated delegats. To a National synod there comes two or three
Ministers with one Ruling Elder from each Presb^^^^ through the Nation, and the
number of Delegates from every Presbytrie is more or less, proportionably to
the number and quota of parishes in the Respective Presbytries: Also there may
be sent Delegates and Commissioners from Universities and Broughs Royal,
providing they be ordained Ruling Elders. Act: Ass: 15^0. 2. B: Dis: 70. Ass:
Dir: 14. etc. Ass: Decr: 17. 1638. Act: Ass: Jul. 18. 1648. Act: Ass: 1694. ss:

14 The Orderly way of bringing Ecclesiastic causes and cases under the
cognizance of the Respective [Superior] Judicatories is either by Bill. by
reference or appeal* For the more methodical tabling thereof [specially in the
General Assembly] there use to be Commities appointed to ripen and prepair
matters for hearing in full Assembly: Appeals ascend Gradatim from the lesser
subordinate Courts [where the cause was first tabled] to the superior till they
finally sist in the Solemn sentence of a National Assembly, this being ultimus
conatus, and res ibi Judicata, not being ulterius Judicanda [for there is no
probability of an Oecumenick Council] otherwise there would be endless
remideless work; They admit not processes to enter per saltum, or to come in at
the broad side, till first they have been tabled, tried, or cognosced upon
before the lesser Judicatories. Act: Ass: Aug: 30. 1639. Act: Ass: 1643. ss: 2.
Ibid: ss: 10. Act: Ass: 1648. ss: 30.

15 The decisive sentences of the foresaid respective Courts, are to be
received; and acquiesced in, as proceeding from an Authority ordained by GOD,
and therefore are Obligatorie either to yield active obedience, unto them, Or
submission to censur in case of disobedience; And affairs are to be carried on
in such a prudent, orderly and Righteous way [agreeable to the word of GOD and
the Laudible constitutions of the Church] as there may be no just Ground to
reclaim, and the Reason why Inferior Judicatories are concerned to do so, is,
because if the parties, against whom the sentence strikes deem themselves
manifestly injured, or that there has been any gross irregularity in the
procedure of the Court, they may be appealed from to a superior judicatory, and
so are liable to be censured for their Maladministration, if the appellant make
it appear to have been so, but if the causes or reasons of appeal be found
frivolous and weak, then the appellant is still under the tie of the former
sentence, for, and from which the appeal was made, and moreover is publicly
rebuked for suspecting and impeaching the justice of a Church judicatory. Act:
Ass: P: 108.

16. Sessions and Presbyteries meet more frequently as their affairs require,
synods ordinarily twice a year, and the General Assembly once a year, and
oftener, pro re nata, if necessary and weighty exegencies call for it, and if
time allow not to overtake all the business comes before them. They use to
appoint a Comittee of the Assembly, either for public emergencies that may
concern the Church, for visitation of Churches, etc. Or for expeding in the
interval till the nixt Annual meeting, what they had not discussed, during the
Sessions of the Assembly, and this Committee they circumscribe and Limit with
instructions and appoint ad hunc effectum; and propresenti Ecclesiae statu, the
particular affairs which they are to meddle with, being specified and engrossed
in their instructions and eommissions, and in all their actings they are
countable to, and Censurable by the next General Assembly. Genev: Form: 2. B:
Disc: 79. Act: Ass: 1638. ss: 26. Act: Ass: 1642. ss: 8. Act: Ass: 1690 ss: 26.

17. In all their Judicatories they have a Moderator, who is chosen for longer
or shorter time, as they see convenient, but they are against a constant
Superintendent or Moderator, least it have a bad tendencie, and produce ill
effects. This protemporal Moderator has no (...) or peculiar power, paramount
to any of the rest of his Brethen, but only (...) ergo, I. E. for orders sake,
and to evite confusion, during his service at this post, he preceeds in their
arguings and ratiocinations, requires the sentiments of the several Members,
sums up what seems to be the Judgment of the Plurality, and if it be thought
fit to bring the matter in agitation to a Vote, he pronounces the mind of the
Major part, which determines the thing in question, but gives no vote himself,
except there be a just equality of Votes of the rest, then [ non potestatis vel
Jurisdictionis; sed necessitatis ergo] he gives his suffrage also, the
Moderator likewise, if need be, intimates a meeting pro re nata, this comely
order they keep, where all may have access to moderate interchangably, and none
to envy or domineer over another, in a Diotrephesian way. 2 B, dis: 79, Act,
Ass: 1638, ss, 24. Al^. dir. p: 6.

18. The Kingdom of Christ being spiritual, and not of this World, his
Subjects, Courts, Stewards or Officers [to whom he has committed the keys of
the Kingdom] are so likewise, therefore it is only Ecclesiastic Causes, which
they directly and properly cognosce upon, they meddle not with Civil or secular
affairs, as being alterius fori, and so extraneous and excentrical to them;
except they be required by the Magistrate, to give their advice and opinion, in
matters wherein the Church and Conseience may be incidentially and (...)
concerned, hence their grand care and business is to fence against Heresies,
Errors, and Schisms, and such heretodox dogmes, or tenets, as are contrar to
sound Doctrine and Godlinss, ne quid detrimenti capiat Ecclesia, they also as
Censores morum, animadvert that no scandalous or notorious vice and impiety
pass without a due check and censure, according to the merit of offenses
occurrent, so that matters of Faith and Godliness of Conscience and
Conversation, are the proper and formal objects of their disquisition and
determinations, 2. B. disc: 79, Ass: dir: 15, etc. Ass: Cons: c. 31. Art: 5.
Act. Ass: 1638, ss: 25.

19 There (...) or Censures are also spiritual, and they proceed from Lesser
reproofs [even as the Offender deserves] ay till they come to the tremenduous
censure of Excommunication, which is seldom inflicted and that not till after
Leasurely deliberation, and frequent dealing, to bring the obdured delinquent
to sensible Repentance, and if a gentle and discreet means are contemned, then
with a great deal of solemnity, as being Summum futuri Judicji prejudicium,
they proceed to this Final and whiles Fatal sentence: they also deal with
censured Delinquents to induce and prepare them to serious Repentance, that
upon the apparent evidences thereof, they may be absolved, and received again
into Church Communion, but if such contumacious miscreants will be obstinatly
wicked to their own perdition, they grieve at Satan's better success then the
Churches, and leave them to the last Judgment of GOD Genev: form of Excom: and
absol: Ass: Cons: C: 30.

20. They are not fond of Significant mystic Ceremonies in the worship and
service of GOD but rather follow and Symbolize that comely Gospel-simplicity,
which Christ and his Apostles used, that in the Church of Rome-hath been sadly
marred with the whoorish fairdings and gaudrie of humane Devices, Additions and
Traditions, rather borrowed from the old Pagan Pagentrie, than the Sacred page:
But though they Nauseat such relics and pieces of Papistrie, yet what Rites
and Ceremonies are decent and convenient, either from the Nature or Adjuncts of
the Religious Things or Actions they are exercised about, they are neither so
shay nor foolish as to refuse to use them, K. J. Conf: Art: 21. Act: Ass: 1638.
ss: 7. Ass: Cons: C. 21. Art: 1.

21. Neither are they for stated anniversarie Feasts or Fasts, which are sadly
profaned and abused among the Romanists, for at least the superstitious
unthinking Vulgar make little other use of them, then for rioting and raveling,
sporting and gamming, and other such dissolute practices, highly unbeseeming
days, that pass under the Character and opinion of Holidays: Yet when
Emmergencies, and dispensations of providence occur, that call for public
humiliation and fasting, or solemn Thanksgiving; they think it their duty to
consecrate some part of their time, for Fasts and Thanksgivings, devoutly to
deprecate GOD's imminent wrath, and to plead the aversion of impendent
Judgments due to them for their sins, or to Praise GOD for Benefits received,
and to beg further favors; These being such pieces of Religious Work, which
GOD both by his Word and Providence sometimes requires, Genev: Treat: of Fast:
Act: Ass: 1645. ss: Vlt.

22. The Church has an intrinsic power, distinct from, and not formallie
dependent upon the Magistratical Civil-Authoritie, being coordinate with it,
not in Spiritualibus, subordinate to it; by which power, though there were no
Magistrate, or albeit there be a Magistrate, Christian or Infidel, yet she may
do every thing needful, according to Christ's Orders, for her own orderly
preservation of Unity and Purity; and the administration of all the
Ordinances of the LORD: This power properly respects (...) Ecclesiae, whereof
the Civil Magistrate has no share, qua talis. either to ordain Ministers,
Preach the Word, dispense the Seals, or inflict Spiritual Censures, this being
remote from his province, 2. B. Disc: 73. Ass: Cons: C. 30. A. ^. C. 31. Ar: 2.

23. Yet as to (...) Ecclesiae, what concerns the External Policy of the
Church, they ascribe much to the Magistrates power and Authority, as being by
GOD's Ordinance concerned to defend the Church against foul Heretics,
turbulent Schismatics, and the contumaciouslie Scandalous, etc: That so Unity
and Purity be preserved, and to reform corruptions, to convocate Assemblies,
to see to the Honest and Honorable provision of Ministers, and to add his
Civil Sanctions to the Churches Acts and Decrees, and therefore in their
General Assemblies, the supreme Magistrate may either be present himself, or
send his Commissioner: But whatever Objective power the Magistrate has circa
sacra, it is not Privative but Cumulative, ad majus bonum Ecclesiae. Genev:
Cons: 2. B: Disc: 72. 73 84. K. J. Cons. Ar: 25. Ass: Cons: C. 23.

24. Article, For as Good as this Government is, yet it may be mismanadged [as
many times Magistracy has been, in all the forms and shapes of it, which none
will deny to be the Ordinance of GOD] therefore whatever Maladministrations,
Mistakes or Escapes, may happen by the Governors of the Church, they are not
forthwith to be fixed or fathered upon the Government it self, Humanum est
labi: Surely a grain of allowance must be given to the Infirmities of Men, who
while clothed with Flesh and Blood, are not to be expected perfect or
infalible, nemo fine crimine vivit: And if a candid Impartial Comparison were
instituted, betwixt Presbyterial and other competitor Governments, it might
probably be found to be the less Criminal: But nihil est ex omni part beatum,
Ass: Cons: C. 6. Art: 5. and C. 25. Art. 5.

We conclude, lamenting the unhappy times we live in, wherein the Christian
Religion sadly suffers, partly by the gross immoralities of many of the
professors of it upon the one hand, partly by the dissentions, divisive
practices, and implacable like animosities of others of them upon the other
hand; As for the first of our maladies, we may justly say with Seneca, collecta
vitia per tot aetates diu. in nos redundant; Seculo premimur gravi quo sceleta
Regnant. Sen: Octav: 355. And this Epidemical plague of prophanity seems herein
to be the more prodigious and desperate, that notoriously, scandalous persons
approbriously contemn the cure of their sins. Viz: The Faithful Administration
of Gospel Ordinances, particularly that August and veneral ordinance of GOD,
Ecclesiastic Discipline and Censures; Alas! few are persuaded this is a Divine
Ordinance, and far fewer will submit to it as such, but rather in their pride,
perversitie and ignorance, decline and scorn Church censures, Tell it not in
Gath, etc: That among Christians, Christ's Laws and Constitutions are so
contemptuously treated, what other could be expected of Turks and Pagans, we
will sav no more to such Unchristian Christians, but what a Heathen did say of
old, Sequitur Superbos ultor a tergo Deus. Sen. Here: Fur: 197. As to the other
Malady of Contentions and Sebisms in the Church, which are also the Bane of
Religion, we may complain as Opratus did of his times, Omnes contentiosi
homines sumus. we are all of us a contentious pack of men, for of a Truth on
all sides litigant, particularly about Church Government, there are too many
inflexible tenacious and peremptory in every punctilio of their espoused
Opinions, as if the whole of Religion were invelopt therein, and are ready to
misjudge, nickname and revile one another, yea and some bigots of each
counterparty to Unchurch and Unchristian one another [a wild practice,
dounright Antipodes, and contrare to the Rules and genius of the Gospel] but be
gainer or loser who will by these intestine tragic digladiations, surely the
common enemy Triumphs in our spoils and ruins, as Trophies of Victory. O
Christians! what shall be done for the remedy of these maladies? It requires
indeed much wisdom to propose, and no less prudence and discretion to apply
what might be thought fit to be proposed, but in all likely hood, only Heavens
hand can rectify and redress what is amiss and out of course this day; Yet
surely as Ministers derive their power from the Mediator Christ, so
Magistrates derive theirs from God Almighty, and both be virtue of their
Office, Commission and Capacity, are unavoidably obliged to join their power
and policy together for the suppression and punishment of vice and wickedness
and the promoval and encouragement of Virtue and Piety, for no less will God
call civil Magistrates to an account for their negligence and
maladministrations then Church Pastors and Ministers, therefore both should
amicably correspond and cordially concur for advancing the peace and purity of
the Church, for which purpose it is our hearty Vote, that God would pour forth
a spirit of Wisdom, Zeal and Holiness upon Magistrates Ministers and all Ranks
and degrees of persons, Amen.

FINIS

