A SHORT TREATISE OF Metal and Mineral WATERS; VIZ. Those of the Spaw, Bathe,
Epsom, Northhall, Barnet, Tunbridge, and the New-Wells at Islington.

WHEREIN Is described their bad as well as good Qualities, with the danger of
Peoples too frequent- and unadvisedly Drinking them.

Mirabilis in aquis Dominus. By E.P. M.D.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Randolph Tailor near Stationers' Hall 1684.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Am not ignorant that the use of Metal and Mineral Waters are often
prescribed by Physicians against many Diseases; as Palsies, Tremblings, Ulcers
of the Stomach, Reins, Bladder and Womb, Tenesmus, depraved Months, Abortion,
etc. and though I know Sacred Writ says, Mirabilis est in aquis Dominus;
because of wonderful and almost divine virtues given them by the Almighty
Physician; for the cure of many rebellious and contumacious Diseases; and that
as Vitruvius says, there is seen no more miracles of nature than in Waters: yet I
would first advise all diseased Persons, that they would not be too hasty, and
run hand over head, as they say to drink those Waters, because it may be some
of their neighbors, etc. told them they found benefit by them, without
consulting the Physician, whether they may be proper for them? forgetting the
old saying, One man's Meat may be another's Poison.

Next I would have the young Physician, chiefly be prudent and cautious in
prescribing them, and not, as too often, to send their Patients, after they
have put them to great cost, and wearied them with multitudes of Medicines, to
the Wells, as their last refuge, without considering the nature of the Waters
or the Sick; and not to send the intemperate, and full of foul humors, or that
have hot entrals, or that abound with stinking, sharp malignant rebellious
dregs, and who are full of obstructions, the notorious Parent of most Diseases,
which are scarcely ever to be removed; For th^se Waters are all of hot and dry
qualities; some more then others, as proceeding from hot and poisonous
Minerals, as you will see in this Book; so that it is impossible but there must
remain an Empyreuma, or collection of filthy matter, which in an intemperate
and disposed body will beget a new kind of Disease, and augment the hot
disposition of the Stomach, Liver, and other Entrals ordained for nourishment,
if there were any; and this from Hipp. de aere, aquis and locis text. 13.
Aristot. lib. 2, Meteor, c. 3. Galen. l. 1. c. 6. de simple facult. They may
work miracles in some Diseases, but rara non sunt artis, and that will not
warrant a dogmatical Physician, instituted in the sound, safe and Orthod x
doctrine of Hipp. and Gal. promiscuously and immethodically to prescribe them
almost to all People and Diseases; as your Diobolory, I had almost said
Diabolary Empirics, and wretches in Town do their Family Pills, their Friendly
and Popular Pills.

Then as for Ulcers of the Stomach, I cannot but think them improper, being too
hot, as proceeding from Nitre, Sulphur, Vitriol, the last of which is
altogether of a contrary nature to Man, as being of a poisonous quality; as for
Gold, Iron, etc. the Learned Fallopius, who understood the nature of Waters
certainly as well as any man, believes they impart not any of their quality to
the Water. The same may be said of Ulcers of the Reins and Blader, which, for
the most part will admit of no cure; by reason of continual afflux of sharp,
watrish humors, whereby their detersion, and desiccation is hindered; so for
Ulcers in the Womb, and preventing Abortion; these Waters are not of so drying
force to work such effects.

So that I cannot in reason see how these Waters should be so proper for so
many Diseases for which they are extolled, for they are all famous for their
potential, as they call it, and hidden heat, in an eminent degree, whereby they
destroy the native economy and temper of the Entrals: and imprint in them an
extraneous heat, and so cause Dropsies, as Hipp. noted in a peculiar Example of
his, and a 1000 other dire diseases, which prove incurable, and hasten death.

Certain it is some Physicians, for private filthy lucre, promote the Waters,
and even discover new ones: And though many out of a good intent, in Books,
extol them, yet let none precipitate themselves into danger of another, and
perhaps worse disease, but advise with the Learned Physician.

TO His ever Honored Friend The LADY VERE BEAVMONT, OF Grace-dieu, in Com.
Leic.
Madam,
PRay be pleased to accept of this small Present; but not as any the least
requital, I beseech you, for the almost innumerable favors you have been
pleased from time to time to conferr upon me; since I fear it can scarcely be
called an Acknowlegment. In short, Madam, this short Treatise, is intended for
public benefit in general, but if it may, in the least measure, be serviceable
or conducible toward the Preserving of your Ladyships Health, in particular, I
have attained my Aim; and in an happy hour may then subscribe my self.

Madam, Your ever obliged Servant, E. Prat.

OF THE NATURE OF Medicinal Waters.
CHAP. I. Of the Matter Origin of Fountains in General.
AND here I shall be brief; intending not a speculative Philosophical, but a
Medico-practical Discourse, for information and instructiof the unlearned, and
not for Learned Philosophers and Physicians.

Now it is clearly my Opinion, with the Divine Plato, Aristotle's Master, and
before him Thales Milesius, as also Philo, lib. de mundi opificio; the great
Seneca, l. 3. c. 1. quest. natural. and others; that the Original of Fountains
is from the Sea; from whence, through Sinuosities, Veins and Meanders of the
Earth, water is carried to certain places, where it breaks forth and
continually flows; it may very probably be conjectured they had this from the
greatest of Philosophers Solomon, who in Eccles. 1.7. says, all Rivers run into
the Sea, and it overflows not; unto the place from whence they came thither
they flow again, and indeed scaree can there be assigned any other reason why
the Sea does not redound by such a daily concourse and afflux of Rivers; unless
because the Rivers do again flow out of the Sea, and return and pay only so
much to the Sea, as they borrowed therefrom. Although the Evaporation and
Extraction of watery Clouds by the Attractive force of the Sun, is no small
help: and other material helping causes are Rains and Snows which augment
(though they do not generate) the Rivers; for these help being withdrawn, heat
of the Sun approaching they become Rarefied and the neighbor parts of the
dried Earth drink them off. Whence Kings 17.7. the River Cares is said to wax
dry by reason of the Sun's too great heat.

But we have one Cardanus impiously and Atheistically disputing against
Solomon, subtle. c. 2. de Elementis, whom we shall endeavor to satisfactorily
answer and enervate; though God Almighty's Power and Wisdom, might be opposed
as answer enough, and Sacred Scripture ought to be of more Authority than all
humane sagacity.

First then he says the Seawater, because it is heavy, cannot ascend to such an
height, as the tops of Mountains; but to this have been several refutations;
some ascribing this motion to the operations of the Celestial bodies; and they
say this motion is not violent, (though it be contrary to the private
inclination of its proper form) if the Potentia obedientialis be considered;
whereby inferior Bodies are made to obey their Superiors, etc. Others say there
is a certain insite, attractive faculty in the Veins of the Earth, whereby it
sucks Water out of the Sea, as the Veins of Animals suck Blood: others there
are but too long for this place, and wholly Philosophical and so not easily to
be understood by ordinary capacities and so I omit them.

Then Secondly, he says before the Water could reach the Mountains out of the
Sea, there is no reason to be given but it would break forth: But the Earth has
passages in some places and in some none. Then whatsoever he assigns to be the
original of Fountains, it may be queried why in some places and Mountains there
are Fountains and Rivers, and in some none?

Then Thirdly, he says, if it were so, Rivers would never be less; but it may
be answered Rivers sometimes grow less from what portion is lost which comes
from falls of Showers and Snows; and when part is sucked up by the dryness of
the Earth, and heat of the Sun, etc.

Fourthly, he says the Sea would not satisfy so many Rivers, when the greatest
part of Waters vanish by the heat of the Sun; But it may be answered that the
Sea receives only as much as it gives forth; as Solomon says, Rivers flow to
the Sea, that they may flow out again; then if the greatest part of Water
should vanish, the Sea would long agone have been wasted; but the extracted
vapors are recondens'd into Water which either flows into the Sea, or falls
upon the Earth, to augment the Rivers, which at length unburthen themselves
into the Sea.

Fifthly, He says, there can be no reason given why it should flow from one
Mountain and not from another; But the answer to his second Objection solves
this.

Lastly, He says, Fountains and Rivers would taste saltish and brackish. But to
this is answered that Seawater, whilst it passes through various Veins, Sinews
and Meanders of the Earth, and so being as it were strein'd it sensibly deposes
its saltness and bitterness. Hence the more remote Fountains are from the Sea,
the sweeter they are. If any shall say, that the Water was more likely to
contract a bitterness by reason of the Exhalations it receives from the Earth:
it may be answered, that they are not any sort of Exhalations that produce
bitterness, but only adust ones; and all are not such in the intrals the Earth.
Therefore now Cardan, we may conclude, I hope, has not got any thing by
contradicting Solomon.

CHAP. II. Of the Division of Fountains and of Mineral and Metal Waters.
HAving in the former Chapter given the Reader a plain account of the Matter
and Origin of Fountains, we should in the next place, see how many sorts of
Fountains there are, but because it is the work of Natural Philosophers and
Hydrographers; and nothing of an advantage to our present purpose we shall
wholly omit it, and only speak of Mineral and Metallic Fountains, as being the
subject of our present Discourse. Now those I call Mineral and Metallic Waters,
which participate of the nature and faculty of that Metal or Mineral through
which they pass in the Caverns and Veins of the Earth. The which are either 1
Salt, 2 Vitriol, 3 Allumn, 4 Bitumen, 5 Naptha, 6 Nitre, 7 Gypsum, 8 Arsenic, 9
Cadmia, 10 Antimony, 11 Chrysocolla, 12 Ochre, 13 Lime, 14 Ashes, 15
Pummice-stones, 16 Gold, 17 Iron, 18 Brass, 19 Lead, 20 Brimstone, and 21
Quicksilver. Now as I said the Minerals through which Waters pass, bestowing
upon them in their journey a considerable part and portion of their good and
bad qualities; I thought it very requisite, before I discoursed of the use of
the Waters themselves, to say something of the Natures and Properties of the
Metals and Minerals they are mixed with; that thereby you may be the better able
to judge of the nature of the Waters proceeding from them; then we will begin
with Salt.

The faculties of Salt are great, many and very useful to man; but not so
necessary in Physic, as many think; such as your Quacking Chemists, who
predicate many wonderful and vain stories of Salt reduced by their Chemical
Art; for they audaciously assert that their is a Purgative faculty in
Medicaments because of Salt; and when they have got some Extract from any
Medicament, then they presently aver that they have got its Salt forsooth; but
these being things above the vulgar capacity; I shall say Salt is very
Conservative, of an Astringing, Absterging, Purging, Discussing, Repressing,
Extenuating quality, and vindicates the Body from Putrefaction; yet some Salt
is better then others; but used immoderately produces very bad effects, as
sharp, salt corroding humors all over the Body, Scabs, Leprosy, the Stone, and
other dire Diseases; as Dullness of sight, disorderly Fermentations in the
Blood, rendering it thick and earthy by burning it; Schroder thinks thus of the
Original of Salts; the Macrocosm he says, as the other two Kingdoms, i. e. the
Vegetable and Animal, is sustained and lives by its food; in this abounds a
salt, answering to the salt Excrements in the Sweat, Urine, and Dejections in
Animals; now the Salt of the greater World congregated into the inferior Glob,
is of a dverse kind, according to the variety of its Matrix, even as the salt
Excrement in Animals is different; hence, Common Salt, Salt Gem, Salt Nitre,
Alum, etc.

The Greeks call that Calcanthum, which the Latins from its blackness, call
Attramentum Sutorium, or Shooemakers Ink; and from its spendent vitreous Nitre,
Vitriol; Dioscorides a man of profound Judgment in the Materia Medica, reckons
three sorts thereof, two Native, and one factitious; one sort of the Native is
found concreted in the bowels of the Earth; another is collected in form of a
Water, out of some Mine, which put into a Vessel soon coagulates into Vitriol;
as for the factitious we have nothing to say to that here: the Native or
Fossile Vitriol participates of Calcitis, Misy, and Sorry; the Native and White
is preferred in the Medicinal uses; which the Metallicolous Alchymists say is
produced by their Sulphur and Mercury; as of Sperm; which they indiscriminately
exhibit to all affections, out of which they draw a certain acid Liquor, a few
drops whereof mixed with Syrup of Violets, acquire a most elegant color and
taste: But Oil of Sulphur will do the same, and a few drops of one or both of
them insused in the Syrup of Roses, will make the whole Liquor red; which they
call, forsooth, Tincture of Roses.

Now Nature it is true has enriched Vitriol with eximious faculties, which
skilful Physicians have both experienced and left described; as Galen,
Dioscorides, Paulus Aegineta, Aetius, Oribasius, etc. who have very much
nobilitated it: it heats, binds, drys, kills broad Worms, helps against Toad
poison, preserves moist flesh, and drys up humors, drives away Putrefaction,
roborates the inward parts: outwardly it binds, purges Ulcers, causes Wrincles
like Alum, with whom it has relation; But besides these excellent qualities
Vitriol has also its bad ones: for it is ill for the Stomach, acrimonious,
corrosive and vomitous, and therefore ignorant Quacksalvers and Women give it
sometimes in Wine, and sometimes in Rosewater in uncertain weight, against
Quotidian and Quartane Agues, and many other Diseases, and indeed the Fever is
often resolved by vehement Vomiting, but this Medicine being unskilfully
Administered proves most often more formidable than the Disease.

Alum is, as it were, the Brine of the Earth; whereof Dioscorides makes three
sorts; the Round, the Liquid, and the Jagged, or Scissile, the last is often
called Plumeous, for they are so like in form that they can scarce be
distinguished, yet they differ both in nature and qualities, for the Scissile
is manifestly binding, and may be burnt, but the other is Acrimonious, and
suffers not by fire. Mathiolus, says he saw and tasted a Liquid Alum; of which
he asserts, that he never found any thing more Astrictive. Now when Alum is
simply mentioned, we mean Roch-Alum, which is a saltness of a Mineral Earth, of
a Leadish nature, consisting of an acid spirit, and a caustic Earthy salt; and
all Alum is of Crass parts, binds much; whence it is called Stypterion in Greek,
because it is Styptical, it heats, cleanses, amends putrid Ulcers, dryes humid
ones, absumes superfluous flesh, takes away itching, cures the Scab, and very
useful in many Medicaments made for the Cure of Ulcers.

Bitumen, which the Greeks call Asphaltes, is as it were the fatness of the
Earth swiming above the Waters, which being cast upon the shore, thickens and
becomes hard, tenacious and inflamable: As long as it swims on the water it is
soft, but when it is off it becomes thicker and harder, and resembles dry Pitch;
yet easily melted at the fire. Many Lakes are bituminous, but especially one in
India, thence called Asphalites, and the dead Sea, because of its vastness, and
because its Water remains almost immovable; not stormy, but heavy, salt,
thick, and stinking; wherein neither Plants nor Animals breed; neither does it
nourish such as are put into it, or admit them into its bowels.

All Bitumen is not solid and hard; but some is perpetually fluid and liquid,
called Naptha; which is the streining of Babylonian Bitumen, white of color,
and most capacious of Fire; for Fire and this are so near a kin, that it will
presently leap into it, when near it. There is also black Bitumen. For its
Virtues all Bitumen discusses, mollifies, glutinates, defends from
inflammation, by olfaction, suffumigation, or imposition; mends the strangling
of the Womb. Naptha extenuates, incides, digests, penetrates, absumes frigid
and thick humors in all, parts of the Body, and cures the Resolution of the
Norues, Palsies, and diseases in the Veins and Arteries from cold cause.

Nitre of the same nature with the Salts.

Gypsum, is a kind of Talk, of the nature of Lime, whose hot, fiery, caustic
quality every one knows.

Ratsbane, or Arsenic, is between a Salt and a Sulphur, it is of such an
acrimonious, corroding, hot quality, that it will burn to a crust; dissolving,
destroying and preying upon the Principles of Life; malignant, and an Enemy to
all Natural parts; and to the Radidical moisture, and innate heat; and
therefore was very ill advised of Nich. Alexanarinus to prescribe it for an
Ingredient in the great Athanasia, says the great man of skill in the Materia
Medica, Johannes Renodeus; for by permixtion with other Medicaments it does not
depose its malignity. The Learned Schroder says it is one of the highest
Poisons; for besides its acrimony, it is an Enemy to our Natural Balsam of
Life, so that it brings strange symptoms, not only tataken inwardly, but
applied outwardly; as Convulsions, numness of Hands and Feet, cold Sweats,
Palpitations, Faintings, Vomitings, Corrosions and Torments, Thirst, etc.

Cadmia, Metallic, it is the Stone out of which Brass is drawn, and is called
Brass-Ore, which Artificers use in making Yellow Brass, which the Shopmen call
Aurichalcum, or Orichalcum, and it is probable this is the Stone which Albertus
Magnus calls, Didachos, or the Devils-stone: Cadmia disiccates gently,
absterges and helps humid and putrid Ulcers, and draws them to scars; Schroder
says it is Caustic, and that it ulcerates the Hands and Feet of the Miners, and
taken inwardly kills all Creatures.

Antimony, or Stibium, or the seventh Metal, which some say is Mercury, others
Ambar, but neither of these are more than in a potency to be Metalls; a grand
Alchymistical Quacksalving Idol; the sole Empyrical, Chemical Cathartic;
whereby they boast to cure all Diseases; but it most devilshly disturbs men's
Ventricles by moving upwards and downwards; others it miserably torments by
vigorous Purging; some it kills and restores very few to perfect health. One
Cornelius Gemma, a Physician of Lovain, relates, how a Paracelsian English
Quacksalver, being himself and his Wife sick of a Fever, took himself and gave
to his Wife, that which they call prepared Antimony, whereupon she fell quickly
distracted, and changed her Life, yet valid, with death; and he complaining of
Dreams and continual Watchings, seven days after his Dejection, began to Rave;
from that he became Epileptical; from his Epilepsie he fell into a Lethargy,
being therewithal somewhat Apoplectical: when he had been three days in that
sopor, he fell again to his raving, and was so agitated with fury, that not
long after he expired and passed from his conjugal Bed to his conjugal Tomb:
and howsoever the Chemists cry up their Preparations of Antimony, yet as able
Physicians as any in the World forbear to exhibit them because they have much
better Medicaments wherewith they may more securely cure any Disease. And I
could give a large account of the dismal Accidents that I have known happen by
the administering of Antimony: and my ever honored Master Dr. Patin, Regins
Professor in Physic in the Famous University of Paris, wrote a Book which he
called the Martyrology of Antimony.

Chrysocolle, which the Shopmen, following the Barbarous Mauritanian Idiome
call it Borax, is found in the Golden, Silver, and sometimes Brazen Mines in
Armenia, Macedonia, and Cyprus; it heats, checks supersluous flesh, and is
mordacious; it produces Ulcers to sanity, but taken at the Mouth it is
perilous, says Renodeus.

Ochre. is a kind of Yellow Earth much commended in Africa, not lapideous, but
friable, clayey and sinooth, it binds, corrodes, discusses Tumors, and
represses Excrescences.

Gold, is the greatest Cordial in the Pocket; most certainly; for omne
cordiacum debet esse Bumidum and Calidum: aurum autem est frigidum and sicum,
i.e. every Cordial ought to be moist and hot, but Gold is cold and dry, Ergo
Gold is no Cordial at all; and nothing indeed is Cordial but what nourishes; a
Glass of generous Wine, and nourishing Broaths, and such Diet are the greatest
Cordials under the Sun.

Iron is an ignoble Metal, consisting of Mercury and Sulphur, not so meltable,
cruder, or rather of Sulphur and Salt; mixed with the Cruder parts of the
Earth: it binds and opens, as the Chemists says; the opening Virtue is chiefly
in its more Volatile part, and so in the Salt; the Astringent virtue lies in
the more fixed part, and so in the Earthy.

Brass, was formerly dedicated to Venus, from her Island Cyprus where great
plenty was dug; it is either of a Golden color called Aurichalcum; or redder,
and then called Brass absolutely. Brass was of more use among the Ancients,
than either Gold, Silver or Iron; for the first money was Brass; and hence we
meet with Aerarium, publicum, Aes ali number, Questor aerarius, their Warlike Arms
also were not of Iron or Steel, but Brass as also their Statues and Temple
doors.

Load, according to the Alchymists, is both dedicated to Saturn and called
Saturn, and in their opinion it is generated of impure Quicksilver, and a little
impure Sulphur, and it is thought that not only under the Earth, but in the open
Air also it angments, and therefore Cardanus, thinks it endamages houses by its
weight: for its Virtues, it refrigerates, binds, and thickens, etc.

Fossile or Native Sulphur is naturally generated out of a certain fat portion
of Earth; much whereof is in Lipara, Melos, and such like places, it is much in
quality a kin to fire, for if be cast upon Coals it will burn, and not be
extinguished, till all its oleous and fat substance be wasted; that Sulphur
whereof your Quacking Chemists tell many vain and ridiculous stories, is not
common Sulphur; yet it is mixed, though they assert it to be a principle of
mixture. But no more of that here. It heats, cooles, resolves, cures Coughs,
and difficulty of breathing, taken in an Egg, or burnt and its smoke caught,
moves Spittle: mixed with Butter or Swines grease, it mittigates and kills the
Itch over the whole Body; and mixed with Turpentine it cures Tetters.

Mercury or Quicksilver is the prime Idol of the Alchymists, which they
pronounce to be the principle of things and Sperm of Metals; and indeed so true
each, that nothing more false; for if Metalls have any Sperm, it is within
themselves, not else where to be sought; nor will ever mixed bodies naturally
resolve themselves into Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, though these Chemical
Vulcans will be hammering them out, as the Learned Philosopher and Physician
Riolanus has proved against them. This Quicksilver its as it were, the Monster
of Nature, which will not be subject to Natures Laws; it is more fluxible than
Water, more permeable than Vinegar; tho it moistens not; sometimes cures cold
diseases; sometimes hot: when it seems cold it induces hot effects; when hot
then cold ones; it sometimes hurts in small quantities, always in great; it
easily loses it proper form, and easily reassumes it; and in this it is
miraculous, that it often profits being taken inwardly; and often causes
Palsy, trembling and other sad effects when applied outwardly; Falop. de Lue
Vener. it is such a Beast that can scarce be tamed by any Art; So that Galen the
Prince of Physicians, next Hippocrates, durst not use it; having learned of
Dioscorides that it was Poisonous. Its qualities are yet under debate; for
some, from its effects, say it is cold; others as Avicen whom Palmarius and
others follow, say it is cold and moist; Fracastorius, Tomitanus and others, who
attribute a corroding faculty to it, contend for its heat. But Renodeus, with
Trajanus, thinks it to be of a mixed quality, participating of many other
faculties, but consisting chiefly of subtle parts; for it incides, attenuates,
penetrates, melts, resolves, loosens the belly; and what is most to be admired,
partly by an attractive quality attracts humors from the superficies to the
Center; and excludes them by stool; and partly by an impulsive faculty, them
from the Center to the habit, and ejects them by salivation; and it often works
by feige when it should salivate; and ofetn salivates when it should move
downward. Thus much of the nature of all the Metalls and Minerals from whence
the Waters proceed, now a few words concerning the manner have the Waters
acquire their virtues from them.

Now all these Waters are of a mixed, not simple nature, for they proceed and
pass not from and through one Quarry or Vein of the Earth only but from diverse;
and therefore acquire diverse faculties according to the diverse substances
which they draw along with them: as for Example, if a Water arises where is
generated a Quarry or Vein of Sulphur, from whence it passes where Iron's
generated, or Lead; this Water more certainly shall acquire mixed faculties to
it self; and yet it shall attract more of the substance of the one than the
other, according as any one quality makes more impression than another: and
many times so comes to pass that the Water proceeds from and passages through
passages where the Metal or Mineral is not yet perfectly generated, then you
must expect it to be of an hot Nature, but not so much participating of the
Metal or Mineral; the reason is because all Metalls and Minerals have heat for
their efficient cause, and therefore if the Waters pass by while the Metal or
Mineral is in generating, and where there is the cause of their generation,
which is heat, they will consequently become hot; whence they will prove to be
actually hot, and of a firery quality; and this shall be more or less according
the more or lesser acting of of the Heat; or by reason of the longer or shorter
stay of the Water, or by reason of the nature, quality and substance of the
Matter which is more or less permiscible. For that the Waters do effectually
attract the Virtue of the Quarry or Vein, there are three things requisite
(viz.) that heat perfom it parts well; that it acts opportunely, and those
things which ought to be mixed, be fit to be mixed. So that since these three
conditions are required to the completing the work; it comes so to pass that
although Water do sometimes participate of more Quarries or Veins; yet it shall
retain the faculties of one more than another; either by reason of one of these
causes, (viz.) either because heat was more active, or from its longer stay, or
from the Matters being more apt, or lastly from all these causes conjunct. Now
a Quarry or Vein does not impart its substance or faculties to the Water one
manner of way only; but either it so imparts it, as its substance, is truly and
really mixed, with its and those Waters and reteins their faculties for a long
time and to some purpose: or else they are mixed not with a true and real
mixture, but are only confounded; and when they are mixed by such a kind of
confusion, the Waters of the Quarry are not all one, neither are they truly
mixed, for one may separate one from another: sometimes lastly they are mixed,
not because of the substance of the Quarry is mixed with Water; but only vapors
elevated from the matter are permixt; And since it happens as you may
understand that mixtion is performed by these three manner of ways, it is no
wonder if Water mixing it self in several Veins, shall attract and contract to
it self the faculty of one more than another. As for example; if Water that
shall be perfectly mixed in one Quarry, with another confusedly only, and with
another, with the vapors only, and not with the substance, it shall retein much
more of the nature of that wherewith it is perfectly mixed, than the other.

CHAP. III. Of the Waters of Bath, and their Causes.
COncerning which there are likewise diverse opinions: Now these Waters being of
so hot a Nature, that throw but a Fowl therein and it shall immediately deplume
it; put Fish and Eggs therein and it will presently concoct them; that these
Waters are so hot of their own nature, I cannot believe; for all Water is
always, and of its own Nature cold in quality; and if it become hot by accident
take but away the heating cause thereof, and it shall return to its prestine
cold temper of its own accord, without any thing of an altering nature being
adhibited: For there are Rivers in hot Countries that are not very hot from the
heat of the Sun: So that I conclude these Waters to be hot in the Caverns of
the Earth from an outward cause: which that it may be made more plainly
manifest, we shall briefly inspect into the causes of Baths.

Concerning their efficient Causes their are likewise various opinions;
omitting the whimsical frothy conceits of the Chemists; let us see what the
more sound and solid sort of Learned Philosophers say to the business; some
ascribe this virtue to the Rays of the Sun with Thermophilus, who held that the
Sun penetrating the pores of the Earth (for certainly the Earth is porous and
Spungy,) was in its bowels there fortified, and made more active in heat; so
that like Fire it heats Water, and what ever it meets with, and even burns what
it meets with combustible; but if this were so, these Baths would be so hot in
Summer only, not in Winter; or at least it would follow that these Springs
would be less hot in Winter than in Summer, contrary to all experience; for
every Idiot can tell you the Springs, etc. are hotter in Winter than Summer,
the cause whereof of the Learned Philosophers ascribe to that they call
Antiperistasis, that is, in plain English; the Earth is hotter within in Winter
when the Sun's absent, than in Summer; and so they will tell you that their
Sellars are hot in Winter and cold in Summer. Secondly, I cannot conceive how
the Sun should penetrate into such deep Caverns of the Earth as, by force of
its heat, to make the Waters therein to become so hot; where we see, it cannot
effect the same on Lakes in any hot Region: Then 3ly, We know that there are
Baths found in the most cold Countries, as Islind, etc-Some with Mileus will
have a Wind or a Spirit vehemently tossed and moved up and down, and so penned
up grows hot, and so coming to fall upon the Waters overheats them. Democritus
says, they receive their heat from Ashes and Lime: others think these Waters
grow hot by reason of vehement motion and beating against the Rocks; and not a
few there are which say that the matter through which they pass heats them,
which they say is the reason that some smell so strongly of Sulphur, because
they flow from Sulphury Veins. Others, o'th other side, will have the cause to
be an extreme heat within the Earth in those places, which overflow with hot
Waters; and Learned Dr. Jordan our Countryman if I mistake not, thinks they
derive their heat from the sermentation of Metals in their Generation; to which
is required an actual heat with a certain humidity; and some affirm that
Thunder heats the Waters, as may be seen from Manlius; Suni autem cunctis
permixti partibus ignes,
Qui gravidas habitant fabricantes fulmina nubes,
Hac penetrant Terras, Aethnamque imitantur Olympo,
Et calidas reddunt ipsis in fontibus undas.


Lastly, the Chemists will have the Waters to wax hot from a mutual combat and
conflict of diverse Salts or Mineral bodies; after the same manner, as we see in
the conjunction of Spirit of Vitriol or Salt of Tartar, as from the two fires
the Glass becomes so hot, Vt multo accensis, fervore exuberat undis, Clausus
ubi exusto liquor indignatur abeno.

Now among so many disagreeing opinions, when there can be but one in the right
on it; Aristotle the great searcher into the Secrets of Nature, in my opinion
hit the Nail o'th head, who following Empedoeles, the Disciple of Pythagoras
when he saw these Therm or Baths, so called from (...), Calidus, to be so hot,
thought they could become so no other way, than from a most fervent cause,
because all Waters of their own Nature are cold, and could think the efficient
cause to be no other then Fire included in the inmost parts of the Earth, and
there, as it were, primogeneally residing; of which the Epicurean Poet and
Philosopher, Principio t^llus habet in Corpora prima,
Unde mare immensum, vo ventes flumina fontes
Assidur revomunt habet ignes unde oria^tur,
Nam multis su^^ensa locis ardent sola Terrae.


Now that there is Fire under the Earth, besides the hot fiery water Springs;
the Lime, Ashes, etc. which are vomited and dug out of the Earth, may confirm
and persuade us; as being the genuine effects of fire; to say nothing of Smoke
and Soot, breaking out of the Earth; and in some places fire it self; therefore
Subterranean fire, which Kirkerus calls pyrophylacia, i. e. a Prison for Fire,
is the most certain cause of the heat of the Waters, For while those Springs of
Waters upon the Mountains, are carried by the Veins and Sinewy bendings of
Metalls, in manner of Dragons and Chaldrons in the Baths of the Ancients,
writhed and twisted with circles of Brass; like a Meander; and from thence
artract the Virtues and Vices, as I may so say, of Metalls, wherewith the Water
is tinctured, they wax hot from the natural fire Subterraneous to those
windings, even just as Water in a Pot is heat by Fire; and Bartholine says
expressly, that Fire does not heat the Water after the manner above related from
Aristotle and Empedocles; but that the Pipes or Veins of the Earth contein Fire
it self within them,

Now the Water becomes more or less hot, here and there, First, as the matter
is found more or less apt for heat; Secondly, as that Fire is nigher or farther
off the Water; whence in some places Fire breaks out together with Waters, in
some places Water without Fire to be seen. Thirdly, as there is a present
quantity and proportion of matter, as for example, a great quantity of Water
would extinguish a little Fire, so that we see no River to be so hot, much less
a Lake, least of all the Sea.

But since so much and lasting a Fire cannot continue without some food, or
maintenance, therefore it must necessarily have some Matter to nourish and
renew it. Now this matter must be something that will burn, either dry, or
oleagenous. Lands taken from the Fens and dried, they call it roasted, cannot
be the fires continual matter; for it is soon consumed by the Fire, and it
burns only by reason of the Roots and Herbs and Grass which it contains;
wherefore it must be oily, fat matter; Now the fatty things which are begot in
the Bowels of the Earth, are chiefly Marle, Bitumen and Brimstone; now Marle
burns not, nor any Earth, unless it be Sulphurous, or Bituminous; so that we
may certainly conclude that Bitumen and Brimstone and Oils are the material
cause of the hot Baths: hence Baths are called Sacred, because they abound with
Sulphur, with which the Ancients used to exprate their offenses, whence the
Grecians call it Theion, i. e., Divine; For whatsoever is anointed with Oil or
Bitumen and Brimstone, it presently takes fire: For moist and fatty, by consent
of the Philosophers, is the genuine food of Fire;

As for the nature of our Baths in Somersetshire, Physicians are divided among
themselves, some saying one thing and some another: Dr. Turner, who has wrote
concerning them, says they consist of Sulphur and Copper mixed together: Dr.
Joraan and Dr. Venner, Practitioners at the Bath, will have them impregnated
with Sulphur, Nitre, and Bitumen, Dr. Venner because he judges Sulphur to have
the dominion; but Dr. Jordan is for Bitumen. Others will have them consist of
neither; as Lossius, who in his counsel concerning these Baths, when he had
given his opinion, that the material cause of Baths in general was Sulphur, Oil
and Bitumen; tells you afterward that the Baths in Somersetshire contein
neither Brimstone, nor Bitumen; as having neither taste nor smell of either,
and says if you distill them in a Glass Alembec, you will not find the least
sign of either, but a certain substance like Salt, such as is found in Pipes,
through which Water runs into Cysterns; and this he takes to he a kind of
Nitre, wherewith that ground be says does much abound; mixed with a portion of
Vitriol: and the Learned Dr. Meara, in a Letter to Dr. Prujean, (before Lossius
wrote) concerning the cause of the Heat in these Waters, tells him; as a
certain person of Quality was riding out of the City one day to take the Air;
he by chance espies a certain kind of Chalk, or Marie as white as Snow
springing out of the Earth like Mole-hills, brings some of it home and shows it
to him and Dr. Maplet; which he says, was of a crumbling nature, and almost
turning to Powder of its own accord; affording a manifest sharp, sour taste
without astriction; but biting; and begetting an inflammatory choking or
stopping in the Throat; that he did not doubt, but that it abounded with much
Vitriol, and that it was not altogether void of Arsnic: put into cold water, it
presently produced an ebullition, as if it had been Quicks Lime, and the water
by degrees grew vehemently hot; and since this Marle or Chalk was found in the
neighboring parts of Bath, he very probably was induced to believe that the
Bath water grew hot from this Fire. And he says, though he is not ignorant that
Authors every where ascribe the heat of the Bath waters to Brimstone and
Bitumen; and though it cannot be denied but that there is great plenty of
Bitumen in those Springs, and that they are abundantly impregnated therewith,
as the Cure of Scabs, Leprosy, Ulcers, etc. may convince, yet he doubts whether
either of them has the nature of a Ferment apt to heat the Waters; since both
are destitute of Acidity, the chief promoter of Fermentation; neither can
either of them, cast into water, produce Fermentation or Heat, and whenas they
are of a clammy consistence, and especially the Bitumen, so that the Water
cannot insinuate or penetrate it self into their particles, it must be
concluded that they are unapt for such a Fermentation; whenas the contrary is
seen in that crumbly, powdry and not gummy consistence of the Marle: and so
concludes leaving it wholly to Dr. Prujean to be judge, in so obscure a case.
And I likewise shall not trouble the Reader, with tedious Philosophical
disputes upon this subject; being as I told thee at first, I intended a plain
and practical, and not an hard, difficult contemplative discourse, and so shall
pass on in the next Chapter to show you the use of these and other Waters, or
as I may say, their Virtues and Vices. But something first of the preparing the
Body.

CHAP. IV. Of the manner of preparing the Body of such as intend to drink the
Waters.
BUt most Peoples intention of going to the Waters being as I suppose to
cleanse their Bodies, and free them from Obstructions, Stone and Gravel, etc.
and put their Bodies in good temper and order; I would advise them by all means
to Prepare and Purge their Bodies before they take any of these Waters, either
Tunbridge, Empsom, Dullege, or any other hereabouts, or at other places, as
likewise at the Bath, etc. for if they go thither with gross, foul Bodies, and
gorge themselves with the Waters before they have unloaden themselves, of
their overfulness of Blood, or bad humors, they had better stay at home, than
to make work for the Physician and damnifie themselves in Body and Purse.

Now if thou art troubled with too much blood, which thou may know by the
fullness of the Veins, and heaviness and dullness of thy Body, thou had best
take away some blood, to the quantity of 6, 9, 12, ounces according to the
strengh of thy body, age, sex, etc. or thou may do it at twice; then Purge
with this or the like. Take from half an ounce to an ounce of the best Sena,
and from a Scruple to a dram of Cream of Tartar, and infuse them all night in
some White Wind or Ale Posset Drink strein it and drink it off early in the
morning or thou may have Electuaries or Pills at the Apothecaries; if thou
had rather; a Scruple of Stomach Pills taken at night going to bed, or after
thy first sleep will work finely the next morning, made into three or four
Pills, and you may go about your lawful occasions: or Lenitive Electuary,
Catholicon, and Diaprunes of each two drams taken after the same manner, then
you may venture to drink the Waters, any of these taken twice first.

If thou be of a Choleric nature prepare thy body, by boiling some Sorrel,
Borage, Bugloss, Chichory, Dandelion, Endive, Strawberry-leaves, Spinach, and
such like in Fountain water or River water, with a little French, Barley and
Liquorice, and strein it and drink thereof for a day or two; if thou would
have it pleasant, add some Syrup of Violets or Lemons, and then Purge with Sena
and Cream or Crystal of Tartar the quantity as before, infused in some of the
Liquor you prepared your body with, or the Electuary above, not Pills.

If Melancholy abound, prepare thy body, by boiling Fumitory, Balm,
Maidenhair, Dodder of Time, Ceterach, Hyssop, Scabious, Agrimony, some of
these, or such like, as before with the Roots of Smallage, Fennel, Parsley,
Polypody, Butchers-Broome, Enulacampane, Orice, and the like, and Syrup of
Maidenhair, Apples, five opening Roots, or such like: then Purge with the
Decoction of Epithymum, at the Apothecaries, or with Sena infused as before, or
the Electuaries, not Pills.

If Phlegm abound, Prepare thy body with Wormwood, Southernwood, Mugwort,
Agrimony, Betony, Centaury, Calamint, Majoram, Motherwort, Penyroyal,
Horehouna, Sage, Savory, and such like, in whose Decoction you may infuse Sena
as before with Cream or Crystal of Tartar; and in lieu of the Electuaries use
the Pills. Now for the manner of using the Waters.

CHAP. V. Of the time, manner and order of taking the Metallic and Mineral and
Bath Waters, and other such like.
AS for the Time then, that is twofold here; of the Year, and of the day:
(prosint; Temporibus Medicina valet data tempore Et data non apto tempore vina
nocent. for the Season of the Year, Summer is the best, when the weather is
commonly settled, warm and dry, and so they are commonly ordered to be taken in
the Dog days; Cum canis arentes findit hiulcus agros. but there are other times
in Summer certainly as fit as that (for the Dog Days keep not always to one
temper) as June and beginning of July, and after the Dog Days, many years are
seasonable, as the Season falls out; and in general when the weather is clear,
hot and dry, the Water is best; as well in Winter as in Summer; nay the Water
is the stronger in hard, frosty weather; the cold hindering the Spirits from
evaporating; for in Rainy or Misty weather, when Jupiter does, per cribrum
mingere, piss through a Sieve, as Aristophanes merrily speaks, the Waters must
certainly lose much of their Virtue.

Then as to the time of the day, the Morning about an hour after Sunrising is
the fittest; for when the Sun begins to get power, it certainly attracts some
of the Spirits of the Waters, and so consequently not so strong; and then is
the best walking.

Now as to the manner and order; it is best taking the quantity you are to take
that day, within as small a space of time, as conveniently you can, without
oppressing the Stomach; then you shall take a gentle walk before you Drink, so
as to warm your blood a little, not to sweat or be ready to sweat, and so
between every Glass.

Next as to the Quantity of Water to be taken every Morning, it cannot be
justly defined or prescribed; in regard of the difference of bodies as to their
Age, Sex, Strength, and other circumstances; in which you are wholly to be
ordered by your Physician; for though the drinking of the Waters be a
Quacksalving, Empyrical Remedy, yet it ought not so to be used or administered;
and every one ought to remember, that the best direction is from those things
that help and hurt: some may begin the first Morning with three pints, or two
quarts, or five pints, and so augment a pint, till they come to four Quarts,
more or less as they find agree with their body and so decrease a pint by
degrees. It Is not good to drink like some, Invenies illic qui Nestoris ebibit
annos. three hundred ounces, according to Nestor's years: Some between every
glass eat a few Carraway, or Corriander Seed Comfeits, or Candid Elecampane, or
Angelica, or Orange, Lemon, or Citron pills, etc. And certainly it is very
necessary that they should have some Electuary, Powder or Lozenge, or such
like, (appropriated to the grief for which they take the Waters) appointed them
by their Physician.

Having drank your daily quantity of Water, you will do well to walk, or stir
up and down, and compose your self to Mirth with some of the Company; for all
cares and contrary passions of the Mind and Melancholy must be left behind:
this done, in the Name of God go to your Dinner; if you perceive the Waters to
be concocted and past through. Now the sign of their concoction is, that your
Urine begins to be colored; which if you perceive not you may abstein awhile
longer. If you drink the Water cold, take not any more after the first draught
till that be warmed in your Stomach, and no heaviness be perceived.

Now the Waters taken in so great a a quantity will force themselves a way
either by Seige or Urine, yet some add opening Syrups as of Maidenhair, etc. or
of Limons, or loosening ones; or Salt, or Manna, and Purging Powders; it is
better to drink them at the Fountains, than some miles off; Then as for the
time of staying to drink the Waters, if you ask me how long it must be? Truly I
must answer it cannot be exactly defined or ordered; some stay longer, some
shorter time, some a fortnight, etc. some a month, some more.

CHAP. VI. Of the Diet to be observed by those that drink the Metallic and
Mineral Waters, and for all other persons whatsoever.
BY Diet here I do not mean only Meat and Drink, as it is commonly so taken by
the vulgar; for with Physicians it has a larger acceptance; as comprehending,
Air, Motion, and Rest, things retained and avoided, Sleeping and Waking, and
the Passions of the Mind: all these are to be duly and rightly ordered and
observed, as most considerably conducing both to the preserving and restoring
of health.

To begin then with the Air; now wherever you drink the Waters you must take
the Air as it is, and be contented with it; otherwise if you will choose for the
best, you are to consider two things chiefly, its substance and its quality:
its substance must be conspicuous, pure and not corrupted, not putrified. A
serene, pure, perspicuous and tempered Air, that exhilerates the heart,
illustrates the Spirits, and makes the blood apt to be distributed through the
whole Body; so that there is nothing almost more healthful for the Body of man
than to live in such an Air.

Next the Quality of the Air, that is from the Sun and Moon, etc. in the Spring,
especially in the midst of its extremes, the Air is hot and moist; ^n Summer,
hot and dry; in Autumn, cold and dry; and in Winter, cold and moist; and the
same may almost be said of the several parts of the day; for the Morning
answers to the Spring etc.

The Moon changes the Air with its quarters; for the first quarter is like the
Spring; the second Summer; the third Autumn, and the last quarter like Winter.

What is said concerning Air, I hope will not displease; for Air is of great
concern in most diseases; thousands have been freed from deplorable diseases by
change of Air only; yet change of Air may do harm, as if one goes out of a good
Air into a bad one.

Next is Meat and Drink, whose substance affords good or bad juice; is of good
or bad Concoction, little or much nourishment: to preserve or recover health,
Meat of good juice is very necessary; for Diseases are produced from Meats of
bad juice: light food and Spices beget thin Blood, which weakens and exhausts
the substance of the Spirits; gross begets clammy blood, oppresses our natural
heat and begets fullness, and bad humors.

For Quality hot, cold, moist, dry meats, do affect us with their qualities;
the quality of Food when in health must be correspondent to the temper and age
of the body; the Region and time of the Year; but in sickness contrary, to
reduce it.

For Quantity, we ought never to eat more than nature requires; fullness is the
Parent of all bad humors; and fasting or a spae Diet wastes the humors and
innate heat: and all manner of Diet is either thin or sparing, or gross, or a
mean; the first diminishes our faculties, the second augments, the last
preserves them.

Custom is to be kept, for it is a second nature. For Rusties who are used to
gross meat, as strong Beef and Bacon; better concoct it than tenderer meats,
which are rather apt to corrupt in their Stomach: therefore things we are
accustomed to, though worse, are better than what we are not.

A regard should be had to the Order of Diet; so that Meats that are easy, are
to be eaten before those of hard Concoction, so moist Meats are to be taken
before dry.

Meats are not to be taken out of Time; those in health are to eat after
exercise, and when their former meat is concocted; and generally at an
accustomed hour: to stay longer fills the Stomach with sharp, bad humors, and
to eat before creates crudities. Neither neglect the Time of the Year, in
Winter it is best to eat more and drink less; let your meat and drink be hot and
drying; as Roast-meat, and stronger drings; in the Spring eat less, but drink
more and smaller drinks; and eat Boiled meats rather then Roast; and hotter
than in Summer: in Summer eat little and often; in Winter otherwise: let the
sickly feed sparingly, for cold dulls weak Stomachs: the same is to be said of
the Region and Age; for we must eat more sparingly in an hot, then in a cold
Country; so Young men require more Meat than Old; so Childrens Diet must be
moist, lest their growth be hindered by a dry one: to Boys hot and dry, a cold
Diet will be best; Boiled meat rather then Roast, much drink, but not strong;
Young men from 14 to 25 of a temperate Constitution, require a temperate Diet.

But here comes a question, How often we are to eat in a day? which I think in
general cannot be decided, because of so numerous variety of tempers; for
Phlegmatic people, who are best able to fast, once a day may be enough; the
Coleric, who easily is hurt by fasting, he may eat oftener but little; they may
Breakfast, Dine and Sup, but soberly: let the Sanguine keep a mean in all
things: let the Melancholic may take something thrice a day, whereby they may
moisten their dryness. Most certain our forefathers were far more sparing than
us; and so prolonged their lives, and were active, strong, beautiful, tall: But
yet we must not believe they fed only on Acorns, as Poetical Fables relate: but
all manner of Fruits, Pulles and flesh: for Holy Writ tells us, after our first
Parents were cast out of Paradise, they tilled the Earth, and sacrificed
Victims, whose flesh and intrails they probably fed upon. And it is most certain
that Intemperance is the Nurse of Physicians; and that more perish by Gluttouy
than the Sword. Our Ancestors says Galen more rarely were sick, because they
lived more temperately. Hippocrates, says, Women, and Eunuchs were not troubled
with the Gout; but neither are free from it now; because of their Gluttony.
Wherefore it is best to observe that Golden precept of Socrates, we ought to eat
to live, and not to live to eat.

Again, At which repast is most to be eaten, Dinner or Supper? This question
has been formerly so much contended for, that some of the Italian Physicians
have written whole books, thereon. I am of opinion that it is more healthful to
sup sparingly. First because of the frequent experience of almost an infinite
of men, who have received the greatest benefits from a light Supper; the
Stomach is least burdened, and so sleep must be more pleasant; Secondly, the
matter is prevented, whereby they are obnoxous to Defluxions, Rheumatisms,
Gouts, Dropsies, Vertigoes, etc. that eat large Suppers. Thirdly, from a
sparing Supper follows more alacrity the next day; and concoction is better
perfected, and so grevious obstructions are prevented, with many more diseases.

Another question may be, Whether Meals are to begun with Meat or Drink?
Liquids or Solids? And here I am of opinion that we should begin with Liquids;
because they are soonest concocted; and then the concoction of Meat in the
Stomach is performed after the manner that crude Flesh is in the pot; whence,
the Prince of Philosophers, Aristotle, compares this first coction to the
boiling of Meat in the Pot; but we first put water into the Pot, then flesh:
which is to be understood of Broths and such liquid things, not Wine, or strong
Ale or Beer, for they offend the Nervous parts of our bodies, and so cause
Gouts and Scurvey humors; and fluctuations in the Stomach, whence is all
coction disturbed: (for this it was that Galen would have meat precede;) drink
Broths first then some solid substance, then to drink, that all may be equally
mixed in the Stomach, remembering what Schola Salerni, says, Inter prandendum sit
saepe parumque bibendum. But not to eat any crude Fruit after Meals, as it is
too common, but either boiled, roasted, baked or preserved may be moderately
taken.

As for Drink, that appeases Thirst, and is the Vehicle of Food, if it be
purely drink, as Water; it may be liberally drank, if the bodies be strong and
firm; but if weak, sparingly, and the oftener. We here in England drink small
Beer generally, and the poor fort in the Country drink Whey and Butter-milk, etc.
of which hereafter.

Thus far of Diet in General; now in particular, the first thing that occurs s
Bread, the best is made of Wheat, leven'd better then unleavened. Now as there
are several sorts of Wheat; so the Bread is of different nature whereof it is
made; that which is made of the pure meal is best; the next is that with Meal
and Bran; that made of all Bran is for Dogs; always remember to put a
convenient quantity of Salt into your Bread, against obstructions.

Bread made of Rye nourishes less, and is not so easily concocted; but mixed
with Wheat it is better, and affords a moderate nourishment. Barley bread,
nourishes least of all; yet it drys and cleanses, and is the same with Oats, by
all which you may easily conjecture at the nature of Miscelane. The old Proverb
is, An Egg of an hour, bread of a day, and Wine of a year. The Crumb affords
the best juice, and is of easier concoction than the Cursed, which is dryer, and
Schola Salerni says, Ne c medes crustam coleram quia gignit adustam, then cut
away the burnt Crust: yet the Crust is not so much to be disapproved as some
suppose; for its a very convenient Food for those of a strong Stomach.

Hither are to be referred all kind of sweet-Breads, which in general are but
bad Food, except Biscockt; for none of them are without their fault; among
which are also Puddings, Pasties, Pan-cakes, Cheese-cakes, Custards, and many
such like, Quelquechose, hony'd, sugared, milky'd, egged: all baked Meats are
hurtful to the Stomach and Liver, seeing they most manifestly heat, obstruct
and offend the inward parts.

The next are Fruits; of which this may be affirmed in general, that they
moisten and cool much; nourish little, yet some more, some less. All Fruits
almost are endued with some bad qualities, and beget winds and serous, thin
humors, and are very hurtful to distempers proceeding from obstruction, and
putrid Fevers: of Fruits that will not keep long, and are soon rotten, the
moister are to be chosen, and eaten in the first course; such are Prunes,
Cherries, Grapes, but the more solid and such as bind more, and will not be
rotten so soon, are to be eaten at the second course; among which are Quinces,
Pears, Apples, Nuts, etc.

It is a most certain rule, that all Fruits that may be boiled, baked, or
roasted, beget bad juice, if eaten crude.

As for Melons, Corcumbers, Pompions, they may in some measure conduce to hot
Stomachs and Choleric persons, for they refresh and moisten much; but they
beget thick, cold juice, and of hard concoction; Historians make mention of
persons of great renown that dyed by eating Melons: and Pears, Quinces,
Medlars, Services, etc. ought not to be eaten by healthful people, but after
meals; and then but in small quantity, to strengthen the Stomach; Filbirds may
be allowed, as being of a temperate nature; Chestnuts beget thick Blood, Wind,
and not easily concocted.

No Pulses are much to be commended; for Beans green are windy, disturb the
senses, cause Dreams, and are of a a thick juice, hard of concoction and not
much nourishing; Primrose says, they beget serous blood; etc. but dried they
refrigrate, dry, and deterge also, applied in Pultises: Pease are of the same
nature. Rice and French-Barly are the most excellent of all Pulses, because
they nourish most, and breed sewest Excrements: both moderately strengthen the
Stomach, and are not of bad concoction: Ciches or Vitches, nourish more than
Pease, and discharge the reins, by their Diuretic faculty, and therefore are
thought to be profitable to those that are obnoxious to the Stone in the
Kidneys: But it is best to use them sparingly, nor without the Physician's
advice; for by the undiscreet using of them, neither few nor light symptoms may
ensue; as also from the untimely use of any other Diuretics.

Herbs come next to be handled; In general all Herbs nourish little and are
rather endued with altering qualities; for they heat, cool, dry, and moisten
what way soever used. Galen extolls Letuce above all herbs; as endued with
nourishing juice, but very cooling; and causing sleepiness: Next in coolness
are Sorrel, Cichory, Porcelan, etc. which may be profitably used daily; Among
hot Herbs are Sage, Thyme, Savory, Penyroal, Majoram, Rosemary.

Lastly, Roots are by all esteemed windy Food, some nourish more than others.

Now the Food we receive from Animals may be reduced to Flesh and Eggs in
general: and Flesh to Fish, Birds, or four footed Beasts. Of Fish those that
live about the Rocks, etc. are most commended; Seafish are better than
River-Fish; standing Pools worst. All Fresh-fish beget Phlegm; are easily
corrupted; dried and salt are of hard digestion, and burn the blood. The best
are Trouts, Pike, Sole, Roach, Carp, Turbot; then Mackrel Perch, Skait, Eeles:
for Tench, Crab fish, Lobsters, are of difficult coction; so last in goodness;
Salmon is to be eaten with moderation. Fish, boiled less good, fried better,
roasted best because dryest. In general the Male better then the Female, young
(but not the very least) better then old; notwithstanding the old Proverb,
Young Flesh, and old Fish.

As for Birds, etc. young better then old, those that feed upon Mountains and
high grounds, are of easier digestion than others; Tame have tenderer and moist
Flesh; wild harder and dryer: those that are castrated are of a more pleasant
taste than others: Birds nourish less, though sooner concocted than four footed
Beasts. The best are Patriges and Mountain Birds, Cardan a a Physician so
highly extolls Patriges, if you will believe him, that of themselves he says they
are able to cure the Pox, which he found by experience upon his own body,
having, as he ingeniously confesses of himself, being infected therewith no
less than seven times; next Woodcocks, Blackbirds, Doves, Pheasants, then
Chickens, Pullets and Capons.

For Four-footed Animals, Fauns, Lambs, Pig, Weather, Veal, are best for taste
and nourishment; Porks-flesh nourishes very much, but requires a stronger
Stomach; Galen prefers it before all; Beef is grosser, and so begets more
Melancholic juice then Mutton. Now there are several sorts of ways of Cooking
this Flesh; roasting, boiling, frying, baking, etc. for dry bodies boiled is
best, for moist others; Broaths are of easy nourishment being soon distributed.

To this belongs Sauces and such things as are used in preserving of Food. As
first Honey; hot and sharp; Sugar comes nighest to it not so hot; more pleasant
and familiar to the Stomach. Salt is hot and dry; and so are all Spices.
Mustard Seed is most hot and dry; Oil is temperate: Vinegar's temper is not
decided; as Vinegar it is cold; as made of Corrupt Wine, it retains somewhat of
heat, but it is more cold than hot; it drys, provoks an Appetite, and
strengthens the Stomach.

Hens, Phesants, Patriges, Turkys-Eggs are the best, Duck and Goose the worst:
besides Eggs, we have Milk, Butter, Cheese, Blood from four-footed Beasts.

Milk is of a diverse temper, according to the Animal it is milk'd from. It
consists of a threefold substance, waterish, whence Whey; thick whence Cheese;
fatty and oily, whence Butter, Cows Milk has most Butter, so it nourishes
most, and cools less. Sheeps more Cheese so worse; Asses most Whey, so fittest
to cool and moisten; Goats of a middle temper, Butter heats somewhat, nourishes
little, losens and and softens: Cheese of thick bad juice so stopping, an Enemy
to those subject to the Stone in the Kidneys: so the Proverb is very true.

Caseus ille bonus quem dat avara manus.
All Blood is of hard coction and nourishes little, Beef-blood the worst. Thus
far concerning Meat, next follows.

Drink, was nothing but Water in the beginning of the World; if it be colored
or smell, or taste, not good; lightest the best; for weak Stomachs it may be
boiled: and because few drink water alone, Barley may be boiled therein and so
made Beer and Ale; stronger or smaller; some add Wheat, Oats and Beans;
certainly it is the most healthful drink, if people would accustom themselves
to it; for so they would free themselves from a a world of Diseases got by
immoderate drinking Wine or strong Beer, etc. as Tremblings, Palsy, Lethargy,
Apoplexy, Verligo, Pains ith Head, Eyes, Gout, Stone, Dropsy, Rheumatisms,
Piles, etc. for it strengthens the Stomach, causes an Appetite; the Egyptian
and Israelitish Priests and Kings drank nothing but Water; Aristotle and Plato
order Nurses, Children, Students to drink Water. Demosthenes left Wine when he
came to the Bar and Pulpit; Water preserves and quickens the sight. Alexander
Aphrodiseus says in his Problems, it makes all the Senses more lively, cools
the Liver, opens the passages, clenses the Reins and Bladder. Fountain and
River Water are the best.

Sleeping and Waking ought to be moderated with Prudence: Sleep concocts Meat
and Humors, corrects distempers of the Mind; moistens; Labor for the Flesh and
Joints, Sleep for the Entralls; Night's the best, three hours from Supper, Day
sleep hurts, unless none by Night, or weary; for it makes a moist Brain, and
breeds sour Belchings, etc. exceed not eight hours; lie first on the right
side, then the left, nor on the Back or Face; Watching's also to be moderate;
for immoderate produces contrary effects.

Motion comprehends all exercise, whereof are several sorts, Tennis, etc. for
the whole Body; riding for the Intestines, walking for the Thighs, and Reading
and Singing for the Lungs, etc. it strengthens, distributes, Meat: Morning and
Evening; exercise till the Body be florid, and begin to sweat; the same
moderation in Rest.

As for things to be retained and voided, they help health, if those be
evacuated that ought, and contra: things to be voided if they are retained
hurt, as voiding of Urine, Ejections, Spittle, Hemorhair, Courses, Seed, etc.
if suppressed oppress and putrify. So if things be voided that ought to be
retained, or voided in too great quantity.

As for the Passions of the Mind, they must not be violent; so of what before
as Meat, sleep, etc. all must be moderate; and thus much for diet which if
minded, there would not be any need of taking such uncertain remedies as
Mineral Waters; which have certainly been the utter ruin of many thousands.

As for the many symptoms following the irregular and unadvised drinking the
Waters, as suppression of Urine, Dropsies, etc. too long here to name, they are
to be remedied by the Learned Physician.

FINIS.

