THE SOLEMN PROTESTATION OF Miles Prance, In Reference to the MURDER OF Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey: And as concerning Mr. Roger L'Estrange.
WHereas some Bold and Ill Men have several times by Various but Different
Suggestions, and particularly more Openly of late, pretended they are able to
disprove the Account I gave from my Personal Knowledge of the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, wherein with unspeakable Grief (though yet not without a
firm belief of Forgiveness from Almighty GOD upon unfeigned Repentance, as well
as the Grant of His most Gracious Majesty, my Earthly Sovereign's, Pardon) I
acknowledge my Self most wickedly Drawn in and Concerned. And whereas likewise
being justly Called thereunto, I did on the 25th of October, 1680. in service
to Truth, the Protestant Religion, my King, and Country, most truly depose,
That about Three Years before that Time I saw Mr. Roger L'Estrange three or
four times Kneeling at Mass in the Queens Chapel.

And whereas several Prints entitled Observators, and other Pamphlets, whereof
Mr. L'Estrange is generally Reputed the Author, have not only denied that the
said L'Estrange was ever^^ Mass, since his Majesty's happy Restoration; but
also have endeavored to fix Scandals upon me, as if I had Defrauded the Queens
most Excellent Majesty, by taking out Silver Screws out of an Anti-Pendium to
the Altar, and putting in Brass ones in their stead, or Reckoning for Silver
ones, when in Truth they were but Brass; as also insinuating as if I had made
away with my Servant, and had pretended that a Tankard entrusted with me was
stolen away, when it was not; since all these Suggestions are not only most
notoriously false, and prejudicial to my Reputation, but also tending to Abuse
and Discredit that Testimony which Honestly and Conscientiously I have given
touching the Damnable Popish Plot:

I the said Miles Prance do hereby in the presence of the All-seeing and
Heart-searching God, and of all Holy Angels and Good Men, solemnly and
sincerely Avow and Declare, That whatever I formerly Deposed upon Oath at the
Trials of Mr. Green, Mr. Berry, and Mr. Hill, or at any other Trial, and what
in my Printed Narrative I did set forth touching the manner and Circumstances
(as far as the same fell within my Knowledge) of the said Sir Edmondbury
Godfrey's Murder; As also my before-Recited Affidavit of seeing Mr. Roger
L'Estrange at Mass, is and are most Punctually and Religiously True.

And I further do Protest and Declare in manner aforesaid, that I did not
directly or indirectly defraud Her Most Excellent Majesty in the matter of the
Screws or Antipendium, but that the said Screws were by consent and order of
those that employed me made of Brass, as also that my said Servant was upon
Trial with several Masters after he parted with me, and afterward by his own
and his friends consent, (without any Concernment of mine) sent into some of
the Western Plantations, where I believe he is still Living; And that there was
a Tankard sent me to mend, stolen out of my Shop in December 1678. For which I
returned to the Owner a new Tankard, to the full Value.

And as to all and every part of this my solemn Protestation and Declaration,
as I do hereby under my hand, most seriously Aver and Avow it, so in further
Confirmation of the Truth thereof, I do resolve (with Gods help and permission)
on the next Lords day, being that Holy Feast of Easter, thereupon to receive in
my Parish Church the Holy Sacrament according to the Rites of the Church of
England (which as I can never enough, Bless and Magnify the Lord for bringing
me into, so by his Grace I shall never in the least depart from.) And I do
moreover declare, That as I had not when I made the before-cited Affidavit any
Malice or Ill Will against Mr. L'Estrange's Person, so likewise I do heartily
forgive him all those Slanders wherewith he has endeavored to Brand me, and
particularly for calling me very lately Raskal in Print: And shall implore the
Divine Majesty both to bring that Gentleman to a due Sense of, and Repentance
for all his Transgressions in that kind toward Me and Others, and to pardon
the same; That as (if it shall so happen) we meet at our Blessed Lords Table on
Earth, so we may together enjoy an endless Repast in Heaven.

In Testimony of all which, from the deepest sense of my Soul, I have here
subscribed my hand, Dated the 14th of April, being the Annual Commemoration of
our Blessed Lord (the Holy Jesus) his Crucifixion for the sins of Mankind, and
thence diservedly called Good Friday, 1682.

MILES PRANCE.

London, Printed for R. Janeway 1682.


