Publick-spiritedness Recommended.

A SERMON Preached before the GENTLEMEN Educated IN Merchant-Taylors School, AT
BOW-CHURCH, DECEMBER 10, 1700.

By SAMUEL PRAT, D.D. Chaplain to Her Royal Highness the Princess, and late
Almoner to His Highness the Duke of Gloucester.

LONDON: Printed for S. Smith, and B. Walford, at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCC.

TO My Honored Friends and Schoolfellows, Mr. Edw. Cook, Mr. Tho. Hill, Mr.
Tho. March, Jo. Rogerson Esquire Wm Turner Esquire Mr. Edmund Lilly, Mr. Wm Thompson,
Mr. Jo. Pelham,
STEWARDS; And the other Gentlemen Educated in Merchant-Taylors School.
GENTLEMEN,
THE most irreparable Calamity that ever befell these Kingdoms by the Loss of a
Prince, might have excused one who stood among the nearest to the Blow, from
appearing in Print, even whilst his Wound is still bleeding: But seeing you
were of the Opinion, that this Sermon, by the great Contribution which followed
it, had already been instrumental, in some measure, to its chief design, and
might probably be farther so when Published; your Importunities proved
irresistible, and has given me occasion to Apologize for that part of it,
wherein I may seem to have forgot the Gravity of a Preacher.

The Juvenility of the greatest Number of my Auditors may make some excuse for
my wresting one Line out of Virgil; and to the more serious I hope I am
accountable for nothing else, unless possibly for the two Verses I quoted out
of Homer.

Now by the first of 'em, I had a mind to express that which I thought would
have been flat without some sort of Allusion; and by the latter I followed the
Advice of the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 38. v. 1. So that if they be not
misapplied, I need not value Censure; for Homer may appear in a Sermon, after
that an Apostle has cited Epimenides. At least you may excuse me this once,
when by my asking pardon for School-learning, ye see I am not over-fond of it.

For what Pride, or what Pleasure can we now take in Philology, after HE is
gone, who by the Innocence and Holiness of his Life would have sanctified Human
Learning to the World, to whom all the great Professors in Humanity were rising
up to pay an Early Reverence; and who Himself was the greatest Master of it
that ever yet appeared at his years; Especially if we consider those great
Ornaments of a Sublime Understanding, which are most properly peculiar to the
first Rank of Men. But yet Human Learning is still necessary; and ye do well to
encourage it more than ever, now that it has lately lost the greatest
Encouragement it ever had.

There is no Consolation left, but in that Holy Spirit, which directs such Men
as you to be Publick-minded: May you always receive the Comforts of that
Spirit, to whose Almighty guidance I humbly commend you, desiring to be
esteemed,

Gentlemen, Your most Affectionate, and most Obedient Servant, S. P.

Publick-spiritedness RECOMMENDED.
1 COR. X. 24. Let no man seek his own.


THIS we may very well believe, was one of those Precepts, that made
Christianity fare so badly at its first Promulgation.

This was a main Cause of men's Prejudices against the Gospel; that it not only
pretended to Mysteries far above human Understanding, and to Paradoxes that, at
first hearing, opposed all human Reason, but to such Injunctions likewise as
were intolerable to human Sense. Now this Text is liable to every one of these
three Objections. For,

First, These Words seem to contain a Mystery; to wit, That after all the Terms
of Benefit and Advantage to our selves, proposed throughout the whole Series of
the Gospel; after all the Motives and Inducements derived from the
Consideration of what we may and ought to expect as a Reward for our embracing
and adhering to this Doctrine; here comes a Clause of quite another strain; We
must not, it seems, seek our own: How does this agree with the rest? When we
have been so often as good as told, we must seek our own, the Tranquillity of
our Minds, the Improving our Parts, the Bettering our Reputation, the
Conservation of our Health, the Establishing our Fortunes, the Refining of our
Enjoyments: Are not all these Lessons of Christianity? Nay, that which is above
all the rest, the Salvation of our Souls? Is it not our own Salvation that we
must work out with fear and trembling? And yet after all, it is here said, Let
no man seek his own. This was not easy to be comprehended by the Gentile World:
This was a New Doctrine, and very Sublime; for none of their Philosophers had
ever touched upon it: The Sum of the Ancient Philosophy was, That every man
should seek his own; that is, prefer his own Safety, his own Ease, his own
Quiet, his own Pleasure, before all the World; and whenever they seemed to step
out of this Rule, you do but think they did so, for they always kept within it.
If you find any of 'em Munificent and Liberal, it was for their own Glory, or
upon some meaner Motive; as that great One, for instance, of Popularity. If you
find any of 'em pushing forwards into Danger with more than ordinary Bravery
and Courage; why, it was, like Caesar, to uphold their own sinking Fortunes;
or, like Scipio, to support a tottering State, in which they themselves had so
great a share; or, like Alexander, through the Unsatiableness of their own
Ambition: It was upon some selfish Motive or other; some such Inducements as do
nowadays prompt the outward Professors of Christianity to do sometimes very
great and heroic Actions, upon very Unchristian-like Principles: those I mean,
who seek more their own Glory, than the Glory of God. Nor was it much less a
Mystery to the Jews, that sour selfish Generation of Men, who lived as if it
were a Point of Religion to be ill-natured to the rest of Mankind. But,

Secondly, It might have passed well enough for a Mystery, if it had not looked
too much like a Paradox; Let no man seek his own. Why, is that the way to bring
it about? Is every thing such a shadow as to follow ye, when ye flee from it?
Credit and Esteem may do so sometimes, but not Riches and Preferment, in any
Age but the Golden One. Perhaps that which we are bid here not to seek, will
come without seeking; and if ye seek the Kingdom of Heaven, all these things
will be added unto you; or perhaps they will come the sooner for not being sought
after; then he who is so persuaded may seek 'em most, by not seeming to seek
'em; yet in the mean time he does seek that which he turns his back upon. Still
it looks like a Contradiction, to bid a man not seek after that which you allow
him to desire. This bears hard upon human Reason. But then,

Thirdly, It Is as hard upon all our Senses. To bid a man not seek his own, is a
very hard Saying to flesh and blood: This is to bid farewell to all the Senses
of the Body; beside those Faculties of the Soul, as, Will, Love, Desire, and
the like: This is more severe than to pluck out the Right Eye, and to cut off
the Right Hand and Foot; for there was One Eye left to seek, and a Foot to
pursue after, and a Hand to receive things, at least of a more lawful, and more
excusable Nature: Such as are our own, one would think, after the others had
been punished for seeking things not our own, such as we ought not to meddle
with.

But after all; how hard soever the Precept may be, it is very necessary,
otherwise 'twou'd not be here. The Apostles, who forsook all they had for the
sake of the Gospel, would not, doubtless, clog it with any thing superfluous,
or give it any disrelishing Taste to the World, they could have avoided: As to
the Mysteriousness, it is no more than what our Blessed Savior himself
preached; He that seeks his Life, shall lose it; and he that loses it for
Christ's, and the Gospel's sake, shall find it. And as to its Severity, our
Lord himself put it in practice; he sought not his own; he did not come into
the World for his own sake, but ours; it was for our Benefit, our Comfort, our
Glory. So his Apostles and Confessors, following his Example, sought not their
own; they pretended to nothing, unless you will make any thing of Poverty,
Labor, Disgrace, Imprisonment, Stripes, Tortures, Deaths: If these were their
own, these they sought; but nothing else, beside the Benefit of all Mankind.
Yet seeing this Phrase is so hard to be understood, and so much harder to be
practiced, I shall endeavor Three Things:

First, To explain a little the Sense of it; show you what is meant by not
seeking our own.

Secondly, I shall discourse of the Reasonableness of the Precept; reconcile it
with your Interest, and recommend it to your Consideration. And,

Thirdly, I shall, by way of Application, direct you to the Practice of it.

First then, for a clearer Understanding of these Words, it is to be noted, that
this former part of the Verse is more strictly translated from the Original
than the latter: Let no man seek his own, is verbatim; but every man another's
Wealth, is not so; the Greek here has no Substantive, (...); i.e. but every man
another's, or the things of another; Let no man seek his own Benefit or
Advantage, but the Benefit and Happiness of others.

Let no man seek his own; that is, study and contrive his own singular private
Interest, but every one the Interest of others; Let no man be selfish in his
Designs, be of a narrow private Spirit, but let him have an open Heart and a
public Mind.

Let no man seek his own so as to injure others, or neglect others; but let him
also seek another's Wealth; and not only his Wealth, but his Safety, his Peace,
his Content, his Honor, his Everlasting Good. Let no man lay it as the only
Principle, no, nor the first Principle of his Thoughts, Words, and Actions; How
shall I raise my Fortunes, or garnish my Credit, or increase my Store, or
improve my own Affairs? But, How shall I do good to others? How shall I make
other People happy? How shall I benefit my Neighbor? How shall I secure his
Fortunes, or Reputation, or Peace? How shall I be beneficial to Mankind in the
general, or to such and such of my Neighbors in particular?

Perhaps if the Apostle had been to speak to the Men of this Age, he would have
said, Let no man do that, which almost every man does now, seek his own; pursue
it as the great Business of every one's life. It seems from the present State
of Affairs among Men, that the first Question every one asks himself upon any
Emergency, is, How may this conduce to my own Interest? For who is it upon
hearing any Public Occurrence, that says first within himself, How will this
conduce to the Glory of God and the Benefit of mankind? Will this propagate the
true Religion, and discountenance every false one? Will this set free the
Captive, or will it relieve the Oppressed? Will it be a means of instructing
the Ignorant, or of enriching the Poor?

These, it is to be feared, are not the first Thoughts. But, Will it alleviate
Taxes, or advance our Friends? Will it raise our Actions, and put a better
Price upon what we have to sell, or further any of our designs? If these are
not the chief Reasons why People are so inquisitive in public Affairs; Let us
enquire into Things of a more private Nature, and we shall be sure to find the
Text come home to many of us.

Let no man seek his own, is a Precept directed to all those who seem to ask
leave of themselves before they do good to any body else: Shall I give such an
one good advice? But will it be safe for me so to do? May not he mistake my
meaning, and so become my Enemy? Shall I bestow such a Bounty? But will it hold
out with my Income? May it not look like Profuseness? or may I not choose a time
in which I shall be more thanked for it? Shall I be such an one's Friend and
Advocate? but shall not I spend my Interest, or my Time; or my Money? These things
are my own, and shall I bestow 'em upon another?

Let no man seek his own, says the Text; no, nor keep his own upon such an
occasion; i.e. not seek to keep it; it is a full and positive Answer to all such
Objections: Let no man ask what he himself shall be the better, or how much a
againer by this or that? Let no man seek his own when he has an opportunity of
doing good: Let no man ask that Pharisaical Question, Is it for a Relation, or
a Friend, or a Customer, or Somebody that will do me good again? Let no man do
any thing for another, but for another's sake.

Nor likewise for himself: Let no man seek his own in the Things that relate
chiefly to himself.

If a man seeks Wealth, let him not seek it as his own; not that he may be
richer than he is, but that he may have wherewithal to relieve those that are
poorer: Let a man seek Honor by lawful means as he should Riches, but then not
as his own; if it be by any part of Learning, let it be to the Honor of his
School, or College, or University; If it be by Justice, Temperance, and
Generosity, let it be for the Honor of his Parents; or Guardians, or Family;
if it be by Courage and Manliness, let it be to the Honor of his King and his
Country: but above all, and that which is the Crown of all, let every thing
that every man does be to the Honor of God, of the Christian, and of the
Reformed Religion. This may suffice to show the meaning of the Words; which was
my first Undertaking. I proceed,

Secondly, To the Reasonableness of the Precept, the Justice, the Goodness, the
Agreeableness of it to our Interest.

First then let us consider, that no good man is a single, separate, and entire
Being of himself; he is but a part of a Whole, or a member of a Body; single
him out, and separate him from the rest, and he is like a Limb cut off from the
Body, dead and useless: So that for a man to call any thing his own, is as
great an Impropriety of Speech, as for a Member of a Society to say of the
Lands belonging to the whole Community, These are my Lands; or for a Scholar to
say, This is my School; or for a Soldier to say, This is my Army; no body in
this World has or ought to have any thing their own, separate from the use and
benefit of the rest of Mankind; therefore for a man in that sense to seek his
own, is to seek his own destruction; he cannot subsist alone upon his own
bottom; if such a one could live as private as his own spirit, he would be the
miserablest thing in the World; he could have no Honor, for no body could pay
it him; he could have no Riches, for there could be no value upon what he has;
he could have no Safety, for no one man is able to protect himself from even
Wild Creatures. That which gives Life and Heat to any Member, is the
Circulation of Spirits that is in Common to the whole Body: Therefore when ye
are bid not to seek your own, ye are bid to live and be happy in the common
Benefits of mankind; ye are bid to have an Interest and a share in that which
others have; it is for your own Preservation and Happiness that ye are bid not
to seek your own.

Secondly, Let us consider, that we our selves are not our own, we have a
Master, a Lord, a Proprietor, which is God: We neither made our selves, nor are
we any thing but what he pleases to make us; we cannot dispose of our selves,
nor do we know how he will dispose of us; we our selves, as well as all that we
have, is of him, and belongs to him; and therefore it is very improper to call
our selves or any thing we have, our own; and to seek any thing as our own, is
to withdraw our selves from him in whom we live, and move, and have our being:
but not to seek our own, that is, not to place our Hopes and Desires on any
thing but God, is to entitle our selves to his Care and Protection.

And these words do not restrain us from seeking that which Impropriety of
Speech many times calls our own; as Wealth, or Honor, or Power, and the like;
these and many other Benefits of Human Life may be sought after by Just and
Righteous means; but we must seek none of all this for our own sakes, but for
the Glory and Honor of God; and when we have attained any thing, we must not
look upon it as our own, but our selves as Stewards of it before God; it
belongs all to him, and we must put it to no other uses but what he ordains; it
must be sought after only for his Sake, and disposed of only by his Will: And
if so, then,

Thirdly, Upon these very words of my Text we may build safely and innocently
the greatest Self-interest; for if we dedicate all our Desires and Acquisitions
to God, then, and not till then, every thing we possess is properly our own,
every thing we enjoy is the free Gift and Blessing of God; then our Riches will
be our own, they will not so easily make to themselves wings and fly away; or
if they do, they will not leave us poor, having a Treasure still in Heaven; our
Dignities will then be our own, they will be intrinsic Honors, and not shine as
others do, with a borrowed and precarious Luster: We may own likewise the
Pleasures and Enjoyments of this life; we need not be ashamed of them as of
stolen Pleasures; it will then be a true Enjoying of our own: So that after
all, the not seeking our own, is the readiest and the only way to find it, that
principally which will be our own to all Eternity; I mean the solid Enjoyment
of Everlasting Life; when after the denying one's self, we shall each of us be
owned by Christ; and the losing of all the World will be the gaining of a man's
own Soul; when the forsaking all that he has, is the laying hold of all that
can be desired, the Infinite and Eternal Riches of God's Kingdom. All these
things considered, there is no Precept in the Gospel that conduces more to our
real benefit and advantage than this does.

Nay, to those who are not sufficiently persuaded of these great and precious
Promises; those that look no farther than the present life, may perceive a
Reasonableness in this Precept suitable to their Temporal Felicity; they may
see that nothing is more disadvantageous to a man than the proposing to himself
only private Interest; for such an Inclination never fails of being discovered;
and then he who is so selfishly disposed, does intimate to other people that
they should be so too, and he may reasonably expect that others will act the
same part which he encourages by his Example; whereas a beneficent and public
Spirit, for the most part, meets with suitable Returns. There is a Magnetic
Force in Generosity and Goodnature, that attracts others, and assimilates to
it self: And, on the other side, the narrow and selfish Disposition is so far
from gaining upon others, that it is never pleased with those of its own
Temper. It Is Humanity and Kindness; it is Goodnature and Beneficence; it is
Largeness of Mind, and Openness of Heart; it is contributing to the Welfare of
others that conduces to our own Happiness; and it is a very easy Observation
which any one may make in the Course of this World, that the pursuing of a
selfish and private Design is one of the weakest and most unsuccessful of Human
Policies. I might enlarge much more upon the Reasonableness of the Precept, but
I must hasten to the Third and Lost Thing I proposed to you.

The directing you, by way of Application, to the Practice of it.

Our Blessed Lord, it is said, came unto his own, Jo. 1.11, 12.
and his own received him not, i. e. the Generality of 'em; but to as many as
received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God. Where they are
called his own; whose Benefit and Happiness he designed; he pretended to
nothing but what might be the better for him; so following his Holy Example, we
may make many things our own, which otherwise we should have no Relation to; we
may make to our selves friends, for instance, of the Mammon of Unrighteousness;
the Mammon it self will fail them that seek it, but the Friends we make with it
will never fail us, they will hand us into Everlasting Habitations: The Poor we
have always with us, and we may make them our own, our Relations, our Clients,
our Dependants here; and they, under Christ, will be our Advocates hereafter:
If we seek out a distressed Family to Relieve it; if we seek out a disconsolate
Family to Comfort it, that will be our own Family, it will always own us before
God, and we our selves shall enjoy as it were the Affluence, the Refreshments,
the Joys of that Family: If we deal out our bread to the hungry, and satisfy
the thirsty soul; if we set free the Prisoner, and take the burden from off the
shoulder of the Oppressed; if we instruct the ignorant, and give advice to him
that is destitute of Understanding; if we are a Father to the Fatherless, and a
Husband to the Widow, in all these we have an Interest; and if they should
prove so ungrateful as not to acknowledge it, yet he who has commanded us not
to seek our own, but to seek the good of others, he will acknowledge it, and he
will reward it. But that Reward, though it be sure and certain, must not be the
only Motive upon which we do all this; that will be seeking our own, if what we
do for others be only upon the hopes that God will retaliate and pay it back to
us; and much less may we propose to our selves any Secular and Temporal
Advantage from the Benefits we confer upon our Fellow-Brethren; we must not
advance the Fortunes of our Relations, because it is for our Credit and
Reputation, that they make a better Figure in the World, but because we are
more sensible of the Wants and Necessities of those that are near us, than of
those that are afar off; we must not do good to our Tenants, or our Chapmen, or
our Servants, because they may be the better able to pay us, or to deal with
us, or to serve us, but because they have a dependence upon us, and because
they have a greater Right to our Assistance than others of equal Necessity. We
must not Relieve any one, because he is a more conspicuous Object of Charity,
but because he is a Greater; We must do good to him that will be most sensible
of the Benefit, rather than to him that will most thankfully acknowledge it.

So likewise in Duties to our selves, we must not seek our own upon selfish
Motives; we must not be Temperate in Meat and Drink for the sake only of our
Ease and Health, but chiefly in Obedience to God, and for a good Example to
others; we must not be sober in our Conversation, and discreet in our Actions,
only because we are in such an Employment, Place or Office; but rather, because
we profess the Gospel of Christ, and are called by his Name: We must not be
industrious in our Acquisitions, and frugal in our Expenses, that we may fill
our Bags, and enlarge our Lands, but because we have a Family to provide for,
or some great Acts of Charity and Munificence to perform: We must not do great
and glorious Actions for the Reputation that we may gain by 'em, but for the
Glory of God, and the Honor of our Country; all our Designs must be of a
large and regular Circumference, our Hopes and Desires must be elevated above
our selves; we must never stoop so low as to any selfish Consideration.

But every one must consider himself as no more than one among the rest of
Mankind; a Servant of Christ's, and a Member of his Body; and therefore he must
seek that only as is most pleasing to his Lord, and most beneficial to the
Advantage of the whole; he must seek to walk worthy of his Lord unto all
pleasing, and be fruitful in every good work; as a Tree that brings not forth
for itself, but for others; he must seek all Occasions and Opportunities of
doing good to every one; he must make every body's Case his own, and be a
Partaker and Fellowfeeler in every one's Circumstances; he must rejoice with
them that rejoice, and mourn with them that mourn; however he be Transported
with his own Affairs, to do good, and to communicate, he must not forget; he
must weigh his Virtue, and measure his Grace, and number his Days by the Good
that he does to Mankind; he must look upon himself as poor, and miserable, and
destitute, when he has not an Opportunity of Feeding the Hungry, and Clothing
the Naked, and Visiting the Sick, and Comforting the Afflicted; he must seek
Occasions and Opportunities of doing all this, and much more; and he must
rejoice when he has found out a way of making others easy and happy: For as
the Enemy of God and Man goes about seeking whom he may devour; so he who will
be a Friend to God and Man, must go about seeking whom he may support; to which
of all those for whom Christ died he may be any ways serviceable.

And now, had I time, I might apply my self more particularly to you who are
here present as a Society. The Self-gratification with which we this Day meet
one another, is one of the most Innocent at least, if not likewise most
Commendable Enjoyments that Human Nature is capable of.

We renew hereby our Pure, Dis-interested, and Virgin Friendships; we bring
back to our Remembrance the pleasing Images of the most lively Scenes, the
sweet Ideas, of the Springtime of our Age; We look back upon the Original
Figures that we made in the School; we reflect upon the Wit, the Docility, the
Sagacity, the Good Humor of our tender Years; we see as it were, after a
Resuscitation, the known Air and Features of each one whom we then loved and
esteemed.

Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic or a ferebat. Virg. (...).


And here we compare our selves by our selves; and what we are now, we judge of
one another by what we have been: We see how the Gifts of Nature have been
improved, and how at the same time the Gifts of Fortune, or (that with St.
Austin I may retract the Word) the other Gifts of Providence have not altered
us; but that the same Love, Friendship and Familiarity continues as at this day.

And we come hither to taste and see how good and gracious God has been to us in
the prolonging of our Lives, and blessing our Endeavors, and putting us into a
Capacity of being beneficial to others; by which means others may behold, and
see, and feel too, how pleasant and joyful a thing it is Brethren to dwell
together in Unity.

For though Self-satisfaction may be allowed us in all these things, yet we
come not hither, I hope, to seek that only. The main design of this Meeting is
to seek the Good of others, to seek it by contributing thereto.

I appeal to the inmost Thoughts of every one of our hearts, whether we don't
mean this day to vie in some measure with all the Societies in England of this
kind.

And wherein shall we vie? in the Honor and Antiquity of our School? that
indeed is very great; but in this we must give way to one or more.

Is it in the Illustrious Conduct under which it now at this time flourishes?
Is it in the numerousness of Scholars within doors? that was I well remember
very great, (...), Od. x.
and is so still; but we will not outvie in that.

Is it in the Eminency of Professors without? If we have many Chrysostoms and
Papinians, and at the head of all our Galens and Paracelsi one Hippocrates,
(...), Il. l
who without Invidiousness can deny the like to some other Schools?

But we can, and I hope shall, this Day outvie all the rest in Benefactions: We
here present are living Instances (God be praised) and I hope grateful
Remembrancers of our Forefathers Benefaction; Let none of us be ashamed of it:
They whose Parents paid for them never so Liberally, and who received not
afterward the Benefactions of the College, have cause to bless God for the
Foundation of a Free School; All the Money in the World will not purchase any sort
of Education which has all the Advantages to be there met with; such useful
Acquaintance and Friendships; such Noble Emulation; such Public
Encouragements; such absolute, and yet easy Subjections; such proper, approved,
and uninterrupted Discipline are there seen, as no Private Education, though
never so expensive and prudent can afford.

And now is there no Debt remaining upon us for all this? Though we were
Free-Scholars, yet, as I take it, we are no Freemen till we have discharged
ourselves to the Public for what we own the Public. What use do we now make
of our former Discipline? The Holy Spirit of Discipline the Wiseman calls it,
Wisd. 1, 5.
if we Sacrilegiously smother those great Talents we received at School as the
Seeds of all our Intellectual Acquisitions, and the Foundation upon which most
of us build our outward Hopes.

What Blessing can we expect upon our Endeavors, unless God assists us? and
how can we expect God's Assistance, unless we assist those that stand in need
of us?

The Sum of Discipline, (...). Plato de Leg.
says Plato, is to teach Children the Love of that Virtue, which, being well
understood, they are to make use of in Manhood. Solomon with more Perspicuity
says, Train up a Child in the way he should go, Prove. 22.6.
and when he is Old he will not depart from it.

We who have had a Liberal Education, have this Day an Opportunity of showing
whether we imbibed that Discipline; that Wisdom which among many other noble
Epithets, in the 7th Chapter of Wisdom is said to love the thing that is good,
to be ready to do good, kind to man. Such a sort of Wisdom is a Treasure unto
men that never fails, Ver. 14.
which they that use become the Friends of God, being commended for the Gifts
that come from Learning.

They who have learned all the Liberal Sciences, will, I hope, show the Quality
of their Education in being Liberally-minded; and they who have learned the
first of 'em only, have been taught their own Interest, taught sure to read
that of Solomon, Pro. 11.24.
The Liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that waters, shall be watered
also himself: but I must keep by my Text; Let no man seek his own. I would have
no selfish Consideration at this time to work upon you: but consider with
yourselves, that you have now an Opportunity of contributing to those that are
in Need, for such a sort of Education as you yourselves were blessed with.

You that are Great Men in Learning, may contribute to make others as Great as
your selves; such as have a Genius and Capacity, which may otherwise perhaps
lie in perpetual Obscurity. And ye who have other Talents, and have met with
Avocations from Learning, may pay that Debt you owe your Country in the want of
it, by being nobly Instrumental in the building up such Scholars, as may be
Living and Lasting Monuments of your Munificence; and may be able themselves,
some of 'em, to do that for the next Age, for which our Example will lay upon
'em the most powerful Obligation.

This minute is the time for you to resolve within your selves what to do, and
this Morning-Offering in your Pious Resolutions; these first Fruits of your
cheerful Intentions will consecrate the Day, and all the next Year, I hope, to
temperate Cheerfulness. Above all things, this will show whose Disciples ye
have been, and whose ye are: By this shall all men, says our Blessed Savior,
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. I Will conclude
all therefore with those Words of St. Paul, in the beginning of his 2d Chapter
to the Philippians; If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, be
ye like-minded, having the same love. Look not every man on his own things, but
every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in you which was also
in Christ Jesus; To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor,
Praise, and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

EINIS.

