A TRUE NARRATIVE AND DISCOVERY Of several very REMARKABLE PASSAGES Relating to
the Horrid Popish Plot As they fell within the Knowledge of Mr. MILES PRANCE of
Covent Garden, Goldsmith.

VIZ.

I. His Depositions concerning the Plot in General, and a Particular Design
against the Life of His SACRED MAJESTY. II. The whole Proceedings touching the
Murder of Sir EDMVNDBVRY GODFREY, and the particular Circumstances thereof.
III. A Conspiracy to murder the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury. IV.
The Traitorous Intrigues and Immoralities of diverse Popish Priests.
Published by Authority.

DUBLIN, Reprinted M.C.LXXIX.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO ALL PROTESTANTS
I Looked upon the following Narrative as justly due to the World, whether I
respected my Self or You: for as I am bound to disburden my own Conscience by a
full and Impartial Discovery of what I know, relating to this horrid,
detestable Popish Plot, and to endeavor to render my Acknowledgments as
public as the Evils wherein I ^^ve been involved; So I am under the
Obligations of Charity to Contribute All I can to your Iuformation and
Satisfaction, That both the present^ge, and Posterity may take right Measures
of Popery, as a thing so destructive to Government and Humane Society in
general, and so directly oppo^e to all the Ennobling, Holy, Humble, Meek and
Peaceable Designs of True ^^ristianity, That the Better Roman Catholic any
person is, the worse man becomes, and look how much more devout, so much the
more dangerous.

For as when the Philistines had once deprived Sampson of his sight, they ^^^de
him grind in their Mill at their pleasure; so when people shut their ^^^es,
and give up themselves to be led blindfold by the Nose with a strong ^^^uceit,
That they are Embarked in a Church that cannot Err, (which is the (...)
Cornerstone of the Romish Building, and the first Principle they in^^^e;
although in truth, by that Church is meant nothing more than the ^^surping,
Domineering Pope, and his Covetous, Juggling, Self-designing ^^^y;) After, I
say, they are brought into this slavish hoodwinkt condition, (...) wonder, if
they be led forwards by the same men, to the most wick^^^ Practices, as well as
false Opinions. For as the Understanding is directed, the man, if he have any
thing of a zealous temper, or be firm to the Religion he professes, will
suitably Act, and comsequently may with ease be sedu^^d to think he does God
the best service, when indeed he most violates all ^^aws of God, Nature and Man.

This I may the more firmly avouch, because I must acknowledge my selt to have
been an unhappy Example of it, and therefore although these al^ minable
Principles and Practices of the Roman Church are already excellen^ laid open by
a multitude of Learned men, (for She has bestowed too man sad instances thereof
on the World, and this Nation in particular,) Yet wha^ have to say, being
matter of Fact, so lately done, and wherein I my self ^^ so nearly concerned,
it may (though never so meanly delivered,) possibly w^ some be of use, more
effectually to prevail with them.

The matters herein discovered are of a various, but all of them of a m^^ black
and villainous nature; some relate to the Plot in general, where you may
perceive how far the design was spread, and how no small numb^^ (to my
knowledge) were privy thereunto, and certainly the poison m^^^ be most virulent
at the Root when so many little Twiggs were therewith in^^^cted. You will find
here (besides what has been already discovered a^^^ proved by others) notice
of a cursed hand that durst resolve to attempt t^^^ Sacred Life of our most
Gracious Sovereign; a Prince, who besides the a^^^ful stamp of Heaven in his
Character and Dignity, and the dread Life-gua^^^ of Sacred Precepts, Not to
touch the Lords Anointed, carries in His Pers^^^ such charms of Sweetness,
Goodness, Clemency and Indulgence, as mig^^ secure him from Violence even
amongst Heathens and Savages; but no Qu^^lity or Innocence is Armor of proof
against a Popish Knife; no Virtue su^ficient to guard any from the
Assassinations of a throow-pac'd Jesuited R^^man-Catholick.

And certainly the Murder of that Loyal Protestant-Magistrate, Sir
E^^mund-bury Godfrey, was a thing so hellish in it self, and yet through Go^^
Overruling Providence, so very considerable in its influences to this poo^
Nations preservation, That I am confident it will be no mean satisfaction t^^
all good Protestants to be ascertained of all (even the smallest) Circumstances
relating thereunto; which as far as came within my knowledge, I have here
freely and faithfully set forth, without adding a word beyond the Truth out of
prejudice, or any sinister end; or concealing any thing for my ow^ Reputation;
For though to commit Sin be the greatest of shame, yet ingeniously and
penitently to confess it, to the Glory of God, and warning of ou^ Neighbor, is
no disgrace, but the greatest Honor, and the best service a se^duced Criminal
can be capable of, or able to perform.

Nor was their other Conspiracy against the Life of that Noble Lord, the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury herein likewife set forth, less wicked and
barbarous on their part in the design, though frustrated by the Providence of
God, who I trust will continually bring to naught all the mischie^vous Counsels
of these Romish Achitophels, and cast the cruel Devices of such Assassinates on
their own heads.

As for that part which concerns the Ill Lives of several of their Priests,
^^^e same is not inserted out of any Spleen or Ill will to their Persons, (for
to ^^veral of them in the Course of my Trade I have been beholden, as far as
^^ey were my Customers) but to give our English World a Taste of the pra^^^ces
of the Leading men of that Apostate Church, and to persuade, if pos^^^le,
Lay-Romanists, to consider what kind of Persons they are, on whose ^^eves they
so blindly pin their Faith, and to whose Conduct they Trust in ^atter of such
unspeakable Importance, as the Salvation or Eternal destru^^^on of their Souls:
And this I the rather recommend, and hope may be ^^^valent with others, because
it had some weight with my self; for next to ^^^ections on the odious Plot they
were carrying on, and the vile murder ^^^y had engaged me in, The certain
knowledge of the close hypocrisy or ^^^fs Profaneness and lewd Lives of their
Ghostly Fathers (at least most of ^^^se I had the unhappiness to be intimately
acquainted with, which were (...) a few, though I accuse not All in that
particular) had a strong Influence awaken my thoughts to quit their Communion;
As conceiving that must ^^a bad Cause which used such wicked means to support
it, and that it was way likely That should be the true Religion, which had no
better Influ^^^e on the Conversations of those who were its Priests and chief
Promoters. The far greatest part of this whole Narrative has already been
attested up^^^ Oath: As for the rest that is therein asserted, as on my own
knowledge, I ^^ll at any time be ready to justify and prove the same: And what
I received information from others, is every where so expressed, with the
Reasons (...) circumstances inducing the credit I gave thereunto. For as I was
educa^^^^ amongst them from my Childhood, so I had a great acquaintance and
^^^iliarity with many of the Fathers and most zealous persons of that party
^^^ut the Town, having been several years her Majesty's Goldsmith, and the
^^^^f of my Trade depending on Priests and others of the Romans Cath. persuasion.
The reason why I presume to dedicate this mean Narrative to so great a ^^^y as
all you worthy Protestants in general, seems to me just, because sin^^^ and
excusable, because in some sort necessary; I make you as it were All ^^^ies to
these Presents, not only that there may be so many living witnesses ^^^nst me,
if ever either there should be any wilful untruth found therein, or (...) I
should fall back, (which God forbid) from that pure Religion which you ^^ess,
and I most cordially though lately have embraced; but also more espe^^y thereby
to engage your united Prayers to God, as well for my perseve^^^ and growth in
Christian knowledge, as for my preservation against the ^^^ce of those restless
enemies, from whom I am to expect the worst that ^^^^revenge can suggest, or
cruel malice execute; partly for my relinquishment of them, but much more for
disclosing some of their Proceed (...) wherein already they have not been
wanting, for besides lies and slander (...) dustriously spread, to vilify and
make me odious, and the depriving me (as (...) as in them lies) of the means of
a Livelihood, I was of late credibly infor^^^ of a resolved design against my
life, and that three persons had dogged (...) for some time for that purpose:
But the Lord is my God, of whom then shall (...) afraid? To his infinite
protection I resign my self, and next under ^^^m to (...) of his Vicegerent,
from whose most Gracious Majesty, as like who from the ^^^^ble Lords of his
most Honorable Council, as well as the Right Honorable the House of Peers, I
have upon all occasions found all just encouragement and very great indulgence,
which with a thankful heart I desire to com^^^ morate, and publish for the
encouragement of others.

The Romanists (especially the Jesuits and Priests, who sway the res^^^ their
pleasure) are a most vigilant and unwearied sort of people to propag^^^ their
false Doctrines, and spread their tyranny; I speak it experimenta^^^ who have
had the advantage in a great measure to know them; no defeat (...) daunt them,
nor scarce any disappointments discourage them: no sooner is (...) Plot
discovered, but they presently lay another. For it is a Rule that th^^ Priests
enjoin their people to believe, I may I am confident say of most, (...) firmly
as their Creed, that their Religion shall infallibly one day or other (...)
restored and established again in England; and being thus verily perswad^^ they
bear up under all Miscarriages, and still vigorously pursue the main^^ sign,
though in new methods, and with different Instruments. And therefore will
certainly concern Protestants to be as careful and active to prevent th^^
designs, and preserve their own Religion and Lives, as the other are to (...)
stroy both: you have now an opportunity put into your hands to crush (...)
Cockatrices egg: O may you all in your several places and stations impro^^ it
with wisdom, and with courage, and with integrity: For if the neck of th^^
Design be not now thoroughly broken, if Popery be not now ham-strung (...)
England; if the Serpents head be not bruiz'd, and the Vitals destroyed, (...)
may justly be feared, that it will revive again, and then the Plot will be o^^
laid to sleep, and not prevented, and the latter end prove worse than the
beginning.

But who am I, to advise so great and so wise a Body? May the God of Wisdom
advise you and direct you, and protect you in his Truth and in his fe^^ And so
begging all your Prayers on my behalf, I shall conclude, and subscr^^^ my self.

A Hearty Well-wisher to the Protestant Chur^^ and the welfare of the King and
People, MILES PRANCE
Covent Garden, May 26 1679.
A NARRATIVE OF The whole PROCEEDINGS touching the MURDER OF Sir EDMONDBURY
GODFREY; AND Several other Passages relating to the Horrid Popish Plot, Which
came within the Knowledge of MILES PRAUNCE Of St. Giles's in the Fields, in the
County of Middlesex, GOLDSMITH.
MIles Praunce was from his Infancy bred up in that Persuasion, which calls it
self the Roman Catholic Religion, having several very near Relations engaged
therein; and being under the strong Prejudices of Education, and continual
Incitements of the Priests, was very zealous for advancing that Church; being
made believe, That in order to that end, no means ought to be avoided or
esteemed unlawful.

He had, by long Conversation, contracted as large and intimate an Acquaintance
both with the Priests and Jesuits residing in England, (especially about
London) as also with Persons of Quality of the Romish Profession, as any man of
his Circumstance was capable of.

He does well know, that for diverse years last past, it has been a general
Opinion and Expectation amongst Papists, That their Religion should in some
short time b^^^ publicly re-established in England. And this vain Conceit
their Priests did alway^ very industeiously nourish in them, but with words
more open and peremptory here (...) late, than before: so that he, as well as
others, had for several years, a general Intimation, That some great thing was
shortly to be done for the Roman Catholic Cau^^^ and that the Redemption (as
they were wont to call it) was drawing nigh. But t^^ first direct and
particular Information he received of the Plot, or any formed Desig^^^^ and
Resolution to take Arms, wa^ near two years ago, on the occasion, and in the
m^^ner following, viz.

One Mr. Towneley of Townley in Lancashire, a Gentleman of a very considerable
(...) state, coming up to London with his two Sons, in order to carry them over
(...) Doway, there to be brought up: For that is the general practice of the
Popish Ge^^try, to send over their Children thither, being made believe, that
we have no go^^ method of Learning in our English Schools or Universities; but
that the only gra^^ Masters of Education in the World are the Jesuits. By
which means, not only o^^ Nation is scandalized, and the wealth thereof
privately drained away, but also it com^^ to pass, that the Children of so many
Noble and Considerable Families, being bred (...) from their tender years
wholly under their Tuition, they have the better opporuniti^^ to instill
Traitorous and Disloyal Principles into their minds, plant in them an endless
b^^ tred against the Protestant Religion, and in general, gain such an
Ascendant over the^^ that as they were their Masters and Tutors in their Youth,
so they behave themselve as their Governors all their lives afterward: the
Estates of many Popish Gentry b^ing as absolutely at the Priests dispose, as at
their own: These things he knows to (...) true, and of very pernicious
Consequence; and therefore hopes it is no unseasonab^^ digression to mention
them.

This Mr. Townley coming to Town on this occasion, did likewise bring up with
hi^^ his two Brothers to keep him Company, and took Lodgings at one Airies
house (...) Drury Lane, where John Fenwick a notorious Jesuit and Arch-traitor,
now in custod^^ then had his residence: where, after they had continued some
short time, the said M^^ Townley and one of his Brothers, went over to Doway
with the two Lads, and left t^^ other here; who, in the absence of his Brothers
declared very often to Mr. Praun^^ Wives Brother, and to one Adamson a
Watch-maker, That when his Brothers can^^ back from Flanders, they expected to
receive Commissions from the Lord Bellasis a^^ other Catholic Lords concerned,
for the raising of men to carry on the Catholi^^ Cause. And this his Brother
and the said Adamson several times told again to M^^ Praun^e at Pedley's house
in Vere-street, where was kept a frequent Club consisting (...) none but
Papists.

That during the time that the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Shafisbury, the
Lo^^ Wharten, and Lord Salisbury, were confined in the Tower, one Mr. Keighly,
a person (repated) of good Estate, was pleased in discourse to express his joy
and satis^^ction for such their Confinement: For, said he, Now is the time for
the Promoting of O^^ tholick Religion (meaning Popery); and if his Royal
Highness be but sure, and will follo^^ the business closely ^^ which he said
Catholics had good grounds to hope he would (...) and we can but strike whilst
the ^on is hot, and not l^se opportunities, I do not doubt b^^ our Religion may
sheedily be settled in England: for no juncture of time can appear more f^^ or
favorable for the Busines^ than the present.

That about a year ago, being in Company with one Singleton a popish Priest, at
t^^ house of one Hall a Cook in Joy lane, London, the said Priest, in the
presence of M^^ Praunce and the said Hall, did say these words following: That
he hoped be shou^^ be settled in a Parish Church before a Twelvemonth came
about; for he did not fear b^^ that the Cath^lick Religion would reign in
England: and to advance it, be would not m^^ any more matter to S^ab Forty
Parliament Men, then to eat his Dinner: he being then (...) ^ing at Dinner with
his Knife in his hand. Concerning this zealous Gentleman's pran^^^ we shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter.

That one Mr. Ridiey a Chirargion, living at the House that was late the Lord
of Ba^^^nor's in Wild-treet, walking in Wild-Garden, declared, The he expected
to be a Chir^^^^on to the Catholic Army in England; and that he hoped the Lord
Bellasis, whom ^^^^ knew wa^ one chief person to command it, would much ^and
his friend in that concern. ^^d since the discovery of the Plot, upon Mr.
Praunce's information, there was a Po^^^ Priest, one Fincham by name, being a
Priest to the Lady Saveil, taken in the said (...). Ridleys House, where he was
sheltered; but since, by the mediation of good ^^ends; he is, as it is said,
sent beyond the Seas.

That in the month of August, 1678. Mr. Praunce having occasion to write to a
friend (...) the Country, but not knowing certainly how to send, went to one
Mr. Paston, ^^om he had some reasons to believe could inform him therein; he
lodged then at ^^e Bamber's a Tailor in Duke-street, and had great resort of
Jesuits and Priests to his ^^amber: after he had satisfied him in the
particular matter he came to him about, ^^ty immediately fell into discourse of
public Affairs, and the interest of Catholic ^^igion; and he bid Mr. Praunce
not to fear any thing, for all would suddenly be well: (...) in the first
place, he said, It was true the King was a great Heretic, but the Lord
^^^asis, the Lord Arundel, the Lord Powis, and Lord Peter's, (these four
Noblemen^ (...) well remembers he named) would have a gallant Army for the
deposing, or disposing ^^e cannot now certainly say which of these words he
used, but is sure it was one of ^^em) of the King, and utter subversion of all
the Protestants; and then the Catholic Religion should established and flourish
in this Nation. And he then farther said, that the Lords had already ^^en out
Commissions to diverse Gentlemen in the Country for raising their Troops; and he
^^med several of them; amongst whom he well remembers one was Mr. Talbot of
^^ngsord; another, Sir Henry Bedingfield of Oxborough-hall in Norfolk, and a
third Mr. Sto^^, who lives within four or five miles of Kingston upon Thames:
others he mentioned, ^^ose names he does not so well retain.

7. That about eight or ten days before Michaelmas, 1678. he had a more clear
discovery of the design in hand, That they intended to leavy War, to subvert
the Government, etc. for being at the Chamber of Father Ireland the Jesuit,
siuce executed for ^^eason, he lodging then in Russel street, where were
likewise present John Fenwick and ^^n Grove; the said Ireland did declare, that
there would VERY SHORTLY be Fifty ^^usand men in Arms. At which Mr. Praunee, as
surprised, demanded of him where ^^ey would have them, and what they were to
do? to which he answered, We must ^^ve them speedily to settle our Religion
here, or else all will be ruined. Then Mr. Praunce ^^uired who should command
them? to which Fenwick undertook to make answer, ^^d said, That they should be
commanded by the Lord Avundel, Lord Bellasis, Lord Powis, ^^d others.
Whereupon, Mr. Praunce apprehending the fatal mischiefs and distracti^^s of a
Civil War, said to them, What then shall we poor Tradesmen do? the same ^^wick
replied, You for your part of all men need not fear a Trade, for you (being a
^^^ldsmith) will have enough in your way by Church-work And several such
discourses ^^en passed between them, whereby he plainly understood, that there
was a grand Plot, ^^d near to be put in execution, and that they were very
confident of the success.

8. That soon after this, the said Grove came to Mr. Prannce's shop to buy two
S^l^^r spoons for a Christning where he was to be Godfather; and taking
occasion to speak (...) their last recited discourse at Father Ireland's, Mr.
Praunce asked him what Office he the ^^d Grove was to have in the Catholic
Army: but he declined to answer directly, and at last said, He did not know AS
YET. Then being asked again, who were to govern t^^ intended Army, he named the
Lord Bellasis, the Lord Arundel, the Lord Powis, and (...) Lord Peter's; and
said, that they had already Commissions for that purpose.

9. The Priests themselves were not only the grand Contrivers of this desperate
Desig^^ with Counsel and Encouragement, but likewise intended to be actually
concerned in (...) Butcheries, as well as the Laiety: for very near the same
time, Mr. le Fevre a Priest, whe^^ Mr. Praunce was well acquainted with, as
having sold him several Chalices, Crewe^^ Basins, O^^-boxes for Extreme
Unction, and suchlike Utensils, came to his Shop^^ buy a second hand
Silver-bilt for a Sword; whereupon, he asked him what he ment^^ do therewith,
for he had a good Sword already? the said le Fevre answered, there w^^ times
coming on, wherein Catholics would have good occasion for Weapons, a^^
therefore he would be sure to be provided, by getting another special Sword,
and wou^^^ have such an Hilt to it.

10. Happening one day to see Mr. Moore, that belongs to the Duke of Norfolk,
ridi^^ in the streets upon a very brave Horse meeting him soon after in the
Court at Somers^^ House, Mr. Praunce was saying what a gallant Beast he saw him
mounted upon late^^ whereupon, the said Mr. Moor wished that he had ten
Thousand of them; but said, th^^ he hoped in a very short time we should have
Ten thousand as good Horses, and mounted with brave men, well Armed and
Accoutred, for the advancing of the Catholi^^ cause: which he spoke openly, and
in a braving manner, as if he were not afraid to ow^^ the thing, nor cared who
heard him.

11. In like manner, and much about the same time, he heard Mr. Messinger,
Gentlema^^ of the Horse to the Lord Arundel, boast, That he doubted not but to
see the Catholi^^ Religion flourish ere long throughout England, and Heretics
to be rooted out: for he h^^ ^^ped to see a gallant Army one of these days, to
effect so glorious a work. The sam^^ ^^man was afterward engaged in the horrid
Designs of Murdering the Kings Sacre^^ Majesty, and also of the Right
Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury; of which a particul^^ Account is herein
afterward given.

After God by a miracle of mercy to these Nations, had been pleased to give
some Discovery of the Plot, their insolence was so little daunted, and their
malice increased; co^^riving new ways to destroy all that opposed them, and to
involve us in Blood an^^ Confusion. For,

12. When the Order came forth for tendering the Oaths of Allegiance and
suprema^^^ ^^ all Roman Catholics, one Mr. Laurence, an Apothecary in Drury
lane, came to Mr. ^raunces House, to borrow a Book which had in it the forms of
the said Oaths, seemin^cry much dissatisfied and offended about it; and after
several Complaints, and mu^^ ^urings against Authority, did speak these words
-- I wish with all my heart, half the Pa^^^ment were poisoned, for they will
ruin us all, meaning all Papists. Now how exce^^ing dangerous may a person,
continuing under such desperate Principles, and of tha^^ ^ade, be to the
Nation, in destroying privately, such as shall oppose their Hellish De^^^^? for
it is reasonably to be feared, that he that had mad zeal and malice enough t^^
^^sh half the members of that most Honorable Assembly poisoned, will scarce
stick to^^ (...) a piece of his skill upon any particular Heretic or
Heretics, when the Interest o^^ ^^ir Bloody Church shall command, or prospect
of considerable gain invite thereunto

13. That about a fortnight before St. Thomas's day last, Mr. Praunce having an
intimate^ ^^quaintance with the Lord Arundel of Warder's Butler, he told Mr.
Praunce. (but ^^th a great obligation of Secrefie,) That the beforementioned
Mr. Messinger (his ^^^rds Gentleman of the Horse) was to kill the King, and to
have a vast Reward, if he ^^aped with his Life, as 'twas well hoped, the
business was so neatly contrived, that (...) might: But however, if he should
miscarry or suffer in or for the Attempt, then he ^^ving appointed beforehand
what Friends should have the said Reward, it should be ^stributed faithfully to
them by the said Lord Arundel, Powis, and the rest of the ^^ords that were in
the Plot. Whereupon, within a day or two after, Praunce meeting with the said
Messinger in Lincoins-Inn-Fields, after some previous and prepa^^tory
discourse, asked him, Why be would kill the King? At which question he appared
strangely surprised and confounded, as wondering how he should come to know
^^uch his traitorous Intention: But Mr. Praunce seeming not willing to give him
any ^^casion of fear, he, recollecting himself, said, Who told you of it? To
which the other ^^swered, That their Butler intimated so much to him, as a
Friend; whereupon he ^^ly said, No, no, we are off of that thing now: giving
him to understand as if they ^^d taken some new Measures. Then Mr. Praunce took
leave of him, who seemed ^^uch troubled at the Discovery: and after he was gone
a few paces from him, called ^^m back again, and asked him to drink with him;
but he told him, that his business ^^quired hafte, and so avoided going with
him. Then he adjur'd him not to speak of ^^at bufiness to any body living. But
afterward the poor Butler came to Praunce's ^^op, and told him. That he had
received great Anger, and was like to be undone, be^^use he had told him what
Mr. Messinger was to have dove.

14. In the same street where Mr. Praunce lives, viz. Princes-street in Covent
Garden, ^^ere dwells one GROVE a Papist (Nephew to John Grove, lately executed
for design^^g to murder the King) who is still, at the writing hereof,
suffered to teach School ^^ere. This person, after the Condemnation of his
Uncle, said very confidently, that ^^ere was no such Plot at all as was
pretended, for it was one'y a Plot. of the Prote^ants: And to vilify the Kings
Evidence, though most plain and pregnant, (according (...) the usual method of
all Papists, who make it their grand business to throw upon ^^em all imaginable
Scandals) said. That they were all Rogues that swore against his ^^ncle.
Whereupon Mr. Praunce (of whom he then had no mistrust, but looked upon ^^m as
firm to their party) said, But then what think you of the Fifty thousand men
^^at were suddenly to be raised? which to my knowledge he knew of: for I well
remember he told me of it. Which plain Argument of his Uncles Treason from Mr.
Praunce, the said Grove not being able to deny, said, That possibly his Uncle
might speak ^^at in jest. Such sorry Evasions will they make use of to outface
Truth, bolster up ^^eir villainous practices, and make ignorant and credulous
people believe, That all their raitors are Saints, or at least Martyrs.

Further Particulars which have fallen within the said Miles Fraunce's
Cognizance ^^uching the Plot in general, (though several material ones there
are) we shall not here ^^ention, as being not yet fit to be publicly divulged;
but proceed to the Murder of ^^ir Edmund-bury Godfrey, in which Mr. Praunce
was unhappily concerned.

The Full Discovery of the Manner and Circumstances of Sir Edmund-bury
Godfrey's Murder.
1. THe Design of Murdering this Innocent and Never-to be-forgotten Gentlem^^
was laid, and some Attempts made to execute it before it was at all
communicated unto Mr. Praunce, for he has since heard by Girald and Kelly
(Irish Popish Pri^^ concerned in the Murder) and others, that once, some small
time before they acquainted him with it; a Gentleman passing by Somerset House,
that was very like Sir Edmon^bury in Statute, Physiognomy and Habit; some of
them mistook and complement him as Sir Edmond-bury, but the Stranger denying
the Name, or that he was any ^u^^ person, they were so confident, as to think
he did it out of Caution to avoid the (...) And therefore peremptorily told him
he was Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey, which he as po^^tively denying, they made some
attempts to push him into the House, but at last pa^^ceiving their mistake,
released him, pretending it was only to have drank a Bottle^^ Wine with him.
Likewise they said that once or oftener, they dogged him into (...) Fields, and
out parts of the Town, but being in the day time, could meet with no
opportunity to dispatch him.

2. On Sunday, wanting but a day of a fortnight before the Murder committed,
con^^ing from the Queens Chapel, the said Girald and Kelly together with
Robert Gre^^ Cushion man to the Chapel, Laurence Hill, Doctor Goddin's Man
(which Doctor^^ Treasurer of the Chapel) and Mr. Praunce went (as commonly
they did every Sunday to the Plough-Alehouse by the Watergate (as they call it,
that is the furthermost Gate (...) passage going down out of the Strand to the
Waterside) of Sommerset House; whe^^ after some common friendly discourse and
talk of the Plot which was then begun to b^^ discovered. Girald the Priest, in
a familiar plausible way asked Praunce if he did n^^^ know Sir Edmond-bury
Godfrey, who told him he had heard of him, and seen him; bu^^ had no particular
Acquaintance with him. Then he asked if he did not know wha^^ (...) bitter
persecutor he was to Catholics, and a particular enemy to the Queens S^^vants
(which it is supposed he urged because Praunce was one of them:) And now o^^
^^ate (said he) he has examined people against us, and got Depositions to fix
odiou^^ Crimes and Scandals upon us and our Religion; To which Praunce answered
that h^^ ^^eard he had lately taken some Examinations concerning the Plot, but
did not know^^ ^^ particulars, though he understood there was a great deal of
Noise abroad about i^^^ ^^nd heard that Mr. Ireland and others last night were
taken upon it. The other told him ^^hat the said Sir Edmond-bury was so
desperate an Enemy, and had done such things that ^^he were not taken off, the
Catholics would be generally ruined, and therefore it was ^^solately necessary
for the Glory of God, and the good of the Church that it be done ^^nd if we can
find an opportunity to do it, we shall have a very good Reward from (...) worse
Man than the Lord Beliasis, and therefore (says the said Girald to Praunce)
^^oking upon you as a good Catholic and that will not deny so good a Service
to ^^e Church; we would have you be aiding and assisting to us in it. This was
the ve^^ effect, and as near as he can remember the Words of his first
Discourse.

To which, being surprised with horror at so unexpected and cruel a Motion,
Praunce ^^wered, no, he could not be concerned, nor would be guilty of any man's
Blood for a^^ ^^ld. For Marther was a grievous and most mortal sin. The Priest
replied, Alas, this ^^o sin, but a work of Charity. There is no murder in this
case, it is for the Glory of God and the good of the Church, and therefore you
ought to do it. With several o^^er words to that purpose.

^^n which wicked persuasions, Kelly the other Priest likewise joined with him,
affirming (...) same and highly encouraging Praunce and the rest present (whom
it seems they had En^^ged before) thereunto, as a meritorious work. Yet still
Praunce told them he could (...) Treacheroufly kill any man, for he was not
able to forte his mind to such an ^^^tion; Girald said, he desired him to be
no further concened than he would be himself, and that he would make nothing of
killing twenty Heretics in such a Case, and ^^t there was no Danger in it, for
it might easily be effected and no body the wiser. ^^veral such words and
discourses passed. At last they told him he should not be troubled to do the
business, but should only stand at a distance, and that they were sure he ^^uld
not deny to do, for, by their very declaring the Business, he was already as
far ^^ce^ned as that came to, unless he would betray them; which if he did, he
was certainly Damned, nor should escapelong here without Revenge.

These, to the best of his memory were the substance of all their Arguments to
him. ^^r did they Assign any particular reason of their malice, only that Sir.
Edmond-bury ^^^dfry was a busy man, and was going about to ruin all the
Catholics in England, ^^d that it was necessary to destroy him, else they
should be all undone. In fine, so im^^tunate they were, that by these cursed
persuasions proceeding from Priests whom ^^had been taught to Reverence, and
receive their words as Oracles; Praunce wa^ ^^vailed with, (with hearty Sorrow,
Shame and Contrition, he defires to acknowledge it) to keep their bloody
Councels, not daring both on a Religions and Tempo^^ account to leveal the
same, fearing as well Damnation in the next World, if he ^^uld discover it, as
Ruin in this, being one of her Majesty's Servants, and so great ^^art or
rather his who^e Livelihood depending on her and other Catholics. With ^^om
these revengful Priests by their Interest and some salse informations might
easily ^^do him, besides the danger he lay under of a private Stab or the like
michief from ^^^m.

Then they acquainted him that some others were engaged in the Business,
besides ^^ose then present, naming Henry Berry Porter to the Queens Majesty at
the upper ^^urt Gate, one Lewson a Priest, and Philip Vernatti, who did belong
to the Lord ^^asis, her to fore Play Master at Tangier, and much indebted to the
said Lord. Who ^^gether with Gerrard and Kely (as it is believed) were the first
that were engaged in the ^^iness, and that the said Vernatti might be induced
thereto by some promise, that his ^^bt should be remitted, and further rewards
promised.

They I kewise said there should be one more in it, whose Nam (as they then
told (...) he does not remember. And as he since understands, there were
several others con^^ned. So desperately were the Original Cont^ivers set upon
this good Gentleman's ^^^ther; That to effect it thoroughly they laid several
distinct Pl^ts, and employed di^^e Separate Agents unknown to each other. But
those above mentioned were all ^^t he then knew of for his part, or that they
discovered to him.

^ In the week following, some of them met with him several ^ime^ at the same
house, ^^d appointed to meet the next Sunday, which accordingly they did:
Wa^king imme^^ely from Prayers at the Chapel down to the Water^side, where
they presently fell ^^o Consultation about the manner of effecting this Horr^d
m^rder. But did not there ^^^e to any Resolation, but went from thence to the
said Plough to drink, where they concluded to dog or watch Sr. Edmondbury the
next week, and that whoever of th^^ could first see him in a Convenient place,
should give the rest notice.

4. Pursuant to this Resolve, as he since understood, Green and some of the
rest were (...) Sr. Edmondbury's House, and endeavored to watch him, but as
appears, could (...) light on a fit Opportunity. They met sometimes in the
former part of that Week, (...) Praunce never concerned himself to go to his
House, or elsewhere, to look for, or a^^ him; But on Saturday the 12th. of
October in the morning Girald, Green and Hill, w^^ forth to observe his
motions, and Kelly the other Priest who lodged in Sommerset-H^^^ and knew of
their going, came about nine a Clook in the Forenoon to Praunce's Hou^^ to
acquaint him therewith, and charge him to be at home in a readiness, The first
th^^ went near Sr. Edmundbury Godfrey's, and whilst two staid some little way
off, Hill w^^ up to his House, and inquired for Sr. Edmundbury, and
understanding he was with^^ Spoke with him, and pretended some sained Business
as it is believed, but not certa^^^^ known what it was, and so he returned to
his Companions (This Account He relate^^ he had it from themselves, viz. Girald
and Green, afterward being not present then h^^ self, but at home as
aforesaid.)

5. About ten or eleven a Clock Sr. Edmundbury came forth all alone (as his
man^^ was, for, being a plain Stout Gentleman, he never or very seldom went
abroad attend^^ with any servant, which they very well knew.) They waiting for
him privately, dogg^^ him to several places, up and down all the rest of the
day, as his business led him, till^^ bout six or seven a Clock at Night he came
to St. Clements, and went into a great ho^^ there, where it is thought he
supped. Then Green left the other two, and came^^ Prance's shop, but he not
being at home, but at a public House hard by, he sent (...) him, and
informed him that they had now set Sr. Edmundbury in St. Clements (but (...)
particular House he did not name or declare to him, so as he might know whose
it wa^^ but only told him that he must make all the have he could down to
Sommerset-House (...) the Watergate, where he should find Kelly the Priest and
Berry the Porter, according (...) Praunce left his Company, went thither, and
found them walking in the Yard, wh^^ they three sometimes walking, and
sometimes sitting on the Bench, continued till ab^^ nine of the Clock; And then
Sr. Edmundbury as it appears came fourth of the said pl^^ by St. Clements, and
presently Hill came running away before, up Street to give not (...) that he
was coming. And ordered that for to wheedle him in, two should pretend^^ be a
Quarrelling, and having thus said, the said Hill goes up again to the Wat^^
Gate, and stood there to expect his coming by, and entice him in. In the mean
(...) Kelly the Priest and Berry began a seeming Quarrel, but made no great
Noise; and (...) Edmondbury coming along the Strand, just as he was passing by
the Watergate, (...) (who well knew Sr. Edmunbury, and Sr. Edmundbury him, as
having traded with (...) for C^a's) steps up to him as in a great deal of have,
and says, for God sake. Sr. Edmondbury Godfry be pleased to come in, for here
are two men a Quarrelling, and I am afr^^^ there will be Blood shed between
them. Pough, Pough, said Sr. Edmondbury, refu^^ at first to trouble himself,
but Hill still crying out he feared there might be a great d^^ of Harm door,
and how glad he was to light on his Worship, who being a M^^^strate, his
presence would presently quiet them and therefore entreated him again (...) ^o
s^ep in; The Gallant Gentleman's good Nature, was such, not suspecting any H^^^
^ut d^signing to do an Act of Charity, and to endeavor that the Peace might be
ke^^ ^ccor^ing to his Office, that he was prevailed with by the Treacherous
perswasion^ (...) Assassinate, to turn into the Trap they had laid for him.
Hill entered the Gate first: Sr. Edmundbury follows him and immediately behind
him ^^ald and Green; they coming down as soon as they had past ^raunce (who
stood close ^^to the wall unseen) went forwards toward the watergate, to
observe any that ^^uld come that way, and Bury then went to secure the Stairs
and passage by the ^^appel. But first he and Kelly were the pretended
Quarrellers, and stood just at the (...) of the Rail by the Queens Stables,
and as Sr. Edmundbury went down, Green who ^^kt just behind him, having in
readiness a large twisted Handkerchief, on a sudden ^^ew the same about his
Neck, and immediately they all four, viz. Girald, Kelly, ^^^een and the said
Hill fell upon him, secured his Sword, pulled him down, throtled ^^m, so that
he he could neither Cry out, nor Speak, drew him behind the Rail and ^^ve him
many violent punches on the Breast with their Knees, and having as they sup^^ed
dispatched him, and that he had lain still for a while, fearing he was not yet
quite ^^ad, Girald the Priest would have run his Sword through him, but the
rest would ^^t yield to that, for they said then it should be discovered by the
Blood, so that at their ^^swasion he put up his Sword again, and did not do it;
however to make sure ^^orke, Green got upon him and punching him with all his
Force on the Breast with ^^s Knee, wrung his Neck round; The first Attaque, viz.
Green's flinging the twist^^ Handkerchief about his Neck, and their falling
upon him, Praunce saw, but then immediately went to the Watergate, and as for
the rest of the Transactions, he had (...) from all their mouths afterward,
and particularly as to the wringing of his Neck, Green told of it himself, for
he boasted of it; and the bloody minded Priest Gi^ald, seeing him Dead, said
these Words: Well if we could not have enticed him in here, (...) resolted I
would have followed him down Hartshorn Lane that leads to his own House, ^^nd
there would have run him through with my own Hand.

But it was otherwise ordered by the Hand of God, who though he sometimes
suffers wicked men to perpetrate their barbarous designs, yet he often
overrules them ^^o far as that they themselves against their intentions,
contribute to the discovery, or ^^prings by infinite wisdom and power, Good out
of Evil, and serves the interests of his Church and people even by the
Cruelties of their implacable enemies. For had they ^killed him in another
place, or disposed of his Body in another manner, it is possible it had never
been found out, and in that Case, or if they had not been suffered to be so
fa^^ infatuated by the Devil as to murder him; it is probable their Hellish
Plot had never been s^fficiently taken notice of, till se^^ in the direful
Effects, so that Sr. Edmondbury must justly be styled, the King and Kingdoms
Martyr, since his Death (though i^^ it self most horrid and deplorable was yet
through the infinite mercy of God, a mean to preserve the Lives of many
thousands.

7. Having staid at the Gate about a quarter of an hour, in all which time no
bod^ offered to come in that way, Prance went down to them, and likewise Berry
came from his post at the Stairs, and then they all set upon removing the Body,
which they carrie^^ in at a Door right against the place where he was Murdered,
and so up a pair (...) Stairs that goes into a long Entry leading into the
upper Court by the Coach House and then into Doctor Geddin's Lodgings, who was
Treasurer of the Chapel to th^^ Queen, where the said Hill lived, and did all
the Doctors Bussiness, being he first Doc^^^^ on the left Hand in the said
Entry, Hill going before and opening the Door; Then th^^ carried him up Five or
six Stepped, in to a little Room on the Right Hand, where th^^ set the Body with
his Back leaning against a Bed and so leaving Hill there as being (...) home
the rest departed, and dispersed themselves, every Man to his own Dwelli^^
getting home about ten of the Clock, or between ten and eleven.

8. The Body lay in that Room, Saturday Night, Sunday all Day and Night, a^^
until Monday at Night, and then Praunce coming from Home about ten of the
Clo^^ down to Hill's, to know if they had disposed thereof, or how they would
do it, b^^ cause he had heard nothing from them; Hill told him, that he and the
rest had th^^ Evening a little before, carried him out to a Room cross the
upper Court of Some^^ set-House, for fear Notice should be taken of their
keeping the other Room so lo^^ private, or that some body should have occasion
to go into it, and discover him; ^he Mr. Prance went to the Plough Alehouse,
where he found Green, Girald and Kelly, an^^ presently Hill came thither also,
and Hill with a dark Lanthorn went with the oth^^ three, etc. To show Mr.
Prance where the Body lay, which was in the said Room (...) the upper Court
upon the Ground, covered with a Cloth over the Head, but h^^ Sword was not
there, but still kept hidden in Hill's House; So having seen the Bod^ every Man
went home.

9. There the Corpse continued Munday-Night, and all Tuesday till about ni^^ of
the Clock at Night, and then all the said five persons, viz Girald, Kelly,
Green, H^^ and Berry took him out of the said Room, and brought him back cross
the Cour^^ Ward to the aforesaid long Entry by Doctor Goddin's Door, but Hill
going in before ^o his own Lodging, found (as they declared after.) some body
there, so that the ^ould not with safety lay him in the same Room where he was
first before, and there ^ore they carried him into another Room on the left
Hand going from the uppe^ Court just opposite to Doctor Goddin's Door, which as
is supposed was Sr. John A^^ ^undel's Lodgings who is Master of the Horse to
the Queen.

10. There the Body lay Tuesday-Night, and till Wednesday about nine a Cloc^ ^t
Night; and then all the said five persons undertook to convey it ba^k again to
th^^ ^oom in Doctor Goddin's Lodgings where Hill Lived, and where it was laid
at first, ^^ey imagining as Mr. Prance supposes that they might have more
freedom, and bet^ ^^er opportunity to carry it from thence unperceived, than
from the other place; Bu^^ ^^uring the time they were so removing him, and just
as they had the Body in the En^^^^y, Mr. Prance accidentally came that way, and
they not knowing who it might be^^ ^^^t the Body there, and began to fly, Berry
running away quite to his Lodge, but Mr. Prance calling to them they knowing
his Voice, came back and then they al^^ (...) but Berry who was so gone) set to
their Hands and got it up again into the said little ^oom in Doctor Goddin's
Lodgings, where it was at first.

11. There they entered into a serious Consutation, and the Two Priests Girald
and ^^elly (whether by Order of Superiors or not, cannot here be set forth
because they ^^med no body that had so ordered, but delivered it as their own
Sense) advised ^^at the safest and best way was to carry him out into the
Fields and lay him in some ^^scure place, in such a manner as that whenever he
should be found it might be sup^^sed that he Murdered himself, which would
much serve the interest of the Church, ^^en it should be publicly known, that
he who was so busy in charging Catholick^^ ^^th a Plor, was so troubled
afterward for so abusing them in the same, that he made^^ ^^ay himself; and
therefore it was agreed that none of his Money or other things should ^^medled
with, the better to color that Report; and indeed if they did take away ^^y
Note Book or other Writing form him, it was in Praunce's absence, for he never
^^w them search his Pockets, nor does know what became of his Band, but
supposes ^^e same might be lost in some of their removes, and being found by
some Papist, ^^en the Body was after discovered, and enquiry made after the
Band, the same might (...) kept concealed, becaused it should not be any
Evidence that he was murdered ^^ere.

12. This being well approved of, it was further resolved to carry the body
away that ^^ght about twelve of the Clock, to which purpose Hill and another
underook to get (...) Sedan, and appointed all to meet there at eleven a Clock,
in the mean time they ^^ent home. Mr. Praunce calling as he passed, upon Berry
to let him know that he must (...) ready on such a sign to open the Gate.

13. Near eleven a Clock that Night Mr. Praunce returned and found all the
four; ^^t. Hill, Green, Girald and Kelly there, and a Sedan provided, standing
ready at Do^^or Goddin's Door Now by that time they had contrived which way to
carry him, and ^^t him into the Sedan, it was near Twelve a Clock, then Girald
and Praunce going to car^^ him found there wanted leathers and were not able to
carry him well with their Arm, (...) Hill provided Cords, which they tied in
the nature of Leathers, and then Girald and ^^aunce took him up and carried him
over the Courtyard up to the Lodge and there ^^ve an Hum (which was the Token
agreed on) and thereupon Bury came forth and ^^ened the Gate and let them out,
having on purpose to avoid any Notice being ta^^n, invited the Soldiers into
his House with Drink and Tobacco, for they saw no ^^entinel at all, and at the
Trial, the Soldiers which that Night stood Sentinel acknowledged that they saw
a Sedan come in, but none go out, and indeed it was impos^^^le they should,
they not being there, but in Bury's House, where were Lights seen ^^d company
heard talking.

Being thus got out of Somerset House, Hill run before to get ready an Horse.
But ^^ose the Horse was, or where provided, Mr. Prance does not know. Then
Girald ^^d Prance carried him into Covent Garden to the end of James-street,
and there set ^^n down; and then Kelly and Green, who walked by, took him up and
carried him a^^g Kings-street to Newstreet-end, and so up Rose-street to
Longacre-end. Then the ^^t two took him up again, and carried him by the Gray
hound Tavern to the Greeian ^^urch, there Hill met them with an Horse, and
taking out the Body, set it on the ^^se before Hill, and clapped the Sedan into
an House that was Building, but un^^nisht, leaving it there till they came
back. The Body being so set on Horse^^k, Girald the Priest said, I wish we had
an hundred such Rogues as secure as we have (...). Then those four, viz.Hill,
Girald, Kelly and Green, went away with him, (...) Leading the Horse, and the
other walking by on each side, whilst Hill held him (...) before him, But Mr.
Prance returned home, because being an Housekeeper his Fa^^y might take no
notice of his being out all Night, nor any body observe his co^^ng home in the
morning, for it was between One and Two before he got back.

14. Next day they met together, and then Girald told him that they had laid
the ^^dy in a Ditch belonging to a Field about Primrose-Hill; and to make
people think ^^enever he shall be found, That he killed himself, I, said he,
run his own Sword ^^ough him, and left it in his Body, and laid his Scabbard
and Gloves at a small ^^ance on the Bank.

15. On the Thursday in the Afternoon the Body was found: That night (...)
Praunce was at the Horsesh^e-Tavern in Drury Lane, with Philip Vernatti, that
sho^^^ have been actually concerned in the Murder, but failed to be there; and
also a^^ther friend that accidentally was with them, knowing nothing in the
least of this h^^rid business. There some people came in and said, That Sir
Edmund-bury Godfrey (...) sound murdered, whereupon the said Vernatti calling
Mr. Praunce aside to the Fi^^ said, Lord! is this man's body found already that
was carried away but yesternig^^ Thanks be to God that he was conveyed away
without any notice, for now I hope (...) will never be discovered. He said
further, That he should have been concerned (...) was sent to, but was not at
home, but was sorry he was not there, to have been (...) stant to them. Then he
asked the manner how the Murder was contrived; of wh^^ Mr. Praunce gave him
some short account, but not all, because his Friend being in (...) Room, they
were afraid of talking long so privately, left he should suspect som^^ thing to
their prejudice.

16. In little time after, the said Vernatti met with Girald, who gave him an
ex^^ account in writing of the whole proceedings and manner of the Murder,
That he (...) he said) might communicate and show the same to the Lord
Bellasis, and other o^^^nal Designers or promoters of the business, for their
satisfaction; which Mr. Pra^^^^ came to the knowledge of in manner following,
viz. About a fortnight afterward (...) met with the said Vernatti again, who
invited him to Bow to take a Dinner, and s^^^ Friend of his: To which he
consented, and the day was appointed. But in the mo^^ing they were first to
meet in London at the George, an Alehouse right over against (...) Stocks
Market; where going accordingly, he found Mr. Vernatti and the before m^^tioned
Lewson, a Priest that was privy to the Murder, and should likewise have be^^
at it, but happened to be absent; these were got thither before, but Mr.
Praun^^ had but a little time been come to them, before the said Vernatti
plucked out of (...) p^cket a paper in which was written down an account of the
whole Murder, readi^^ the same to Lewson. Upon which Mr. Praunce asked him who
gave him all that ex^^ Account? He answered, Girald gave it him to show it to
the Lord ^ellafis, and (...) rest concerned.

17. Then away they went together all three to Bow to a Tavern; being the Qee^^
Head, one Mr. Cashes House, where they went up one pair of Stairs, and there
Mr. Vernatti wrote a Note to one Mr. Dethwick who lived about a mile and an
half o^^ (...) (as Mr. Praunce thinks, about Poplar) to come to him, and causes
a messenger (...) be provided to carry it, who was a Cobbler, whom he strictly
charged not to deliv^^ the same to any but Dethwicks own hand, and if he were
not at home, to bring (...) back again; whilst he was gone, looking out at the
Window, and hearing Fish cried (...) Mr. Praunce bought some, and ordered the
people of the House to dress them. B^^ after some time, both Vernatti and
Lewson went down to desire the Woman not to f^^ them with Suet but with Butter,
saying they would allow her so much the mo^^ for dressing, pretending fat would
rise in their Stomachs; but the true reason which they declared above, was
because it was Friday (being as he remembers the Frid^^ next after the
Proclamation came forth, commanding Papists to depart the City. Thus nice and
scrupulous were they in that paltry Observation who could ab^^^ counsel, and
without the least remorse, carry on a most Hellish Plot, and premedi^^ ^^ed
Murder. Yet was not this Caution so neatly delivered but that the people be^an
to have a suspicion that they were Papists; for having a Barrel of Colchester
Oy^ters brought, the Cobbler returned with word, That Mr. Detbwick, would
presently ^e there; who came accordingly, and was entertained by Vernatti with
abundance of Complaisance and Caresses; so fell to their Oysters, and preparing
for Dinner: Mr. Vernatti was so eager to communicate the business, that he had
got the beforementioned Narrative of Sir Edmundbury's Death in his hand, and
was reading the same to Dethwick, who said the same was very well; but a boy of
the House observing a paper ^n his hand, and having some suspicion, because he
heard the name of Sir Edmundbury Godfry mentioned (as he has since made Oath)
did listen at the door, till Mr. Praunce percieving something stir behind the
door, and being (as the Guilty always ^re) full of suspicions and jealousies,
ran to the door, and opening it, found him there, and threatened to kick him
down stairs; and from that time they would not suffer the door any more to be
shut, because no body should listen. However there they continued all that day,
and at night went every one to his home.

18. Soon after this, Vernatti was very importunate with Mr. Praunce to go out
o^ Town with him; whether it were to have done him a mischief, as fearing to
put confidence in him, and suspecting he should discover them, he knows not,
but absolutely refused to go with him. This Vernatti is a person that has been
a great Traveller, and lived a long time at Rome, maintaining a Correspondence
both in France and Italy with Jesuits and other the most dangerous Popish
Firebrands; he frequently made it his business to carry away young Gentlemen to
Rhemes, Doway, and other foreign Seminaries, and sometimes young Ladies to
Nunneries. In a word, he was amighty stickler in the Catholic cause; and a
person so dangerous, that it is pit^ he has escaped the hand of Justice.

19. Thus far this Execrable Murder was carried on in secret, and the parties
concerned began to be out of all pain concerning it, not dreading any
discovery; but a^ last the righteous God by an unexpected means was pleased to
lay open the same, and in infinite mercy to bring Mr. Praunce (whom the vile
Priests persuasions as aforesaid had drawn in to be an Accomplice, and hardened
so far as not to have any due sen^^ of the Guilt he had contracted) to be
deeply affected with the horror of that crime heartily penitent for the same,
and instrumental toward a full discovery. The bringing this to pass was most
assuredly the overruling hand of a special Providence, (...) appears by the
strangeness of the circumstances which contributed to his being fir^^
questioned for the same.

For the better understanding whereof, we must acquaint the world with an
Accident that happened before the Murder committed, which yet casually
occasioned i^ discovery so long after.

Upon the first notice of the Plot and Commitment of Fenwick, Ireland, and the
rest of the Traitors that were first apprehended, Mr. Praunce being then
blindly ze^^lous for Popery, happening to be in a Coffee-house where some
people were ta^^ing of the said Prisoners, for the credit of the Catholic
cause, did there speak wor^ in their favor, which some of the Company thought
ill, and gave (as he was tol^^ some information against him; whereof having
notice, to avoid trouble and charg^ he did absent himself from his house the
three nights next, and immediately (...) Michaelmas day, viz. on the Monday and
Tuesday nights he lay at a Friends He^^ right over against his Dwelling; and on
Wednesday-night at an House by the Mews^^ But then understanding that the
business was over, and no prosecution like to^^ made on it, he afterward lay
at home as before, and this was very near a Fort^^^ before Sir Edmund-bury was
murdered. Yet by occasion of this, twelve weeks ^^ Mr. Praunce was called in
question; for there happening some misunderstanding between a Neighbor and him,
who having got some intelligence that he once lay three Nig^^^ out of his
House, he will not say out of ill will, because he acknowledges the hand of
G^^^ in it, but upon a mistake it was, that he did imagine that these might be
the Nig^^^ whereon Sir Edmund. bury Godfry was murdered, and those that
succeeded it and u^^^ this naked surmise, bottomed upon nothing that he or any
that he could produce (tho^^^ Mr. Praunces Servants were scrutinized) knew of
the matter, a Warrant was obtai^^ from the most Honorable Council Board to
apprehend and examine Mr. Praunce touching that matter. Being taken upon that
Warrant on the 21. of December last, being St. Thomas his day, he was first
carried into the Lobby by the House of Common where Mr. Bedlow, whom he did not
know, having but once been seen by him before viz. between the Murder and
carrying out of the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godson and at a time when Mr.
Praunce did not observe him, yet knew his face again, a^^^ charged him
positively with being concerned in that murder; and thereupon after
Examination he was committed to Newgate on Saturday the one and twentieth of
December.

Upon the Monday following he made a discovery upon Oath, and then did impeach
the said Fitz. Girald, Dominick Kelly, Robert Green, Henry Berry, and Laurence
Hill; (...) these the two subtle Priests made shift to escape; Girald having
not since been hear^^ of, but Kelly was got into the Prison of the Marshalseys
by the name of Daniel Edmond being taken up somewhere in the County of Surrey
where he retired to hide himself and sent thither for being a Recusant; and
hearing of Praunces being apprehended made all the Interest he could to be
gone, and so procured unknown Bail hired to ^^ shillings a piece, and got away
in December, before he was known to be Kelly though since there has been a
full discovery thereof made public; as for Hill and Berry they were forthwith
taken at their own houses, but Green was before clapped up (...) Prisoner in the
Gatehouse for refusing to take the Oath, (for his Conscience was wonderful
tender in that, but able to digest a murder.) And when his Keeper came t^^
^quaint him that there was another Business come against him, and that he was
charged with the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, he hastily asked, Who
accused him and the Keeper telling him, It was one Praunce: he presently clapped
his hand on his reast, and said these words, Then am I a dead man.

20. On the 24th. of December, Praunce was carried before the King and Council,
here he gave a particular account of the Circumstances of the Murder, as
herein be^ ^re is set forth; and for more full satisfaction touching the
several places he had had occasion to mention, his Majesty thought fit to
appoint his Grace the Duke of Monmouth, the right Honorable the Earl of
Ossory, the Earl of Clarendon, and Sir Robert ^uthwell Clerk of the Council, to
go with him and take his Examination on the place, ^^d see if he could show all
the particular places be had mentioned to the Board; being come there he showed
his Grace and those Noble Lords, first the fatal spot, or place ^^re Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey was murdered, the place where Berry was assigned to (...),
and where himself stood; then the door he was carried in at by the end of the
^^^es, the stairs, the long dark Entry, the door leading to Doctor Goddins
Lodgings, little Chamber there were the Body was first laid; going to them all
as readily as a (...) could do to any room in his own House, which all appeared
to be exactly situate (...) had desc. ibed them that morning before to the
Board. But as to that Room where ^^^aw the body lie on the Monday-night, being
cross the upper Court, (though he ^^^ed them directly toward the place cross
the Court, and told his Grace so far he was sure ^^^as right, yet there being
several Rooms, and he having never been there but once, that in the night, and
only with a dark Lanthorn,) he was not able certainly to in the very Room. But
as to all the other places he was positive, and so his Grace their Honors
returned very well saisfied in the reality of his Information.

21. Here is to be noted, That whilst they were viewing Doctor Goddins
Lodgings, Broadstreet the Doctor's Housekeeper, coming to understand what it
was for, and Hill their Servant was charged with the Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, she (...) a right Papist, to keep up the reputation of the party)
voluntarily offered her Oath, did swear before the Duke of Monmouth, That the
said Hill had taken an House in ^hope-street, and went thither to live and
lodge at Michaelmas; whereas in truth, and ^^e Trial of the said Hill, etc it
was plainly made appear before her face, That the Hill did not go to reside at
such his new house so soon, but continued his Lodging (...) till about three
Weeks after Michaelmas, in which time all these Transactions coning the
murder, happened. She then further swore, that there was but one Key being to
the outward door of their Lodgings, and so it was impossible that Hill ^^d go
out and in, and all these things be done, and they within not see him, or take
^^e of them; and yet before they went away from thence, Mr. Praunce made it
appear, she was forced to confess, That there were four or five Keys amongst
them thereun^^e of which Hill did always use to carry about him, that he might
at any time (...) in, and go out at his pleasure without troubling or
disturbing the rest of the Family; Mr. Praunce himself has been several times
let in by him there with, they in the (...) rooms taking no notice, as he could
perceive.

22. But now because Mr, Prance would conceal nothing, but impartially set
forth all happened in this matter, he must not omit the Relation of that
Imbecility (or what ^^ber and unbiast Judges shall please to call it) which
has been so much talked of, variously reported.

^ost true it is, though the sense of the bloody crime that he had been
concerne'd in, in spite of all the Popish Doctrines he had imbibed) work such
Convictions ^on Mr. Prance his awakned Conscience, as to make this real
Confession; yet by the or thereof, the danger his life was in, the apparent
hazard of being utterly undone, ^her with a certain respect which he still bore
toward that Religion he had been ^in, and other selfish Considerations he was
once, for avoiding (as he then conceit these dangers, betrayed by humane
frailty so far to retract by word of, mouth, what he before most truly
consessed upon oath, as to say before the King and Council, That he innocent,
and they all (meaning the rest accused) were innocent; and that was the ^nce of
all he then and there declared in that kind: For which he humbly begs par^^ of
God, his Majesty, that Honorable Board, and the world. And though he dare not
go a bout to excuse the same wholly, yet there are several Circumstances that
my alleviated it, and render it insignificant to invalidate what he had before
truly forth. For, 1. What he before declared concerning the murder in manner
before herein set fo^^^^ was solemnly upon Oath; this supposed Retractation was
suddenly done under consignation and fear, and not upon Oath. 2. He was at that
time under certain danger of his life if he persisted in that Confession, for
he had no pardon granted, nor any certainty of obtaining the same. 3. If he
should obtain his pardon, he considered, That yet his Life would be sti^^^
danger from the revengeful and bloody Priests and Jesuits. 4. His mind was
sorely troubled, as with all these dangers, so with this further apprehension,
That if he should escape with his life, yet by this discovery he should lose^^
livelihood, and in all humane probabillity both he and all his Family be
utterly under for as he was the Queens Servant, and that his Trade and
subsistence chiefly, or ind^^^ wholly depended on Her Majesty's Custom, (which
was certain and considerable) (...) that of other Reman Catholics; so it was
not to be doubted but the most crafty and (...) placible Priests would soon use
means by false Representations and scandal, to dep^^^ him thereof if he
proceeded in this detection. 5. He retained still a certain respect to the
Popish Religion in which he had so (...) been educated; for he had not yet
entirely got his soul out of that snare, and therein he did then conceive,
being swayed by such powerful Inducements, That he might lawfully say, He was
innocent, and so they were All; which in Popish construction is no^^ deny that
they killed Sir Edmundbury Godsry, for that according to their Divinity, (...)
what the said Priests had solemnly declared, was no sin or crime, and
consequently (...) might all in such their Catholic sense still be innocent;
yet this he must acknowledge somewhat doubted, because he had never been at
Confession, and received Absolute since the Fact committed, which all the rest
(as some of themselves had declared) had d^^^ and so might more peremptorily
persist (as they did) in averring themselves to be^^ nocent; and he does
ingenuously declare, That had he received Absolution, it is his he should never,
or not without extreme difficulty have been brought to any acknowledgment.


These Circumstances, together with a great distemper of body contracted by the
incommodities of Confinement, want of Air, etc. occasioned that sudden revolt
of his rea^^^ and duty under that perplexity of spirit; but as soon as he had
done it, Conscience (...) in his face, and would no longer be laid asleep with
any delusive Popish charms; (...) he began to recollect himself, the power of
Truth dispersed all these temptations of^^^ terest, fear and superstition. If
it were true, that he might hazard his Life and lose^^ Trade, if he did persist
in the confession of the Murder; it was as true, and he fou^^^ by experience,
that he should never have peace of Conscience if he denied it.

And therefore he was no sooner returned from the King and council to Newgate
((...) coming in a Coach it is certain was not half an hour) but he most
earnestly request Capt. Richardsou (who had been with him, and heard what he
had said that morning for Gods sake to go back and assure the King and that
Honorable Board from him, (...) the first Confession which he had made on Oath
was true in all circumstances; (...) that whatsoever he had said before them
that morning to the contrary, was occasionly by the consternation, fear, and
perplexity of mind he was under, which the Capt. ^^mediatly did, and had since
declared the same upon Oath.

23. The next day he grew more sich, in so much that his life was despaired of,
co^^^uing so for about a week; during this sickness, the Reverend Dr, Loyd Dean
of Ba^^^, was charitably pleased to give him a Visit, and bestowed much pains
with him at several times, instructing him in the grounds and reasons of the
Protestant Religion; from whose pious admonitions and labors, by the Divine
blessing, he reaped much benefit fo^^ ^^e comfort and settling of his perplexed
Soul, and thinks it his duty, for the sa^^^ publicly to return him his hearty
Thanks, Being wholly taken off from the Apostatize, ^oody Roman Church, which
he utterly renounces, and does freely, cordially, and impurely embrace the
Protestant Religion, and therein particularly submits himself to th^^ church of
England, resolving (by Gods Grace) therein to live and die.

24. After God had been pleased to restore in some measure his health, having
give^ several Instances of stedfastness to his first Confession, by making some
further Discoveres in the mean time, he was again carried before the Kings most
Excellent Majesty and (...) Right Honouable the Lords of the Council, and there
being largely re-examined speated his former Discoveries, agreeing in all
circumstances; and then his Majesty wa^^ ^raciously pleased with his own Royal
Lips to give him assurance of his Gracious ^rdon, and soon after the same was
perfected in due Form of Law, under the ^reat Seal of England. For which with
deepest sense of humility and gratitude, he de^^^red himself ever ready to pay
most hearty thanks in all observance and duty, desiring ^^ longer to enjoy that
life which he holds by his Royal Favor, than he shall upon al^ ^casions employ
it to the utmost of his Capacity in his Majesty's service, for the safety ^his
sacred life, the welfare of his Kingdoms, and the interest of the true
Protestant religion.

But whereas by Popish Adversaries there have been several false and scandalous
Reports invented and spread abroad, that he was rackt or tortured in Newgate,
and with ^ish usages forced to confess what he did touching the Treasons and
Murder afore^^d, he does declare the same are wholly false, and that on the
contrary he did the same ^eely within two days after he was brought in there,
and that he received several Civlities from Captain Richardson during his
Confinment under his Custody.

And he does protest in the presence of God, the searcher of hearts, before
whose just ^^ dreadful Tribunal we must all appear, that as to the whole
Discovery and Evidence (...) has given, he has not therein been biased with
any malice or sinister ends, no^ ^ne any wrong to any of the persons accused;
but shall conclude this impartial Account of Sir Edmundbury Godfreys Murder,
with his most hearty prayers, That as be ^^th obtained the Kings Majesty's
Gracious pardon here on Earth, for his heinous Crime in ^^ing so Accessory to
the Death of that innocent worthy Gentleman, so on sincere Repentance, ^^d
through the only Merits of Jesus Christ, he may for the same receive
forgiveness from the ^ing of Kings in the World to come.

The Popish Conspiracy to Murder the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury,
and some other Contrivances after Sir Edmondbury Godfrey's Death
AFter the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and some farther discovery of ^^
Plot, there was no person (next to his Sacred Majesty) against whom the ma^^ of
these Popish Conspirators was more directly levelled, than at the Right
Honoural the Earl of Shaftsbury, as knowing that till so able a Statesman, and
vigilant and acti^^ Patriot, firm to the true Interest of his King and Country,
and zealous for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, was taken out of
the way, their cursed Machine ^^ions would be frustrated, and their wicked
designs be rendered ineffectual. And therefore they not only by their Emissaries
and Abettors, both formerly and of late, h^^^ endeavored to asperse his
Honor, but also entered into a formal Conspiracy and R^^olution to murder him,
and engaged several barbarous Villains to do it; tho a^^^y the Providence of
Heaven over his Noble Person, and a timely discovery happily prevented.

1. About five weeks before William Staley. (lately executed for Treason) was
apprehended, Mr. Praunce was with one Mr. Messinger (Gentleman of the Horse to
th^^ lord Arundel of Warder, and formerly named in this Narrative for a Design
to mur^^^er his Sacred Majesty) one Prosser a Silver-smith, and one Matteson a
Barber then li^^ ^^g in Holbourn, all rank desperate Papists, at Mr. Bradleys
an Alehouse in Holbourn, ^here the said Mr. Messinger grievously complained of
the severity of the Laws that ^ere against the Roman Catholics, expressing his
apprehensions that they would no^^ ^^^e rigorously put in Execution against
them, by some that were not lovers of their party, and particularly he named
the Earl of Shaftsbury as one of their most dangerous nemies, and who did most
concern himself about them, and in discovering the Plot, ^^^d therefore he
said, There must be some effectual means used to rid him out of the ^orld, and
declared that it was already resolved on.

2. That about a Fortnight, or near theresbouts, before the said Staleys
Apprehension, (...) was in Company with the said Staley, and the said Matteson,
at the Cross-Keys Tavern ^^er against Mr. Staleys Fathers House, where in
discourse they were complaining of ^^e great Afflictions the Catholics lay
under, and what severe Usage; they must further expect, if once this, Plot
should come to be believed, and be made out against ^^em; and thereupon the
said Matteson said, That if they did not take some speedy ^orse to destroy some
particular persons that were their most active Enemies, they ^eaning the Roman
Catholics in general) should be mined; and therefore in the (...) place (said
he) we resolve to kill my Lord Shaftsbury, (whom he then called, The
^^ng-leader of the mischief which they feared would fall upon them:) And
further, the (...) Matteson said, That he would engage three more to assist in
that work of killing (...) said Earl, whose Names he then and there declared;
that is to say, one Adamson a ^^tch maker, and the said Prosser, and one
Bradshaw an Upholsterer.

3. That some short time after the said Matteson came to Mr. Prannees Shop, and
^^ded a Pistol out of his pocket, saying, This shall do Shaftsburys business;
declaring had provided the same on purpose for killing the said Earl.

4. That afterward Mr. Praunce met with the before-named Adamson at Mr. Ped.
at the White Posts in Vere-street; where discoursing of News, Adamson said,
That the Catholics would be all undone, if they did not look about them, and
therefore ^^y were resolved to kill the Lord Shaftsbury: Against whom, upon all
occasions o^^ ^^ntion, both he and the other Persons before nominated,
expressed the utmost malic^^ (...) hatred imaginable, as being, they said, most
likely to obstruct and frustrate their resigns: Likewise the said Adamson
another time, not long after, did again expres^^ ^^h Design to murder the said
Lord, and then owned that he himself in particular was ^^aged therein, and
would kill him as soon as he could get an opportunity: which ^^ords were by him
uttered at the Sign of the Gridiron an Alchouse in Holbourn.

5. About the same time the beforenamed Prosser coming to Mr. Praunces Shop,
did ^^ewise tell him, That he did resolve to kill the Lord Shaftsbury, and
assigned this rea^^n or provocation which incited him thereunto, viz. For that
he the said Earl of Shaftsbury and some other Protestant Lords, did intend to
ruin the Lord Arundel of Warder, on the ac(...) of the Plot, which Lord
Arundel (as he said) was his the said Prosser's very good Cummer and
Benefactor. And also the said Prosser did, at Mr. Bradley's House in Holbourn,
de^^ate, that he was to be an Ensign under the said Lord Arundel in the Forces
which were (...) have been raised by the Conspirators, for the subversion of
the Government and Extirpation of the Protestant Religion.

6. That the before-named Bradshaw, about the same time, viz. the first or
second week of November, came to Mr. Praunce's Shop one day, and in discourse
did say That he would make no more to kill a Protestant than to Kill a Dog or a
Cat, which (...) pronounced with a great deal of vehemence and earnestness, and
said moreover, That (...) was resolved to dispatch some of those busy
heretical Lords, but the first should be th^^ Lord Shaftsbury: and likewise the
said Bradshaw pulled out a Pistol and showed the same (...) the said Shop,
declaring that he had prepared the same to do the said Execution there ^^th.

7. That the said Bradshaw is a violent cruel Papist, of most dangerous
principles, an^^ (...) to be employed in such assassinating bloody Attempts,
appears by this Instance. That about three years ago being with some Company in
a Shop in Dukes-street, discoursing ^^nd seeing a little Child passing by, he
voluntarily said, that he would make no mor^^ ^^o kill that heretical Child
than to kill a Dog.

8. That another time the before-named Prosser, at Mr. Bradley's House in
Holbourn did declare, That the beforementioned Mr. Messinger (Gentleman of the
Horse to th^^ Lord Arundel of Warder) was the person that principally promoted
the killing of th^^ Lord Shaftsbury, and that he himself was engaged therein,
and did not doubt but (...) short time to get an opportunity to effect the same.

9. That Mr. Henry Nevil is very intimate with the before mentioned Prosser,
and hat^ for a long time been aiding and assisting to him, and does hold a
Correspondence with the Lords in the Tower, and with some persons at Rome,
sending Letters duly thither^ and receiving great Pack quets back again from
thence very frequently; and that one (...) his Servants having several of the
said Letters in his Trunk, the said Mr. Nevil about last caused the said Trunk
to be broak open (the Fellow being the in the Country) and took a way the said
Papers, to prevent any Discovery that might (...) made thereby.

10. That Mr. Richard Nevil, Nephew to the said Henry Nevil, did maintain a
Corr^^ ^^spendence with the Lords in the Tower in a very suspicious manner,
viz. Dressing himself in a Coach-mans Habit, he drove his own Coach, wherein
rode his Coach man (...) the Equipage of a Gentleman, and taking upon him the
Name of Squire Duck; wh^^ ^^eing come to the Tower, this pretended Squire Duck
commanded the disguise Coachman (who was his real master) to go into the
Lords, and present his m^^^ ^^umble Service to them, and to tell them that he
came as nigh them as he could, an^^ should be most glad to hear of their good
healths; in which disguise the said No^^ ^^ent up to their Lordships Lodging,
and stayed with them a considerable time, which ^^e true Coachman remained in
the Coach. But soon afterward the said Duck was removed from that employ of
Coachman and sent away into the Country; for fea^^ (...) is most probable,
that he should discover this and other the like Actions of the sa^^^ two
Gentlemen; this Relation came from the said Coach-mans own mouth.

11. That in the month of October last Mr. Praunce met with one Mr. Cozeen a
French papist, and by Trade a Tailor, who walking together in Covent Garden,
and discou^^ ^^ng of News; The said Cozeen said, that the King and Parliament
designed to unders, (meaning the Romanists) but, said he, if I were to kill a
man, I would kill th^^ ^^ing as soon as any man, and if we had him in France we
would have killed him before now; intending thereby, as he understood him, and
as the Natural sense of that expression imports, to magnify the Courage and
Zeal of their French Papists, and now ready they would be to kill their King,
if he were of another Religion, which (...) proposed as an Example that he
would have English Roman Catholics to imitate (...) another time, not long
after, the said Cozeen spoke the same words, or to the very ^^e effect in
Praunces Shop.

A brief Detection of the Immoral Behavior, Cruel Expressions, and Vile
Practices of several other Popish Priests with whom M.P. has been acquainted.
HAving thus faithfully and impartially made a candid Discovery of the several
Traitorous and Bloody Intrigues carried on by the Papists, herein before set
^^th, we shall thereunto add a short Account of the Manners of diverse Romish
Priests, ^^th whom Mr Praunce has had Conversation; which he does protest to
do, not out (...) any malice to their Persons, but out of detestation to their
dangerous Principles ^^^d lewd Practices, and more especially that others whom
Education or crafty Infinu^^ons have brought up in, or inveigled to the Romish
Communion, may reflect and insider what kind of people they are whom they
blindly follow, and thereby be ^akened to forsake such wicked and beastly
Guides and no longer be led astray by ^^em, to the dishonor of God, feandal of
Christian Religion which they ^etend to profess, disturbance of Government,
danger of their Neighbors, and ^^ard of their own Souls.

1. Amongst many other Priests he had a particular acquaintance with one Mr.
^^tthews, that was Priest to the Lord Peter's, who was a very bitter Enemy to
all Protestants, and has several times said, That they (meaning the
Protestants) were all ^^^ainly and infallibly damned, and that it was
impossible for a Soul of them to be saved; ^^ther adding, that to kill any of
them was no sin, especially if is were for the interest the Church; and the
like wicked and cruel Expressions: He also in or about the Month of August
last, said, That his Lord and the Lord Bellasis, with some other Catholic
Lords, would ere long have a good Army on (...), and that all the Devils i^
^^ll could not prevent it, but the Catholic Religion would quickly be settled
in England. We may believe him, that the Devils would not prevent or hinder i^,
since it was (...) much their Interest to have it establish^, especially by
such bloody and hellish mean^ (...) the conspirators were resolved to make use
of for that purpose; but God has hither^ (...), and we hope will still, be
grac^o sly pleased to prevent their Designs. This Gentleman was a great Dealer
in Relics and Agnus D^^^^ and has cheated diverse ignorant ^vout people (as
has been credibly reported) of considerable sums of Money for such trumpery.
He has often times, with much reverence and ceremoney, as kissing them (...)
showed Mr. Prance several pieces of Bones, which he said were the Bones of such
and ^^^h He-and-She Saints whose names her had at his Tongues end, had
attributed most ^onderful Virtues to them; for he has affirmed, That they
being worn about one; could keep the Devil from one, so that not only he should
have no power to hurt ones ^rson, but not so much as to tempt those to sin that
carried them about them: That in Tempest they would preserve one from drowning,
and if at House were on fire if you (...) in one of them the same would
presently stop the fire etc. But as to the last it is apparent, that he and his
brethren, the Popish Priests and Jesuits, are far more dexterous Artist, (...)
contriving devices to burn down Houses than to quench them when on Fire.

2. there was occasion before to mention one Singleton a Priest, that declared,
He would (...) no more to stab 40 Parliament men, than to eat his Dinner,
besides his Quality of Priest (...) was also a kind of Solicitor or Broker
amongst the Pacists, making it his business to (...) other Peoples money into
his hands, and put it out to Use; in which trade he played (...) Extortioner
most egregiously, for all that he could get above the due Interest of 6 (...)
Cent. being to be put in his own Pocket, he would not let 40 or 50 l. out for
six months, but he would have 40. s. for procuration, which must be deducted on
the first i^^ing of the Money, and yet the full legal interest to run on; and
besides he always would (...) up the Bond himself, and for that business, (for
which no Scrivener ever asked above (...).) he would make the poor people pay
five Shillings: These Practices of his Mr. Prance can affirm on his own
knowledge; and there are diverse who have de. It with him (...) these terms who
can testify the same; and yet this Ghostly Father was a great preach^^ against
Covetousness and Usury, but it seems he meant only in others, not himself: For
(...) other Cases likewise he allowed himself the like Privileges, for he
would frequently Drunk, and stay out till one or two of the Clock in the
Morning, or after, and yet go^^ (...) same Forenoon to say Mass, and
consequently received the Sacrament, which they ^^ch the People must in no wise
be done, unless the party be strictly fasting.

3. Mr. Byfleet and Doctor Guilding, two Priests, have severally declared in
Mr. Ha^^ (...) Cooks House, and diverse other places, That they respectively
had turned several people from the Protestant Religion, and reconciled them to
the Church of Rome in the ^^^ty of London, and that they hoped they should turn
many more. They were both per^^^s of a very vicious Conversation, but stily
carried it. Byfleet was a mighty magnifier o^ (...) Vortues and Necessity of
Fasting to other People in Lent Ember-days, etc. but as f^^ himself, could
frequently, as is well known, dispense with six pennyworth of Victuals ^^^d a
quart or two of Ale, all alone for a Breakfast or Supper on the same days in
his Chamber. As for Doctor Guilding, he was his cousir, and (they said) had
read Philosophy many years at Doway, but very much forgot his Ethics in
England, being so only addicted to lewd Women, that one could not but conclude
he received his Ordination from Pope Joan, or some of her fulsome Successors.

These two la^^^ amed, and Singleten, were most frequently at Mr. Hall the
Coo^^ house in ^^y Lane, and there they dined, and Mr. Prance does verily
believe, that th^^ ^^any Popish Books being above a Cart-load and an half, with
the Priests Vestment ^eads, Images, and other superstitious Trumpery, which
were lately found there it Sear^ (...) of his House, did belong to them; And
the said Hall (as he likewise believes) d^^ now where they are, or were since
they absconded themselves, for which suspicion the ^^e these two grounds.
First, Because whenever about November or December last, ^^ame to speak with
Singleton or either of the others, he the said Hell undertook to (...) ^^is
business, and must needs deliver it to Singleton; because when he called again
he fa^^^ ^^ot to give M.P. an Account of it from him; Secondly, Because Mr.
Hadden Servant Doctor Parrot, the Superior of Seoular Priests told him, that
always when he came w^^^ ^^^oney to be distributed for Masses for the Dead,
Hall took the money that was design^^ (...) Singleton, and conveyed it to him.
The meaning of which is thus, when any Rom^^ Catholic dies, it is probable
there is a Priest (sometimes two or three) by him, who a^^ ^^er fail to put him
in mind, and frighten him with the pains of Purgatory, and of (...) ^^irtues of
Masses said to ease and deliver them from the same so much the sooner, so (...)
^^eing therewith terrified, If he be a person of any considerable Quality or
Estate, it (...) ^^ome happens but he leaves so much money to pray his Soul out
of Purgatory, then th^^ ^^oney is paid in to the Superior, who thereupon
according to the Sum, sends to so m^^^ (...) Priests so many shillings a piece,
for which they are each to say so many Masses for th^^ ^^ceased; the common
price of Mumbling over a Mass being accounted 12 d. And as (...) ^^is Doctor
Parrot, who is, or lately was the Head of all this sort of Priests in England,
'(...) credibly informed, That he has been seen in Bed with a Whore, by the
said Mr. Ladden his Servant who told the same to Mr. Praunce.

4. But as whoring is counted but a Venial Sin by Papists in general; so
amongst th^^^ ^^arce any are more devoted thereunto than their Ghostly Fathers,
who rail so loud at th^^ Protestant Clergy for having honest Wives of their
own. About 3 years ago one Kelly (...) ^^^ish Priest, (a Kinsman to the before
named Dominick Kelly, concerned in the murder (...) Edmund-bury-Godfrey) being
just Arrived from France or Flanders, was brought (...) ^^dge at Mr. Praunces
house, and the very first night, the maid going up with him to war^^ (...) Bed,
he began to use some Incivilities, which the modestly opposing, he proceeded
(...) violence, and would have Ravished her, insomuch that she cried out, and
Mr. Prance ^^ife hastening up Stairs, and perceiving his rudeness, being
affrighted run down against ^^aring he would have done her some mischief, and
called in some Neighbors, wh^^^ ^^mediately coming in, caused him to desist:
for which M.P. Wife would present^^y: turned him out of doors, but it being
late in the Night, and he wholly a Strarg^^ the Town; He would not (though he
were a Rogue) be so inhospitable to him; bu^^ ^ffered him to stay till morning;
However they were obliged to burn Candle all night (...) fear in Revenge he
should do them a Mischief.

5. One Dowdal being Colonel Talbot's Priest at Twitnam. some few years ago,
and under that Quality much Entrusted, stole and run a way with the Chalice,
Crewet, Basin, ^^^h Copes, Vestiments, Surplices and other Sacred Gear,
provided for him to officiate Mass with, and being wholly a Stranger, exposed
the Basin and Crewet to Sale at (...) Prance's Shop, who fairly and at a
valuable price bought the sam, The Priest having received his money, invited him
into a Tavern, and afterward agreed, That he (...) come next day to his
Lodging in White-Fryers, and see the Vestments, Linen (...) other things;
which he did and offered him 8 l. but he would not take under 12 or (...)
However he would go again to drink, and at last walked with Mr. P. home, who
lea^^^g him in a parlour, where there was a little Girl of about 6 years of
Age, whilst he (...) to attend some customers in the shop, this Goalish Priest
began to play the Villian (...) the Child, and would have spoiled her, (had she
not cried out) with his impu^^ Rudeness, which made him run into see what was
the matter and occasioned the (...) to hasten away, and presently shifted his
Lodging, for going next day to look (...) him he was gone, out of fear (as is
supposed) of being apprehended for the Robber, of which yet there was no great
danger; For though within a day or two Mr. Prance heard of the Robbery, by one
that was a servant to the Colonel, yet such was the Colonel's extreme Zeal, and
so prevalent above the Resentment of his loss, that (as was by that servant
assured) as soon as he discovered what their Priest had done, he (...) all his
people together, and did solemnly charge them not to speak thereof to (...)
person, because if known, it would be a soul scandal to their Religion; Adding
if he found any of them should utter a word of it he would run them through, A
(...) of secresy, (when ones life lies at Stake) almost as firm as that of
confession.

about 4 years ago there was one Mr. Thomas Shepherd a person related to Mr.
Prance, (...) being sick, sent to him to procure a Romish Priest to come to
him, Mr. Praunce (...) wondered at his desire, as having always accounted him a
Protestant, however it (...) his Request, and understanding he was very ill,
and not likely to live, he did en^^our to get one. And thereupon repaired to
Dr. Hanson a Carmelite, at Wild-House of their Superiors, who directed him to
Dr. Clement Mutus, a Benedictin Monk ^^nging to the Spanish Ambassador; but
lodging then at one Irelands a Tobacconist in street, having told him the
story, and what a work of Charity it would be to save a (...), he readily
condescended to go, and did give the man what advice he thought fit But the
sick party being very poor did not give him any money, which as appears he
^^cted; for next day the man growing still weaker, sent to desire the same
Priest again, which purpose Mr. Prance went to request his company. But here
truly found the old ^^erb verified. No penny no Pater-Nister for this
charitable Father told him no, he would for he gave him nothing yesterday. Mr.
Prance urged that so good a work as to re^^^ a dying Heretic to the Church
would reward it self, and be meritorius. H^repl'd ^oved a Reward in hand, for
all that of the other world; For (said he) they get Hea^^y us, and why should
not we get money by them: The other insisted, that the man was (...) poor, and
had it not, and that he hoped he would not suffer his Soul to be lest; his
Soul, quoth he, do as it will, I am resolved not to go to any twice that do not
me; And so by no entreaties could be induced to stir; but the poor man soon
after

(...) So sordidly covetous are these people, and not withstanding all their
pretenses, ^^^ng really so little Regard to the Salvation of men, that they
would suffer a Soul to perish Eternally) as they say all do that die out of
their Church's Communion less they can get money, by saying it, if indeed (as
they impudently pretend) (...) in their power:

There is another Priest that did likewise pretend to belong to the Spanish
^^bassadour, his name is Collins, who 'its said is now in Custody, when His
Maje^ Proclamation came out some years ago, commanding away all Priests (but as
were allowed) And that none of His Subjects should go to hear Mass, this lous
Father got up on the Leads of Somerset House, and there held Conventicle, and
said Mass, having a great Concourse of People that followed yet this precious
Saint, when a young Wench has come to him to Confe^^ has been seen to get her
between his Legs, and so closely hugg, and kiss her (...) times over, as if it
had been part of her Penance to be most filthily smuggled, was a common
frequenter of Bawdy-Houses, and has been observed many times to (...) drunk out
of such lewd places, in such filthy postures as it is a shame here to re^^

There is also one Davenport a Friar, but of what Order, Mr. Prance does not
member, who calls himself, and is usually styled, Captain Davenport. He is a
kind strowling, wandering Priest, that rides up and down the Countries, but
^^^^cially, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridg-shire, Isle of Ely, etc. where he does
abunda^^^ of michief in seducing people both from the Protestant Religion, and
their A^giance to their Sovereign: For he makes it his whole business to
infinuate, (...) News, unsettle weak heads, abuse the Church of England, and
its Ministers, and serters, magnifying the Holiness, Piety, Charity, etc. of
Rome, and by such his (...) perverting the minds of many; For he has long
followed this michievous practic never constant in any place, but always in
motion from one Gentleman's house to ^^^ther, and some times amongst people of
mean condition, to spread his poison the ^^^ther; As if he designed to infect
the whole Country. He is no doubt a very danger^^ fellow, and no longer ago
then the last Summer was Twelvemonth, there being Chapter (as they call it,
that is, a General Convention) of Friars held in Som^^^ set-House, whither many
resorted both from beyond the Sear, and all parts of (...) Realm; On what
Design (whether to carry on the Great Work) Mr. Prance (...) not, But has some
reason to suspect it was for no good purpose: For seeing ab^^^ Twenty of them
together, amongst the rest there was this Captain Davenport, whom then heard
say, That he hoped to be a Captain once again in the Catholic Cause, fore he
dyed.

There is one Bully, a Secular Priest, who formerly did belong to a French
Embas^dour, but of late his Trade has been to run about Hackneying forth of
Masses for tw^^^^ pence a piece at private Houses, where ever he can get
Customers. He was might strict in his teaching (as they all do) That people
must by no means eat or drink a drop the morning on which they intend to
Receive the Eucharist, before they come to Mass, (...) cause they must receive
strickly Fasting; Yet has not only been frequently seen in (...) Road to Mr.
Paston's in Duke-street, call in at an Ale house, and take his pot (...) more
of Ale, and so away to Mass; (Now a Priest cannot say Mass, but he himself must
needs receive.) But also he ha^ been known at play at Cards, Tippling in
Company, and Drunk after One a Clock in the morning at Pedley's at the White
Posts, and (...) ^he same day Trudge to Mass and earn a Shiling to furnish a
fresh debauch. But the are not all the rare Qualities he has, For he is a
notable Whore-monger too; Nay if the General Report be true that is current
amongst Catholics) keeps another ^^^n's Wife; which Mr. Prance is the rather
inclined to believe, because he has (...) met them hand in hand in Cheapside,
and other places.

There is one Holt a Secular Priest, that used to officiate at the Lady
Somersets (...) ^incolns-Iun-Fields, who is a virulent Enemy to all
Protestants, and has often be^^^ ^^ard by Mr. Praunce to declare, That it is
impossible any of them should ever (...) ^^ved. Now how ready a way is this to
inflame Papists against them, and how apt w^^^ ^^ey be to cut their throats,
and any way destroy those whom they are already made to believe are Enemies of
God, and nothing but fit fuel for Hell. And th^^ his was his Design, is most
probable both by the violent eagerness of such his Expressions, As also because
Mr. Prance has often heard him say. That he did not doubt (...) to see Heresse
rooted out, and the Catholic Religion e're long estal lished in England.

Father James an eminent Friar at Somerset House lately deceased, was for
several yea^ ^onsessor to Mr. Praunce, so that he had with him an intimate
Familiarity; About year and an half ago discoursing with him, He told him, That
there would short (...) be on foot a considerable Force to settle the Roman
Gatholick Religion in England; And that he did not question but to see it
established very shortly. Upon which Mr. Praunce said to him, That he was
confident that could never be do^^^^ without opposing his Majesty's Authority;
and it would be a great shame and scand to Roman Catholics, who had valued
themselves so much upon their Loyalty in th^^ ^^ate Times, if they now should
be Guilty of Rebellion against their King. Whereupon (...) replied, That in the
Cause of God there was no Consideration to be had of Princes; That it was no
sin to be active to suppress Heresy, and establish the Catholic Doctrine: For
though Obedience was a duty in other Circumstances, yet in th^^ Case the
Obedience to the Church was to be preferred; For the Civil Magistrates (...)
submit to the Spiritual, and might lawfully be resisted, and That it was the
Duty very Priest to give any man Absolution that should be concerned therein,
with several other Seditious and Traitorous Expressions. And further Mr.
Praunce having several times fallen into discourse upon some occasions
concerning the nature of (...) Absolution given by him and other Priests, he
the said Father James did declare That such Absolution was a full and perfect
Remission of Sin, and such an Acquit^^ is rendered any man as innocent and free
from Guilt as the first day he was born, fr^^^^ any actual Transgression. Then
he asked him, for Example. If a person should commit a Sin, and confess it to
him, or any other Priest, and receive an Absolution, a were afterward taxed or
questioned for that Fact, Whether he might with a safe Conscience, and without
Sin say be was innocent. To which the said Father James repli^^ That if such
person had received such Absolution, and performed the Penance impo^^ upon him,
he may lawfully say, He was innocent: for, says he, When God by (...) mouth of
his Priest, has absolved any person, he becomes innocent in the sight of G^^^
and being so, has no reason to impeach himself by owning of the Crime before
m^^ nor cast a scandal on the Church, which to do would be a greater sin, than
to de^^^^ matter which he is no ways obliged to confess.

These and several other like Discourses to the same purport and effect has
the (...) ^ather James declared to Mr. Praunce, inquiring his Instructions for
the Direction is Conscience; whereby may appear, by what measures such men
steer the Soul hose that ignorantly commit themselves to their Conduct; and no
wonder it (...), that some persons gasp out their last Breath with pronouncing
a Lie, and per^^^^ (...) the utmost in denial of those Crimes, which both their
own Consciences and (...) world know them to be guilty of, since they are
before hand hardened into a person (...), That it is not evil, but rather their
Duty in respect to the Churches Interest so (...) ^^^o.

Jeremy Jennings, a Secular Priest, lately living at Mr. Ramseys near Norwich
in No^^^^lk; a little after Midsummer last, both at Mrs. Hells in Eagle-Court
in the Strand, an^ (...) Mr. Praunces own Shop, told him, That we should
shortly see better times, an^ ^^at he did not doubt, but such Roman Catholic
Priests as he was, should e're lo^^^ ^alk publicly in Parsons habits. He also
has reconciled several (as he has acknowledged) to the Church of Rome, and
amongst his Acquaintance was very free of h^^^ ^eads, and Prayer books, and
has been heard to say Mass at Sir Henry Benifields, (...) Oxford. Hall in
Norfolk; So that by such his aforesaid Words, there is good reason (...) ^dge
that the said Jennings was acquainted with the Plot, nay it is reasonable to
be^^ ^^^e that there was not a Priest in England, nay scarce any Gentleman of
Note, or (...) ^^^te person of any Condition of the Roman Catholic Persuasion,
but was privy (...) the said Plot and Conspiracy, if not as to the particular
Intrigues, yet at least as (...) General Substance and Designs thereof.

There was one Monsieur L' Hay (to the best of Mr. Praunces remembrance, that
was ^^s right name) who not much above a year ago retaining to a Foreigner, a
Person (...) condition (whose name and Quality is not convenient here to
mention) did debauch young Woman, and to avoid Charge that he suspected might
ensue, by her proving ^ith Child, procured a certain person of his acquaintance
to be married unto her (...) ^^d after this, privately bargained to commit
Adultery with her for so much a time^ which he practiced so long without
payment, that at last at the rate agreed on, he was (...) l. in her debt, which
refusing or avoiding to pay, the Woman impatient to be so ^^^ved, did repair
unto his Lords House, and getting access to him complained of his Priests owing
her Twenty pounds; who demanding for what? She, after some tri^^ings of
pretended modesty, confessed it was for the ill use of her Body; the Gentleman
surprised, and scarce believing her, asked her when the last time was that he
had do with her? She answered on Friday last about Nine of the Clock in the
Fore^^on; the Gentleman remembering that his Priest was that day at Mass; told
her, She ^^s certainly mistaken; but she persevering in her story, he called in
the Priest, desanding if he owed her any money; which he not being able to
deny, nor yet to clare on what good account he became so indebted to her, his
Master could not but include him Guilty, and began to upbraid him, saying, Are
not you a most profane ^^llain to lie with this Woman at Nine a clock and
approach to the Altar, and offer to ^^ceive Gods Body before Ten, and that
without any Absolution too? The Priest ^^uld not deny but that he was Rogue
enough, but as to the last particular, assured ^^^m he had Absolution. And
being inquired how or from whom, after some Evasion (...) confessed that are
her French Priest and he both lay with her successively at that time and that
they mutually (...) each other Absolution; which is a notable Reli(...) method
of Whoring, and as it is likely often practiced by these Ghostly Fathers.
^elation Mr. Praunce does not aver upon his own knowledge, but knew the said
Hay very well, and was most credibly informed and assured of the Truth there.

The foregoing Narrative touching the Murder of Edmund-bury Godfrey, and other
Passages relating the horrid Popish Plot, were written by my Dire^^ns, and put
into Method for the Press, the matter ^^^g dictated by me, and taken all along
from my (...) mouth: And having since perused it all over (...) own the same,
and attest the truth of the several particulars and things therein contained,
as they are are related and set forth.

Miles Prance.


