PROPOSALS To all such People as are minded to Transport or Concern themselves
in the Island of TOBAGO, Which lies about forty Leagues South from Barbados.
WHereas his Majesty the King of Great Britain, that now is, has given and
granted unto James Duke of Courland, his Heirs and Successors, the said Island
of Tobago, on Condition that none shall inhabit the said Island, save only the
Subjects, of the King of England and the Duke of Courland, their Heirs and
Successors: On the said Condition, Captain John Poyntz has contracted with the
said Duke, that himself and Company settle One hundred and Twenty Thousand
Acres of Land in the said Island, and to have several great and large
Privileges; Some of which are here incerted, viz.

Imprimis, That One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Acres of Land in the said
Island of Tobago, is given and granted to the said Poyntz and Company, and
their Heirs for ever; and Seven Years to be free from Payment of any Rent; and
after the Expiration of Seven Years each for himself is to pay Two Pence per
Acre every Year to the said Duke, his Lawful Heirs and Successors.

Secondly, That Poyntz and Company, and all the Inhabitants, shall enjoy
Liberty of Conscience, without Interruption; Roman Catholics only Excepted.

Thirdly, That Poyntz and Company, etc. are to be Governed by a Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Assembly, to be yearly chosen by the Majority of
Freeholders Votes, of the People in the Island, to make good and wholesome Laws
for the good Government and Defense of the said Island; and all Controversies
in the Premises to be decided by the Majority of Voices.

Note, These are but Breviates and part of the Heads of the Grant from the Duke
of Courland, Ratified to Poyntz and Company, whereby they hold and enjoy their
Land; for that end the said Poyntz and Company do refer all People to The
Present Prospect of Tobago, now in the Press, and to the Grant, as more at
large; as also to them that have been on the Skirt or Body of the said Island,
to confirm the Truth of the Products thereof.

Proposals for Further Encouragement.
First, Those which are desirous to concern themselves in the said Island,
shall and may have as much Land as they themselves please, either by Lease or
Purchase; only they are to put upon every Fifteen Acres of Land one White Man,
and so in proportion to the rest; and this to be done in Three Years time.

Secondly, All Persons that are desirous to Transport themselves to the said
Island in the quality of Servants, shall have Better Encouragement from Captain
Poyntz and Company, than has been yet Propounded by any of His Majesty's
Subjects in any Settlement in the American Plantations.

Thirdly, And for a further Encouragement, All those Persons and Planters that
are any ways concerned in the Premises, shall have Credit given unto them from
Crop to Crop, as the Factory is stored, for what they shall stand in need of;
for which the said Company will Erect a Bank or Factory of Credit in the said
Island, the Debtor allowing only two and a half per Cent.

Fourthly, All Merchants and others that shall import any Negroes or other
Merchandise into the said Island, shall have their Goods and Debts Insured, and
disposed of, for Two and a Half per Cent. with Factorage, Storage, Wharfage,
etc. And Exported again for Two and a Half per Cent. more. And all Tradesmen
and Others that Contract any Debts amongst themselves, shall have Credit given
them out of the Bank or Factory, from Crop to Crop, for Two and a Half per
Cent. And the Proprietors do engage their Whole Interest for the True
Performance of the aforesaid Premises.

Fifthly, All Merchants and others that have Goods fit to Accommodate the said
Island, and have not ready Money to purchase Land, nor to pay for their own or
Servants Passage, such may barter with Goods in lieu of Money: Always provided,
This implies only such Persons as contract with the Proprietors, or some of
them, before the first Shipping departs out of the River of Thames, to Ship
off, as above, their proportion of Goods or People, as is already sufficiently
above-expressed.

For the Accommodation of all Persons that desire to be Concerned in the
abovenamed Island of TOBAGO, some of the Proprietors, or their Agents, will
give their Attendance every day in the Week, at Mr. Nathaniel Morin's, at the
Blew Anchor in Finch-Lane, near the Royal Exchange, from Eight a Clock in the
Morning, till two in the Afternoon: And at Jone's Coffee-House in Ship-yard in
Bartholomew Lane, from two in the Afternoon till four. And at the
Amsterdam-Coffe-House in Bartholomew Lane from four in the Afternoon till six.
Where any Person may receive more Particular Satisfaction.

London, Printed by George Larkin, at the King's Head in Broadstreet, 1683.


