THE Present Convention, A PARLIAMENT.
I. THat the formality of the King's Writ of Summons is not so essential to an
English Parliament, but that the Peers of the Realm, and the Commons, by their
Representatives duly Elected, may legally act as the great Council and
representative Body of the Nation, though not summoned by the King, especially
when the circumstances of the time are such, that such Summons cannot be had,
will (I hope) appear by these following Observations.

First, The Saxon Government was transplanted hither out of Germany where the
meeting of the Saxons in such Assemblies was at certain fixed times; viz. at
the New and Full Moon. But after their Transmigration hither, Religion
changing, other things changed with it; and the times for their public
Assemblies, in conformity to the great Solemnities celebrated by Christians,
came to be changed to the Peasts of Easter, Pentecost, and the Nativity. The
lower we come down in Story, the seldomer we find these General Assemblies to
have been held; and sometimes (even very anciently) when upon extraordinary
occasions, they met out of course, a Precept, an Edict, or Sanction is
mentioned to have Issued from the King: But the Times, and the very place of
their ordinary Meeting having been certain, and determined in the very first
and eldest times that we meet with any mention of such Assemblies, which times
are as ancient as any Memory of the Nation if self; hence I infer, that no
Summons from the King can be thought to have been necessary in those days,
because it was altogether needless.

Secondly, The Succession to the Crown did not in those days, nor till of late
years, run in a course of Lineal Succession by right of Inheritance: But upon
the death of a Prince, those Persons of the Realm that Composed the then
Parliament, Assembled in order to the choosing of another. That the Kingdom was
then Elective, though one or other of the Royal Blood was always chosen, but
the next in Lineal Succession very seldom, is evident from the Genealogies of
the Saxon Kings, from an old Law made at Calchuyth, appointing how, and by whom
Kings shall be chosen; and from many express and particular Accounts given by
our old Historians, of such Assemblies held for Electing of Kings. Now such
Assemblies could not be Summoned by any King; and yet in conjunction with the
King that themselves set up, they made Laws, binding the King and all the Realm.

Thirdly, After the Death of King William Rufus, Robert, his Elder Brother,
being then in the Holy Land, Henry, the youngest Son of King William the First,
procured an Assembly of the Clergy and People of England, to whom he made large
promises of his good Government, in case they would accept of him for their
King; and they agreeing, That if he would restore to them the Laws of King
Edward the Confessor, then they would consent to make him their King: He swore
that he would do so, and also free them from some oppressions, which the Nation
had groaned under in his Brothers and his Fathers time. Hereupon they chose him
King, and the Bishop of London, and the Archbishop of York, set the Crown upon
his Head: Which being done, a Confirmation of the English Liberties passed the
Royal Assent in that Assembly, the same in substance, though not so large as
King John's, and King Henry the Third's Magna Charta's afterward were.

Fourthly, After that King's Death, in such another Parliament, King Stephen
was Elected, and Mawd the Empress put by, though not without some stain of
perfidiousness upon all those, and Stephen himself especially, who had sworn in
there Fathers Lifetime, to acknowledge her for their Sovereign after his
decease.

Fifthly, In King Richard the First's time, the King being absent in the Holy
Land, and the Bishop of Ely then his Chancellor, being Regent of the Kingdom in
his Absence, whose Government was intolerable to the People for his Insolence
and manifold Oppressions, a Parliament was convened at London, at the Instance
of Earl John, the Kings Brother, to treat of the great and weighty affairs of
the King and Kingdom; in which Parliament this same Regent was deposed from his
Government, and another set up, viz. the Archbishop of Roan in his stead. This
Assembly was not convened by the King, who was then in Palaestine, nor by any
Authority derived from him, for then the Regent and Chancellor must have called
them together; but they met, as the Historian says expressly, at the Instance
of Earl John. And yet, in the Kings Absence, they took upon them to settle the
public Affairs of the Nation without Him.

Sixthly, When King Henry the 3 d. died, his Eldest Son, Prince Edward, was
then in the Holy Land, and came not Home till within the third Year of his
Reign; yet, immediately upon the Fathers Death, all the Prelates and Nobles,
and four Knights for every Shire, and four Burgesses for every Borough,
Assembled together in a great Council, and settled the Government till the King
should return: Made a new Seal, and a Chancellor, etc.

I infer from what has been said, that Writs of Summons are not so Essential
to the being of Parliaments, but that the People of England, especially at a
time when they cannot be had, may by Law, and according to our Old Constitution
Assemble together in a Parliamentary way without them, to treat of and settle
the Public Affairs of the Nation. And that, if such Assemblies so convened,
find the Throne Vacant, they may proceed not only to set up a Prince, but with
the Assent and Concurrence of such Prince, to transact all Public business
whatsoever, without a new Election; they having as great Authority as the
People of England can deligate to their Representatives.

II. The Acts of Parliaments not Formal nor Legal in all their Circumstances,
are yet binding to the Nation so long as they continue in Force, and not liable
to be questioned as to the Validity of them, but in subsequent Parliaments.

First, The two Spencers, Temp. Edvardi Secundi, were banishedby Act of
Parliament, and that Act of Parliament repealed by Dures and Force; yet was the
Act of Repeal a good Law, till it was Annulled 1 Ed. 3.

Secondly, Some Statutes of 11 Rich. 2. and attainders thereupon were Repealed
in a Parliament held, Ann. 21. of that King, which Parliament was procured by
fore'd Elections; and yet the Repeal stood good, till such time as in 1 Henry
4. the Statutes of 11 Rich. 2. were revived and appointed to be firmly held and
kept.

Thirdly, The Parliament of 1 Hen. 4. consisted of the same Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses that had served in the then last dissolved Parliament, and those
Persons were by the Kings Writs to the Sheriffs commanded to be returned, and
yet they passed Acts, and their Acts tho never confirmed, continue to be Laws
at this day.

Fourthly, Queen Mary's Parliament that restored the Popes Supremacy, was
notoriously known to be packed, insomuch that it was debated in Queen
Elizabeth's time, whether or no to declare all their Acts void by Act of
Parliament. That course was then upon some prudential considerations declined;
and therefore the Acts of that Parliament, not since repealed, continue binding
Laws to this day.

The reason of all this, is, Because no inferior Courts have Authority to judge
of the Validity or Invalidity of the Acts of such Assemblies, as have but so
much as a color of Parliamentary Authority.

The Acts of such Assemblies being Entered upon the Parliament-Roll, and
certified before the Judges of Westminster Hall as Acts of Parliament, are
conclusive and binding to them; because Parliaments are the only Judges of the
Imperfections, Invalidities, Illegalities, etc. of one another.

The Parliament that called in King Charles the Second, was not assembled by
the Kings Writ, and yet they made Acts, and the Royal assent was had to them;
many of which indeed were afterward confirmed, but not all, and those that had
no Confirmation, are undoubted Acts of Parliament without it, and have ever
since obtained as such.

Hence I Infer that the present Convention, may, if they please, assume to
themselves a Parliamentary Power, and in conjunction with such King or Queen as
they shall declare, may give Laws to the Kingdom as a legal Parliament.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.


