A PRAYER FOR THE Prince and Princess of ORANGE.
Translated out of French.
O God, who have commanded us to address our selves to thee in the time of our
Necessity, with promise to deliver us thence, and that we should return thee
our most humble Thanksgivings for the same; we present our selves upon this
extraordinary Occasion before the Throne of thy most Sacred Majesty, to Implore
thy Assistance from on High, in the present Conjuncture and Delivery of thy
Church. Thou know, O Lord, the many Evils she has undergone, even to this
present time, and the Designs of the Grandees of the World, to annihilate and
exterminate her from the face of the Earth. We may say to thee as David said,
Why do the Heathen rage, and why do the Kings and Princes of the Earth conspire
together, against the Lord, and against his God? Yea, O great God, it is against
thee that they Rebel, since they endeavor to abolish the Truth of thy Word,
and to set up an Idolatrous Worship, which is an Abomination in thy sight.
Behold, O Almighty God, from the highest Heavens the Affliction of thy People
Descend from the high Throne of thy Glory, to overthrow and confound their
Counsels and Conspiracies, which only tend to the Oppression of thy poor
Children, who groan under the heavy burden of Persecution; assemble together
the Kings and Princes who serve thee in Purity, to defend thy Cause, and make
them Victorious over thy Enemies. And thou, most Puissant God of Arms,
strengthen their hands in Battle, and surround them with thy saving Protection.
Particularly we implore this Favor from thee, for his Highness the Prince of
Orange. It is he who has most deeply laid to Heart the Outrage that has been
done thee, and which they would offer to thy Church. Support his Cause, since
it is thy own, and favor him with Victory over all his Enemies. His Enterprise
is dangerous: But what may not he do, being sustained by thy All Powerful Hand?
Command the Sea and the Impetuous waves to be smooth before him. Restrain the
contrary Winds within their bounds; and permit not the least Gale to blow, that
does not favor his Designs. Thou, O Omnipotent God, who heretofore did say
to Joshua by Moses, fortisie and strengthen thy self, strengthen and fortify
this Great Prince, this Leader of thy People, this Great Joshua, whom thou have
given us to be the Zorebabel that must Reestablish thy Jerusalem. Gird him with
Courage and Strength, that he may be undaunted in the midst of the most
dangerous Perils, that he may have the Strength of Sanison, the Prosperity of
Gedeon, and the Victories of David; and that lastly, after the Signal Victories
which thou shall give him, he may be a Prince of Peace like Solomon. Grant him,
Lord, these Blessings always to accompany Him: And may the Eternal hear thee,
Great Prince, in the day of thy Distress, and may the Name of the God of Jacob
grant thee a happy Repose, may he send thee Succor from his Holy Place, and
defend thee out of Sion. Remember, Lord, the Oblations of his Heart, and may he
perform thy Will.

Lord, thou know that thou did send this Great Prince into the World as it
were by a Miracle; by the same Miracle preserve him. Thou have been his God
from his Mother's Womb: thou have brought him up between thy knees: thy
Guarding hand has defended him from his Enemies. Thou have already done great
things by his Prowess. Through his Courage thy People look upon him as the
Pillar of thy Church. Deprive him not, O God, in this unhappy Time, of thy
Supports, which are his only Consolation. Remember the labors of his Anoestors
for the Establishment and Maintenance of thy Holy Gospel. They have upon a
thousand occasions experienced that thou were their God. Thou have preserved
them in the day of Battle, in Sieges, and in a thousand dangers. And, Lord, we
hope from thy Goodness and Mercy that thou will also protect with equal force
this Prince, who has more formidable Enemies to encounter. Shorten, O Eternal
God, sooner shorten our days, than the Life of a Person so dear to thy Church.
Let the Holy Angels encamp round about Him; command them to fight, as
heretofore thou did in the days of Sennacherib, to exterminate all those
Idolaters that dare oppose his Arms; and grant Him, O God, for his two
Fortresses, thy Grace and thy Truth, to the end that this Prince, accomplishing
his just Designs, thy Church may erect her Banners, and sing the holy Hymn, God
has shown himself, and his Enemies are confounded. Halleluiah, Safety and
Strength belong to our Eternal God. O Eternal God, support on this occasion the
heart of her Royal Highness, his Illustrious Consort; Confirm her against all
fear that may possess her Mind; and say to her Soul, that thou will be the
Deliverance of her Husband, and that no Mischief shall approact his Pavillion.
Give ear, O Holy Father, to the fervent Prayers which she sends up to thy
Throne, and send her thy Holy Spirit to comfort her in this her Trial, and let
nothing but the Messengers of good* News approach her Sacred Person. Doubtless,
Lord, thou will be Merciful to her, since thou have filled het Heart with the
fear of thy Great Name. Her trust is in thee, let her not be confounded.
Preserve her Health, preserve her Life, that she being advanced to that High
Dignity, which we so ardently desire, may become a Nurse to thy Church; the
Hester of this Age, and the Blessed Mary, that shall give a new Birth to the
Savior of the World, in supporting thy Church, and diffusing thy Gospel to all
the ends of the Earth. True it is, O God, that we might hope for all these.
Favors at thy Hands, but that we are such vile Offenders, and therefore,
sensible of our Guilt, we are in continual Fear. Confirm us, O Eternal Father,
through thy Mercy, and wash away our Sins in the Blood of our Redeemer; in
whose precious Name, etc.

FINIS.

