PREDICTIONS Of the Sudden and Total Destruction of The Turkish Empire, AND
Religion of Mahomet: According to the Opinions of the Lord Tycho Brahe of
Denmark, and many Others of the Best Astronomers of this Later Age; Collected
and Humbly Dedicated to all Christendom by a Lover of Christianity.
THE present War of the Turks upon the Christian Empire of Germany, and indeed
upon all the Eastern part of Christendom, ( Russia only excepted) Begun without
any pretense of a just Cause, or other Provocation, than mere Conquest,
sufficiently demonstrates that the Ambition of that Empire (if it were
possible) aims at nothing else then to bring the whole Earth under its Slavery,
Bondage and Vassalage, which she might soon Acquire, could she make her self
Mystriss of the Remaining part of Europe, of which She has already Gained so
great a Share, as may be Compared not Inferiout to either of the Mighty Empires
of Germany or France, and Naturally much more Pleasant and Fertile then Either.
The Sweets as she Gathers thence, tempt Her upon the Reduction of the Whole;
And the frequent Distractions and Wars which Happen amongst Christian Princes
and States, do point out to her own Greatness, an Opportunity of being much
Greater, by the weak and distracted Condition Christendom is almost continually
in, and consequently not able to withstand any of Her (though never so unjust)
Demands; Last Years Attempt upon the Imperial Christian City of Vienna, may
sufficiently convince any Man, that the Attaque of the Turks upon that place,
(if God Almighty had not wonderfully preserved and defended it) would have
brought inevitable destruction and desolation upon the whole Empire of Germany.
And it is hard to judge in Humane Prudence how they could possibly have bin
forced to quit such a Conquest, where the Treasure they would have made
Themselves Masters of in the Enterprise, might sufficiently, without any
domestic Tax, enabled them to carry on the War against, and (totally to
subdue) the greatest Part of Christendom.

But Almighty God, which puts Bounds to the Sea, and says, Hitherto shall
thou Go, and no further; Also Boundeth and Changes Empires and Kingdoms, and
sets up Emperors and Kings, as seems good to Himself, of which the
Histories of all Past Ages do furnish us with plenty of Instances.

The Jews were always of Opinion, That every Person and Place has a certain
Guardian-Angel set over it. And many Doctors of the Christian-Church seem to
Agree with them in that Particular, upon the Warrant they have from the Holy
Prophet, Dan. 10.11. Where mention is made of an Angel-Governour over Persia,
and over Greece; Rulers and Potentates, or, as our English Translation has it,
Principalities and Powers; And the Learned in all Ages have Observed, That God
hash Set Intervals and Periods of Times to all Empires and Governments in the
World; Amongst which Periods the 500. and 700. are Accounted the most Fatal, as
you may see in Bodin. Lib. 4. cap. 2 The Natural Reasons of which is, for that
in the said Spaces of Time there Elapseth so many Generations of Men, which
abateth off, and more and more declineth from the Simplicity, Strength and
Fortitude, whereby Kingdoms are Acquired Preserved and Propagated.

It is also Observed, That no extraordinary Change has ever happened, but, has
been Attended with, or fore-boded by strange Comets or Apparitions in the
Heavens, as Gods Monitors pointing to us the Judgments threatened.

A Comet Appeared in the Year 603. about a Year before the pretended Prophet
Mahomets Birth; And another Comet Appeared in the Shape of a Fiery Sword at
Noon day, and continued the space of one whole Month at his Death, Rendering it
no less prodigious then the Course of his Life, or the Success that has since
Attended his Religion and Empire to this very day, of which see Jos phus Bell.
Jud lib, 7. cap. 12.

That God has Appointed fatal Bounds and Limits of Time to Empires (none will
deny) so has he the like Bounds and Limits to other particular Places; And
when any Change of an Empire is imminent, he commonly Raises up some Great
Heroes, whom he uses as Organs to Punish or Amend Them, yet first reveals
such future Changes, by certain Signs and Prodigies, as St. Augustine lib. de
Vrb. excid. Tom. 9. Speaks of a Great Comet that Appeared about the Year 396
over Constantinople, according to the Revelation first made thereof to a
Soldier, and by him to a Bishop; who thereupon exhorted the People to
Repentance, etc. He has these very words, Volens siquidens Deus terrere
Civitatem. and terrendo emendare, terrendo convertere, terrendo mundare,
terrendo mutare servo suo fideli viro ut dicitur Militaris, etc. -- God being
pleased to terrify the City, by terrifying to convert it, by terrifying to
cleanse it, by terrifying to change it, he Revealed (as is reported) to a
Soldier his faithful Servant. And a little further, Noct is initio tenebrantes,
etc. In the Beginning of the Night, whilst Darkness Covered the Earth, there
Appeared a Fiery cloud in the East, (at first but a little one); Afterward by
degrees, as it Approached the City, it so increased, till being mighty big it
Hovered terribly over all the City, there was seen a horrible Flame which
descended from it, neither was there a Sulphurous Smell wanting, all the People
fled to Church, the Place contained not the Multitude, every O^e wrested
Baptism from whom he could the Sacrament was Exposed not only in the Church,
but also through the Houses, Lanes and Streets, to Avoid the present as well as
future wrath of God. Thus far St. Augustine. What strange Revolutions have
since befell that City, all ^hristendom and the greatest part of the
Intelligible World can sufficiently Witness. And to the purpose intended by
this Paper, which is to show by the many strange Comets which have Appeared of
late Years, not only in Sight of the same Constantinople, but even of all
Christendom, as Forerunners of the Great Alterations and Changes which shall
Happen and particularly on the Turkish Empire, whose Grand fatal Year is
Proclaimed by the Heavens to be so near at Hand, as has been long since
Observed by Learned Men, by the Cause of the Suns Eccentricity, described of
Copernicus, ( cap. 20. lib. 3. Revol.) By a Motion of a little Circle, having
the Eccentrick of its Center in its Circumference; Georgius Johannis Rhetius
called this Circle, The Wheel of Fortune; By whose Revolutions, says he, the
Monarchies of the World received their Commencements and Changes, for like as
the Roman Empire obtained its highest dignity when the Eccentricity was
greatest, so the same Decreased is very much Empaired, and almost at the brink
of Destruction; But the Turkish Empire began in the first Quadrant with the Law
of Mahomet, and has been most swiftly Augmented proportionably, according to
the Motion thereof; being at this day wherein the Eccentricity is at the least
in a flourishing estate, but shall henceforward be diminished until the other
Quadrant, and alike swiftly (God so pleasing) Hasten to destruction:

According to Tycho and Others of the Best Astronomers, the Eccentricity is
already notably increased, (viz.) unto Part 2.9. or thereabouts. Lausburgius
makes it Part 2 6 21. Insomuch (says the same Author) That if the Christians
would henceforth lay aside their Ambition and Avarice, and Live at Peace among
themselves, the God of Nature Presents them with an Age, wherein they may
totally Overthrow and lay Waste the Empire of the Turks, and put a speedy
Period to the Law of their Prophet Mahomet.

Cardan. Seg. 1. Aph. 37. Permutationes Absidum Regna, and Regiones, and
Religiones mutant. Changes of the Absids Alter Kingdoms, Regions and Religions.

Whence a Learned Author observes, That from the Change of Saturns Absis into
Cancer Mahomet had his Growth, and by the Change thereof into Capricorn (the
Sign opposite thereunto) receives he Detriment, and at length a final
Destruction.

As Mr. Ashmole in his accurate Translation of Spinoeus, tells us, That
Mahomets Destruction initiated Anno 1630. And this he deduces from the Change
of Saturns Absis, out of Sagitary into Capricorn (according to the Prutenick
Tables) But by the Pololiaque Tables (the best extant). It enters not Capricorn
till the beginning of the Year 1728. After which Time the Heavens have decreed
that, and several other Causes which will Occur to extirpate Mahomet and his
Law, which God in his infinite Mercy, (to Bleeding Christendom) in his due time
bring to pass.

The Wonderful Providence of God can never be sufficiently admired in all his
Ways, and particularly to permit the Growth of the insulting Turks, (as a just
punishment to his Chosen People), so swell to such a Magnitude, (rather than
grow) too big a Body for any Legs possibly to be found sufficient to support
its Weight, that of its own unweldiness it may, like a distempered Body, Pine,
Waste, Consume, Decay and Moulter to as mere a Nothing, as it was before the
Birth of their Grand Impostor.

And whereas such a Mighty Empire that has shaken the Remotest Regions of the
Earth, cannot reasonably be supposed to be dissolved into Atoms, in a Moments
Space of Time; And the Fatal Year of that Monarchy Appearing by the said
Learned Authority to be Anno 1728. Which is but 44 Years from this present time
to come. The present happy Union that now is Established between His Imperial
Majesty of Germany, the Crown of Poland, and Senate of Venice, together with
the Inclinations the Sophy of Persia and the Czaars of Moscovy, who seem to
declare to come into the said Union. Besides, the present Consternation the
Turkish Empire is in, what a Fever and Ague is Fixed in the Blood, Body and
Heart of that Empire, Occasioned upon the Blessed Success of the Christian
Arms, that an Insulting Empire, who but a few Months past Threatened
Destruction to the Remotest Parts of the Earth, now feels a Mortal Distemper in
its own Bowels, (by a brave Diversion of the Christian Cessacks and Morelaques)
and is Reduced to Consult of means to defend it self against its weakest
Christian Neighbors, which being but indifferently considered, who can doubt
but this present time, is an AE a or a Praeludium to the Fatal Year Anno 1728.
And that the present Illustrious and Renowned King of Poland, with the many
Princes of the Holy Empire, and Others joined with him, are the Heroes that God
has Raised to Subdue, Alter and Amend the Eastern Empire of Europe, which so
long has Groaned under the cruel Bonds (...) Turkish Slavery, Vassalage and
Subjection; What a blessed state would Christendom be Reduced to in an instant,
if it would lay aside Domestic Wars, Quarrels and Pretensions of Strife; What
an Opportunity presents it self (of Immortal Honor and Renown) to such as have
Youth, Strength, Fortune and ^ourage, to List themselves in the Noble Roll of
such brave Heroes in the best of Causes that ever Sword was drawn in, and in
which the Valiant and Heroic Lords, Lansdown and Tass and many other British
Subjects, have made so brave an Essay. What a happy Day would it be, that there
was no other Emulation among Christians than a Vying who should do the bravest
Act against their Common Enemy? If the Heavens have decreed it, it is not the
Taking of a Luxemberg, or the Assaulting of a Genoa, or the Sending of a Fleet
into the Baltic, can divert the unalterable Fate that Attends a sinking
Empire, upon the Period and Brink of utter Destruction. The 500 and 700 Years
fatal Periods of Time, mentioned before, may be sufficient to Caution such as
Confederate with, or otherwise Assist an Empire under such a Destiny, that such
do but Fight against Heaven; And that you may plainly understand the whole
Course of the Heavens, are by Divine Providence at this Juncture on the
Christian side, whose Celestial Influences join with and strengthen the Events
of the said fatal Periods; To discover which I Refer you to the General History
of the Turkish Empire, and you will find their Monarchy was first Settled and
Founded in Asia, under the Denomination of a Kingdom, in the Year of Our Lord
Christ 1030 by Tangrolipyx, (and in the Reign of Constantius Monomachus the
Christian Emperor) of which a Man may very reasonably suppose, that the same
Tangrolipyx, or his Predecessors, were some Years in preparing a Foundation, on
which so great a Structure as an Imperial Monarchy was to be Raised on; And if
you Add the 44 Years yet to come, when the Change of Saturn's Absis out of
Sagitary into Capricorn, will Happen, as I have said with 654 (at this
present,) so many Years sin^e Tangrolipix to 1030 in which Year Tangrolipix
first settled his Empire, it makes up Complete 1728. and wants only two Years of
the Grand fatal Period mentioned, by which it may be Observed, That there is
not wanting a double Destiny to secare and strengthen all Accidents, that
Naturally and properly Occurr to the laying Waste that Tyrannical Government,
which for so many years has Oppressed so great a Part of the Earth; What surer
and more lasting Monument can a Man Raise to himself, than to be an Instrument
in so Glorious a Cause, whose daily Success will be continually Celebrated with
Te Deum's through the Universe, and all Ages to come for ever rejoice of their
so mighty Deliverance; To effect which, let all good Men continually pray for
the uniting and strengthening of the Christian Arms, which whenever it shall
please God to bring to pass, will certainly be the Time that will Confirm these
Predictions.

FINIS.
London, Printed; And Sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. 1684.


