A Modest, and True ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST Mr. Abraham Anselm, late
Secretary to the late Admirals of the FLEET: AS They happened, and were brought
on before the Right Honorable, Their Majesty's Principal Secretary of State,
Their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Their Majesty's Council at Law;
and as they were Examined by the Grand Jury for the County of Middle-Sex, at
the Sessions, held at Hick's-Hall, September the Sixth, 1693.

In a Letter to a Friend.

Together with an Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Mitre within Temple Bar. 1694.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
PErhaps I had not Exposed this my Letter to the Public View, but that Mr.
Anselms, to Captain Wall, (wherein he calls me Villain, etc.) has been shown
to some of the Honorable Representatives of this Nation, before whom the
business of the Admirals have been brought about, and so may others also.

I hear, I have been Misrepresented to to Their Majesty's (as well as to
others) as I was to Charles the II. for serving my King and Country Abroad,
with the hazard both of my Life and Fortune, and then I could not defend my
self from the Defamation, but now (I hope) I may without any Offense.

Philip of Macedon (as Illustrious for his Wit, as for his Valor and Virtue)
being advised to Correct a Man for saying some things (as his Enemy said)
Unseasonably -- We must first, (said the King) Consider, whither he had not
occasion given him to say what he did.

A Modest, and True ACCOUNT OF The Proceedings against Mr. Abraham Anselm late
Secretary, to the late Admirals of the FLEET.
Dear Sir,
SINCE (As you are pleased to say) I have lost that Reputation, which I lately
Regained by a Law Suit, and that I am fallen under the Defamation of a
MALICIOVS JNFORMER; I think fit (as your Request commands me) to give you the
following Account concerning Mr. ANSELEM, etc. though I had rather be silent in
the Case, like a Man of Inward and Real Honor, who adventures the Fame, to
preserve the Conscience, of an honest Man.

SOME time after I came to London, about the Law Suit; I had occasion to
Converse with one Captain Peter Row, not only upon Account of the Law Suit,
but also on some other account, because he is an understanding Man, in many
things, which I have had occasion to make use of.

This Captain Row, came one day to me and told me (as a secret) that he had an
Incredible thing to impart to me, which he would trust no body else withal;
because he could not but mistrust it himself.

But soon after he went to one Captain Peter Wall, and not only told him what
he told me, but also what I told him, as a secret, thereon; which was, that I
did the rather believe what he had so entrusted me withal, for a reason which
hereafter follows.

NOW a strange Discourse about the Turky-Fleet was just breaking out, when
Captain Wall came to me, and asked me concerning what I had said to Captain
Row, and what Captain Row had said to me: I was surprised at his knowledge
thereof, but since the Truth was out, I could not say (as some say I should) it
was a Lie.

So, upon my acknowledgement of the matter, Captain Wall asked my advice; and I
gave him such as Corresponded with his own opinion.

But I told him it might do more ill to me, than good to the Nation, for two
Reasons; one whereof was, that I had a just Pretention against Mr. Anselm for
1500 l. and therefore prayed him if possible, not to mention my name in the
matter; nevertheless I left it to him.

The Captain at that time as little regarded that reason, as he did the other,
and, going into Southampton, he wrote from thence (unknown to me) the following
Letters, to Two of the Admirals.

To the Honorable, Mr. Henry Killegrew.
Sir,
I Take the boldness, being formerly Acquainted with you, to give an Account of
the Gentleman, Mr. Abraham Anselm, who is now your Secretary which might prove
of very bad Consequence, as well to your self and the other Gentlemen that are
with you in Commission, as also to the Nation, which I wish well, as do your
self.

Yesterday, being Sunday the 22th. of May, came a Sea-Commander to my House,
who told me that he was Recommended by the said Anselm, to give his word that
he would Command a Ship for King James, and if he would, he assured the Cabal
would perform it. That also the said Anselm did desire to know of a Gentleman
of your own Country, where he could raise Men in Cornwall, for the Late King
James, and what Number: So (for your Government,) you may use your own
Discretion, Jam the Gentleman you commonly called your Countryman Wall, in
your Kinsman Kirk's Service of Genoua; so shall desire the favor of you to let
me know where you receive this or no. Direct your Letter to me at Mr. William
Tyler in Southampton: I have no more, but wish you all Prosperity in your
Undertakings, I remain,

Your Humble Servant Peter Wall.


London the 22th. May, 1693.
Sir Ralph Delaval SIR,
I Take the boldness, though unknown, to give you an Account of what I hear of
your Secretary Mr. Abraham Anselm, (viz.) Yesterday came to my House a
Sea-Commander, who told me that was Recommended by the said Anselm, to be a
Sea-Commander for King James, as also that he had some time since, spoke to a
Cornish Gentleman, to know where he could raise Forces in Cornwall for King
James, the which this Morning I spoke to the Gentleman himself, who told me the
same. This I thought fit to give you an Account that you may Govern your self
according, knowning what Charge he is in. I shall desire the favor of you to
write me a Line or two, whether you receive this or no. And direct your Letter
to me at Mr. William Tylers in Southampton. Is the needful at present, from

Your Most Obedient Humble Servant Peter Wall.
London, 22th. May 1693. Your Honor is unknown to me, but you may please to
Inquire of Captain Good, Captain Dover, and Captain Grantham; or any that have
passed the Streights.




Captain Wall, as he tells me, Received no Answer from the Admirals, but their
Secretary Mr. Anselm fent him thus Letter.

SIR,
UPon Two Letters Writ to Mr. Killegrew, and Sir Ralph Delaval, wherein you
Inform them, that a Sea-Commander acquainted you, that I had Consulted with him
about getting a Ship to serve King James, to which he applied himself to a
Cornish Gentlman, to know what Forces could be raised, I suppose, Seaman you
mean, to Man her. I am to desire you to send me the Name of said Commander; the
Gentleman 's Namehe applied himself to, for that purpose, and the Reason why
you did not apprehend him, till such an Information could be made appear in
this matter, you would have done the Nation Service, and me Justice; It Is
looked upon (as it is plainly Evident) as Malice, and therefore regarded
accordingly; however in Justification of my self, I am to inquire in this
Matter, and wherein you can be serviceable to me in it; I shall think my self
very much obliged to you, for such Villains ought to be made Examples of: Pray
upon sight hereof, let me hear from you. Direct for me, at Mr. Grandons Agent
for the Victualers at Portsmouth,

SIR, Your Humble Servant, Ab. Anselm,
Portsmouth the 25th. of May.

Which Letter of Mr. Anselms, Captain Wall thus Answered;

Mr. Abraham Anselm. SIR,
YOurs of the 25th. May, I have Received, by which I see you had seen what I
writ to the Admirals, Killegrew, and Sir. Ralph Delaval, and if you have not
let them see the Letters, you have not done well, for what I did Inform them,
was, what was told me by one Captain Peter Row, of your recommending him to be
a Captain for King James, and for the other, is a very honest good Gentleman,
to whom you inquired where he could raise Forces for King James in the West:
There was no body but my self when he told me; so cannot name his name, but is
a Man very well known to you, and did wish you well, and was not willing that
your Person should come to any harm; but on the contrary, was willing that
should be known, that you being in such a place of such Trust as this, might be
of bad Consequence to the Nation: As to what I write of the Captain, there was
my Wife in Company when he told it, and also told of the same Matter, how you
had been Tampering with the other Gentleman; so on the next day I went and
Discoursed the said Gentleman my self, and he Confirmed the same, of which I
thought Convenient to give advice, for I think in Duty so to do. I have no more
to add, but that I am

Your Obedient Servant at Command Peter Wall.


Which Letter of Captain Walls, Mr. Anselm thus Answered without date.

SIR,
I Received yours of the 26th. Instant, and thank you for letting me know my
Accusers, your Letters were both delivered to Mr. Killegrew and Sir Ralph, into
their own hands, before I knew any thing of the matter; who sent for me to
them, and gave them me to Read, which I could not believe, there was so much
Villainy in Man; for as I hope for Mercy from Heaven, I am so far from talking
with them about any such matter, or indeed of business of any kind whatsoever,
that I have been hardly three times in his Company since I saw him in Venetia;
and that never at my own Invitation, but as he has been Introduced by others:
So that what Malice will invent, no Man is secure from; but how possible it is
for me to prefer him for the service he pretends, without the consent of the
Admirals, your own sense and reason may judge, since you cannot but know, that
no Stranger as he is to them, is to be Recommended by a bare Character, without
produceing Substantial Certificates, both of his Ability and honesty from the
Parties that have Employed him: Which they must surely remember, if I had
Recommended any such Person, which I am so far from doing that I never did, but
for one Man in my Life, who is known to them, and now on Board. As for the
other Gentleman you mention, I presume he is one that Mr. Row can Instuence to
say what he pleases: However I do not take it unkindly of you at all, for
giving this Information, for it is what an honest Man ought to do. I shall take
care to inquire into the matter, and do my self that Justice I ought to do; The
Answer to me now shall certainly be showed to the Admirals, from whom nothing
of this Matter shall be concealed,

Sir, I am Your Friend and Servant, Ab. Anselm.
This is to assure you, I delivered the Two Letters to the Admirals.

J. Fletcher.




About the same time also, that Captain Wall wrote to the Admirals, he wrote a
Letter to Mr. War, one of the Secretaries to the Earl of Nottingham: I never
saw the Original, nor Copy thereof; but Mr. War thus Answered it.

White Hall, May the 23d. 1693.
SIR,
I Had not your Letter till this Morning, and immediately showed it to my Lord,
who Comands me to tell you, that he would have you let me know, whither you
have given the Admirals an Account of the Matter whereof you writ to me? And
likewise, that you will send me the Name of the Person, who gave you this
Account, and such other Circumstances as may be necessary for a full
Information,

I am Your Humble Servant, R. War.


WHICH Letter was Answered by Captain Wall, who kept no Copy thereof, but he
writ in the (Original to the best of his Remembrance,) that I was so much Mr.
Anselm's Friend, that he thought I would be loath to confess what I knew of him.

SOME time after that, Captain. Wall came to Town from Southampton, and the
aforementioned Discourse of the Turkey-Fleet, being in every Man's Mouth, he
went, (unknown to me) to the Earl of Nottingham, and desired his Lordship that
I might be sent for, and Examined.

Whereupon my Lord sent for me by the said Captain, and I was Examined by his
Lordship, as to what I had said concerning Mr. Anselm; and my Lord asked me if
I could Swear; it I assured his Lordship, I had said nothing but what was True,
and could, with a safe Conscience, take my Oath of it, but not with as safe
Interest, because of the 1500 l.

His Lordship ordered me to write down what I had said; but, because it was
long, I desired an Hour or two's time to do it in, which being granted, I
brought the following Account to his Lordship in the Afternoon.

ABout two Months since, (as near as I can remember) one Captain Peter Row
came to me at the Ship-Tavern without Temple Bar, and told me he had a Business
to Impart to me, that (perhaps) I would hardly give credit to; I asking what it
was, he told me, That there came an unknown Gentleman to his Lodgings, and,
Inquiring for him by his Name, he being in the way, made Answer unto him
hiself: The Gentleman told him he was a Stranger to his Person, but however,
had heard of his Character, and told him that Mr. Abraham Anselm had
recommended him to great Lord, (from whom he came) as a fit Person to take the
Command of a Ship of War, and that, if he were willing, to bring in King James
again, he should have a Ship of Eighty or Ninety Guns, and he would introduce
him to the Lord that sent him, otherwise the Lord was not to be known. He made
Answer, (as he informed me) that he thanked the Lord, and Mr. Anselm, for their
Esteem of him; but, although he was a Man of Misfortunes, yet he was a true
Subject to the Government Established, and so refused to accept thereof.

After this, asking my Advice, what proper Courses he should take in this
Matter, I told him his best way was to acquaint the Earl of Nottingham, or the
Admirals of the Fleet with it, and withal, told him, I was the more apt to give
credit to what he said, for that, about a Twelve Month since, meeting Mr.
Anselm, and Sir Richard White, in the Pall Mall, Mr. Anselm told me, Jack, I
know that thou art an Honest Fellow, and one that has great interest in the
Tinners in the County of Cornwall, and asked me what Men I could raise, in case
there should be a Design to bring in King James; telling me, that in Monmouth's
Rebellion I was much for King James, and hoped I would be so still, for that he
had beard that I would have accepted of King James's Commission; I answered I
was for the Present Government, and so we parted.

And about five Weeks since, there came one Captain Peter Wall, and acquainted
me that the day before there called upon him one Captain Peter Row, (the same
afore-mentioned Captain Row,) and discoursing with him about the Affairs of
the Fleet, and wondering how one Anselm came to be in so great a Post as to be
Secretary to the Navy, in regard he was a reputed Jacobite; He told him that he
was so much his Friend that he had (unknowingly) recommended him to a great
Person of Honor, as a fit Person to serve King James, and that there came a
strange Gentlement unto him, and acquanted him that his Character was made
known to a great Person of Honor, from whom he came, and that if he were
willing to bring in King James again, he might have a Ship of Eighty or Ninety
Guns, and would also tell him the Lord's Name, but he refusing the offer, (as
he told me) the Gentleman went away, and said no more.

But Captain Row finding that Captain Wall gave but little credit to what he
said, told him he had related the same thing to me, and thereupon Captain Wall
came to me, relating the same Matter, and asked me if I had heard any thing of
it, and I told him, I had; then Captain Wall asking of me what was the best
Methods to be used, being a National Concern, I told them the best way was to
write to the Earl of Nottingham, and so likewise to the Admirals of the Fleet.
And Captain Wall wrote to the Admirals, Mr. Killegrew, and Sir Ralph Delaval,
but had no retrurn from themselves, but had two Evasie Letters from Mr. Anselm,
nothing of Answer to what Captain Wall writ, or the Matters he accused him
with, which Letters Captain Wall has in his custody, and Copies thereof I have
now by me. Captain Wall likewise wrote a Letter to Mr. War, Secretary to the
Earl of Nottingham, which was Answered the 23d. of May last, a Copy whereof I
have now by me, and Captain Wall has the Original; which was Answered by
Captain Wall about two or three days after that, but Captain Wall had no Answer
since, as he has informed me,

John Praed.
Sworn before me this 7th. Day of June, 1693.

Nottingham.



SOME time after Mr. Anselm was sent for, and soon after that again, I received
the following Order, which was left at my Lodgings.

Mr. Praed is desired to attend at the Earl of Nottingham 's Office at
Whitehall, at Four of the Clock this Afternoon, being July the 7th 1693.

Francis Clarke, Messenger.

Captain Wall, Captain Row and my Self came accordingly, and having been
Examined seperately before the Privy Council, Mr. Anselm, and my Self, were at
last called in Face to Face.

And after the Two first Paragraphs, of what I had Deposed before my Lord
Nottingham, were Read by Sir John Trenchard, it was asked by my Lord Marquess
of Winchester of Mr. Anselm, what Acquaintaince he had with Sir Richard White,
and Mr. Anselm answered, he had but little, or that he had no great
acquaintance with him. Then it was asked if he were not Bail for Sir Richard
White, when he was Clap't up into Newgate, upon the suspicion of the French
Invasion; he answered, that he was Bail, and when it was asked him what he was
Bail for, his Answer was, for that Sir Richard was his Friend.

After that it was asked him, if he had any more to say for himself, and he
Answered their Lordships, that he had adventured his Life for his King and
Country, and that being more then I had done, he hoped he should have the more,
and I the less Credit.

To which I answered (by their Lordships leave) that Mr. Anselm knew that I had
adventured my Life for King Charles the II. and not for his Pay, and that since
my Case in Chancery was so lately brought to the Bar of the House of Lords,
their Lordships might please to Remember how much I have suffered for my
Country, and to consider the present Risque that I was running, for attesting
the Truth, I so accidentally said without any design against Mr. Anselm.

UPON which we were dismissed, and sometime after the Two Captains, and my Self,
were Ordered to attend the Kings Council, which we did.

And, on the 7th of September in the Morning I was served with the following
Subpoena Ticket.

Mr. John Praed.
BY Virtue of their Majesty's Writ of Subpoena, to you and others Directed; you
are to be, and personally appear, before Their Majesty's Commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer at Hick's-Hall in St. Johns-street, to Morrow being the 7th. of
this Instant September, at Two of the Clock in the Afternoon, to give Evidence
on Their Majesty's behalf, against Abraham Anselm, for high Misdemeanour
against their Majesty's. And this you are not to Omit, under the Penalty of 100
l. dated the 6th. of September, 1693.

P. Cey.

To Mr. John Praed.
I Waited the same Day, from Two till Eight, and next Morning, from Eight till
Twelve of the Clock; and then I was Sworn, with the Two Captains, and after
them, was called in before the Grand Jury.

I told them what I had to say, and they asked me, what Men I could pretend to
raise in Cornwall, I thought that was an Improper Question, because I did not
pretend to raise any, and I answered it accordingly.

Then, one of them asked me, if Mr. Anselm was not in Drink, or in Jest, when
he said the words, I told them, he could not be much in Drink, because we had
drunk but little; but whether he was in Jest or not, (when he said these
words,) I told them, I could not so well tell, because a Man may speak a thing
seemingly in Jest, and yet design it in Earnest.

But I told them, (as I told the Lords of the Privy Council) that he spoke them
after such a manner, that I did not take so much notice of them, until he
became Bail (as aforesaid) for Sir Richard White. And then another asked me, if
he did not speak the words, seemingly, in Jest; I told them all, that I was
upon my Oath, and my Conscience, as well as they, (and that to my seeming,) he
spoke these words after this way of speaking some others. And they asking me no
more Questions, brought it in Ignoramus.

But one of the Jury came to me, as I was going out of the Room, and asked me,
if I was that Praed that Printed the Varieties of Villainy against Mr. William
War. I told him I was, he said, I had done my self a great deal of Right, and
that he had made use of the thing to Vindicate my Evidence, which was called in
Question.

AND now give me leave to tell you, I have been no more a Malicious, or
Self-Intress'd Evidence against Mr. Anselm, in this Case, then Mr. Anselm was
against himself, when he was an Evidence both for me, and against me, in my
Case Contra War and Gates.

For when he was Examined upon Oath, and Interrogatories by Sir John Francklin,
one of the Masters in Chancery, to know if he, or his Partner at Venice, or
both, ever sent down to Zant any Money to me in particular, for Account of the
said War and Gates, he Answered in the Negative, though his Deposition was
something against his Honor, and above 1500 l. against his Interest.

For I having drawn from Zant, for Account of the said War and Gates 6000
Dollars, by a Letter of Exchange, on Mr. Williams and Anselm then at Venice;
and thereby ordered them to send me down the same by the first Ship, Mr.
Williams (unknown to Mr. Anselm, as he assured me) accepted the said Letter,
both in his own, and Mr. Anselms Name; but, being in Combination with Mr.
War, to wrong me of all, and more then all, I was worth in the World, he, nor
his Partner, never sent me the said Sum, nor any part thereof.

So that Mr. Anselm, as well as Mr. Williams, (by the Law of all Trading
Nations,) remains my Debtor, not only for the Principle, (which is about 1500
l.) but also for Interest, and all Damages, from the Year 1680 to this Day.

But I did never trouble Mr. Anselm for any part of it, because I could not
think in my Conscience, that such a Man as he seems to be, would be accessory
to Mr. Williams and Mr. Wars designs aforesaid.

NOT WITHSTANDING which, etc. I have been often told that I have betrayed my
Friend by the aforesaid Information, and I have as often answered, that he
betrayed himself to an Enemy to Treason: And all Effects, of what kind soever,
art chargeable on the first Causes.

Yet I kept his Council (if I may call it so) as long as I could, But even a
Son, by way of Prevention, may betray his Father for Treason, Cic. Offic. lib.
3d.
in case the danger be Great and Imminent.

I knew I should be called an Informer, for confessing the Truth at such a
time, Especially any thing like Treason; but Defamation is incident to all
Instances of duty, and I thought it a very seasonable opportunity to lay out my
Reputation, whatever came in thereby.

Yet Mr. Anselm was so kind (in his Letter without date) to Captain Wall, as to
Commend him for giving Information to the Admirals, For 'twas what an Honest
Man ought to do; And truly such an Honest Act, (if I may judge by the rough
Draught, I have seen thereof) seems to have respected the Public Good of
England, rather than the private Interest of him, that Exercised it.

But, in the same Letter, Mr. Anselm presumed, That the other Gentleman was
one, whom Captain Row could Influence to say what he pleased, and I presume he
meant me, because he thanked Captain Wall in the said Letter, for letting him
know his Accusers, of whom he seems thereby to have satisfied.

I am sure one of his Accusers has not Incriminated him, of what he has been
Guilty himself, though he was unwilling to have his Name known, and he could
assure Mr. Anselm also by other Reasons, (which it may be he already knows of)
that he is not one of those whom any others can Influence to say or Act, etc.

IN his First Letter to Captain Wall, he calls me also One of those Villains,
which ought to be made Examples of.

FOR my part, I do regard such Words, as Honest Women do the Incrimination of
Varlets; for no Man is a Villain, but he that Acts Villainous Things, either
for one, or against another. Non e Villan' che Villan' sia, ma quel e Villan',
che fa Villania.

And, above all Villains, (except two) I hate A Malicious Informer, (as Mr.
Anselm calls me,) and such an Informer as will say unto me, Do not you tell
that you had the Information from me, for if you do, Sen. Mor. pa. 169.
I Will deny it. By which means (as my Author says) Friends are set together by
the Ears, and the Informer slips his Neck out of the Collar. Such an Informer
is farther set forth by the following Letters from Mr. Williams, and Mr.
Anselm, (then Factors at Venice,) to a Certain Merchant, and Company of London.

Venice the 14th 9ber. 1691.
WHat has been here generally discoursed for some time, we have now an assured
Ground to believe, und that is the Endeavor of Consul Hobson to Establish
himself Agent of Venice, and his Son Consul. The Wisdom of the Supreme Powers
will sufficiently Canvas this Proposal, whether it be for his Majesty's
Interest, for a Man that has lived all his time in the Sphere of a very
private Merchant, with little Credit, till he writ himself Consul, and that
jumped into the Profession from Supra Cargo, that has his Wife and Family of
this Country, whose Estate is likewise here wholly concerned. We say whether
such a one (setting aside what also might be said with respect to the Infirmity
of his Body, and Closeness of his Fists) may be a meet Subject to represent the
Majesty of England, Especially when we consider the Promotion of his Son to the
Consulship, whom any one knows, that knows him; that he is such a miserable
Tool of State, more sit to serve a Seven Years Apprentiship, than appear before
Senators. This also we write, and recommend to your Secrecy, that no Odium may
fall upon us, but as we are neither Desirous or Ambitious (Si Fosse per
Imaginatione) of any such Employment, so it should displease us to see Places
of Honor and Trust, Bought and Sold at the pleasure of the most unbecoming.


Mr. Anselm was the Penman of this Epistle, but, to do him Right, Mr. Williams
most commonly prescribed to him; and therefore, I presume (to use some of his
own Words) He could Influence him to write what he pleased.

And now if I did know Mr. Anselm to be more unfit to serve His Majesty, King
William the III. then Mr. Hobson and his Son were to serve King Charles the II.
the question, which I would put to Mr. Anselm himself, is, Whether, all other
things considered, I am as much to blame as he, and many other Persons report
me to be?

GIVE me leave to tell you but one thing more, and that is concerning the Two
Factors aforesaid.

There happened at last a Difference between themselves, wherein, I must needs
say, Mr. Anselm distinguished himself much to his Commendation, for when he had
written home to his Corrispondents, in offense to Mr. Williams, and in defense
of himself, he showed him what he had written, and what Answers he had received
thereto: But Mr. William's dealt not so honorably with him, for he writ home a
secret Letter as full of Scurrility, as some Men's Discourses are. And because
it is so, I shall conclude this Letter with the least part of that.

Venice the 9th. of May 1681.
I Was not a little startled, when lately Mr. Anselm Recommended to my
perusual, the Contents of yours to him in proprio, dated the 25th past. I
easily observed thereby, how I have been represented by one whose corrupt
Judgment has been so far from discerning his own Interest that he has ever
perverted the designs that others have put on foot for his good, etc. It is
strange you should lay so much weight on the report of such a fellow, that
found no foundation to raise himself but on the failings of another. What a
condition think you had I been in, had that unnatural Brute any thing material
to writ of, but because he wanted Subject, he made a Contrivance of Impudent
Lies to give plausibility to his most Ignominious, and I had almost said
Inhumane Ingratitude, etc. But were there any need to give the Portraict of
this Informer, I could do it at large, and unto his Confusion.


I JUST now met with the MEMOIRS of the Present State of Europe, for the Month
of August, 1693. and therein is this Passage.

MR. Anselm Secretary to the Admirals, having been charged for holding a
Correspondency with the Enemy, is brought up to London. The principal Witnesses
against him are Captain Row, and Captain Wallis, and one Praed a Tradesman and
Citizen of London, who have all Three been confronted by him before the Privy
Council, and charge him with having in these Two Years last past Corresponded
Criminally, with a Brother of the Marquess Albeville, I am told that there is
more Truth in this then the World is aware of, for Sir Richard White being a
Spanish Chevalier is of nedr Relation to Albeville.
the Envoy formerly from King James at the Hague, as also, with having
endeavored to debauch a Sea-Officer, into the Service of France, where they
say he promised kins, he would get him the Command if to Ship of 80 Guns. The
Attourny General has Orders to prosecute him: And in the mean time, another
Secretary is sent down to the Admirals. It must needs be, that either Mr.
Anselm, or some other has given notice to the Enemy of all that did pass.
Because they have taken their measures, so that it cannot be doubted but that
they were well instructed. They write that since this, he has been discharged
out of the hands of the Messenger, who had him in Custody, upon his giving
security to appear at all times, when ever he is called for.

By which, and what follows, you may see how some things are represented.

London Gazette, from Monday October the 23d. to Thursday, October the 26th.
1693. By the Lords of their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
WHereas a Report has been raised, and spread, by Henry Kilegrew Esquire Sir Ralph
Delaval and Sir Cloudsly Shovel Knights, Admirals of their Majesty's Fleet,
that the Right Honorable, the Lord Viscount Falkland, one of the Lords of
their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council; did upon reading a Paper at the
Board, stiffle something that was material to their Justification. The Lords of
the Council, having considered of, and Examined into the matter, are satisfied,
and do declare, that the said Report is False, and Scandalous: Although upon the
said Examination, it does appear, that something happned, which might mistead
the Admirals into that Error. And it is Ordered in Council, that this be
Printed, and Published in the Gazitte.

W. Bridgman.


AND NOW I have appealed to a Man of Impartial Honor and Apprehension; I will
hope it does appear, that I have been no Malicious Informer; if it does appear,
I know you will Affirm it, not so much against Mr. Anselm, as in favor of your
most

Effectual Friend, And Humble Servant John Praed.

My Dear Friend,
I Received your Letter, and being pleased with the the Perusal thereof; I read
it over and over, according to Prescription I have met withal in one part of
the Turkish-Spys.

I have likewise shown it to some of your Friends, and mine; and we are all
exceeding glad to see you vindicate your self so upon all Occasions, that the
World may not believe you are one of those Villains that ought to be made
Examples of.

And since you dared to speak the Truth so much against your own Interest, to
Serve your King and Country; Let me prevail with you to Print your Letter for
the Public Good, and your own Reputation.

The Supposition I have, that you designed so do, puts me in mind of this
Passage, in the Description of Russia.

Juan Vasiloreidg, one of the Emperors of Russia, nailed a French Ambassadors
Hat to his Head, for putting it on before him. At which time Sir Jerome Boze,
Ambassador from Queen Elizabeth, put on his Hat, and Cockt it, saying, That the
French Ambassador represented a Cowardly King of France, but he, the Invinsible
Queen of England, who veiled Her Bonnet to no Prince in Christendom, and was
both able and willing to vindicate her Minister -- Look you there, quoth the
Emperor to his Boyars, Which -- of ye all dare do so much for your Master, as
this Man does for his Mistress!

FINIS.

