THE TRUE HISTORY OF CARA MUSTAPHA.

Late GRAND VIZIER.

BEING A most faithful account of his first rising, the several degrees of his
Fortune, his Amors in the Serraglio, his Emplois, the true cause of his
undertaking the Siege of Vienna, together with the particulars of his Death.

Written Originally in French by a Person of quality, and now translated in
English by Francis Philon. Gent.

London, Printed for L. Curtiss on Ludgate hill, and Hen. Rodes next door to
the Bear Tavern, near Bride-lane in Fleet Street. 1685.

The Strangling of the Grand Vizier.

A. The Grand Vizier: B. The chief officers of the Army assembled in council.
C. The warrant of ye Grand-Seignior for ye death of ye Grand Vizier; which he
reads. D. an Aga holding ye silk rope to strangle ye Grand Vizier. E. an Aga
who presents to ye Grand Vizier a Cushion to Kneel upon, and pray. F. a
velvet bag to put in ye Grand Visiers head, which ye two Agas had order to sever
from ye body, after his being Strangled.


(...) in Fleet street

TO THE READER.
THis Book contains the whole Life of Cara Mustapha, late Grand Vizier, who
was Strangled last Year at Buda, by order of the Grand Seignior, his Enemies
having turned into a crime, the necessity he had been brought unto, to raise
the Siege of Vienna, it is an History, which has deserved a general approbation
in its own Country, and it is not to be doubted, but it will find the same
acceptance in its Travels in England, being dressed up after the English
fashion. The most secret intrigues of the Serraglio, are there traced with so
much likelihood, that it is impossible to forbear being convinced, that they
have occasioned all the misfortunes of this famous Minister.

That Place which you see at the beginning of the Book, may instruct you with
the sad manner, and fatal Ceremonies of his death; whilst he was reading the
Grand Seignior's Warrant for his Execution, one of the two Agas, who had been
trusted with that cruel Commission, set down before him a rich embroidered
Cushion to kneel upon, and make his last Prayer, and the other at the same time
put a silk Rope about his Neck, and Strangled him; without allowing him liberty
to speak a word, after he had ended his Prayer; There you see the Divan
assembled, the Grand Vizier reading the Order, the general amazement of the
attendants, the joy of some, the trouble of the others, and all the
circumstances of that dreadful Spectacle, as they are explained by the notes
beneath. This Book recommends it self so well by its own merit, that it would
be needless for me to speak any more in its commendation; this only I will
venture to say, that both they that seek merely for pastime, and pleasure in
the reading of a Book, cannot but take a great delight in seeing here the
subtle management of love tricks at the Turkish Court; and those that are for
instruction, may be here abundantly satisfied, if they but reflect upon the
wonderful revolutions, that appear in the whole stream of this great Man's
fortune, from his very Cradle to his Death; nay, they that are truly pious will
find here a fair opportunity to adore the Judgments of God, and confess that
this Grand Vizier, who had contrived the Death of two eminent Bashaws in the
Ottoman Empire, was at last justly and deservedly paid with his own coin. In
fine, they that are true Patriots, and deserve to bear the glorious name of
English Men, cannot but be very sensible of their happiness, when they see in
the several transactions of this History, the most Tyrannical Government of the
Turkish Empire; they cannot, I say, but praise God, Love and Honor from the
heart, our Most Gracious and Merciful King, when they consider, how happy is
the condition of Subjects, that live under a Monarch, who makes the Law the
only Rule of his Government, in comparison to that of those, who groan under
the heavy Yoke of a Prince, who follows no other rule, but his own will. I will
put an end to this advertisement, by giving a short explanation of some obscure
terms, which I thought not fit to alter in the translation of this Book, to
help thereby those who have perhaps never heard of them in their life.

The Serraglio means properly a Palace, but it is commonly understood of that,
wherein the Grand Seignior dwells.

The Port is the Turkish Court.

The Grand Vizier is the supreme Minister of State, such as were formerly the
Mayors of the Palace in France; the Ximenesses in Spain, and lately the
Richly us and Mazarins beyond Sea.

Bashaws are like our Lords in England, who Commands the Armies, and are made
Governors in the several Provinces and Places of the Empire.

Beglierbey is a Viceroy of a whole Kingdom, who has under him many Bashaws.

Caplan Bashaw is the High Admiral of Turkey, who not only commands the Fleet,
but has also Authority over all Islands, and Seaport Towns, or Fortresses of
the Archipelago.

Aga is a Colonel or Captain of a Troop, Regiment, or the whole Body of the
Janisaries gradually.

Spahis is a Horseman.

Cadi is the chief Justice of a Province or Town.

The Divan is understood either of the assembly, or of the place of the Council.

Itchoglans, are young Men brod in the Serraglio, almost after the manner of
our Pages in Europe, they are sent thither from all parts of the Empire, and
chosen amongst those that the Governors send yearly to Constantinople, as a
tribute due to the Grand Seignior by the several Provinces.

A Selam is a kind of Nosegay, or rather a little Basket full of Flowers whose
quality, color, simetry and proportion, are as much expressive of the passions
of love amongst the Turks, as our Billets or Love Letters in Europe.

I cannot but observe you at last, that the History of Donna Emanuela is not a
fiction; it is an incident, the Gazett took notice of, at the time when that
fair Spanish Lady was taken.

THE HISTORY OF CARA MUSTAPHA GRAND VIZIER.
OF all the Monarchies of the World, that of the Ottomans is without
contradiction, the most despotick and absolute: All the Subjects of that vast
Empire, are Slaves to the Grand Seignior; Birth gives no rank amongst them;
Children do not inherit their Fathers Estate; nay, the Bashaws themselves, know
not their own Parents, the most part of them being stoll'n away in their most
tender years, and brought into the Serraglio, wherein they learn all sorts of
Exercises. There they are bred in such a great submission to the Sultan's
orders, that they make to themselves a principle of Religion, to yield up their
heads without repining, when that Prince demands them, (...), being satisfied,
they go straightway to Heaven, if they be happy enough as to dye, either for
the Service, or by the Command of their Emperor. As the Sultans do ordinarily
leave, all the care of the state to the vigilance of the Grand Vizier, that
first Minister, has a boundless and illimited Authority; he bestows favors
as he lists, and never wants fair pretenses, to rid himself of those who have
displeased him. All the other Visiers or Bashaws give him an account of that,
which concerns their Ministry, and the Emperor is never acquainted with other
things, but such as the Grand Vizier is willing to have him know; even to that,
if the Prince comes to the Divan, that is the Council Board, his presence
serves for nothing else, but to give more credit to the motions of the Grand
Vizier, which are always approved of, without that any of the other Ministers
durst contradict him. Nevertheless, that exceeding great power freeth him not
from often being exposed, to the danger of losing his life, through the secret
Cabals, which are contrived against him, within the Serraglio, although he
does his best endeavors to prevent them, by making sure of the protection of
the Sultanesses, and the friendship of the Eunuchs; and because the Sultanesses
are always sensible, either to love, or to ambition, and the Eunuchs do seek
how to satisfy their insatiable covetousness, that gives occasion to an
infinite number of intrigues; so that, notwithstanding the great precautions of
the Grand Seignior, and ^he external rudeness of the Eunuchs, ^here always
passes some secret gaantry within the Palace, by such like ^itrigues Cara
Mustapha arrived to the place of Grand Vizier; but, that we might give a more
perfect and clear knowledge of it, we must come back and search into the very
Principles of the matter.

The Grand Vizier Orcan, having displeased the Sultaness Queen Kiosem, was
strangled in the Reign of Ibrahim. The Janissaries, who loved that Minister,
revolted thereupon, and resolved to revenge his death. Their fury brought them
to such an extremity, that they cut off Ibrahim's head, and set his Son on the
Throne. That Son was but Six years old, who is this now Reigning Emperor,
under the name of Mahomet the Fourth. They did however consent, the Government
should be given to the Sultaness Kiosem, Mother of him whom they had just now
Sacrificed to their Vengeance. That Princess who had much Wisdom, and was
jealous of the pregnant wit of the Sultaness Valide Mother to the Reigning
Monarch, made a new Cabal for the undoing of Mahomet, and setting up in his
place Suleiman, his Brother, who was Son of another Sultaness. The Sultaness
Valide having discovered that Intrigue, had interest enough among the
Janissaries, to put them upon a second revolt. The Old Sultaness lost her life
in that sedition, and the Sultaness Valide, was proclaimed Regent of the Empire.
After all those troubles, the Ottoman Monarchy enjoyed a long calm, through the
great care of the Sultaness, and the peaceable temper of the Prime Vizier
Boinou-Egri; but the Eunuch, who has the direction of the treasure, having
retrenched something of the Spahis pay, which are the Turkish Horse, they
revolted, and made strange disorders. They could not be appeased, but by the
Sacrifice of two of the chief Eunuchs of the Serraglio, whom they strangled
presently; which so much incensed the Eunuchs, that they ever since that time,
conceived an implacable hatred against the Spahis, and put all Engines at work
for a revenge. Nay, the Sultaness Valide had a share in their just resentment,
and promised them to take a convenient time for the punishment of the
Criminals. She spoke about it several times to the Grand Vizier; but that
Minister, who had not courage and resolution enough to undertake such a
dangerous revenge, found therein a great deal of difficulties: So the Sultaness
being pressed by the Eunuchs, resolved to cause the Grand Vizier to be deposed,
and designed for his Successor the Famous Kioupruli, who had the repute of a
fearless Soldier, and was accounted a Man of a vast capacity. She communicated
her designs to the Kehaia, or Master of the Serraglio, and ordered him to wait
upon Kioupruli from her, for to acquaint him with that great Fortune he was
designed unto, thereby to engage him, to be for ever inviolably bound to her
interests. The Sultan who Governed through his Mothers Councils, approved of
the resolution she had taken. Boinou-Egri was turned out, and Kioupruli
Proclaimed Grand Vizier with a general applause. A little while after, he found
a way how to disunite the Spahis; they were dispersed, and then separately
punished for their revolt, by order of Kioupruli. That Minister having so
answered the hopes of the Sultaness Valide, got deep into the Grand Seigniors
esteem, and purchased the friendship of the Eunuchs, who have always ever since
sought the occasions to show him their sensibleness thereof; that which much
contributed to the Fortune of the Grand Vizier Cara Mustapha. Kioupruli who
owned him to be his Kinsman, had put him in the Serraglio, there to be brought
up together with a great number of young folks, that are called Itchoglans. The
Eunuchs, the care of their breeding is committed unto, thought themselves happy
to have frequent occasions of favoring Mustapha, who, of himself was a very
comely and witty young Man, and did in all his Exercises, behave himself to the
admiration of the whole Court; so that, either by his own merit, or through the
favor of the Master of the Serraglio, he got in less then ten years, into the
Treasure Chamber, which is the post of distinction, and the first door of the
Temple of Fortune; for the Itchoglans that serve there, do often approach the
Grand Seigniors Person, and usually arrive to the eminentest dignities of the
State.

The Beglierbey of Egypt being dead, his most precious goods were brought into
the Sultan's Treasure, and because there were found a great many most curious
things, the Grand Seignior invited the Sultaness his Mother to take a view of
them; and although the like is almost never practiced, obliged her to come
along with him into the Treasure Chamber, attended by two of her
Itchoglanesses, or Maids of Honor. The Officers who were not used to such like
visits, were much surprised at. Cara Mustapha distinguished himself both by his
good mien, and by a certain air of Grandeur, which none of the others could
pretend unto; so that he was presently observed by the Sultaness, who did, with
great earnestness look upon him. The Grand Seignior having perceived it, spoke
of him most favorably, and told her, he was Nephew of Kioupruli. The Sultaness
overjoyed to have such a specious color, to give him some token of that
inclination she begun to feel for him, asked the Grand Seignior a rich Emerald
he had showed her, and as she had seen him bestow many gifts upon the other
Officers of the Treasure (which he is wont to do when he commands it to be
opened) she gave it to Cara Mustapha, who was so dazzled at the sight of Women,
having perhaps never seen any till that day, that he durst not accept of the
Emerald, before the Sultan bad him to receive it. The Sultaness Valide retired,
well satisfied with the Magnifick presents her Son had made her, but with her
mind filled with the sweet Idea of the young Mustapha, who had appeared to her
Eyes exceeding amiable: As soon as she was alone, she recalled to her mind, all
the features of Mustapha, together with all she had heard of his good parts;
but when she reflected on the impossibility of ever seeing again that young
Itchoglan, she was sorry that she saw him; nay, she earnestly endeavored to
forget him. While she was working upon her self to conquer it, the Kehaia, or
Master of the Serraglio, who is a black Eunuch that commands all the others,
put one day in his mind, to remit some dragm of his severe humor, and to be
merry with the Itchoglanesses of the Sultaness Valide. Those Maids who spend
their life in a perpetual confinement, resolved to fool him to some purpose;
and accordingly, one of the handsomest feigned to love the Kehaia. The Eunuch
observing, that the Itchoglaness used him with an extraordinary kindness, could
not forbear believing, she was indeed moved by his merit, and showed her a
great sensibleness thereof. That young Person ravished with joy, for the happy
success of her trick, acquainted her companions withal, and continued to feign
a vehement passion. Our Eunuch, who had less love than vanity, promised her,
not reflecting upon his sad condition; secretly to drop into her Chamber, when
her Companions were a sleep. The Itchoglaness, feigned to be most sensible at
such a proof of his affection, and assured him, she would wait for his
Eunuchship, with a great deal of impatience; he failed not to come to the
rendevous, and a minute after his coming, all the Itchoglanesses entered with
Links, and scofft at the poor Wretch at an high rate. Eunuchs are revengeful
People; therefore the Kehaia took pett at this affront, and resolved to seek
for a revenge. In the mean while, the Sultaness Valide did in vain resist that
violent passion, which drew impetuously her heart toward Mustapha. It grew so
strong with time, that she more than once had a mind to get him secretly into
her apartment; but the fear of endangering the life of so dear a lover, and
those almost unconquerable difficulties, that she foresaw would be found in
making sure of the Master of the Serraglio, did plunge her into an unspeakable
trouble of mind. She heard in that very time, by one of her Itchoglanesses, the
merry trick they had played upon the Kehaia; and because she consented and
referred all things to her love, she hoped, she could draw some advantage out
of that adventure. She called privately the handsome Itchoglaness, who had
feigned to love the Kehaia; and after she had represented unto her, how much
Eunuchs are inclined to vengeance, and that the Kehaia being Master of the
Serraglio, would not fail to undo her, she promised her her protection, and
that she would never forsake her, if she would exactly follow her directions.
That Maid being truly sensible of the Queens kindness, proffered her her own
life, if such a victim should be necessary to her interests. Then the Sultaness
commanded her to feign still to love the Kehaia, and to show him both by deeds
and words, she was brought to despair, for the misfortune happened in their
interview without her knowledge. The Itchoglaness discharged her commission,
with as much cunning as wit, but she found the Eunuch highly offended at the
insult he had, being exposed unto whatever she said, he could not be persuaded
of her innocence: nevertheless, she gave him so many signs of an extreme
passion, that at last, she made him believe it true. The poor Kehaia, was so
much moved by the false show of that fair ones tenderness and constancy, that
then he felt more sensibly, than ever, the misfortune of his State; he was
conscious enough of his being utterly unable, to answer the forwardness of the
young Maid, so it came in his mind to supply in his room an Itchoglan of the
treasure house, hoping with that trick, to breed in his Mistresses mind, an
high apprehension of his Valor in Loves Wars, and that afterward, he should
have the pleasure of despising her. That conceit so much tickled and charmed
his vanity, that he resolved to ask young Mustapha, if he would accept of a
private conversation with the handsomest of the two Itchoglanesses, which he
saw waiting upon the Sultaness Valide. Mustapha answered him out of hand, he
would not be grieved to lose his life after such a happiness. The Eunuch
conceiving by that brisk answer, he could not choose a Man more proper for his
design, told him, he should e're long hear of him; and now, after he had taken
fair measures with his pretended Mistress, he put Mustapha in disguise, whom he
had first instructed, how he must behave himself, to avoid the miscarriage of
an unlucky discovery. Night being come, he led him with unheards of precautions
into the Itchoglanesses Chamber. The Sultaness Valide, being acquainted with
all by that Maid, had taken her place, designing to catch the Kehaia, and
threaten him with his utter ruin, except he would make an atonement, and buy
his pardon for his crime, by an entire submission to her commands, and the
introducing young Mustapha in her Chamber. As soon as he was come in, that
Sultaness emboldened by her passion, and filled with the Idea of her Lover,
opened a dark Lanthorn, and did already begin to fright the false Eunuch, with
swinging reproaches, when she knew again her dear Cara Mustapha. There was
never a surprise like hers; however it could not be but acceptable to her,
since she saw him whom she had judged so worthy of her love, in lieu of a black
and dreadful Eunuch, she thought to meet with Mustapha, on his side, was not so
much pleased at the encounter as she; having no experience in loves intrigues,
he fell so much out of countenance at the sight of the Sultaness, and was so
frighted at her threatenings, that he durst not lift up his eyes to look upon
her, fancying the Kehaia would undo him, and that he was a going to be
abandoned to the merciless fury of the dumbs of the Serraglio, but our
Sultaness did not leave him long in that fright. She plainly confessed him the
violent passion she had for him, and forgot nothing that might give him such
proofs thereof, as he could wish himself, so Cara Mustapha abundantly
satisfied, nay almost overwhelmed with his Sultanesses kindness, acquainted her
with the design of the Kehaia, and how he put him upon cheating the
Itchoglaness; she heard that secret with a great deal of pleasure, and after
she had promised him to take care of his fortune, she sent him back, strictly
forbidding him to tell the Kehaia, he had seen her.

Now the Eunuch proud as can be, of an imaginary esteem, he thought, he had got
in his Itchoglanesses apprehension, did already affect to slight her, when the
Sultaness sent for him; being come, and her waiting Ladies retired, she told
him, four dumbs were in search of him, to strangle him by the Sultan's order,
because he had, by Night, introduced a man into the Serraglio. The Wretch
seized with fear, cast himself at her Feet, entreating her to be so merciful as
to save his life. She engaged to sue for his pardon, but on condition, he would
confess his crime, and discover her all the circumstances of that Affair, that
might, said she, regard the Sultaness Queen. The Kehaia made her unheards of
Oaths to undeceive her, and after a downright ingenuous account of the
Itchoglanesses adventure, freely confessed, his vanity made him choose Cara
Mustapha, to supply his place. The Sultaness well pleased at his honest dealing
with her, made him conceive, she knew well how to make a good turn to her
friends, even before their application to her, and assured him, he might retire
without fear, because she had hindered the noise of his Crime, from coming to
the Emperors knowledge. The Kehaia gave her a thousand assurances of his
gratitude, swore an inviolable attachment to her interests, and took his leave,
a little while after, the Sultaness who longed to see her Gallant, called again
the Kehaia in private, and declared to him, that ever since she had seen Cara
Mustapha in the Treasure-house, her mind was so filled with the charming Idea
of his good mien, that it was impossible for her to think of any other thing,
and that the most important and acceptable service he ever might do her, was to
introduce him at Night in her Chamber. The grateful Eunuch answered, he was
exceeding glad he had opportunity to Sacrifice his life to her commands, and
promised her to acquaint Mustapha with so divine a fortune, that he might
prepare himself to answer it, with such forwardness as was due to so special a
favor.

The Sultaness having so cunningly engaged the chief Eunuch into the interest
of her passion, got several times Mustapha into her apartment; but scarce was
their sweet commerce well established, when the Grand Vizier who minded his
Nephews preferment, took him out of the Serraglio, and put him amongst the
Troops, that he might give proof of his courage in the War. The Sultaness did
resent to the quick her Lovers departure, and wholly applied her self to seek
how to have him back again, and at the same time to procure him an employ, that
should engage him to reside there. She had still a great share in the
Government, so it was an easy matter to her to find a favorable opportunity
for that. The place of Master of the Horse being vacant, she moved the Grand
Seignior to bestow it upon Cara Mustapha; assuring him, the Prime Vizier would
be extremely sensible of it. The Sultan gave his consent, and happy Mustapha is
commanded to return speedily to Court.

The Sultaness having by these means, renewed her former correspondence with
her Lover, failed not to put an high value upon the services she had made him;
and he failed not on his side to do his utmost, for being even with her, but in
the midst of his pleasures, he did not neglect his interest; he made so good
use of those suitable advices she gave him, for to insinuate himself in the
Grand Signiors favor, that he honored him with his special friendship, and
gave him a little while after, a Commission that showed both a great trust and
esteem. Assan Beglierbey of Asia, being revolted against the Grand Signior, had
drawn in several other Bashaws to his party, and with impunity plundered all
the frontiers of Anatoly. The Grand Vizier, had sent a small Body of Troops to
fight that Rebel: but Assan was grown so powerful, that Kioupruli was forced to
draw back his Army, and stay till he were able to send more considerable Forces
thither.

That Bashaw had Married the Princess Bash-lari, Sister to the Grand Seignior,
who had already been Married to three Bashaws, tho then but between Sixteen or
Seventeen Years Old. Assan, who was grown in years, had not, since his revolt,
the same respects as before, to that young Princess; her Birth Inspiring her
with a noble and Just pride, made her more sensible of the unkind usage, she
received from him, she could never use herself to it, and found a way how to
send a Letter to the Grand Seignior, wherein she complained to his Highness of
her present misery. The Sultan was moved at Bash-lary's misfortune, and spoke
of it one day to Mustapha, in such Terms, as might plainly show the greatness
of his sorrow. This was a sufficient warrant to Mustapha's Courage, he followed
the Transport of his Zeal, and feigning himself extremely Surprised, that there
could be found upon Earth a man so base, and so unmannerly, as to want respect
for a Princess of the Ottomans blood, he offered himself to feign a discontent
from the Port, and go to Assan's Army, to cut off his Head upon the first
opportunity, if his Highness would but give him a Hatcherif. You must observe
the Turks have so much Submission for a Hatcherif (That is a warrant written
with the Grand Seignior's own hand) That, as soon as it is showed them, they
give over their life, choosing rather to die, than to oppose such an Order. The
Sultan admiring the Zeal of Mustapha, accepted of his proffer, and made him
depart secretly, authorized with a Hatcherif. Mustapha's Journey was not long
hidden to the Sultaness, and the Grand Vizier thought fit to acquaint her with
the true motives thereof. She was so allarmed at the danger, her Gallant was
like to be exposed unto, that she fell out with the Sultan her Son, and
upbraided him with a reproach that he did, without any appearance of good
success, Sacrifice the Nephew of a Minister, who served him with an Inviolable
fidelity, giving him to understand at the same time, she was confident,
Kioupruli could never find comfort in such a great loss. The Sultan persuaded
by his Mothers reasons, Commanded the Grand Vizier to send a Courier to
Mustapha, to stop him in the way, and call him home again: but Kioupruli, who
had already a prospect for the establishing of his own Son's Fortune, scrupled
not to hazard the life of his Nephew, for such an important service to the
State. Wherefore he told the Grand Seignior, Mustapha had already entered the
Country occupied by the Rebels, and that his Couriers could not join him. The
Sultaness was like to dye with grief, when she heard of the unhappy success of
her cares, she spent several days in a dreadful trouble and perplexity of mind,
and found no comfort, but in the flattering hopes that fortune would perhaps
help her Lovers courage, he behaved himself with so much prudence, that he
deceived the Rebel Assan, who rested abundantly satisfied, that indeed he was a
Malecontent, and upon this account trusted him with a most considerable employ
in his Army. Wise Mustapha dissembled for a while, but at last, sitting one day
at Table with Assan, and other Bashaws of his Party, he drew out of his bosom
the fatal hatcherif, and having publicly read, and kissed it with a great deal
of respect, set upon the unfortunate Assan, and cut off his Head, and none of
the Bashaws offered to oppose him; which proves that Religion has more
influence, than policy in that blind obedience, the Turks pay to those orders,
that comes immediately from the Grand Seignior. Assans death disheartened so much
all those of his Party, that afterward, they endeavored to make their peace
at the Port.

Next to this Famous action, his first care was to look for the Princess
Bash-lari, who lived in Assan's Serraglio, confounded with a great Number of
other ordinary Women, he waited upon her with all the respect due to a person
of her rank, and begged her orders for the carrying away of all Assan's goods,
which belonged to her by the Death of her Husband. Basch-lari whom Old Assan
did not use with so much civility, could hardly conceal her trouble, at so many
Testimonies of respect from a man of so good mien. She stood a while
speechless, and gave time thereby to Mustapha's Eyes, to view her exactly, and
to satisfy himself, she was one of the handsomest persons upon Earth, he was
himself so far ou^ of order, that he knew no more what to say, when by good
luck, Assan^ slaves, who cast themselves at hi^ feet, begging his favor,
Interrupted his so steadfast staring upon her, h^ rebuked them severely, and
sent them back to the Princess, declaring, she was now the Sovereign Mistress
o^ their destiny. Basch-lari could not but be very sensible of all Mustapha's
civilities, and thoroughly inflamed his heart with a most kind and obliging
answer, she made him. In the mean time, she showed a great desire to return
near the Sultan her Brother, and Mustapha, who was wholly possessed with the care
to be officious, and complaisant to her, gave all suitable orders for a speedy
departure. During the Journey, he did exactly wait upon her, and went so far,
as to make her observe, the respect he owed to his Emperors Sister, was but
the least motive of his so assiduous attendance, and so exact a complaisance
for all her desires. The Princess could not but perceive at last, that he loved
her, and whether she was charmed with his good mien and civilities, or dealt
out of gratitude for that important service, she had just now received of him,
in freeing her from Assan's slavery, she granted him the liberty, he with much
earnestness sued for, to send her Selams in the Grand Seigniors Serraglio.
Selams are Nosegays made up of Flowers, which the Turks use instead of
Love Letters.

The News of Assan's overthrow, filled Constantinople with Joy. The Sultan did
applause himself, that he had alone concerted that enterprise with Cara
Mustapha. The Vizier was exceeding well pleased, to see the Empire freed by his
Nephew from such a dangerous Enemy; and for the Sultaness Valide, she was no
less satisfied with the happy success of her Gallants perilous undertaking, as
if she had her self cut off the Rebels Head. So Cara Mustapha came back again,
and was upon his return, welcomed and overwhelmed with Presents. The old
Kioupruli being sick to death, made use of this favorable juncture to give the
Sultan to understand, his Son alone had the secrets of the Empire; for he had
always bred him with a prospect to make of him a most able Minister of State.
The Grand Seignior prepossest with the Fathers former services, and besides
that, being well satisfied that the change of Ministers is the greatest plague
and disturbance, that may befall an Empire, thought fit to bestow the Fathers
place upon his Son, and accordingly Proclaimed him Grand Vizier.

Although Cara Mustapha, stood as fair as any of the Court for Preferments, yet
he was contented with his employ, and put upon this moderation an high value
before the Sultaness Valide, who took it as an unquestionable proof of his
love: But indeed, she was no more but the pretext of it. Mustapha's heart was
wholly devoted to fair Basch lari, and if he answered the forward affection of
the Sultaness, 'twas only to get thereby more means and convenience to court
the Princess, 'twas not long e're he made use of the liberty she had given him,
he won with his Gifts, one of the Eunuchs that waited upon her, and sent her by
him a Selam made up with mysterious Flowers, which with a silent speech set
forth the violence of his passion for her, and how smarting and cruel was his
grief, to see himself bereft of her sight. The Princess kindly received his
Selam, and to show him how far she was satisfied with it, she returned him a
Box filled with Musk ('it is observable, that among the Turks this Language is as
much intelligible as Love Letters amongst us) Cara Mustapha was so ravished with
joy to see, through Basch-lari's answer, she was not insensible of his Love,
that he fancied he might, in time Marry her, notwithstanding the vast distance
he saw betwixt his present state, and such a height of Fortune. This thought
did so sweetly flatter and tickle his passion, that he minded nothing else, but
how to carry it on to an happy end; and because he well knew, it is not lawful
for any man to ask a Princess of the Ottoman Blood in Marriage, and that the
Grand Seignior himself must choose him, he deems worthy of the honor of his
alliance, he resolved to court more assiduously the Sultan, that he might
prefer him before all them, that were in right to pretend to the possession of
Basch-lari.

Hunting is the darling passion of Mahomet the fourth; Cara Mustapha presented
him with a great number of choice Dogs, he had gathered from all parts of
Europe; so that the Sultan grew thereby more fond of the sport, and hunted
since oftener than formerly: As many times as he Hunts, the Boars are commanded
to encompass Six or Seven Miles about, a vast space of Land, to the end that
the game might not escape. These frequent troubles being very tiresome to the
People, and utterly defacing the Country, gave occasion to great murmurs and
complaints, but however no body durst tell the Sultan of it. The Mufty, which
is the chief Doctor of the Law, spurred by his own zeal, and with the
entreaties of several grave Bashaws, resolved at last to ventute on it, and
fancied, he could, perhaps cure him of so violent a passion, in urging to him
this religious argument; that, when his Predecessors were not in War, they
used, to work with their own hands; that so illustrious an example might move
their Subjects to give themselves to useful things, no body daring stand idle,
whilst the Ruler of the World was busy; that even the Law it self ordered the
Emperors to live upon their own labor, and not upon the sweat of their
Peoples Eyebrows, or the Money of Taxes. Mahomet repining at such an
unacceptable harangue, was ready many times to interrupt him, and showed by his
countenance and gestures, that so free a discourse did not please him. The
Mufty, who already repented his having taken upon him that dangerous
Commission, would a little sweeten what he said, and added, that if a
handiwork should vex the Prince, he might, to fulfill the Precept of the Law,
make Arrows or any such like small pieces of work, that require little or no
application; that as soon as the work is finished, he must but send it to some
Wealthy Bashaw, who would receive it with a great deal of respect, as made with
the Grand Seigniors own hand, and not fail to return his Highness such a
Magnifick present, as might abundantly provide for the charges of his Table.
The Sultan sweetened with these last words, or perhaps, dissembling his Anger,
told the Mufty, that he took in good part his Fatherly remonstrance, and
assured him he would make use of it. Cara Mustapha had been very attentive to
that conversation, and well knowing that Mahomet, though very respectful to the
Ministers of the Alcoran, yet does not willingly suffer himself to be crossed
in his divertisements, begged of him the honor of a private audience, and
spoke to him after this manner.

Cara Mustapha, the humblest and devotedst of all thy Slaves, who uses his
Ears, his Eyes, and his Tongue, but for the increasing of the Glory of his
Lord, not being able to endure that the Mufty should abuse the Sacred Authority
of his Character, presume to make remonstrances, and meddle with giving
unseasonable advices to him that gives the Law, wherever the Sun shines, not
remembering, that all the goods of the Earth are his own, and that it is through
a special favor, that he bestows part thereof to his Slaves, does with a
deep sense of humility show thee, thou should punish his rashness, and yet
not recede from his advise, lest it might seem, the beloved of Alla and his
Grand Prophet should contemn his Law. Thou know, the Mufty is the most
covetous and saving of all Men; If thou will then, mortify him to the quick,
thou must but go a hunting again, and send him part of the Venison, thou have
taken, with a word, that, to follow his sacred admonition, thou have chosen the
trade of a Hunter, and sendest him the fruit of thy labor; no doubt but he
will liberally reward the Bearer, and return thee such a present, as may
largely provide for the Expenses of thy diet. I am confident, if thou but
followest this my humble motion, he will no more in his life School his own
Master. The Grand Seignior hearkened to Mustapha's Speech with an unspeakable
joy, gave him a Thousand thanks, and vowed, he was more beholding to him for
this counsel, than for the very head of Assan. Two days after he failed not to
go a Hunting, and performed all he had resolved upon with Mustapha. The Mufti
knew too late his fault in opposing his Sovereign's pleasures, and was obliged
to pay the honor he did him, with a very rich Present; and ever since that
time, I warrant ye, he did never think of giving him such Godly Admonitions.

Cara Mustapha was so entirely possessed with the care of courting the
Princess, that his so frequent and regular attendance upon the Grand Seignior,
was rather the product of his love, than of his ambition. It fell out
nevertheless, that this Monarch being extremely satisfied with his Services,
began to think of setting up his Fortune, and accordingly Proclaimed him Bashaw
of the Sea. Mustapha who looked upon this dignity, as a new step toward the
Princess, was overjoyed at the happy news thereof; as soon as his preferment was
public at Court, all the Grandees of the Empire were very forward in
complementing him thereupon, and sent him rich Presents, as is usual in such
like occasions, but in the midst of all these applauses, he thought of nothing
but Basch-lari, and of preparing a rare Selam, that might with his silent
Language, acquaint her with the true Sentiments of his aspiring heart; after he
had got into the Selam all those Flowers he thought fittest to show a strong
passion, and to let his Princess know, that he had accepted of the place of
General of the Sea, but to have more opportunity to grow less unworthy of her,
he trusted with it that Eunuch who had espoused his interest, but this
Block-head did so ill discharge his trust, that being caught by the Kehaia, he
could never have escaped a most severe punishment, if he had not confessed, the
Selam came from Cara Mustapha. The Kehaia without any further inquiry, doubted
not but this Galantry regarded the Sultaness Valide, he warned the Eunuch never
to take upon him such Commissions, took the Selam out of his hands, and carried
it himself in great have to the Sultaness, who sometimes indeed was entertained
with Selams by Cara Mustapha, but made up only with Flowers of a most
respectful and sensible gratitude. She was so surprised, and at the same time
so overjoyed that a Woman of her Age, was presented with so tender a Selam,
that not finding now at hand what was necessary for a regular answer, she bid
the Kehaia to bring him, next Night, into her apartment. In the mean time, Cara
Mustapha having heard of his Selam's miscarriage, attended all the day long
upon the Grand Seignior, waiting for an opportunity to meet the Kehaia, who on
his side was seeking for him. They met opportunely together, the Kehaia shook
Mustapha's hand, and whispered him in the ear that he himself had delivered his
Selam, and was commanded to bring him that very Night, in such a place where he
should be thanked for it. The Sultan's presence did not permit him to explain
himself farther, Mustapha whose heart was filled with nothing but his royal
Mistress, was so agreeably surprised to hear, she would see him, that without
any other reflection, he wholly gave himself over to the transport of his Joy;
and tickled in this critical minute, with the sweetest hopes that may attend
love, he looked upon the Grand Seigniors condition as far less happy than his.
The rest of the day was long to him, he past it away in dressing up and
undressing himself, never finding himself well enough, to appear before the
Eyes of his Basch-lari. This so long expected Night being come, the chief of
the Eunuchs who used to guide him through different ways, for fear of meeting
the Guard, got him safe into the Sultanesses Chamber. What pen might express
Mustapha's amazement? he had flattered himself with the hope of seeing his
Princess, now he finds himself unavoidably engaged with the Sultaness Mother!
that Sultaness beginning to press him hard, he could by no means master up his
disorder; she perceived it, and begun to fall upon reproaches, when Mustapha
fearing least she should dive into the true cause of his coldness, called back
his wits about him, and told her that his new place forcing him shortly to
absent from her, and put out to Sea, she indeed wronged him with her wondering
at his trouble. This witty and most seasonable answer charmed the Sultaness;
she was so satisfied with Mustapha, that far from searching any more into the
Mystery of his disorder, it turned into a source of merit to him, so true it
is, that a beloved one is easily credited and trusted unto. The Sultaness
dismissed him, overloaded with all sorts of caresses, bid him to ground upon
her protection in all things, and to be sure she would shortly see him called
back at Court. So Cara Mustapha very cleverly came off this time; he cleared
afterward with the Kehaia the matter of the Selam, but because he knew him to
be wholly devoted to the Sultaness, he took heed not to give him the least hint
of his love with Basch-lari. Now, nothing being impossible to a man that loves
indeed, he found a way how to send to the Princess another Selam, no less
mysterious and tender than the former, through the contrivance of a Jewess,
that sold Jewels in the Palace, and he had before parting this comfort to
receive from her a Box full of Amber and Musk, which are the most open and
expressive tokens of love, a Lady might give to her Lover.

As Soon as the new Caplan-Bashaw had put to Sea, he bent himself wholly to the
management of a glorious Campaign, hoping speedily to return, and throw his
Laurels at the feet of his Princess, he gave chase to several Christian
Corsairs, and met at last the Galleys of Maltha, which he attached with much
bravery: but a Prince of the House of Lorrain, who commanded them, made so
stout a defense, that after a long and cruel Combat, the Wind so parted both
Fleets, that though they made their uttermost endeavors, they could never
engage again one another. Two days after this Combat, the Turks discovered a
Spanish Man of War, which they Fired upon, and took it after a very feeble
resistance. Cara Mustapha having called on board his Admiral, the Spanish
Captain, heard of him, that Ship was loaded with a great deal of precious
goods, which the Viceroy of Naples, did send into Spain with his Daughter a
beautiful Young Lady, who was a going to Madrit, in order to her being matched
there with a Grandee. Mustapha conceiving that amongst so many rich goods,
there might be found something worthy of his Princess, strictly forbad
pillaging, and after he had got all the Soldiers out of the Ship, he came in
and viewed her; he met first a number of Women bitterly weeping, who surrounded
the fair Spanish Lady, which he presently discerned through her singular
beauty, and the State of her Garb. Cara Mustapha, whose courage, and Warlike
temper were assuaged by love, tho the only Princess Basch-lari, was the Goddess
he thought worthy the Sacrifice of his liberty, used his Slaves with kindness,
and civilly answered the Petition of one of those Maids, that spoke to him in
Italian, and whom he observed to be very witty. Among all the riches of the
Ship, nothing pleased him so much, as a mirror wrought with a great deal of
art and Industry. It was encompassed with little Cupids, playing and saying to
one another, felice chi e amato. As Soon as Mustapha saw it, he designed it for
his Princess; the Captain of the Ship told him, it was a Masterpiece, which
the ablest workmen of Italy, had with emulation exercised their art on, and
which was to be presented to the Queen of Spain, from the Viceroy of Naples by
the Famous Roxolane, the very same Maid, which spoke just now with him, whom
the Viceroy had with most advantageous proffers engaged for the Court of Spain,
because she was endowed with the most pleasant and harmonious Voice that might
be heard upon Earth. This stirred up Mustapha's curiosity; he discoursed again
with Roxolane, who, notwithstanding the great trouble she was in, by such a
sudden and cruel change of her condition, did nevertheless judiciously answer
all his Questions: Mustapha, who aimed at his love in all things, conceiving,
she could do him a kindness near Basch-lari, resolved to make her a present of
that Slave, and the more to engage her in his interest, he used her with much
civility, and saw all her goods exactly restored to her. Nay, his kindness
stayed not there, he was no great admirer of vocal music, however he desired
her to sing, and after having highly praised her voice, he took this
opportunity to present her with a Bracelet of Diamonds. Roxelane whose Birth
was but mean, and who had bid adieu to her own Country, to purchase with her
Voice those advantages, fortune had refused to bestow upon her, thought her
self fortunate in her slavery, and left no argument untouched to bring Donna
Emanuela (such was the fair Spanish Ladies name) into a better temper, and to
persuade her, not to give her self over to her sorrow; but that fair one, who
had not the same reasons to bear up, did hearken to no counsels, and was
continually weeping. Our Bashaw seeing, Roxolane was mighty sensible of his
civil and gentle carriage toward her, called her once in private, and after he
had exaggerated the great account he made of a person of so rare and excellent
qualifications, he told her, he would make of her the most happy Slave in the
World, if she would in good earnest espouse his interest, and engage to perform
what he would prescribe her. Roxolane who had but an ordinary share of Beauty,
and did never pretend to a very severe honesty, was even apt to think ill of
the Turks palate, and did already prepare a favorable answer to his Gallantry,
when he imparted to her the secret of his passion, and his design to place her
near Basch-lari, that she might help his love, and keep the heart of the
Princess besieged in his behalf; he made her so enticing a Picture of the inner
part of the Serraglio, and of the happy life of them that wait upon the
Sultanesses, that she, hoping thereby to better her condition, promised him a
blind obedience to his commands, and a careful and exact performance thereof.
Cara Mustapha was exceeding well pleased at her readiness, and now thought of
sending his Presents to the Sultan and Sultanesses, that he might have a color
to send to Basch-lari the rich Looking-glass, without danger of discovering the
Mystery of his Love, he would fain have sent Donna Emanuela to the Grand
Seignior, but being well acquainted with the fancy of the Prince, who was no
way inclined to black beauties, and expecting an high ransom from a Person of
so eminent a quality, he altered his mind.

Amongst all the Presents he sent to Basch-lari, nothing was more acceptable to
her, than the mirror; but when a Christian She-slave, explained to her the
Motto of the little Cupids, felice chie amato, she did more attentively
examined it, and found it more and more worthy of her esteem, well conceiving,
Cara Mustapha would not have Presented her with it without a design. The Voice
of Roxelane was wondered at in the Palace, and both the Sultan and Sultanesses
would several times have the entertainment of her Singing; as for Basch-lari,
although she was mighty pleased with it, yet she made more of her Company,
because Mustapha was always the subject matter of their conversation: she did
always commend to the Princess, either his good mien, his wit, his courage, or
his unparalleled passion for her: In all these discourses, she did often
mention the handsome Spanish Lady, not being able to forbear praising her
excellent parts, as many times as she had occasion to name her; and her
indiscreet zeal for Mustapha went so far as to commend him several times for
his civility and kindness toward this fair Slave. That unseasonable way of
commendation wrought upon the Princesses mind quite contrary to her
expectation; she fancied it was not impossible but that Slave were loved by
Mustapha, since he had not sent her to the Grand Seignior; in a word she came
to that height of suspicion and jealousy, that she turned into as many crimes,
all the particulars of the Bashaws handsome usage toward Donna Emanuela.

The Sultaness Valide was indeed a great admirer of fine voices, but yet she
discovered new graces, unknown to any other but her, in Roxelane, when she
reflected upon her coming from Mustapha, and that she could by her hear of the
present condition, and circumstances of her Lover. Therefore she feigned to
spend whole Nights without sleeping, and upon this fair pretense, desired
Basch-lari to give her Roxelane for a while, that the charm of her voice might
ease her in her so long and troublesome watches.

The Princess durst not refuse her, and passing by all the secret reasons she
had to keep that Slave by her self, she must yield her to the entreaties of the
Sultaness Mother, for as long as she would. The Sultaness begun to work upon
her with Presents, then feigning her self to be much concerned in her
misfortunes, she cunningly brought her upon the narrative, of the taking of the
Man of War she was Shipped in. Roxolane who served the times, turned all to the
advantage of the Turks, and inserted in her discourse so many passages glorious
to Mustapha, that the Sultaness was moved at them, and stuck not to tell her
this Bashaws interests were very dear to her remembrance, nay, that she had
just now procured him the place of Caimakan, which is the first dignity of the
Empire, next to the Grand Visier's. Roxolane ravished with joy for these good
news, went on in her Commendation of Mustapha's qualities, and well perceiving,
the Sultaness had an extraordinary kindness for him, even to show a great
desire to see him possessed with his new dignity of Caimakan, which should
engage him to a constant attendance upon the Grand Seignior, she was deceived
by so likely appearances; and thinking, the Sultanesses inclination did not go
farther than a virtuous esteem for Mustapha, trusted her with the intrigue of
his Love with Basch-lari, and earnestly entreated her to see that match made,
assuring her, she could never do any better, or more acceptable service to him,
than this: So unexpected a confidence smote the Sultanesses heart, like a
Thunderbolt; she bid her to tell again and again, what she had indeed too well
heard for her peace at the first time; and fearing, lest the Slave might
perceive the unconquerable trouble she was in, she promised her to remember
Mustapha's business, and quickly retired into her Closet, where she gave her
self over to all such transports, as a cruel jealousy can breed in a slighted
Woman. After a thousand projects of revenge, she found at last some comfort to
think she could, with her credit and intrigues, put a stop to a passion so
ruinous both to her glory and love. She begun accordingly with seeking new
pretenses to keep Roxelane in her apartment, for fear she might discover to
Basch-lari, what had passed between them, and so quite spoil her designs.

In the mean while, Mustapha comes to the Court, where he finds himself far
less sensible of the Grand Seigniors new preferment, than of the happiness of
being so near his adorable Princess. Upon his arrival he presented the Sultan,
Sultanesses, and chief Eunuchs with Magnifick Presents; and being conscious of
the so many obligations the Sultaness Mother had heaped upon him, he thought it
his next duty, to make application to the Kehaia for a secret entertainment
with her; the Sultaness being satisfied of his ingratitude, and yet exceeding
well pleased at his continuing to court her, refused it at first, and sent the
Eunuch packing; but that motion of pride proved too weak, to resist the plea of
her own heart in behalf of Mustapha. She called back the Kehaia, even as soon as
she had bid him retire, and commanded him to bring with his usual precautions,
the Caimakan into her Chamber. As Soon as Mustapha came in, he with an affected
transport of joy, cast himself at the Sultanesses feet; but she, far from
helping him up again, as she used to do before, rebuked him severely, and
choose the most injurious reproaches to upbraid him with his perfidy. Vile
Slave, says she, Christian Brood, which I have from the very dust of Mankind,
lifted up to the second dignity of this Grand Empire, do thou believe me so
insensible of my glory, as to hearken to thy tales, while I am convinced, thou
cheatest me, and that with an unpresidented ingratitude, thou make a
sacrifice of thy heart to a person famed, but by Assan 's slighting of her, and
who is altogether unworthy to come into a Parallel with me, who am used to the
adorations of the Rulers of the World. Mustapha overwhelmed with these so cruel
reproaches of the Sultan^ss, and wondering at her being so far acquainted with
his secret, durst neither answer, nor lift up his Eyes to look on her. Speak
thou, perfidious Wretch, continued she, spoke, is it not true, thou love
Basch-lari? I confess, answered then Mustapha, that I have deserved Death,
since I have been so unfortunate as to incur your displeasure, but can thou
deny, replied she, that thou have sent a Christian Slave to the Princess, with
a very strict order never to let slip any occasion to entertain her in thy
favor? it is true, said Mustapha, I have sent indeed a Slave to the Princess,
and as I know that Christians are very ill bred, and know not what respect is
due to the Ottoman Blood, I will not disown it, I took care to instruct her;
and because she does not very well understand La Lingua Franca, she must needs
have mistaken my words. Though the Sultaness was satisfied in her judgment,
that he was guilty, yet she did so much wish to have him cleared, that she
allowed of this slight reason, and heartily forgave him, flattered with this
thought, that if he had felt some tender motions for Basch lari, he did truly
repent it. Mustapha took his leave after a World of Oaths, that he would rather
undergo a Thousand Deaths, than to give her the least occasion of displeasure;
he was so much troubled at the Sultanesses anger, and over all, to see her so
near acquainted with the Mystery of his Love, that during a great many days he
suffered all the torments a most disquieted mind is subject unto, a Thousand
things perplexed him at once; on one side he feared the Sultaness, on the
other, he loved Basch lari; he would not displease the Sultaness for fear of
ruining his fortune; but he could not live, without hearing of his Princess; he
was jealous of any thing he doubted, whether Roxelane had betrayed him or not;
and in case he should send a Selam to Basch-lari, he was afraid that the
Sultaness should be acquainted with it. After he had long floated among so many
vexatious thoughts, he resolved at last upon undoing himself, rather than to be
any longer ignorant how his case stood in the Princess's mind. Another Eunuch,
whom he won with much bribing, took upon himself to deliver into her own hands
a Salam, by whose silent Language, he assured her, that he was insensible to
any other pleasure in the World, but to that of thinking he would love her for
ever; and entreated her to believe that he had rejoiced at the new favor the
Sultan was pleased of late to bestow on him, but because he grew thereby less
unworthy of her alliance. In the mean time, Basch lari, whose mind was still
possessed with the opinion, that the Caimakan Loved Donna Emanuela, had since
confirmed her self into it, because of the so long silence of her lover, but
more, especially, since she was told that having upon his return made several
considerable Presents to the Sultan, he had still kept by himself the Spanish
Lady. Such was her mind when the Selam came; she hardly took time enough to
view it, and returned presently a small Box, which Mustapha received with all
joy imaginable, not doubting in the least, but it was full of Musk and Amber.
The great desire, he had to know the true sentiments of his Princess, did not
permit him to put off one minute, the opening of the Box; but, oh strange
amazement! he found it filled up with Rue, which herb shows, in that Language
of Selams, the uttermost indignation; he was near to dye with despair, at the
sight of so convincing a Witness of his misfortune; after he had long vexed his
mind, and guessed at the true cause of his Mistrisses anger, he fancied that
Roxelane had betrayed him; and upon this account conceived such a general
hatred for all Christians, that without any other ground, he put a very ill
usage upon all those, who were in his power, and caused Donna Emanuela to be
clapped into a Dungeon, declaring her in plain Turk, her life should be
accountable to him for Roxelane's perfidy. The Spanish Lady, who did not
apprehend the meaning of these words, and daily expected to be redeemed by her
Parents, was so frighted with the Caimakan's threatenings, that she laid several
days under the horrors of present Death, and without any comfort or hope of
ever recovering her liberty.

Now, the Princess Basch-lari, who was not yet undeceived about the pretended
infidelity of her Lover, made her business to speak upon any occasion of the
Spanish Lady's perfections, even to that degree of Womanly malice, that she
said in the presence of the Grand Seignior, that if all that, Roxelane
published of that Christian Woman's charms were true, there was no such beauty
in all the Serraglio. This word slipped out of her mouth as at unawares, stirred
up the curiosity of the Sultan, who complained to Mustapha, for that he had not
presented him with that handsome Slave, and bid him to send for her forthwith.
She was brought, but so changed by the sorrow she felt for the loss of her
liberty, and the bad usage of Mustapha, that the Grand Seignior found not her
beauty answerable to the Picture, Basch-lari made him of it; however she
remained in the Palace, and did nevertheless give great jealousy to the
Sultanesses, who had been allarmed at the report of her perfections, and at the
Grand Seignior's earnestness to see her. Basch-lari, whose jealous Eyes found
out a Hundred faults in her Face and Features, delighted much in vexing that
poor innocent Maid, and asked her, one day, if she was not very sorry to part
from the Caimakan. Donna Emanuela modestly answered, that ever since the
beginning of her captivity, she knew no interruption in her misfortunes; that
however, she found her condition much bettered in the Serraglio, since she was
no more exposed to the threatenings of the most cruel Man in the World, she was
moved at these words, and with great eagerness descanted upon the hard usage,
she had received from Mustapha. The Princess, though she much pitied the
Spanish Maids misery, did nevertheless feel a secret tickling joy at those
complaints she made against her Lover; and though one cannot but be moved at
the hearing of a Friend's misfortune, yet it is very true, that in this
occasion, all the cruelties of Mustapha to his Slave, were put to account of
merit by Basch lari, who knew, at last, her error, and much repented her
having sent to him a Selam made up with Rue. After she was fully convinced of
the injustice of her suspicion, she felt a secret shame for it, and upbraided
her self with her jealousy, as a weakness unworthy of an Ottoman Princess. In
the mean while, the Caimakan vexed to the highest degree at the last tokens of
her anger, was still minding how to justify himself; 'twas hard to do it: The
Palace was inaccessible to him, he durst not trust the Eunuchs, and saw a
Thousand almost invincible obstacles, that opposed his approaching Basch lari,
however all those difficulties disheartened him not. It came in his mind to make
application to the Sultaness her Mother. She lived in the old Serraglio, and
because the Persons that are sent thither, are not kept under so strict a
confinement, as in the other, it was easy to him to send Presents to that
Sultaness, who seeing her self out of favor, was overjoyed, that one of the
most powerful Officers of the Empire should seek for her Friendship. She made
on her side all suitable advances to answer the esteem he showed for her, and
meet him half the way; so that Mustapha seeing her well disposed, acquainted
her with his Love for the Princess her Daughter, and assured her, if he should
ever become her Son in Law, she might expect from him an entire, and perfect
obedience to her commands. The Sultaness did joyfully approve of his wooing,
and proffered him her interest at Court to bring him to happiness. The Caimakan
thanked her with much respect, but let her understand, 'twas more to the
purpose to make sure of the heart of the Princess, than of the Sultan's
consent. The Sultaness, upon the first opportunity failed not to speak a good
word to her Daughter in favor of Mustapha, and showed her the great
advantages, that must needs attend her Marrying so puissant a Minister. That
long silence, the Caimakan had been forced unto, did a little perplex the
Princess's mind; therefore, she was not sorry, that her Mother would manage her
interest, and she answered her, with a blush, she would willingly Marry
Mustapha, if the Grand Seignior commanded it. That conversation was not hidden
to the Caimakan; Basch-lari's Mother gave him a faithful account thereof; and
conceiving through the modesty of her answer, that she was appeased, he sent
her a Selam, wherein he got such Flowers as might best assure her of the
unshaken fidelity of his love, and of the pleasure, he felt for his being
reconciled with her. The Princess was not insensible of his great zeal; at
first, she would have returned him a Box full of all sorts of perfumes, but
upon better thoughts, and least so kind a Selam might show too much the
sentiments of her heart, she was contented to send him a Box, wherein he found
a small piece of white linen, which is a token of peace, he received it with
much satisfaction, nay he would have it inchased into a rich Watch, which ever
since he wore always about him, kissing it a Thousand times in a day.

The Sultaness Valide, who was never wanting new pretenses to keep Roxolane by
her, that she might not speak to the Princess in behalf of Mustapha, begun at
last to perceive, he was grown less forward in his duties, and attendance upon
her than formerly. This remissness permitted her not to doubt any longer, but
he was bound Slave to the Princess, her jealousy discovered to her, so many
other circumstances, that in the first transport of her anger, she thought of
utterly undoing that ungrateful Bashaw, but having not virtue enough to
countenance so violent a resolution, she fancied, that if Basch-lari were once
Married, Mustapha having no more hope to arrive to the possession of his
Mistress, might easily forget her: As she had still much credit with the Grand
Seignior her Son, 'twas not long e're she moved to him a Match for the
Princess, and urged so many reasons for it, that he gave his consent, casting
his eyes upon the Bashaw of Aleppo, to honor him with his alliance; he sent
him word thereof, by a Hatcherif, and bid him forthwith to take his Journey to
Constantinople. The Sultaness ravished with Joy, for a success so advantageous
to her passion, did no more trouble herself for any good office, Roxelane might
do to Mustapha, and sent her back to the Princess, who found no small comfort
in complaining with her, of that cruel Match she was threatened with; as for the
unfortunate Caimakan, nothing may be compared with his grief, when he heard of
a decree that left no hopes to his Love. The Sultan's orders being all
irrevocable, he gave himself over to despair, seeing nothing at all that might
help him: The Sultaness was grown odious to his remembrance, because he knew
well, she had alone advised that Marriage. The Grand Seignior seemed unjust to
his Judgment; nay, his own fortune was burdensome to him, since he could no
more, either share it with, or sacrifice it to the only person upon Earth, for
whose sake he loved to live. In this so general consternation of his mind, he
thought, he might ease himself, if he could but see his Princess pay some
Tears, or some sighs to their disappointment. The fancy of so slight a comfort
flattered him to such a degree, that, maugre all dangers, that attended the
Execution of this bold enterprise, he resolved to speak with her, choosing
rather to perish than to be deprived of that Comfort. So having taken a
resolution so suitable to his love and despair, he begged a private audience of
the Sultaness Mother, who commanded the Kehaia to introduce him by Night,
disguised in a Maids garb, as he was used to do; he got then into the
Serraglio, and leaving aside the Sultaness Valide's apartment, he went
straightway to Basch-lari's, his garb deceived the Eunuchs that waited in her
Chamber; they thought this Itchoglaness came from the Sultaness Mother, and
gave her full liberty to approach the Princess, who was little less cast down
than her Lover, for whether her heart secretly pleaded for him, or she feared
to fall again into the hands of an Old Man, after the sad experiment she had
made of Assan's contempt, the very thought of her Match brought her to despair.
She was much astonished at the sight of Mustapha, and though her surprise and
trouble hindered her to apprehend thoroughly, the dreadful danger he had run
himself into, she nevertheless, blamed the boldness of his attempt; but, what
have I to spare, when I lose you, fair Princess, says he; since I must needs
dye with grief, if I see you in any other Man's arms than mine, I had rather to
dye by the hands of the Mutes, than to be forced to behold so dismal a
Spectacle. Basch-lari's heart melted into Tears at these words, and left to her
Eyes the care to give him a Thousand Witnesses of her gratitude, for such a
proof of his Love: but while they are so tenderly engaged, the Sultaness Mother
who waited for her Gallant, wondering at his not coming, sent for the Kehaia,
who assured her, that he had long since let in the Caimakan, and attended him
pretty near her own Chamber. Then all her jealousy awaked, she doubted not but
he was with the Princess, and fell into such a fury to see her self slighted by
a Man, who notwithstanding those so many favors she had heaped upon him, used
her as a Cloak to cover his Love for another, that without any farther
Examination, she came to the Kaden or Governess of the Maids, and bid her
presently to advise the Grand Seignior, that a Man had dropped into the Women's
apartment, and at the same time sent word to the Mutes of the Serraglio, that
they should be ready for the punishment of that rash mortal, as soon as the
Grand Seigniors Orders were come, the Eunuchs begun to seek after that Wretch,
who was easily found out just as he was going to rejoyn the Kehaia. The Sultan
highly incensed at a boldness almost without president, would not have him
Strangled by the Mutes; this Punishment not seeming to his Justice, cruel
enough for so enormous a crime, he commanded, he should be the next day
publicly impaled in the great yard of the Palace. The Kehaia himself was
arrested, because he is accountable for all that comes into the Women's
Serraglio. Now the Sultaness hearing of the cruel decree of the Sultan, spent
the whole Night in a great perplexity of mind. Sometimes she applaused her
self, and flattered her passion with the hope of being soon revenged of her
treacherous Gallant, but a minute after she repented to have caused such a
noise, and feared least the Caimakan would discover her secret commerce with
him; pity succeeded these wise reflections. That punishment, he was threatened
with, seemed to her too cruel for a crime, which had no other principle but
Love; and besides that, minding that Basch lari's Marriage was resolved upon,
and that her departure would have infallibly broken the two Lovers measures,
she cursed her own transport, and was in an extreme impatience to see the break
of day, that she might go and beg the criminal's pardon. She thought moreover,
if she discovered to the Sultan, that Mustapha had been so bold as to enter
into Basch-lari's apartment, it would be a hard case to hinder his death, and
though she found an unvaluable pleasure in undoing her rival, yet she choose to
bereave her self of it, and renounce so tickling and so sweet a revenge, rather
than to exasperate her Sons spirit with so odious a circumstance. At break of
day, she run into the Sultans apartment. Dear Lion, says she, it is the
Caimakan, who has been found disguised in a Maids garb; no doubt, the violent
passion, he had for the Spanish Lady, put him out of his wits; I am very sorry
for it, because he was a faithful Servant to thy Highness, he deserves indeed
to dye; but, thy service being preferable before all, look thou whether it be
not less inconvenient, to pardon him, than to deprive thy self of a Minister so
zealous of thy glory. The Sultan surprised at the name of Mustapha called to
mind, in that critical minute, the great and important services he had received
from him, and finding much likelihood in all that his Mother said, he told her
he was sorry, that he had been arrested, because he did not at all concern
himself for the Spanish Slave, nay that he had repented to have taken her away
from him.

At the same time, he granted his pardon, but was not so indulgent to the
Kehaia, whom he commanded absolutely to be strangled; nevertheless, the
Sultaness Mother so earnestly sued for his life; that, though with much ado,
she at last obtained he should not dye; but he must lose his place, and be
turned out of the Palace. So Mustapha was set at liberty, when he expected
nothing but Death, and as great Monarchs know well how to season their favors,
The Sultan being persuaded, he was in Love with the Spanish Lady, sent her back
again to him two days after, and Mustapha had ever since that time, all respect
imaginable for Donna Emanuela, because he looked upon her as the Grand
Seignior's Slave. In the mean while, the very terrors of Death had not been
able to diminish his Love; he was on the contrary so bewitched with
Basch-lari's charms, since his private conversation with her, that he grew more
sensible than ever of that fatal Marriage, which was to rob him of his
Princess, but especially, when he heard, the Bashaw of Aleppo her future
Husband was upon his departure, and would shortly arrive at Constantinople.
This news allarmed him so much, and his hatred for that rival increased to such
a degree, that he wholly bent his wit, to find a way how to undo him, and
because he knew well, that the Bashaws who have Governments afar off the Court,
do endeavor to grow rich by all sorts of wicked ways, and the People durst not
complain of their injustice, but after they are called home, he sent one of his
confidents to Aleppo, who did cunningly publish every where, that the Bashaw
should never come back again. This false report wrought in the Peoples mind, as
far as Mustapha could wish, an infinite number of complaints were made against
the Bashaw; and the Cadi of Aleppo, who had a secret Order from the Caimakan,
to examine carefully all that might serve a turn against him, he sent, in a few
days, to the Grand Vizier, an ample memorial of all his cruelties and
misdemeanors, he made the report thereof to the Divan, in the presence of the
Grand Seignior, who was so highly offended and incensed thereby, that not
expecting so much as the Grand Visiers Vote, he sent presently a Chiaoux with a
hatcherif to fetch his Head. This unfortunate Bashaw, having no reason to fear
such an order from the Grand Seignior, who had lately designed him his Brother
in Law, bid his Steward to bring the Chiaoux into a magnifick apartment, which
he had prepared for the Princess with great cares and infinite expenses. After
he had given him sufficient time to view all the riches of the place, that he
might give a favorable account thereof to the Grand Seignior, he came to him
to know what was his errand. The Chiaoux served him with the fatal Hatcherif,
and without any other complement threw a silk rope on his Neck, and Strangled
him presently. The Princess, who hated that Old Bashaw, had the good fortune to
succeed him in his vast Estate, though she never saw him in her life; and
Mustapha being so happily rid of one whose life was so great an hindrance to
his love, flattered himself now that nothing would oppose his happiness, and
contrived with the Sultaness Mother of Basch-lari, that upon the next Bayram,
at which time the Sultanesses of the Old Serraglio wait upon the Grand
Seignior, she should recommend her Daughters interest to his Highness, and move
to him the intended Match.

Although the secret commerce of Mustapha with the Sultaness Valide was ended,
with the favor of the chief Eunuch, yet he still managed her protection, and
sometimes sent Selams to her, wherein he affected to show himself very
sorrowful, for being so long bereft of the happiness of her presence. These
Witnesses of a remnant of love did very little persuade the Sultaness. She
doubted not but Mustapha had much contributed to the Death of the Bashaw of
Aleppo; however, because Women do not willingly part with any of their
Conquests, she accepted of his Selams, and feigned to believe what they meant,
but she nevertheless, minded of Marrying Basch-lari, and removing her from the
Port. The Grand Vizier being dead in this juncture, all the Subjects of that
vast Empire stood in great expectation of him that should be raised to that
height of honors. The Sultanesses and prime Eunuchs made their interests,
every one in favor of their particular friends; but the Sultan, who had a
great inclination to Mustapha, preferred him before all the other candidates,
and Proclaimed him his Grand Vizier, whereupon he received the complements of
the whole Court, his very Enemies being the forwardest of all in sending
Magnifick Presents to him. The Sultanesses whose interest it is to keep a good
correspondency with that first Minister, sent secretly their emissaries to
complement him in their behalf, every one of them respectively, endeavoring to
let him understand, they had had a great influence in the Grand Seignior's
choice. Cara Mustapha being so arrived to the highest dignity a Subject of the
Ottoman Empire may aspire unto, did no more doubt but the Sultan would honor
him with his alliance, and give him the Princess Basch-lari in Marriage, and if
sometimes his love made him apprehensive, and fearful of some difficulties, he
presently relied upon the Grandeur of his fortune, which lifted him above all
other Visiers and Bashaws, that might pretend to the possession of his Mistress.

The Bayram being come, the Sultaness Krali a very ambitious Woman, who hoped
to get again in the Government of the State, if ever the Grand Vizier should
Marry her Daughter, waited upon the Grand Seignior, and so cunningly wrought
upon him, that he approved of the Match, and promised her, he would shortly see
it accomplished. She failed not to acquaint the Grand Vizier with the good
success of her visit, who was so transported with joy at these happy news that
he set all his Slaves at liberty, the fair Spanish Lady alone did not enjoy
that favor, because having once entered the Sultan's Serraglio, the Vizier
could not free her without his special Warrant; but that Prime Minister used
her with so much civility and kindness, that such a captivity might have been
pleasant to any other, but this charming Maid, who had secret reasons to bewail
still the misery of her State. although the Grand Vizier had granted liberty to
all his Slaves, yet there was found amongst them a young man of very good mien,
who refused it. The Vizier referring his refusal to the great Zeal he had for
his service; proffered him several advantageous conditions, if he would turn
Turk. The Slave answered him, he was so well satisfied with his fortune, that
he would not change it for that of any Bashaw of the Port. So proud an answer
surprised the Vizier, who caused him to be secretly observed, he that was
charged with it, acquainted him a little while after, that this young Slave
spent whole Nights in weeping under the Windows of the Spanish Lady. The Vizier
conceiving he was in love with her, commanded him to be put in Fetters, and
having sent for Donna Emanuela, told her, in a jesting way, that a Christian
Slave did so passionately Love her, that he spent whole Nights under her
Window, lying upon the ground; but that he would soon see her rid of that silly
Gallant, and cure him of his folly, with a daily doze of Five Hundred
Bastinadoes. She grew pale at these last words, and a deluge of Tears breaking
out of her Eyes, stirred up the curiosity of the Grand Vizier, who earnestly
entreated her to tell him whether she knew that Slave. Donna Emanuela seeing
herself betrayed by her Tears, resolved to discover her secret, and being
afraid, the Vizier might perhaps, put a bad construction upon her conduct, she
spoke to him in these terms.

THE HISTORY OF DONNA EMANUELA
THat unhappy Slave you speak of, my Lord, is called Don Gaspard de Toledo, he
is of one of the most Illustrious Families in Spain, Donna Maria de Mendoza his
Mother, was bred together with mine in the Queens Palace, both under the
quality of Maids of Honor; and though beauty does always breed envy amongst
Persons of the same rank in Royal Houses, yet there was such a conformity of
humors and principles between them, that they never concealed any thing one
from another, and loved themselves withas much sincerity as tenderness. They
were both Married the same year, and their love proved no less fervent and true
after their Marriage, than while they were Maids. About the Years end Donna
Maria was brought to Bed of the unfortunate Don Gaspard; as for my Mother she
found her self big with Child but three years after, and you see my Lord the
product of her breeding. Donna Maria was exceeding glad that my Mother had
brought into the World a Daughter, and even as soon as I was born, she demanded
me in Marriage for her Son; our Planets approved of our Mothers design, and
bred between us such a sympathy, that we did prefer the pleasure of being
together, before all other divertisements suitable to our Age; but our
happiness ended almost as soon as we begun to know it. Don Gaspard was near
twelve, and I eight years old, when my Father was sent Ambassador to Rome, and
took along with him all his Family; our Parents were very busy, how to give us
some comfort in this hard separation, and found no better way to sweeten our
grief, than to conclude our Marriage, which was done with all usual
formalities, having both signed it by their command.

My Fathers Ambassy lasted Six Years, and because he had been at vast expenses
in Rome, the Government of Naples was bestowed upon him, as a recompense for
his Charges; so that my Mother foreseeing, we could not return so soon in
Spain, wrote to that of Don Gaspard, and desired her to send him into Italy.
They gave him an equipage answerable to his birth, and he departed. But Don
Gaspard who then begun to be sensible of Martial glory, hearing of the Wars in
the low Countries, took his Journey toward Flanders, and thought no more of
Naples. My Mother who had been acquainted with his departure from Spain, was in
a great trouble for him, and I must confess to you, my Lord, that I had a great
share in her sorrow, a while after we had intelligence from Madrit, that he was
in Flanders. My Father was so offended at his coldness, or rather, slighting of
me, that he would have broken all the bounds of our Engagement, had not my
Mother sweetened his anger, and taken him from that resolution, though with no
small pain. Peace having succeeded the War between the two Crowns, which
balance the Affairs of Europe, and Don Gaspard having no more occasion to get
glory, felt some impatience to see me again, but he was willing to satisfy his
curiosity without being known, he came to Milan, and having communicated his
design to the Prince of Ligne, who was then Governor of that Dukedom, he
earnestly entreated him to give him leave to go under the name of his Son, and
to write a recommendatory Letter to my Father, that upon account of their
ancient friendship, he might hope a kind reception from him. The Prince, who
was not ignorant of my being long since Married with Don Gaspard, conceiving,
he would use that Letter only to play upon me some gallant trick, that should,
at most, last one day or two, granted it to him in what manner he was pleased
to have it. Don Gaspard arrived at Naples, where he passed easily for the
Prince of Ligne's Son, for he was so changed since his Childhood, that no body
knew him again. My Father gave him an apartment in his Palace, and forgot
nothing that might Witness the great esteem he had both for the Father and the
Son. The first time, I saw him at Naples, I wished, my Lover might be as well
made as he, he entertained me with so much wit, and I discovered in his Person
so many excellent qualities, that I had a secret shame within my self for that
natural inclination I felt for him, fancying that I ought to esteem none in the
World but Don Gaspard; so that I resolved to shun the Company of a Cavalier,
whose sight might prove so ruinous to my virtue. In the mean time, my Father
being extremely scandalized to hear no more of Don Gaspard, although the peace
was made, was so satisfied with the young Prince of Ligne, that he said several
times to my Mother, he would willingly have him to his Son in Law, my Mother
gave him a Thousand reasons to the contrary, and though she did agree with him
about the merit of the young Prince, yet she could not resolve to turn out the
Son of Donna Mendoza her Friend. I had much to suffer in this juncture. My
Father on one side would have me no more think of Don Gaspard; on the other, my
Mother represented to me as so many crimes, the least thoughts of any other but
him who was designed to be my Husband. My perplexity was such as cannot be well
imagined. I could not keep me from a great esteem for the Prince of Ligne, but
however my heart stood firm for Don Gaspard. I will not trouble you, My Lord,
with the several ways he used to corrupt my virtue, which held out against all
his attacks; nay, I did so happily hide from him the secret motions of my
heart, that he could never observe in my conduct any thing that might give him
the least hope. A little while after, my Father received a Letter from the
Governor of Milan, wherein he begged his pardon for the little cheat he had
put upon him, in writing a recommendatory Letter to him for Don Gaspard de
Toledo, under the Name of his Son, and wished him much Joy for having chosen a
Son in Law endowed with so many excellent parts. As he was already prepossest
with a great esteem for the Prince, he was overjoyed to find in him the true
Don Gaspard, he sent immediately for him, and all the attendants being retired,
he embraced him with all the tenderness of a true Father, approved of his witty
Plot and permitted him to carry it on still. Don Gaspard who fell at first in
no small confusion, to see himself discovered, confessed to my Father, he had
thought fit to know me before our Marriage, for fear of falling into that
inconveniency which is so common amongst Spaniards, who slight their Wives,
because having never seen them before their engagement, they use themselves to
a possession which was never mixed nor seasoned with any allarm, and
consequently they never feel for them but very lukewarm and languishing
passions; he added so many things to my advantage, that I could not rehearse
them without a blush. My Father left him, being extremely edified to see so
much wisdom in so tender a Youth. That very same day, he would have him sit at
Table with my Mother and me, which is looked upon in our Country, as a very
extraordinary favor, my Mother repined at it, and did her utmost to hinder it;
but seeing my Father would absolutely have it so, she ceased to oppose it.
After meat she retired in her Chamber, and I was obliged to follow her. She
told me, with tears, that she could not apprehend the meaning of her Husband,
but entreated me never to forget that I was bound to Don Gaspard, and feign a
Distemper rather than sit again at Table with the Prince of Ligne. In the mean
time, my Father not being able to see my Mother any longer in a bad humor, let
her know that the false Prince of Ligne was the true Don Gaspard, in Witness
whereof he showed her the Letter of the Governor of Milan. There was never a
Joy like hers. She embraced her Husband an Hundred times, and recalling in her
mind Don Gaspard's features, she found that, indeed, he resembled Donna Maria
de Mendoza, and she could not imagine how she might have staid so long in so
gross an error. She was in a great impatience to see Don Gaspard and embrace
him, but my Father who had bound himself to secret, earnestly entreated her to
be silent, nay to conceal still from me the business for a while, as I was
ignorant of all these particulars, I lived in a great perplexity of mind. I
pleaded indisposition according to my Mothers command, but yet I insinuated to
my Father, that I was well enough to go and sit at Table with him, he was angry
with me, for that out of complaisance to her, I failed once to be there, but on
a sudden, I saw a strange alteration in my Mother's carriage, she did no more
oppose it, on the contrary, she bid me fit at Table every day just by the
Prince, and dressed me with her own Jewels to set off my Beauty; I perceived at
the same time, that she had an extraordinary kindness for him upon all
occasions; nay, she affected to withdraw in her Closet after meal, and
commanded me to stay by my Father, who usually played at Chess with an old
Chaplain of his, so that the false Prince was in full liberty to court me;
which indeed he performed with so much passion, and in so tender and enticing a
manner, that I was even ready to surrender, when my Mother did well perceive my
weakness, and being afraid like a prudent Woman, that I would perhaps too
favorably answer his Fires, and that Don Gaspard would not approve of the
Princes's progress upon my heart, discovered me the intrigue of his disguise,
and recommended me over all, not to give him the least suspicion that I were
acquainted with it. I resolved at first to be revenged of this trick, and to
punish him soundly, who was the contriver thereof; but it was impossible for me
to dissemble long, and I found so much pleasure in thinking that I could,
without failing to my former engagement with Don Gaspard, satisfy the secret
Inclination I had to the Prince, that I had not virtue enough to show him the
least indignation; nay, far from frowning upon him, I sought his company, and
admired all that he said, and kept with him as long as decency could allow, and
when I was obliged to retire, it was always with a secret impatience to see him
again; he had for me the same sentiments I had for him, but with this notable
difference, that he enjoyed the pleasure to express them to me an Hundred times
a day, whereas I lived in a continual reserve, being forced to conceal mine
from him, but at last his passion grew so violent that he came to my Father,
desired him to accompany him to my apartment, to tell me his true name, and
bring quickly our Marriage to an happy conclusion. I was so troubled, when my
Father presented him to me, and I was so little attentive to his complement,
that I have quite forgot it; but this I remember well, that Naples was
preparing to honor our Wedding with Magnifick Feasts, and all manner of
public rejoycings, just at the time when Letters came from Spain, by which we
were informed of the Death of Don Gaspard's Father. This unseasonable news
broke all our measures. It was resolved, Don Gaspard should ride Post to
Madrit, and that, for his Mother's comfort, we should be Married in Spain,
whither I was to go by Sea three Months after. I will not trouble you, My Lord,
with the sad account of our grief, when we left one another; but it is certain
that I had a foresight of those misfortunes that have befallen us since, and
that I swooned away within my Mothers Arms, when he took his leave of me.
As Soon as he was arrived in Spain, he wrote to my Father, and desired him to
send me thither before the three Months we had agreed upon were expired. My
Father who had a great desire to see me Married with that young Lord; whose
merit and virtue were well known to him, thought fit to grant him his request;
I embarked, and after a long and troublesome Navigation, our Seamen told us,
they had discovered the Coast of Spain, this news made me forget all the toils
of so painful a Journey, and I did already flatter my self with the hopes of
seeing shortly my Lover, who expected me at Barcelona, when you made your self
Master of our Ship. Don Gaspard's heart was broke at the tidings of my sad
adventure, his courage or rather his Love, did not permit him to stay for any
succor from my Father. He provided himself with a considerable Sum of Money,
and took Ship together with some Religious Men, who depart every year from
Spain, for the Redemption of Christian Slaves in the Dominions of the Grand
Seignior; having Landed at Constantinople, he was told, that I could no more be
Redeemed, because I was shut up in the Serraglio, and what care soever he took
to hear of me, it was impossible for him to do it. All his Friends advised him
to return home, but he would not follow their Counsels, he stayed in
Constantinople, though bereft of all hopes of ever seeing me again, he heard
nevertheless of some Jews, that I had been sent back in your Serraglio; he
proffered them an ample reward, if they could but get him a place in your
Household. As nothing seems hard to those Mercenary Souls, when they have a
prospect to satisfy their insatiable avarice, they gave him great hopes; but
however, after they had vainly tried all sorts of ways to compass their design,
they told him 'twas altogether impossible to do it, because, there was no
President that a Mussulman had ever kept Christians in his service, except they
were his Slaves. These difficulties disheartened him not, and he did very
willingly consent that the Jews should sell him to your Kehaia; after which he
found a way at last how to discover himself to me, and notwithstanding the
great alteration of his fortune, I presently knew him again. Now see, my Lord,
continued Donna Emanuela, if he deserves to be so severely dealt with as you
had designed.

The Grand Vizier was moved at this Speech, and after he had commanded his
Kehaia to see Don Gaspard put out of Fetters, he assured the Spanish Lady, that
her condition was not so unfortunate as she fancied, since the Grand Seignior
whose Slave she was could permit her to Marry her Lover, and bestow upon them
both such an Estate, as might equal if not surpass that which they had left
behind them in their own Country; that they should but cause themselves to be
instructed with the Law of Mahomet; to enable him thereby to speak in their
behalf to the Sultan, and procure them all manners of benefits from his
Highness; which else he could not do, because his Religion did forbid him to
concur any way to the settlement of a Christian; he would or could not stay for
her answer, but sent immediately to both of them; his Doctors to teach them the
Precepts of the Alcoran, being very confident, that loving one another to such
an high degree of tenderness, they would never refuse those so advantageous
conditions he proffered to them; but these couple of Heroic Souls stood firm
and unshaken in their Religion, and after they had given one another a Thousand
assurances, that their mutual love should endure as long as their life, they
resolved in presence of the Turkish Divines, rather to dye than to renounce
Christianity. The Grand Vizier being acquainted with their resolution spoke
again to Donna Emanuela, and let her know that she must bid an eternal farewell
to Don Gaspard, if she would be so obstinately bent upon her Religion; nay,
that he was a going to embark him in a Ship, that was ready to sail for Spain,
but all these threatenings did not shake her constancy. She answered still with
the same courage, and her virtue carried it over her Love. The Grand Vizier
applied himself next to Don Gaspard, urged to him all sorts of reasons and
arguments drawn out of the interest of his Love and Fortune, but all in vain,
so that seeing it was not lawful for him, according to the Principles of his
Religion, to help them in these circumstances, he forced the Jews, who had sold
Don Gaspard to pay his ransom, and sent him back in his own Country.

Whilst the Grand Vizier waited with an unspeakable impatience, for the Grand
Seignior's Orders upon his Marriage with the Princess Basch-lari; that Monarch
who did never take a final resolution upon any thing, but more especially upon
such matters as regarded the Princes, or Princesses of his Family, without
first consulting the Sultaness Valide his Mother, imparted to her his design to
match the Grand Vizier with his Sister, and related to her all those reasons,
the Sultaness Krali had urged to him, to move him thereunto. The Sultaness
Valide needed the succor of all his wit to put by this dreadful Blow. She
feigned at first to approve of the Sultan's project, and added yet other
reasons to confirm her Son in this resolution: but (oh what is not a cunning
and jealous Woman capable to do) after a silence of some moments she said, that
when the Prince has once trusted a Minister with the whole conduct of his
Empire, he cannot be too cautious, or do too much to engage him in his interest
by all possible means; that, for her, for from disliking a design so
conformable to the good of the State, she thought 'twas not enough to Match his
Sister with the Grand Vizier, but moved further that, to bind him with a nearer
alliance, he ought to give him his Daughter, though then but Five Years old.
She upheld her motion with so many other arguments, that she persuaded the
Grand Seignior of the reasonableness thereof, and he promised her to follow it.
This Sultaness, whose aim was only to break the measures of our Lovers, was not
contented with the resolution of the Sultan, to make of the Grand Vizier his
Son in Law, her jealousy did yet require a more cruel revenge. She showed a
great concern for the establishment of the Princess Basch-lari, and entreated
the Sultan to prevent all the complaints of the Sultaness Krali her Mother, by
Matching her with Bashaw Asasp, upon whom at the same time he might bestow the
Government of Buda, which is one of the most important and considerable post of
the whole Empire. The Grand Seignior having approved of all his Mother's
Counsels, thanked her for her great Zeal to his interest; the next day he sent
for Cara Mustapha, to whom he declared his resolution to honor him with his
alliance, by giving him in Marriage his only Daughter, which was the richest
and dearest treasure he had in the World, and the infalliblest Witness, he
might have of his being fully satisfied with his services. Mustapha stood so
amazed, and so overwhelmed with anguish at this cruel discourse, that the
Sultan should have certainly perceived the great trouble, which was spread all
over his Face and Person, had not he, to hide his commotion, cast himself at
the Feet of his Master, which he embraced a long while, without uttering one
Word. The Sultan who attributed this respectful silence to an excess of joy for
so pleasant a news, told him at the same time of Basch-lari's Match with Bashaw
Asasp, whom upon account thereof he made Governor of Buda: The unfortunate
Vizier resented this addition of grief in a manner, that can be better imagined
than expressed. The Sultan seeing him still prostrated at his Feet, and that he
would not rise up, thought to the purpose to spare him the confusion of an
answer, upon so nice an Affair, and retired still persuading himself, that
Mustapha's silence could have no other cause but the excess of his Joy.

As Soon as he was alone, he gave himself over to despair, seeing no condition
in the whole World more unhappy than his, he revolved in his mind, that he had
arrived to the highest dignities of the Empire, far less by his ambition, than
by his Love, which had made him vigilant and active in hope of pleasing his
Princess; that after he had ventured his life to inform her of his passion,
that same love had prompted him with means how to undo the Bashaw of Aleppo her
designed Husband; that he had rejoiced at his preferment to the place of Grand
Vizier, but because he grew thereby less unworthy of his Princess; that he had
engaged the Sultaness Krali to speak in his behalf; that the Grand Seignior had
liked the motion of his Match, and that after all that he must spend his life
in a continual Slavery with a Child of Five Years, and see his Princess in
another's Arm, or to say better, never see her any more, since she must go to
Buda with her Husband; these cruel reflections afflicted him so much, that he
should have forgot to send the usual presents to the Grand Seignior's Daughter,
had not his friends, hearing of the Honor this Monarch had bestowed upon him,
earnestly entreated him to answer it, and to present the Young Princess with
Slaves, Toilets, Gowns, and Jewels, according as it is practiced in such like
occasions. The Grand Vizier passed many days in private, during which he
granted audience to no Body, and found no better comfort than to let Basch-lari
know his despair, and assure her, that in spite of all the Grand Seigniors
violence and injustice, he was resolved to venture a Thousand lives, for to
convince her, he would love her to his last breath; but Bashaw Asasp having
used the Precaution to draw in, with rich presents, the Sultaness Krali to his
party, she spoke to her Daughter in his Favor, and cunningly let her
understand, that the Grand Vizier, being Master of the Empire, it would have
been easy for him to Marry her, if sacrificing his love to his ambition, he
had not preferred the quality of Son in Law, of the Grand Seignior before that
of Brother. The Princess who found a great likelihood in her Mothers reasons,
was sensibly moved at that contempt, and resolved to forget the Grand Vizier;
but all the efforts she made to conquer it, were fruitless. She endeavored to
stifle that secret inclination, she felt for him; but it had got so deep and so
strong a root within her heart, that this rebellious heart did always revolt
against her reason; and all that she had been told of her Lovers ingratitude,
was not sufficient to blot out his sweet Idea of her mind; however, though she
had an extreme repugnancy for a March with Bashaw Asasp, she must follow the
stream of her destiny, and her Mother made her at last resolve to obey the
irrevocable Orders of the Grand Seignior. The Sultaness Valide whose aim was
only to remove, as soon as she could, so dangerous a rival, persuaded the Sultan
to make her depart upon the very same day of the Ceremony of her Marriage,
which was performed with such rigor, that she had not so much liberty allowed
to her, as to wait upon her Mother in the old Serraglio, to bid her the last
adieu. The Grand Vizier got nevertheless his Selam presented to the Princess,
that same fatal day; she received it without knowing almost what she was a
doing, being tossed with an infinite number of confused and opposite motions;
yet, maugre her anger, and all those bounds she had just now entered into, she
found some comfort in receiving a Selam from her Lover, though she conceived,
that he could not allege any good reason, to excuse his perfidy; but when she
knew through the disposition and quality of the Flowers the Selam was
compounded with, that Mustapha was brought to despair, and assured her of an
everlasting love, that knowledge served but to increase her grief, and to make
her more sensible of so cruel a separation. Roxelane who with her discourses
had always nourished and cultivated her love for the Grand Vizier, in hopes of
obtaining her liberty after their Marriage, was no less cast down than her
Lady. This conformity of sentiments, or perhaps, a secret pleasure the Princess
felt in talking of Mustapha, with a Person that was in his interest, made her
complain to that Slave, for to try her mind, of the perfidy of the Vizier, who
after having made a Sacrifice of her to his ambition, was yet so cruel as to
increase her anguish with vain endeavors to persuade her by most passionate
Selams, that he did lose her to his great grief, and would never cease to love
her; Roxelane forgot nothing that might justify the Grand Vizier, and the
Princess was so ready to allow of all that could do it, that she easily
believed, the Sultan had forced him to Marry his Daughter; but when she
reflected upon her Mothers reasons, and that the Grand Vizier, being absolute
Master in the Empire could have taken other measures to prevent her misery, she
presently concluded he had never had for her but an ordinary passion, since he
had not opposed her Match with Bashaw Asasp, as he did with the Bashaw of
Aleppo; as these reflections did interess her glory, she was so overpowered by
them, that she took a final resolution never to hear of him, and accustomed
herself by degrees to the caresses of her Husband, who used her with all
imaginable respect and kindness.

The Grand Vizier being inconsolable upon the Princesses departure, gave over
the Government, and spent some Months in such a languishing condition, that
they despaired of his Life. Nevertheless with time, and the remedies of the
ablest Physicians of the Empire, he recovered his former health, and took again
the care of the State. As Soon as he begun to recover, the Sultaness Valide who
was no more afraid of a rival, made several steps toward him, for the renewing
of their commerce, but the Vizier, who could not forget her so maliciously
contriving the Match of Basch-lari, and would no more trouble himself with the
intrigues of the Serraglio, since life it self was a burden to him, did not
answer these advances; nay, he took from her that share she had in the
Government of Affairs, by insinuating to the Grand Seignior, that 'twas to
bewanting to his own glory, and to violate all the Rules of State Policy,
partake his authority with a Woman, who had abused it on several occasions. The
Sultaness being incensed at the Grand Visiers contempt, and well warned of his
design to get her out of credit, turned all her kindness for him into a mortal
hatred. She was seized with a fit of fury as often as she remembered, that the
very Man who was beholding to her for his Life, and which she had raised to the
eminentest dignity of the Empire, did now slight her, and used that credit she
had procured him, but to destroy her. She looked upon him as a Monster of
ingratitude, and found as much pleasure in contriving a revenge against him,
than she had done formerly in raising him to honors for to content the motions
of her love, but the Grand Vizier, who did put to no account all the good
Offices he had received from her, since that cruel outrage she had made to him,
by taking away Basch-lari even from his own arms, used such precautions near
the Sultan, that he countermined all the Sultaness Mothers cunnings, and was
ever since more absolute in his Ministry, than he had ever been until that
time. In the mean while, the Princess Basch-lari, who was at Buda with her
Husband, lived a very happy life in appearance; but all the respects of the
Bashaw her Husband, did not hinder her to think sometimes of Mustapha, and to
feel a great pleasure in talking of him with Roxolane; she did nevertheless
endeavor to persuade that Slave, she had wholly forgot him. But Roxelane, who
knew well her sentiments was not complaisant to such a degree, as to agree with
her about it. The Princess being ashamed of the opinion, or rather knowledge,
that Maid had of a Love, which she could not stifle, made an effort upon her
self, and resolved to set her at liberty, that she might be rid of a Person,
whose presence did continually upbraid her with her weakness; and that she
might the better persuade the Slave, that she was no more troubled for
Mustapha, she commanded her to return to Constantinople, to see the Grand
Vizier, to assure him, that she lived happy, and that she had set her at
liberty, merely to be rid of the sight of a Woman, that might remember her of
her former complaisance to him. Though that resolution was most contrary to her
sentiments; she thought it however most conducive to her glory, to let the
Grand Vizier know, that she saw his indifferency without grief. This last
reflection thoroughly determined her, and caused her to take measures with her
Husband, for the Journey of Roxolane to Constantinople upon other pretenses;
as soon as she was arrived at the Port, she failed not to wait upon the Grand
Vizier, who received her with a great deal of kindness. She gave him an account
of Basch-lari's sentiments, but with so much cunning, that he remained
satisfied, there was less indifferency in her anger, than love; from that
moment he thought himself less unfortunate, and begun to mind of the means, how
to see his Princess again, he had several conferences with Roxolana, who helped
him to perceive, that Basch-lari's so much affecting to be believed happy,
showed rather a passion not yet well extinguished, than a Soul truly quiet and
calm. The Grand Vizier was so transported with joy at the hearing of
particulars which still flattered his passion, that he forgot nothing to show
his gratitude to Roxelane, and promised her to send her back in the Country of
her Birth. Roxelane not being willing to let slip so fair an opportunity,
entreated him to grant her also the liberty of Donna Emanuela; but the Vizier
let her understand, that it did not lie in his power to do it, because a Slave,
who had had the honor to be designed to the Grand Seignior's pleasures, could
never upon what color soever, be redeemed or freed; but he assured her, that
he would never demand of her any thing contrary to her fidelity to Don Gaspard,
though she should be used with the same respect, that was paid to his Wives.
Roxelana seeing 'twas impossible for her to obtain Donna Emanuela's freedom,
accepted of the Grand Visier's proffer, and returned in Italy overwhelmed with
favors, and more happy than she was, before she fell into Slavery.

The Ambassadors of Count Teckley, that Famous Chief of the Malcontents in
Hungary, did at that time renew their entreaties at the Port, to obtain a
relief from the Sultan against the Emperor. The Grand Vizier would fain have
made use of so favorable an occasion to go, and see his Princess at the Head
of an Army, under the pretense of assisting the Malcontents; but he had just
now concluded a Peace with the King of Poland, and put the Grand Seignior upon
the thoughts of other Conquests, being both prepossest, through the intrigues
of the House of Austria, that most part of the Princes of Europe, were
confederate under the Emperor's command, to destroy France, which could never
resist so many Puissances united against it: and not doubting, but in such a
happy juncture, it would be easy for the Grand Seignior's Navy to make
themselves Master of Provence, he had already sent Orders to Caplan Bashaw to
put to Sea.

Now seeking a fair Color to break honestly with France, It came in his mind
to refuse the honor of the Sopha to the French Kings Ambassador, and engaged
the Corsairs of Algiers and Tripoli to insult all the Ships of that Nation,
they could meet with; assuring them of a powerful protection: But seeing, the
War of the Christian Princes did not facilitate any enterprise to the Grand
Seignior, and that France did still maintain it self, maugre that great number
of Enemies, he fell into a fit of impatience, and his love made him wish, that
all that he had been told of the State of Christendom, might prove false, to
the end, that he might have a pretext to go in Hungary, and see his Princess by
the way at Buda. Therefore he sent secretly his Emissaries in most Courts of
the Christian Princess, with Orders, to send him a faithful account of the
posture, and condition of Affairs therein. A little while after he heard, by
their reports, which were all found consentaneous, of the Conquest of Lewis the
French King, the admirable conduct of that Monarch, and of the great disorder
of his Enemies. The Grand Vizier acknowledging thereby, that all he had heard
before, was but an effect of the contrivance of the Emperor's Emissaries,
acquainted the Sultan withal, and drew him out of that error, he had himself
so long been in, of the pretended decay of France's power, but they knew soon
after with their own experience, that Lewis the great was more in condition to
give the Law to others, than to receive it of any body. The Grand Seignior's
Fleet favoring by the secret Orders of the Port, the Corsairs of Algier, that
of France blocked up Caplan Bashaw in the Port of Chio, and forced him to
abandon them to their just revenge. The Grand Vizier took no notice of this
swinging affront, and insinuated to the Grand Seignior, it was now time to make
War in Hungary, and make use of the ill posture of the Emperor's Affairs, who,
aiming at the destruction of France, had exhausted his treasure. So dreadful
preparations were made in the whole Empire, that People believed the Sultan was
going to conquer all Christendom. The Sultaness Valide was very well pleased at
this design of War, hoping it might furnish her with means and occasions to
undo more easily the Grand Vizier when absent from the Port. The Emperor
having intelligence of the extraordinary preparations of the Turks sent Count
Caprara to Adrianople, to treat of Peace, he proffered so advantageous terms,
that all the Divan rejected them with scorn, conceiving thereby that the
Affairs of the Emperor, were in a most desperate condition.

All the Troops being assembled about Adrianople, the Sultan Mustered them, and
taking a Herontops from his own Turbant, set it upon the Grand Visiers, with
all the usual Ceremonies, to show that he trusted him with all his Authority;
it is observable, that Mustapha who had his Friends and Spies in the Serraglio,
was before his departure warned, the Sultaness Valide had boasted, she would
undo him in this War, he slighted the advice, though he ought to foresee, she
would not fail to turn his absence to her advantage, and could, perhaps, get
again that great ascendant she had formerly had upon the Grand Seignior 's
mind; his private friends represented unto him, he could not remove himself so
far from the Port, without breaking all the rules of Policy, and endeavored to
persuade him to accept of Count Caprara's proposals; but he was too much in
love, to hearken to their reasons. Princess Baschlari's Charms did wholly
possess his Heart, and all the powers of his Soul. The mere hope of seeing her
again, filled him with so much Joy, that he feared no more to loose his
fortune, conceiving he should not buy such a pleasure too dear with his own
life. Nevertheless, because he knew the Sultanesses Spirit, and that women do
seldom forgive when they think themselves to have been slighted, he resolved to
take from her all means to hurt him, and in order thereunto, to persuade the
Sultan to March at the head of his Troops; he urged to him, that the Monarch's
presence gives always much reputation to an Army, and that he ought not to
doubt but the Christians hearing of his Highnesses Marching with so formidable
Troops, would rather crave his mercy with respectful submissions, than provoke
his anger with an unprofitable resistance. In fine, he did so prepossess him he
had no other motive in advising him so, but a great passion for his glory, that
the Grand Seignior resolved to pass into Hungary; and now the Grand Vizier
seeing himself secured thereby from all the contrivances of the Sultaness,
Enjoyed before hand, unvaluable pleasures in thinking that after he had
troubled all the World, to put himself in measures of seeing his dear
Basch-lari, he was gone so far that he could see no more obstacles to the
performance of his design.

The Grand Seignior parted then from Adrianople, at the Head of two Hundred
Thousand Men, but the continual rain that numerous and formidable Army was
troubled, and almost overwhelmed with, the first days of its March, seemed to
many of a very bad omen, the Troops upon their arrival at Belgrad were so much
out of Order, and the Trains so harassed, that the Sultan thought fit to dwell
there a long while, that they might have time to be set up again in order. The
Grand Vizier longing to see Basch-lari, wanted not a pretext to go with a
strong detachment straightway to Buda; and fearing lest she should be perplexed
for the presence of the Bashaw her Husband, he sent him Orders to go and join
Count Teckley, and both together to relieve Newheusel, which was threatened with
a Siege by the Christians. The Princess who had a Thousand reasons to be fully
satisfied with her Husband, hearing of Mustapha's coming to Buda, fancied at
first she could see him without trouble; she did nevertheless mistrust her own
heart, and to avoid any return of her former tenderness for a Man whom she had
judged worthy of her esteem, she recalled in her mind, with how much
ingratitude this Grand Vizier had sacrificed her to his ambitious projects, and
at the same time, reflected upon those great obligations her Husband had laid
upon her, and with how much respect and complaisance he had used her ever since
their Marriage. These tumultuous thoughts inspired her with so much pride, that
far from being afraid of the Visier's arrival, she longed to see him, that she
might have the pleasure, to show him a great indifferency; he arrived at last,
and demanded to wait upon the Princess from the Grand Seignior. She received
him in State, and in an attire, which did so much set off her natural beauty,
that the Grand Vizier was extremely moved at it, he complemented her first in
the Sultan's name, and would next persuade her, that he had never performed his
Highnesses commands with so much contentment, as now. The Princess answered him
haughtily, and with a set malice assured him, that the best token the Sultan
her Brother could give her of his love, was quickly to send her Husband home.
Mustapha being surprised at a repartee so contrary to his Love, pretended, he
had orders to acquaint her with the operations of the Campaign, and the
Princesses Women and Eunuchs being retired at a distance, he complained of her
coldness, and used the tenderest expressions to satisfy her of the continuance
of his passion. The Princess let him know, she had followed his Example, but
however would not take it ill from him, since she had been so fortunate, as to
fall into the hands of a Husband, who was without contradiction, the most
honest Man in the Empire. The Grand Vizier deeply penetrated with grief, cried
out against the injustice she was doing to him, by believing him liable to
change, he afterward discovered to her all those tricks wherewith the
Sultaness Mother had broken their Match, and told her at last, that not being
able to live any longer, without the happiness of seeing her, he had moved the
Grand Seignior to renew the War in Hungary, that he might have occasion to come
and dye at her Feet, if he were so unhappy as to be indifferent to her. The
Princess, who had till now been ignorant of these so material circumstances for
the justification of her lover, was so much moved by them, and that pride,
which is intailed into the Ottoman Family, was so much satisfied to see, that a
passion she was the cause of, had put all Europe in Arms, that in spite of all
her duties toward her Husband, her tenderness carried it over all the other
motions of her heart. She spoke very kindly to Mustapha, and after having
bitterly inveighed against the Sultaness Valide, she could not forbear
confessing she was for the future, afraid of a very unhappy life, well
foreseeing she should feel an equal trouble to resist her passion on one side;
and to weaken that great esteem she had already for her Husband on the other, a
flood, of tears poured down from her eyes at these words; and having desired
Mustapha to retire, she called back her Women, and told them, she had not been
able to keep in her tears, conceiving through the Grand Visiers discourse, this
would be a Bloody War, and her Husband should be exposed to great dangers
therein. Although Mustapha were extremely glad for his being at last justified
in the Princesses mind, and had reason to be contented with those signs she had
given him, of what passed within her heart in his favor; yet because he looked
upon the Bashaw of Buda as a rival, who had robbed him of his treasure; he was
seized with so strong a jealousy, that he resolved to remove him speedily from
the Princess; he revolved a Thousand times in his mind all the particulars of
his conversation with her, and knowing she was above all taken with a great
show of merit and virtue, he thought, that if he could command the Army in his
own Person, it would be easy to dazzle her with some shining action. Therefore
he made speed to rejoyn the Grand Seignior, whom he endeavored to persuade
'twas fit he should stay at Belgrad, and leave to him all the care of this War.
The Sultan at first opposed it; but as able Ministers do never want means and
reasons to attain to their ends, the Grand Vizier represented to his Highness,
that if he should advance farther in the Christian Territories, his being so
far removed from Constantinople, might give way to some Rebellion; whereas if
he would reside at Belgrad, no insurrection was to be feared at home, and he
should be near enough the Army to reap all the Glory of the Conquests to be
made. The Sultan being overpowered with these reasons followed the Counsel of
Mustapha, who being desirous to do any thing, that might shine to Basch lari's
Eyes, he resolved to begin the Campaign with the Siege of Vienna, and sent
Orders to the Bashaw the Princesses Husband to block up the place, he Marched
afterward, at the Head of an Hundred and Threescore Thousand Men to besiege it
actually; his Troops to terrify the Christians, plundered and killed all that
they met with in their March. As Soon as the Siege was formed, the Grand Vizier
Summoned Count Staremberg Governor of the place to surrender it, assuring him
of the Grand Seignior's friendship, if he would deserve it by a speedy
Submission to his command; but threatening him at the same time, that in case he
would be so rash as to resist, and force him to expose and shed the Blood of
the Mussulmans, he should put all to the edge of the Sword, without sparing
either Age or Sex; nay, that he would excogitate a new torment for him in
particular. Count Staremberg slighted this insolent Turkish Rodomontade, and
prepared to discharge his trust like a Gallant Man, by a stout and vigorous
defense; he caused all the Suburbs of Vienna to be Burnt, and so much
encouraged both with deeds and words, the Soldiers and Citizens of the place,
that they made a most solemn vow to defend it even to the last drop of their
blood. The Turks attacked at first with much valor, but were beaten back, and
lost a vast number of Men. The Grand Vizier, whom the conduct of this Siege did
not trouble so much as his love, had conceived an unspeakable hatred for the
Bashaw of Buda, he thought he had done but little to remove him from the
Princess Basch-lari; his Jealousy demanded a greater Sacrifice, and inspired
him with a dark design to seek his Death, fancying this War gave him a fair
opportunity to rid himself handsomely, and without fear of the least suspicion,
of so potent and troublesome a rival. So he called one day the Council of War,
and after having complained of the length of the Siege, he moved for a general
assault, which he got resolved upon against the opinion of his most experienced
Officers. The Bashaw of Buda was commanded to head the detachment, though he
was one of them, who had voted against this rash enterprise. Nevertheless, he
discharged his duty with much valor; but the Christians being encouraged with
their former happy successes, slew many Thousand of Turks, and forced the
Bashaw to a retreat, to save the small remnant of his Troops; however the Grand
Vizier blamed his conduct, and charged upon him this unhappy success, which did
not vex him so much, because of the great number of Soldiers killed, as because
the Bashaw had escaped the danger. In the mean while, a report was spread of
the great King of Poland's Marching toward the relief of Vienna. The Bashaw of
Buda, who was a great Commander, moved in the Council that a strong body of
Troops should be sent forthwith, to hinder the junction of the King's Army with
the Emperor's, and made it appear, that the Polanders could not approach the
place without Marching through several narrow passages, which few Armed Men
were able to keep against the Power of an Army, but the Grand Vizier, would not
hearken to this prudent Counsel, and proudly answered, they must be let come,
that the Sultan might be revenged upon them, for the great losses he had
suffered during this Siege. Infine, upon the Twelfth of September 1683. the
Christian Army was seen upon the Hills of Vienna. The Grand Vizier, who relied
upon the Multitude of his Men, thought, he could well Fight the Christians, and
carry the Siege on both together, left a strong body of Janissaries in the
Trenches, and commanded another detachment to strengthen them, and hinder the
Sallies of the besieged. Afterward he Marched with the main Body, to fight the
Christians, and conceiving that notwithstanding the huge inequality of both
Armies, the first shok was like to be very cruel, he thought it might prove
favorable to his jealousy, by occasioning the death of the Bashaw of Buda.
Therefore he commanded him to go and meet the Christians, forbidding him to
retire, what effort soever they could make against him, and assuring him to be
backed with the whole Army; besides, he was so confident of the victory, that
he would have all his Wives mounted on Horseback, and upon Camels to behold
from a Neighboring Hill, the defeat of the Christians; nay, they did already
rejoice before hand, for that imaginary Triumph, and attributed great praises
to the Grand Vizier. The only Donna Emanuela, who heard talk of nothing else,
but of projects fatal to Christendom, was continually weeping; one of them,
that was most of all in the Grand Visier's favor, and had always feared lest
this Christian Slave's Beauty, might engage her Husband, moved to her to pass
into the Camp of the Polanders, since she found herself so unhappy amongst the
Mussulmans. Donna Emanuela let her understand, that her escape was not
altogether impossible, if she would countenance it. The Visier's Wife being
very desirous to be rid of a Person, that could contend with her for Beauty;
promised her, she would contribute to it with her utmost Power, and trusted
with her design two other Women, who had the same interest in Donna Emanuela's
escape. In the mean time, the Bashaw of Buda was beaten back, and his Troops
having had no succor retired in such a disorder, that they broke a great part
of the Turkish Army. The Christians pursued them very close, and the Turks
having no time to rally, lost a great number of Men. The fright was general,
and many a squadron retired without fighting, or daring so much as to approach
the Christians. The Grand Vizier had much ado to keep in the Soldiers that fled
on all sides; he did nevertheless, in such a hurly-burly cover with much are
the disorder of his Troops, and without seeming to be forced to decamp, he made
them retire with speed; nay, he left behind him the Janissaries, who were in
the Trenches, lest he should be discovered in his retreat; but Donna Emanuela,
who had contrived with the Grand Visier's Wives to make her escape, as soon as
Night would help it, made use of the Turks consternation, and passed with
little or to pain into the Christian Army. She was brought before the King of
Poland, and acquainted his Majesty with the Flight of the Turks, who Fled with
so much precipitation, that they had abandoned their Tents, and all their
baggage. The King wondered at the great courage of that Heroine, and because he
did not well understand Spanish, he sent for some Cavalier of that Nation in
the Emperor's Army. The Duke of Lorrain, sent a Man of quality, who served
under him as adjutant General. The King of Poland, who had a mind to know the
condition of the Turkish Army, commanded him to ask that Maid several
questions, but as soon as Donna Emanuela had cast her eyes upon him, she knew
him to be her dear Don Gaspard, and swooned away at the King's Feet. It was not
long e're she recovered of her swoon, through the cares of Don Gaspard, who was
ready to dye with joy, to see so unexpectedly that charming Maid; as the King
wondered at such an extraordinary adventure, Don Gaspard acquainted him with
Donna Emanuela's quality, and how far they were bound one to another. The
King's presence could not hinder many tender expressions to pass between them
both at so sweet and charming a remembrance. Donna Emanuela put an end to them,
being desired to relate the particulars of the Turks disorder, and the fright
of their Camp, when she made her escape. The King made so good use of her
advice, that without any further delay, he pursued the Enemy, cut in pieces the
Janissaries, who guarded the Trenches, and made himself Master of all the
baggage and Tents of that numerous Army, finding both the Grand Visier's
pavillion, and all the others still set up, he charged afterward their rear,
and should have certainly defeated the whole Army, had he had Troops enough
ready to stop the passages to the Grand Vizier. Mustapha who had flattered
himself, that he could make retreat without being pursued by the Christians,
hearing of Donna Emanuela's escape, and of all the circumstances that attended
it, doubted not but she would inform the King of Poland of the dismal
condition, he was brought unto, for which he sell so grievous angry with all
those, that had favored or countenanced her Flight, that he caused presently
four of his Wives, and two Eunuchs to be Beheaded. In the mean time, though the
loss of so many fine Troops did much trouble him, yet because he referred all
things to his love, his heart was far less vexed at the raising of that Siege,
than at the Bashaw of Buda's still living maugre all the tricks he had made use
of, to destroy him; and conceiving, this Bashaw might upbraid him before the
Sultan with the so many gross faults he had committed in the management of the
Siege, he resolved to prepossess his Master's mind, and to charge before hand
upon the Bashaw all the misfortunes which had befallen the Army; but when he
reflected, that the Grand Seignior might perhaps forgive him for his Wife's
sake, and that the Bashaw should find however a great comfort within the Arms
of the Princess Basch lari, this thought tormented him to such a degree, that
without any farther examination, he gave himself over to the impetuousness of
his vengeance, and caused this great but unfortunate Bashaw to be Strangled;
and to avoid the suspicion that any private grudge might have influenced in
this severe punishment, he served so two other Bashaws whom he accused of ill
conduct, and cowardice in the discharge of their duty. Every one was amazed at
so bold an action, but the Vizier did not matter much the murmurs and
discourses of the People, he was only troubled about Basch lari, how she should
receive this news. Nevertheless, knowing that most Women bewail the loss of
their Husbands, meerfor decency's sake, and do easily forget the dead in favor
of the living, he hoped that the remedy of time, and his cares should diminish
her anger. Therefore being pretty well freed from fear on that side, he bent
all his wits to find a way, how to justify himself before the Grand Seignior;
he sent a trusty friend of his to Belgrad, and let the Sultan understand, that
the Bashaw of Buda, looking upon his Highnesses Conquests with a jealous eye,
and foreseeing Buda should no more be a Frontier after the taking of Vienna,
had crossed with all manner of obstacles the success of that enterprise; that
he had been contented at first to upbraid him with it, in hope that a man, who
had the honor to be so near related to the Ottoman Family, would soon
acknowledge his fault, and endeavor to make amends for it; but that the Bashaw
abusing his moderation, had persisted in his former sentiments, and that after
he had been such a coward, as to fly before a handful of Christians, he had
broken the ranks of the Mussulmans, and put the whole Army into confusion; that
two Bashaws having been frighted like Children, had increased the disorder, of
which the Christians had made so good use, that if he had not used all
necessary precautions to keep in the flying Soldiers, and to make an orderly
and honorable retreat, all his Highnesses Army, had run the danger to be cut
in pieces; that afterward having had intelligence, that those Bashaws being
ashamed of their cowardice, were about making secret Cabals, that might be of a
dangerous consequence, he had judged it necessary to punish the criminals
without any delay, that he might by their death stop the Rebellion in its
cradle; nay he assured him, that having no more Traitors nor Cowards in his
Army, he should advantageously repair in the next Campaign, the losses he had
made by the ill conduct of those unworthy Officers. The Grand Seignior being
persuaded by the reasons, and satisfied of the zeal of his Vizier, approved of
all he had done, and as a witness of his satisfaction, he sent him a new
Standard with Seven Horse tales, assuring him he would for ever honor him with
his favor, and provide him abundantly with all necessaries, that he might be
enabled to revenge upon the Christians, the great affront he had received at
Vienna.

The Princess heard very confusedly of her Husband's Death, and conceived, he
had been slain in the War, her grief hindered her to hearken to the other
circumstances of his death, which none was very forward to acquaint her with.
She paid a great tribute of Tears to his Memory, but was soon comforted with
the thought that the Grand Vizier loved her still, he arrived at Buda about
that time, to receive there the great Standard the Grand Seignior had sent to
him, together with all the Testimonies of his esteem, he might wish for. So
being assured again of his Masters favor, he thought of nothing but to clear
himself before the Princess, he could not but know how great was her esteem for
her Husband, and he doubted a while whither he should see her, or no, but the
new tokens he had just now received of the Sultan's kindness, made him so
proud, or rather his love made him so impatient, that he resolved to demand an
audience of Basch-lari, pretending he had an Order from the Grand Seignior to
communicate to her. The Princess received him with a great show of sadness, and
desired him to give her time to wipe off her Tears. The Grand Vizier, who
expected a greater transport, because he supposed she knew already, what kind
of Death had robbed her of her Husband, begun his own apology; and told her, he
had passed by the Bashaw of Buda's faults, as long as he could; but that having
occasioned the loss of the best part of the Army, he durst not put off his
punishment any longer, for fear of exposing his own Head to the Grand
Seignior's wrath. Basch-lari was ready to dye with grief at this discourse,
which let her know, that her Husband was dead both by the Hangman's hand, and
by the order of her Lover. These cruel circumstances vexed her so much the
more, because she could not but be conscious of her having had a great share in
his crime, her love did nevertheless plead for the Vizier, but she was seized
with such an horror for his cruelties, that maugre all the secret motions of
her heart, she reviled him grievously, and threatened him to Strangle him with
her own hands, except he would presently be gone; when he was retired, she
condemned her transport, and though she was satisfied of the justice of her
grief, yet she perceived, her anger had made her speak against her true
sentiments; but revolving in her mind a minute after, that neither the respect
he owed to her, nor the fear of displeasing her, had been able to take him from
the black design of Strangling her Husband, she thought herself highly injured
by so criminal a boldness, and that both glory and duty obliged her to be
revenged of Mustapha's cruelty. These last sentiments prevailing upon her, she
was ashamed of her weakness; and believing, she had overcome the secret revolt
of her heart in the Grand Visier's favor, she departed from Buda for Belgrad,
with a firm resolution to petition the Grand Seignior against Mustapha, about
the unjust Death of her Husband. In the mean time, the Grand Vizier, who
resented to the quick the Princesses anger, did endeavor with gifts to draw in
her Women and Eunuchs to his interest, persuading himself, that time and love
would do the rest. Neither did he neglect to write to the Grand Seignior, and
prepossess him upon Basch-lari's discontent, he let him understand, amongst
other things, he could hardly imagine, that a Princess of the Ottoman Blood,
could be sorry for the Death of a Husband, who had no courage; his Letter had
more effect than he expected. The Sultan seeking to justify his Vizier by all
means, that might shine to the Eyes of the People, send Orders to the Princess
not to come to Belgrad, and letting her know, he would see nothing, that might
remember him of a Man, who had made himself unworthy of the honor of his
alliance, he sent her back to Constantinople, attended by a Minister of the
Alcoran, who declared to her that the Grand Seignior being willing, to condemn
the Memory of the Bashaw of Buda to an eternal oblivion, and to blot out the
remembrance of his alliance, with the Ottoman Family, had made choice of Bashaw
Ibrahim to be his Brother in Law; he told her farther, the Sultan would very
willingly own her to be his Sister, and see her with pleasure, as soon as he
could look upon her, as the Wife of a Man whom he loved, not as the Widow of a
Traitor. Basch-lari was at first surprised at this harangue; but when she had
made reflection, that 'twas not lawful for her to oppose the Grand Seignior's
Command, and that, by this Match she could both revenge the Death of her late
Husband, and free herself from the cruel necessity, she was in, to speak
against her Lover, she consented with less repugnancy, to Marry Basham Ibrahim,
who was a Young Man endowed with many excellent parts. A little while after,
the Grand Seignior arrived at Constantinople, where he received his Sister with
all the respect she might wish for; and now conceiving it would be a pleasant
piece of news to the Grand Vizier; which he had lest at Belgrad, he acquainted
him with that Marriage, to show him that he sought to destroy the Memory of the
Bashaw of Buda, by all means that lied in his Power. The Grand Vizier, who had
flattered himself, that the Princess should be appeased by length of time, was
mighty troubled at the news of her being Married, and when he knew, that Bashaw
Ibrahim had reaped the fruit of all the pains he had taken, to undo that of
Buda; he fell into so deep a Melancholy, that he troubled himself no more,
either to keep his credit, or maintain his fortune; he had advice, the
Sultaness Mother was about making new cabals against him, and that Gran was
besieged by the Christians, but he neglected to relieve that place, and scorned
to go and justify himself to the Grand Seignior, choosing rather to perish,
than to be a witness of Bashaw Ibrahim's happiness. The Grandees of the Port,
being tired with the Tyranny of the Vizier, who had lost by his fault the best
Troops of the Empire, had vainly attempted to destroy him in the Sultan's mind,
but after the taking of Gran by the Duke of Lorrain, the Sultaness did serve
herself so well of this favorable juncture, that the Grand Seignior being
amazed at the daily reports of the ill posture of his Affairs, begun to alter
his Sentiments for the Grand Vizier. Now, the Janissaries who could not find in
their hearts, to forgive him the foul trick he had played upon them, in
abandoning their Comerads to the fury of the Christians, at the Siege of
Vienna, and being countenanced by the secret contrivances of the Sultaness,
they did tumultuously repair before the Serraglio, and demanded the Head of
that Minister; as the present condition of Affairs rendered such seditions very
dangerous, the Sultan spoke to them with much courage and firmness, and causing
some Money to be distributed amongst them, he dismissed them with hope, that he
would mind how to see them satisfied. The Sultaness together with all the Grand
Visier's Enemies, renewed their interest against him, and endeavored to
persuade his Highness, that the Empire was threatened with a general
insurrection, except he would sacrifice his Vizier to the public hatred; at
last, the Grand Seignior consented, the business should be referred to the
Mufti's judgment, his case was brought under borrowed names, before him, who
after a long debate thereof with the ablest Divines of the Empire, voted at
last, and wrote with his own hand, that he who had committed those faults,
which he had just now examined, was worthy of Death. The Grand Seignior did
nevertheless keep this resolve secret a great while, but being pressed by his
Mother, he made choice of two Agas of the Janissaries, which he knew to be
Wisemen, and giving them in charge to behave themselves with an extraordinary
prudence, he gave them a Hatcherif, and commanded them to go secretly to
Belgrad, and Strangle the Grand Vizier. The two Agas being arrived at Belgrad,
let Mustapha understand, they were sent by the Grand Seignior to take just
measures with him, about the things he might want for, to be ready against the
next Spring to take the Field, and repair by some great exploit the miscarriage
of the last Campaign. The Vizier who was not ignorant of the Plot, that was a
hatching against him at the Port, had some suspicion, that their errand was
only to demand his Head, and delayed a while to give them audience. The two
Wise Agas showed no impatience at all to see him, on the contrary they sent him
word, that they came merely to wait for his Orders, and would stay as long as
he pleased. This prudent carriage deceived the Vizier; he assembled the Divan,
and received the two Agas, one of them served him with the Sultan's Hatcherif,
which was packed up in a small Bag of Velvet; at the same time the other Agas
untied his Girdle, made up with several little silk twists, and threw it upon
the Grand Visier's neck, who was reading the first lines of the Warrant, he
seemed to be surprised, named the Princess without explaining himself farther,
and observing upon the face of the Officers, that sat about him, no motion,
which might put him in hopes of a revolt in his favor, he desired the Agas to
grant him time for a short Prayer, and then was Strangled; his Head was carried
with speed to Constantinople, where it made a very pleasant Spectacle to the
People, and especially to the Janissaries. The only Basch-lari, who loved him
still, maugre all the reasons she had to complain of him, paid Tears to his
Memory, and not being able to endure, that the Head of a Man, whom she had
honored with her esteem, should be exposed to the scoffs of the rabble, caused
it to be secretly taken away, and decently Buried.

FINIS.

