Dr. PRAT's SERMON, Preached before the Honorable SOCIETY OF THE County of
KENT, November. 23. 1697.

Martis, xxx die November. 1697.
IT is Ordered at a General Meeting of the Stewards for the Society of the
County of Kent, That their hearty Thanks be given to Dr. Prat, for his Sermon
Preached on the 23d. instant, at St. Mary le Bow; and that He be desired to
Print the same.

John Cook, Treasurer.

Peace and Gratitude.

A SERMON, Preached before the Honorable SOCIETY Of the NATIVES of the County
of KENT, November. 23. 1697. At St. Mary le Bow, London.

By Samuel Prat, D. D. Chaplain to His Highness. William Duke of Gloucester.

LONDON, Printed by J. Dawks, for John Back, (Bookseller to the said Honorable
Society,) at the Black-Boy on London Bridge, 1697.

To my Worthy Friends, Capt. William Wright. Mr. William Rolph. Mr. Henry Hene.
Mr. Thomas Staples. Mr. Edward Simmons. Mr. Sarles Goatly. Mr. John Cook. Mr.
Tho. Gibbs. Mr. Tho. Bishop. Mr. Ja. Almond. Capt. Geo. Weller. Mr. Henry Shers.
STEWARDS, For the Honorable Society of the Natives of the County of KENT.
GENTLEMEN,
IT was not want of Love or Respect to your Honorable Society, that made me so
unwilling to Preach before you; but having very little time at my own disposal,
and knowing how many Learned and Eloquent Divines now residing in the County,
had better opportunities of performing that Duty, I was loath you should be
involved in a discredit, which my incapacity at so short a warning, must needs
bring upon my self. And the same reason made me resolved against Publishing
this Incorrect Discourse.

It will easily be granted, that the other great and Sacred Charge in which I
have the Honor to serve, will answer for me to all the World, if I don't shine
very bright in the Gift of Preaching; I should I hope give a tolerable account
of my self, if at present I should hide a great part of that Talent, which at
the same time I have a secret desire (as all Lawfully Ordained Ministers ought
to have) of improving.

I must confess withal it is my Opinion, that the Advancement of Reputation with
the best Judges gotten by this way of Printing Sermons, has of late Years
scarce compensated for the trouble; while the greatest number of Readers seek,
rather to exercise their own parts, than to add to 'em.

They are not so severe upon the Preacher, as they are upon the Publisher, and
therefore seeing Men are willing to Forgive, what they are too ready to Forget,
I think that the Ministers of the Church of England, should content themselves
with being generally reputed the best Preachers in the World, without giving
any body the trouble of Revising their Performances: At lest till any other
Church can equal the smallest part of what in this kind has hitherto been
extant. So that I had much rather you would have been prevailed upon to excuse
the omitting this, of which I fear, I shall never forgive my self the doing.

All that I can say for my self is, that I ought not to decline any opportunity
of showing my Respect to the County, for had I no other Obligations to it than
the generous Friendship I have met with in the Noble Family at Eastwell, I
should think all my spare Hours very well employed in expressing my Gratitude.

Therefore it is no wonder, Gentlemen, if the warmth of your importunities,
contrary to my own Judgment and Resolutions, has made me to expose my self at
this time to Censure; and particularly of those Men, who have a low esteem for
every thing that is not elaborate and polite.

And I have still some hopes, that I shall buoy my self up; when I put into the
Scale of my Apology, the great Civilities that I have received from you in
your Representative Capacity, which have for ever obliged me to be,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Humble, and most Respectful Servant, Samuel Prat.

A SERMON Preached at the Kentish-Feast.
Coloss. III. 15. Let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts, to the which also
ye are called together in one Body, and be ye thankful.


THE Apostle in the foregoing Verses exhorts us, to Bowels of Mercies,
Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, and long Suffering; that we should
forbear one another, and forgive one another. If any Man has a quarrel against
any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye: But above all these, says he,
(and it is indeed, the Root and Foundation of all these,) put on Charity.

Now here in the following Verse, he recommends two other Virtues, which are
inseparable from such a Christian Temper of Mind, to wit, Peace one with
another; and Gratitude toward God: Let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts,
and be ye thankful.

As to the First of these, Peace, we have here Three Particulars to be observed.

The Original of it, the Peace of God.

The Property and Office of it, Let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts.

The Motives or Inducements,

In the First place, unto which ye are called: And,

Secondly, in one Body.

First then, the Peace of God,

That, that inward Peace, which is the Peace of a good Conscience, or that
peaceable Inclination of Good Will to one, another, which by all the Offices of
Love and Charity, exerts its self outwardly.

The first of these is compacted between God Almighty, and the Conscience of
every particular Person; upon a firm, lively, and active Faith in the Son of
God, and the Promises made through him to Mankind, with hearty Repentance for
Offenses past, and firm Resolutions of Amendment for the time to come; has a
lively hope that his Sins are forgiven him, through the Merits of Christ, and
that his Peace and Reconciliation is made with God, as Romans 5.1. Being
justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: so that
it is the Peace of God, because it is the Peace which his Son procured for us;
there having not been that Love and Agreement between God and Man under the
Law: we were then Strangers and Aliens unto the Covenant of Grace; Ept. 3.13.
But now (says the Apostle) ye who sometimes were far off are made nigh, by
the Blood of Christ, for he is our Peace.

But that Peace which the Apostle seems chiefly to aim at in this Text, is
external in its Operations; when a Habit of Love and Good Will, one toward
another, disposes us to all the Offices of Charity and Kindness, and
particularly to a Sociable and Friendly Conversation: in which it is so much
the more our Parts and Duties to be engaged, by how much we are assured, that
God is the Author of it: for this reason, he is called the God of Peace, as in
2 Cor. 13.11. Brethren, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one Mind; Romans
15.33, 16, 20. Heb. 13.20.
live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

And from hence we may infer, that all those who disorder the Communion of
Saints, who break the Bonds and Obligations of Peace and Unity, who disturb
that Christian Fellowship and Harmony which we ought all to conserve, how
strictly Religious soever they pretend to be, how often soever they take the Name
of God in their Mouths, yet acting directly against the Dictates of God's Holy
Spirit, they are professedly the Opposers of his Divine Will; for God is not
the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all Churches of the Saints.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 14.33.
Let us consider the Property and Office of this Peace of God, that it is to
rule in our Hearts.

This Word Rule in the Text, is Metaphorical, relating to the Public Exercises
of the Ancients, over which there were chief Officers or Judges, constituted to
decide any Controversy which might arise among the Candidates striving for
Victory: so that the Word signifies, to superintend and judge.

Now there being a continual Conflict in the Heart of Man, the virtuous
Affections striving against evil and carnal Passions, and the unruly Desires
usurping upon, and insulting over the calm and lovely Graces; Hatred and
Envyings against Love and Joy, Strife and Emulations against Goodness and
Meekness: Here Is the Peace of God must moderate among 'em, and give the Palm of
Victory to the most Peaceable; every thing that proceeds from God, having a
Sovereign Authority, which is to be executed with all the Force and Vigor
imaginable, for the punishment of the wicked Doer, and for the praise of them
that do well.

But farther: This Phrase, Let it rule in your Hearts, has another very great,
and peculiar Emphasis.

For the better understanding of which, let us reduce all Mankind to four
several Tempers and Dispositions.

First, Satyrs without a Metaphor, that insult all Mankind like the Giants of
Old, and storm Heaven too with the reakings of that Hell which is always within
'em:

These have no Rule and Government for their Thoughts, Words or Actions; no
Governors can please, no Administration of Government oblige these Men;
kindness and indulgence has but little influence upon their Reason, their own
true Intrest less, and Religion least of all: These are such as Holy David had
to encounter with, Woe is me says the Psalmist, Psalm. 120.5.
That I am constrained to dwell in Mesech, and to have my Habitation in the
Tents of Kedar, my Soul has long wished for Peace, but when I speak of Peace
they are for War.

These Men, though in Times of profound Peace, Live according to the Doctrine of
the Leviathan, in a perpetual State of War; and their greatest Quarrel of all,
is against the very Articles of Peace, as in that great one relating to our
Superiors; Duty and Allegiance is reproached, as time-serving; so Love and
Kindness to our Neighbors, as Compliance and Officiousness; Temperance and
Industry, as mean and servile: such sour Thoughts and bitter Sarcasms, is a
mixture doubtless of Gall and Vinegar, no less offensive to the Blessed Jesus,
than the cruel Sponge which was proferr'd him upon the Cross. But then,

Secondly, Jews; there is a Root of Bitterness still alive, though as it were
deep buried.

Of either of these two sorts of Men, I have now mentioned, there are none I
hope among us here present; although some of 'em crept into the primitive Agapae,
or Feasts of Love; of whom St. Peter takes notice, as of Spots and Blemishes in
their public Meetings, rity, Sporting themselves, says he, 2 Ep. 2.13.
with their own deceivings, while they Feast with you.

Now if we have no such among us, all is well; for there can be none of this
Honorable Society like those Men, whose Character I am now entering upon.
Although,

The Third Rank of Men,

I don't only speak of such Men, who neglect Opportunities of promoting Love
and Charity amongst their Neighbors.

And who absent themselves from such Laudable Conventions as this is, whereby
Publick-spiritedness and Charity, are as much amplyfied as Unity.

But of those Persons likewise, who love to manage that little good Nature they
are Masters, of by way of Paradox; People that think and mean well, and yet
love to talk amiss; unless it could be supposed that they speak without
thinking; and when the wantonness of their Wit or Genius, would be loath to lie
under that Censure:

Now both these sorts of Men, though in some respects they may be said to have
the Peace of God in their Hearts, their own Consciences not accusing 'em of any
mischievous Designs, or so much as uncharitable Thoughts; yet the Peace of God
does not Rule within 'em, they receive the Spirit of God into their Hearts as a
Guest, but not as a Governor.

And this in other respects is the case of many Men; who have not only
Inclinations to Virtuous and Moral Duties, but who are likewise well disposed
to Exercises of Religion; yet for want of fixing their Resolutions, and giving
themselves up wholely to a Spiritual Conduct, they are overcome by the
Treachery of some unmortify'd Adversary; such as Penuriousness, Peevishness,
Sloth, Pride or the like; or else by the boisterousness of that unbridled Lust,
which under the denomination of Wit, is subservient to all the designs of
Ill Nature. But now,

The Fourth sort of Men,

Those, which you appear to be as a Society, I would have you approve your
selves in your single and particular Capacities.

In whose Hearts the Peace of God has not only possession, but Government; and
Exercises a Sovereign and Uncontrolled Authority over all the Faculties of the
Soul, and Actions of the Body.

Well then, that we may the better understand the Allegory, and the force of
this word Rule, we are to suppose in the Heart of Man two contending Parties.
The Spirit of Love, and the Spirit of Enmity; the one lays claim by a Lawful
and Eternal right of Praeeminence, and the other only by Stealth or Usurpation.

The Spirit of Love sets up the Peace of God, and because Peace is a thing so
universally desirable; the very Spirit of Enmity sometimes pretends to set up
a sort of Peace too; the Peace of Necessity, the Peace of Worldly Interest, a
Politic and designing Peace, such an one as never comes up to that of God,
which passes all Understanding.

Now the words of my Text are a decision of the Controversy, and give the sole
Authority to the Peace of God, it makes this the Judge and Umpire of all
Occurrences: (...) let it Rule, or rather let it give the Palm of Victory; it
is a word that alludes to the ancient Exercises among the Grecians, and
Originally signifies, to bestow a Reward: The Office of the Judge, being to
bestow a Palm or Crown upon the Victor.

And this Metaphor should methinks silence all Pretensions to Uncharitableness
and Censoriousness; here is a Commission only for Approbation, and none at all
for the Condemnation of any one; its Office being no other, than to silence and
overruled all things that do not make for Peace. I proceed therefore.

Thirdly,

First, Unto which you are called. And,

Secondly, in one Body.

First,

The pleasant Fruits of Peace, Love and Joy, for instance, he did in the
earliest days of his Prophetic Office in a very extraordinary manner encourage;
Witness the first Miracle he did in Cana of Galilee, by changing at a great
Feast of Love, so much Water into Wine: Which was a plain Argument, that he
came not to introduce a sullen, sour, morose Affectation of Religion; but so
far as might conduce with Charity and Temperance, he indulged his Proselyes to
Innocent Mirth: and so much more than the commonly supposs'd necessary
Refections of Nature, that the envious Cynicks and meagre Puritans censured
him, as a Glutton, and a Wine-bibber; adding to his Charge his Eating with
Publicans and Sinners, whilst his Accusers were in the mean time Devouring
Widows Houses.

The Examples of Peace, Love and Unity, which our Savior set the World, are
evident, and no less so are his Precepts; as in the ninth of St. Mark, at the
fiftieth Verse, Have Salt in your selves, [that Wisdom and Prudence, which
seasons every Feast of Love] and have Peace one with another. St. Paul likewise
in the twelfth to the Romans, seventeenth Verse, If it be possible, as much as
lies in you, live Peaceably with all Men; so Chap. 14. verse. 19. Let us follow
after the things which make for Peace, and things wherewith one may edify
another.

And then I must needs infer, That if our Assembling our selves here together
this day, after this manner, be a thing that makes for Peace and Amity? why it
seems we have a proper Call to it, and I don't see how any one can without good
Reasons excuse his absence.

Correspondent hereto we find the Beginings of Christianity, as in the fourth
of the Acts, 32 verse. we read, that the Multitude of them which believed,
wereof one Heart, and of one Soul.

They had Societies, and Feasts of Love, wherein there was constantly a
Communication of outward things to those that were in want; and which joined
together with Meekness, and Forgiveness of Injuries, was indeed a walking
worthy of the Vocation wherewith they were called. Ephesians. 4.1


Now by how much we come short of these things, by so much we are fallen off
from Primitive Christianity, by so much we are unmindful of our Calling; for
those whom God Almighty has called into his Church, are by him commanded to
Live as Brethren, and Heirs together of the same Promise; and this is

The second Motive, To the which also ye are called together, in one Body.

Among all the several sorts of Societies in the World, Societies of
Consanguinity or Affinity, Societies of Policy or Civil Government, Societies
of Places, Societies of Profession, and Societies of pure Friendship; that
which Supersedes all, nay rather Blesses and Sanctifies all, is Ecclesiastical
Society; which every Christian at his Baptism has entered himself into, and
engaged to observe the Heavenly Economy thereof; each Christian being but a
several Part of that one Body, of which Jesus Christ is the Head; For as we
have members in one body, Romans 12.4.
and all members have not the same Office, so we being many, are one body in
Christ, and every one members one of another.

We have to the like purpose, 1 Cor. 12.12. For, as the body is one and has
many members, and all the members of that one body being many, are one body, so
also is Christ. And then it follows, verse. 25. God has so ordered, that there
should be no Schism in the body; but that the members should have the same care
one for another; and whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it;
or one Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with it.

Thus much concerning the Peace of God.

I come now to speak more briefly of this other Christian Virtue Gratitude,
expressed in these words, Be ye thankful. By which we are to understand, a
Religious and thankful acknowledgment of the Benefits which we receive by the
dispensation of the Gospel.

The Comforts of an Holy Fellowship here, and the Promises of Eternal Life
hereafter, are tendered to us upon such Conditions, which are in themselves so
easy to be observed, and so much our Natural Duty to perform, that they can
never be said to merit or deserve any thing at God's Hand. So that all the Good
and Charitable Works we are capable of doing, are but so many acknowledgments
by way of Gratitude, for what we are never able to purchase, but has been
freely offered by the bounty of God. All returns therefore which are under
Valuation of the thing received, can be upon no other account, but of Gratitude.

Our Duty and Obedience to our Superiors, our Love and Friendship to one
another, our Charity and Liberality to the Poor and Needy, are but so many
returns of Gratitude to God; for the Comforts and Protection of Government, for
the happiness of a Christian Neighborhood, for making us Members of Christ's
Holy Body, and the Entitling us to the Inheritance of an Heavenly Canaan.

A Sense of Gratitude therefore, should have a powerful Influence upon us in
the whole course of our Lives.

In our Duty to God, by doing him all the Duties of Faithful Servants in his
Holy Family; and above all, expressing continual Thanks to him, for Sustaining
us by his Word and Power, and placing us in a Society, whose reciprocal
Obligations are Love and Peace.

In our Duty to our Neighbors, by all the Holy Offices of Love, Joy, Peace,
Longsuffering, Goodness, Meekness, Patience and the like; considering one
another as the Image of God, as the purchase of our Blessed Savior's Blood,
and as Coheirs of the Heavenly promises.

In our Duty toward our selves, by Living in Temperance, Soberness and
Chastity, as those that have possessed their Souls with an hope of Eternal
things, that exceeding weight of Glory, which is laid up for us in Heaven. And
then with a Prudent concern for public good, let our own Interest prompt us to
Peace and Unity.

Let us remember that it was Faction and Rebellion, which threw some Angels out
of Heaven, and that it is Concord and Obedience which must bring us into their
forfeited Places; that it is impossible we should ever be established in Peace,
unless we are Linked and United together in the Bonds of Love and Charity, De
Civitat. Dei.
For as the Humane Spirit, says St. Austin, can never animate the Members of
the Body, unless they are joined, or united together; so the Holy Spirit of God
does never animate the Members of the Church, unless they are likewise united
in Peace and Goodwill.

But above all, let a Sense of Gratitude toward God, oblige us to this Duty of
public Peace and Concord; since he has been so graciously pleased to disperse
the dangers of a Foreign Enemy, when he might have given us over as a Prey unto
'em: Let us take heed that we fall into no Enmities at home, and so become a
Prey one to another: Let the tenderness that God has showed to us, not only
teach, but by all the Obligations of Love and Gratitude operate so upon us, as
to be much more tender of the public, than of our private concerns.

Let us take heed that we slight not the late instances of his Mercy, but
unite our Hearts and Affections to one another, by that (among other
Considerations) of our late dangers of falling into Misery or Captivity; and
let us be speedy in such returns of Gratitude, lest mischiefs worse than those
we fear put it out of our Capacity, or a greater security out of our Thoughts:
You sure to whom I address my self, have the greatest reason of any Tribe or
County of this Nation, because you lie most exposed to Foreign Invasions, or to
any other Insults of an enraged Enemy: You were within hearing of the Alarm of
War, and the nearest to Outrage, had we been overthrown.

You would never more have boasted that you are the only People of England that
never were Conquered; for then you would in all probability have been the
first; you would have found something more formidable than the Arms of Julius
Caesar, or even of the Norman Conqueror, though they carried such a terror along
with 'em, as made the Heart and Spirits as it were of the whole Nation, to
retire into your invincible Corner of it.

You would no more have retained your ancient Liberties; those I mean, which
your Ancestors had Rescued by unexampled Courage and Conduct out of a general
Deflagration.

All the Riches, and Honors, and Beauties, in which you excel other Counties,
had made your Captivity or Banishment, but the more insupportable. Then in such
a Case, Nos Patriae fines, and dulcia linquimus Arva, Virg. Ecl. 1.
had been the sad Palinode to your pretty Motto. Sub tegmine Fagi Invicti.


But instead of that, you were the first People that were now lately Blessed
with the return of our Triumphant Mouarch.

The first that strow'd your Ave's under the Beautiful Feet of him that brought
Peace.

And what returns of Gratitude can you make to God and the King, but by
possessing your Souls with the Peace of God, with such a Peaceable disposition
as becomes good Christians, and good Subjects? letting it rule in your Hearts,
to the which also ye are called together this day, as it were in one Body.

You are called together not only to the Festivity, but to the Duties of the
Day. And it is my Duty to put you in mind, that seeing you now meet together
with greater causes of Joy, and greater marks of Prosperity than ever, that you
now make greater returns than ever of Gratitude to God.

How many Illustrious, how many Prudent, how many Wealthy, how many Active Men
will meet this day together! with what Mercies received, with what Abilities
attained, with what Opportunities of doing good, will they come laden! and will
some little usual or ordinary offering of Praise serve turn; will the doing
that, be an acceptable Sacrifice from so potent a Society which is not above
the Ability of one Man?

Your County indeed can vie in public Works of Charity with any in the Nation,
not only of the Deceased but of Living Benefactors too. But these public Works
which are the Gifts of private Men, should much more excite you methinks now in
a public Capacity, to the doing more works of Charity, than ever any Body of
Men has yet done for the Relief of private Necessities.

I am afraid, lest you should degenerate from the Character of your Ancestors;
Caes.
they almost 2000 Years ago were reputed to have had the greatest Humanity of
any People in the World, and if the Humanity of Gentiles exceed the Charity of
Christians; then as to your parts it is, as if Christ had Died in vain; and
though you were probably the first Christians of this Isle, yet your faith has
been in vain.

No: Let every Man do indeed according as he is disposed in his Heart; but he
that does most to the Glory of God, will feel the Peace of God in a good
Conscience here, and everlasting Peace, Tranquillity, Joy and Pleasure
hereafter.

Wherefore Brethren, 2 Cor. 13.11.
be perfect, be of one Mind, live in peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall
be with you. Amen.

FINIS.

