Mr. PRANCE's ANSWER To Mrs. CELLIER's LIBEL, AND Diverse other false Aspersions
Cast upon him: CONTAINING LIKEWISE A VINDICATION OF Sir William Waller from
Popish Scandals;

Some Mistakes in a Pamphlet Entitled, The Narrative of William Boys,
Rectified, and other Remarkables.

To which is Added the Adventure of The Bloody Bladder: A Tragi-Comical Farce,
Acted with much Applause at Newgate by the said Madam Cellier, on Saturday
Sept. 18. instant, Faithfully Related by an Eye- and Ear-witness.

LONDON, Printed for L. Curtis upon Ludgate Hill, 1680.

Mr. Prance's Answer to Mrs. Cellier's Libel, and diverse other Aspersions cast
upon him: Containing likewise a Vindication of Sir William Waller from Popish
Scandals: Some Mistakes in a Pamphlet Entitled, The Narrative of William Boys,
Rectified; and other Remarkables, etc.
HAving twice heretofore caused some Papers to pass the Press, I may possibly
incur some Peoples Censure for appearing this Third time in that kind. My old
Roman Friends will perhaps cry out, I do it only to raise some sorry
Contribution from the Bookseller, or out of a foolish Delight I take in hearing
my Name Bawled about Streets. These (however will be much more harmless
Scandals, than many others they have been pleased to bestow upon me, and yet no
less false; for as the Stationers are commonly wise enough, not to give too
much Encouragement; so I am as little inclined unto, as qualified for
Scribbling; and therefore shall not presume (with their Famous Oratress) to
persuade the World, That every Line of this shall be my own Handwriting; but
this I will assure the Honest Reader, That he shall find nothing here, but what
I know and can justify to be Punctual Truths, and of which I think my self
obliged in Conscience to give a public and more particular Account, for
stopping the Mouths of such, as make it their Business to palliate their own
Villainies, by wrapping me up in a Cloud of Falsehoods; or if it be impossible to
silence their incorrigible Humor of Lying, yet I hope, at least, by evident
Demonstrations of Truth, so to fortify impartial Ears, That they may not
henceforth be in danger of Delusion from these Egyptian Charmers.

There is scarce any thing has given a greater Confirmation of the Reality of
the Popish Plot, than their Murdering Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, of which I have
made a Candid Discovery; they had no other way to shift off that Guilt from
their Party, than by Discrediting my Evidence: But my Conversation having, I
Bless God (till then) been free from any Notorious or Extraordinary Crimes or
Follies, wherewith they might reproach me; and it being unaccountable Nonsense
that any man should own himself concerned in so black and horrid a Crime, if in
truth he knew nothing of it, or that he would run the Hazard and Infamy
thereof, merely to bring himself into danger, and destroy people that were both
Innocent, and his Intimate Friends; and that I Especially (who was never noted
for any extraordinary Invention) should forge this story, so reproachful to
that Church in which I have been bred, and for which I was so foolish a Zealot;
I that had then (and for ought I know have still) two own Brothers that are
Priests, and one sister a Nun; I whose Trade and whole subsistence depended
upon her Majesty, and others of the Roman Catholic persuasion, that under such
Circumstances I should testify such things (if they were false) would be
Bedlam-Extravagant as well as Hellish malice. They therefore concluded, that no
false Suggestion would appear so probable, as to give out that what I have
declared of that Assassination, I was compelled unto by Violence and Torture.

This spurious Conceit, first begot in Adultery between Priestly-Impudence and
Lay-Credulity, being now grown to some Bulk, comes the ever-memorable Madam
Cellier (that notorious Midwife, that has brought abundance more Lies, than
ever she did Children, into the world) and she exposes the Bantling, and licks
the Cub into form, and tricks it up with gay Swadling-Cloaths of Circumstances,
or in a word (to leave fooling with Metaphors) to color the business, She
offers her self as a kind of Ear-witness of the force pretended to be used to
me.

The Mischiefs designed by this most groundless Lie, are no less various, than
all advantageous for the traitorous Conspirators.

1. Hereby they hope to represent my Evidence as Invalid or at least suspected,
as being originally given not voluntarily, but per duress.

2. This point being once gained, The Actors and manner of Sr. Edm. Godfreys
Murder will become dubious, and then they may not only Outface it for their own
Credit, but cast it upon Himself, for the Beggars, or the Earl of Danby, or the
Preshyterians, or any body else, for all these they have already (though
Sillily and in vain) attempted,

3. Hereby they hope to give some color to the belief of the Sham-Plots, which
they have or intend to set on foot, making the World believe that some persons
had made it their Interest and Business, by undue means, to fix horrid Crimes
on the Papists, of which they were not guilty, which must be in order to some
sinister designs upon the Government, etc. All which Methods are indeed only
their own Popish Policies and Practices.

4. A further design is not only to Baffle the Discovery of the Plot, but to
bring an Odium on the Nation and the Protestant Religion in general, as
allowing or suffering such Cruelties, and Prosecuting Roman Catholics on
Testimonies so unduly obtained.

Wherefore, though I my self am inconsiderable, and not worth an Apology, but
satisfied with Truth, could contentedly sit silent and smile at their effronted
Forgeries, yet since in the consequences, it is a matter of importance to the
Safety and Honor of the Nation, I know not how I can discharge my Duty to my
Gracious Sovereign, (to whose Mercy I owe my Life) to my Country, and
Protestant Religion (in which by the Divine Grace I resolve to live and dye) if
I should not detect this lewd Scandal.

It Is true, Authority in a late just Prosecution of that Wretched Woman, has
fitly confuted her Libel, no Answer being so proper for such stuff as a
Pillory; And at her Trial upon my Oath (which I wish Jesuits, Priests, and
indeed all sorts of Papists, had that Conscientious reguard to, as I have, and
I hope shall ever conserve) I did fully satisfy the Court of the utter falsity
of any such usage; yet lest the Romanists and their Abettors, should pretend
that she was Convicted only for other Branches of her Libel, and Brazen it out
(as they are wont) that what I there delivered was but downright Swearing, I
shall here by pregnant circumstances, evident Matters of known Fact, her own
Contradictions, and other undeniable Arguments, make such her Story of my being
Racked or Tortured, appear to be as empty, though withal as malicious a
Fiction, as the Father of Lies could invent.

1. It Is well known, (and Celliers Libel, p. 18. confesses, that the King
himself told her so) That the Law (of England) will not suffer any person to be
Tortured; It Is a thing not allowed, not used amongst us; How then can That be
imagined to be practiced upon me, which never was done on any body else since
the memory of Man?

II. If Eliz. Cellier did at the time she mentions hear such Groans of Torture,
and had such Reasons to believe they proceeded from me, why did not she, who
was so notable a Busie-body, and so familiar with Ladies and Lords, and persons
of greater Quality (as she pretends) give immediate notice thereof to His
Majesty, that the thing might have been inquired into, the Contrivers thereof
and their illdesigns discovered and punished? Could she doubt a Fair Hearing?
that were to cast a most undeserved Reflection on His Majesty's Justice and
Goodness; For can it be imagined that the best and most Gracious of Princes,
would permit, or Connive at causeless Cruelties and Violations of Law, merely
by a false extorted Testimony to take away the lives of his innocent Subjects?
Or can we think the Papists so destitute of Friends, that they could not have
Access, on so important an occasion, to that Sovereign Ear, which is ever open
to the Just Complaints of the meanest of His Subjects? Their Interest was too
much, and their Modesty too little, to have forborne; but rather they would
forthwith have filled all the Court, and Kingdom too with Exclamations. At
least, why did not this Gentlewoman or some of he. Five Associate Gossips come
in to weaken my Testimoy at the ^^yal of Green, Bury, and Hill, then had been a
proper time for the starting of this Story? But alas! it was not hatched for
many Months afterward.

III. The Libel, p. 2. says, Cellier never saw the Countess of Powis, or had
any Money from the Lords accused, till about THE LATTER END OF JANVARY, (78.)
and then she went and told that Lady abundance of strange Stories of Mr. Oats
and Mr. Bedloe. And after this (which must be supposed to be in February at
least) her Ladyship (Powis) taking the Prisoners distressed Condition (so
miserably distressed that several of them died with Over-eating themselves, and
four or five in a Gang would commonly Tope off a dozen or more Bottles of Wine
in a day) into her consideration, there was a weekly Charity erected. And this
Mother of the Maids, and Nurse to suckling Swearers of St. Omers, was made Lady
Treasuress in that Affair. About this time (says she) going to the Prison to
perform these Offices of Charity, on Thursday Jan. 9. I dined in Newgate, etc.
Sure the Holy Father that forged this part of the Libel, had taken too large a
Mornings draught, else he would have laid his Lies a little closer. For how
does this hang together? She saw not the Lady Powis till the latter end of
January, and after that there was time spent in telling of Stories, and
erecting the Contribution of the well-affected, and yet after all this, comes
this Female Judas with the Bag to Newgate to scatter the Charity, and it
happens still to be but precifely the 9th of the same January. I would entreat
the worthy Author, (whether Lord, or Priest, or Monk, or Bawd, or all together)
to soder up this flaw in the next Edition.

IV. She proceeds, p. 3. -- About Four of the Clock I came down into the Lodge
with five Women, of which three were Protestants, and we all heard terrible
Groans and Squeeks which came out of the Dungeon. -- Pray observe, there is not
one of all these five Women that has got either a Name, or place of Habitation.
Nor can she say they were Strangers, for by her own Tale, they were her
Companions, staid with her three hours after, nay so intimate that she could
tell what Religions they were severally of, a very difficult business, I Will
assure you, as times go, but undoubtedly they dwelt in Fairy-Land, and were
some of Queen Mabbs waiting Gentlewomen, that use to walk invisible; or the
Devil has since run away with them; For else why were not some of them, the
three Protestants at least, produced in Court now at her Trial to confirm this
part of the Story?

V. I asked Harris the Turnkey, etc. Here the Reader must note, That the crafty
Gypsy knew well enough, that this Harris was not in a condition to disprove
her, being long since dead, and therefore of all the rest chooses to make use
of his name. -- We went behind the Gate and lissened, and found it to be the
voice of a strong Man in Torture, and heard, as we thought, the winding up of
some Engine; -- That was a most lucky thought, and very pat to the Business.
But when you invented this Lie, I Will warrant you never thought of the Engine
called the Pillory. -- We went to the Turners Shop without the Gate, and stood
there amazed with the horror and dread of what we heard -- And yet neither the
People of that Shop, nor any body else heard one bit of all this Tragedy.

VI. One of the Officers came running from the noise [but he too, has no Name;
What! Could she think of never a Servant at Newgate that has died within these
two years to father it on?] One of us caught hold of him, saying, O! What are
they doing in the Prison? Officer -- I dare not tell you: [on my word, a very
Civil Gentleman! I was afraid he would have answered, -- D -- m ye for a Bitch,
what is that to you?]

Mistress -- It Is a Man upon the Rack, I Will lay my life on it [What Mistress, or
whose Mistress, this was, is a Secret; but A Miss she was, we have Madam
Celliers word for it, who has as much Judgment and Experience that way as any
body about Town, her dear Sister, and fellow-helping Witness, the famous Madam
Mosely her self, not excepted.]

VII. We heard these Groans perfectly to the end of the Old Baily. What, no
further? Why not as well to Powis-house? For undoubtedly this strong Man was
Tortured in Perillus's Bull, and had a Speaking-Trumpet all the while at his
Mouth. -- They continued till near seven of the Clock. So that it seems Cellier
and her five Companions attended three long hours to hear them, which had they
been so dreadful as to be perfectly heard to the end of the Old Baily, what a
fright must they have put all the Neighborhood into, and how many hundreds, nay
thousands, in so public a passage must have been gathered together to inquire
the cause of such dolesome outcries? yet is there not one person living
besides this worthy Gentlewoman that remembers any such thing.

VIII. Then a Person in the Habit of a Minister, of middle stature, etc. meant
in, and a Prisoner loaded with Irons was brought into the Lodge -- The
Incoherence of this part of the Romance was excellently observed at her Trial
by my Lord, Baron Weston, how absurd it is to imagine a man that had been three
hours or more on the Rack, should presently be able to walk, loaded with Irons
too.

IX. It Is evident, That the Scope of this Invention, is to abuse the World into
a persuasion, that I was thus misused only to force me to own my self privy
unto and concerned in Sir Edmundbury's Murder, and to charge it on the Papists.
Now therefore, to Knock the whole Lie of the head, and confute it beyond any
possibility of Reply, by notorious Matter of Fact, I shall only desire the
Reader to observe, That I was taken into custody the 21 of December (78) as
appears by the Warrant of my Commitment; That on the next day, being Sunday, I
did upon Examination, set forth several particulars of the Popish Plot, which I
had heard from Fenwick, Grove, and others, as that there would very shortly be
50000 Men in Arms, etc. And on the next day, being December 23. on further
Examination by a Committee of the House of Lords, I made a Discovery of Sir
Edmundbury Godfry 's Murder, and the Persons that actually Butchered him, viz.
Fitz-Girald, and Dominick Kelly, two Priests, Henry Berry, Robert Green, and
Laurence Hill, upon which the three last were apprehended, the said Hill being
brought to Newgate the same night, Berry, the next day, being the 24th, and
Green on the day following, being Christmas Day, as by the Records of their
respective Commitments (to which I refer my self) does appear.

Furthermore, on the said 24th of December, I gave a large Account before His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of that horrid Murder and its
circumstances that fell within my knowledge (agreeable in all things to what
the day before I had declared to the Committee, and which since I have deposed
at the respective Trials, and Printed in my first Narrative) And for more full
satisfaction to His Majesty, and their Lordships, did then go to
Summerset-House, and show to the Duke of Monmouth, the Right Honorable the Earl
of Ossory and Clarendon, and Sir Robert Southwell (appointed by His Majesty for
that purpose) the particular Rooms in which the Martyred Body had for several
nights been Reposited, as most truly, and at large, is set forth in my said
Narrative, Page 21.

Since therefore I had, upon my Oath, made such a full Discovery on the 23d of
December; Confirmed the same the 24th, both by Oath, and Satisfactory
Circumstances; And that the Three Assassinates (since deservedly Executed)
were, Merely upon my Information, all secured in Gaol for that Fact, before the
26th of December; What occasion was there to Torture me on the 9th of January
following, to dispose me to a Confession of that, which I had voluntarily, and
so effectually made above 16 days before?

From all which (I suppose) the Vanity, Incongruity, and Utter Falsehood of the
Story is sufficiently apparent, and from thence no less plain, That as the
Papists have a most Wicked Cause to Manage, viz. Treason and Murder; so they
make no Scruple at all of Forging and Asserting any kind of Lies that may serve
their Interests therein; And the more Groundless and Improbable such their Lies
are, with so much the greater Assurance do they Print, and Brazen them out to
the World, to make them Credited.

Yet is not this Slander of Torture any New Stratagem; but has been used often
and long ago by Popish Libellers. For Example, in one of their Pamphlets
Printed Anno 1602. (but said to be Written in the year 1599.) Entitled, An
Apology of T.F. and other Catholics. Designing, to Outface the Treason of
Edward Squire against Queen Elizabeth, for which he had been Legally Convicted
and Executed; The Contents of the Third Chapter run thus -- Of the Cruelty of
the Rackmasters in England. As if Racking of Men were as common amongst us as
in the Spanish Inquisition, and that Torturers here kept their settled Ordinary
Offices, and Commenced Masters in the Faculty, And presently after he says --
And may it please you to consider, the Barbarous Usage and Tyranny that the
Rack-Masters, Tormentors, and Inferior Officers and Examiners, have used in the
Causes of Catholics for many years, and daily do use, observing no order of
Justice, nor form of Law -- And, Chapter the Fourth, he has these words -- They
Torment the Catholics on bare Suspicions without any Proof, or Witness in the
World, and that with such Extremity, as they Lame some, and Kill others, and
with such Devilish Devises, as amongst Christians has not been heard of. And
then to make such his Impudent Assertions the better swallowed, proceeds thus
-- It is not many years [but pray observe, he dares not say for fear of a
Detection, When, or Where] that Francis Dickenson, Priest, was taken and
Committed to Prison by one of the Persecutors, who seeing him to be a very
proper young Man, in the Flower of his Age, and imagining that he might quickly
Overthrow him by the sin of the Flesh, found means to have a Woman conveyed to
his Bed, who being repelled by him, and the Enemy seeing that the practice took
no effect, but came to be known, not only to all that were in the Prison, but
also to many others abroad, to the Commendation of the Priests Chastity, and
honor of the Cathalick Religion, he was so incensed against him, That he caused
him to be hanged up, first by the Privy Parts ( which he made to be Pierced in
diverse places with hot Irons) and after by the Hands, until he was half dead,
and then called in many to see his said Privy parts instamed and rankled with
the Burning of the hot Irons, saying unto them, after they were gone forth
again, Behold this Chaste Priest, how he has dressed, and spoiled himself with
naughty Women. And not content therewith, caused him also to be Arraigned, and
Executed for being a Priest, without having any other Matter against him: Which
kind of Cruelty, tending to the Overthrow both of Soul, Body, Honor, and all,
can hardly be matched with any Example of the Old Heathen Persecutors of the
Primitive Churches.

Thus far that effronted Jesuit (for so the Author appears to be) and indeed,
Could any thing be devised more horrid, but withal more improbable, and remote
from Truth? yet hereby we see Cellier, and her Inspirers, wanted not Presidents
for their Fiction, their Party having so long inured themselves to Forging
Untruths, that now they think they may lawfully Lie by Prescription.

Having therefore Vindicated, not so much my Self, as Truth, and the Honor of
my Country, from that Notorious Slander, I shall take this Opportunity to wipe
off some other Aspersions that have altogether as groundlesly been raised by
the Popish Faction, and other ill people, to the prejudice of my Reputation.

1. In the Month of May last, there was a Public Reflection upon me, in a
Thing called, The Domestic Intelligence; Suggesting, as if I had received 500
l. of one Blunden, for my being concerned in the Murder of Justice Godfrey. The
Truth of which whole matter was thus -- Some short time before the first
Discovery of the Plot, I did, by the Order of one Fowler a Priest, that was a
kind of Steward to one Mr. Ployden then in France, receive of Mr. Blunden of
Basingstoke in Hampshire (then utterly a stranger to me) 90 l. Fifty pounds
whereof I soon after paid away to a Merchant in London, to be Transmitted to
the said Ployden, and the rest to the said Fowler. Now afterward when I had
made my Discovery, and was generally Talked of, the said Mr. Blunden, in
Discourse with one Fowler an Apothecary in London, happened to say, That he had
once seen me, and paid me some Money, and he wished it were not Employed in the
Plot, or Words to that purpose; Long after this, a falling out (as it is said)
happening between Mr. Blunden and the said Fowler the Apothecary; the latter
having, it seems, heard talk of one Blunden, a Popish Priest, that used to
frequent Newgate, and manage Catholic Fireworks, etc. did thereupon (whether
out of Revenge, or purely on a Mistake, I know not) give Information against
this Mr. Blunden as a Priest, and that he Confessed to him that he paid me 500
l. for the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, etc. Hereupon I was called before
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, to whom I related the Premises, How
that Blunden was a Stranger to me; that I never saw him but once, and then
received 90 l. of him on the Account aforesaid But, most truly denied, that I
ever received of him, or any other Person whatsoever 500 l. or any other Sum of
Money for my being Concerned about that Horrid Murder. And the said Mr. Blunden
being sent for up by a Messenger, did deny that he ever spoke any such words
relating to me, but only that once he, by Order, paid unto me the said 90 l.
and, upon Examination, was found to be A good Protestant, and a very honest
Man; Whereupon, the matter being referred to the Kings Bench, he was there soon
after Discharged But the Apothecary, who occasioned all this Noise, and
causeless Trouble, was ordered to find Sureties for the Good Behavior; And the
Author of the Domestic Intelligence did Retract his News, and Ask my Pardon;
And perceiving he did it through Misinformation, and not with Design, I did
pass it by, without giving him further Trouble.

2. The Papists buz abroad Reports, as if what I have done were for Profit, or
that I had got some Great Advantages by becoming an Evidence. This is the
Common Lerry of their Pamphlets; Mrs. Cellier has a Touch of it, in that most
Audacious and Seditious Expression (in the Postscript) Whenever His Majesty
pleases to make it as safe and Honorable to speak Truth, as it is Apparent it
has been Gainful and Meritorious to do the Contrary, etc.

In Answer to which, I shall only say, That as I owe my Life to His Majesty's
Mercy, so I am freely ready to expend the whole Remainder of it in his Service:
And as I must acknowledge, That when I have done all I can, I have done but my
Duty; So with all Thankfulness I do own, That His Majesty has Graciously been
pleased to Encourage my poor Endeavors, To whose good pleasure I contentedly
submit my self; Only to confute these Malicious Clamors of Extraordinary Gains,
am obliged to Declare this Truth, That from my first Discovery to this day, I
never had, or received any Allowance, Pension, Salary, Place Sum of Money, or
other Advantage whatsoever, save only the Sum of 30 l Ordered me soon after my
coming out of Prison: Now, if it be Considered into what hard Circumstances
this my Honest Discovery had brought me, That I have lost a Considerable and
Constant Employ from Her Majesty; Nay, that I have lost my whole Trade and
Livelihood, which lay altogether amongst Priests and Papists. That I have now
spent well nigh Two years in the Service of the Public, which occasionally has
taken up most of my time, and necessitated me to very considerable Expenses,
and the neglect of my Private Concerns, to the great hazard of Ruining my self
and Family: All this, I say, being considered, I conceive 30 l. cannot be
thought any such enviable sum, that any need upbraid me with the Gains I have
made by my Evidence; Though yet, to me, the Gains (but in a far different
sense) are invaluable. Having, I bless God, gained the Quiet of my Conscience,
before miserably distracted with being Privy to that Horrid Murder (The only
Rack and Torture which I ever suffered.)

3. Another Aspersion, is, That I have charged some as Popish Priests, whom I
could not prove to be such, and particularly one Geldon But this I do avow is
absolutely false: For, as several Priests, viz. Parry, Knapper, and others,
have been by me Discovered, and are Legally Convicted (though I have not yet
received one farthing on that Account of the Rewards proposed in His Majesty's
Royal Proclamations) so I never Taxed any but whom I certainly knew to be
Priests. And as for Geldon, alias Bacon, I did Discover and Apprehend him in
January last (he having just before been in Cure of a desperate. Pox) who
thereupon was Committed to Newgate: Nor was it my Fault that he was not
Prosecuted, having been ready to Attend to give Evidence; and since,
understanding that he was got out upon Bail, I did my self, the Last Sessions,
prefer an Indictment against him, which is found by the Grand Jury; and I am
ready (as I doubt not with good Evidence) to prove it upon him, Let him appear
if he dare.

Another damnable Scandal they have broached, which, tho it principally be
levelled at Sir William Waller, as if he under pretense of searching for
Priests, and seizing Popish Trinckets, should take away Money, Plate, and other
things of value from the Owners, and Necklaces of Pearl for Beads; yet since I
very frequently went along with him, it does obliquely reflect on me, and I
cannot but do that worthy Gentleman the right to justify him against such a
most false groundless and malicious slander: I do therefore Declare in the
presence of God, and shall be ready to Attest on my Oath, that whenever I
attended him in Searches, (which was almost every day,) I never could discern
in him the least inclination to any such base practice; but that to the
contrary he behaved himself as a good Christian and just Magistrate; for
wherever we came what Money was found was left in the Owners possession, and as
for Chalices and Pixes (of Plate) belonging to Priests and used in their Mass,
or for keeping Holy Oil, etc. We did indeed batter or break them to pieces, but
always returned all the pieces to the Proprietors, But their Copes and Priestly
Vestments, Superstitious Pictures, Habit of Monks belonging to their peculiar
Orders, and such like Trumpery, we did sometimes take away and cause them to be
publicly burnt never making any advantage thereof. And as for Books being
sometimes too numerous to be immediately perused, they were laid up (each man's
by themselves) in places where those they belonged to, might by their Friends
have Access to them, and such as were not Prohibited by Law were ready to be
returned. And as to any Necklaces of Pearl, reported to be by him taken away, I
am more than consident the same is as errand a Lie, as that he thought one
Bednigfield, whom he took at Newmark -- to have been the same Beding field, who
dyed in the Gatehouse, for he well knew it was another Man, but likewise was
not ignorant that 'twas not unusual for two or more Priests to go by the same
Name, which yet many times does in truth belong to none of them. And if Sir
William had committed any such ill Acts, why did not the People injured or some
of them Indict him, or bring their Actions, (his being a Justice was no
Protection,) or why at least did not they forthwith complain to the King and
Council, rather than Right themselves in N. T's Lying Intelligence? But alas,
they well knew these stories would not endure the Test, only might serve to
raise scurvy apprehensions among some silly inconsiderate People.

And therefore to show Sir Williams innocence, integrity, and kind dealing in
these Cases, I shall at present only give the following instance amongst many
others, which to my knowledge are true. When we took Napper a Priest, and now a
Condemned Traitor in Newgate; we found in his Chamber about 50 pieces of Gold,
several parcels of Silver, two Silver Tobaco-Boxes and other such things to the
value of above 100 l. as I verily believe, and there was no body present but
Sir William and his Company. Now here was a convenient bootty, which if there
had been any such bese avaritious design, might have cleverly been carried off
by color of seizing it as appertaining to a Traitor. But Sir William was so
far from offering any such thing, that he called to Mr. Napper, and told him,
Sir, You must to Prison, and possibly may have occasion for your Money;
therefore take this Cabinet (pointing to one that stood there,) and put all
your Treasure therein; and either take it with you, or reposite it in such
hands as you can trust. Now, how unlikely is it, that he who was so generously
just and kind to a known Priest, should be so pitifully injurious to Ladies of
Quality, or any other People far less obnoxious, and more capable to right
themselves.

This I thought my self bound in Conscience to say of that Honorable
Gentleman, (for whether he be living or dead, I know not,) and do heartily
wish, That all Ministers of Justice throughout England were as diligently
zeasous in discharge of their Trust, for the finding out and punishing all
lurking Jesuits, Popish Priests, and such like Traitorous Vermin; for if they
be not vigorously prosecuted, his Majesty's sacred Life and Government cannot
be safe, but they will be perpetually carrying on their Hellish Plot, and
creating fresh Disturbances.

Fifthly, There is yet another Aspersion, which is so vain and incredible, that
I could scarce believe it should enter into the Heads of any reasonable people,
did I not to my amazement often hear it Reported, which is, That I am still a
Papist. Now as to this, I know not what words I can use will be effectual to
Confute such a ridiculous suspicion, if the Things I have done, so clearly
demonstating the contrary, cannot convince them; I shall therefore only say,
That as Reflections on the horrid Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and the
villainy of the Priests urging the lawfulness on it, did (when I came calmly to
Consider it) raise at first an Aversion in me to that Bloody Religion, so by
the Grace of God, the Conferences which the now Reverend Bishop of St. Asaph,
and other Divines were charitably pleased to use to me, fully convinced me of
the Falsehood, Absurdity, and Superstitions of the Roman Church; and on the
other side, of the Truth and soundness of the Protestant Doctrine, and it is
agreeableness to the sacred Word of God, and all the glorious Ends of
Christianity, whereupon heartily, unfeignedly, and on grounds fully satisfying
my Conscience, I did cast my self into the Arms of the Church of England, and
have without wavering in the least, strictly adhered to her Communion in all
the Ordinances and Exercises of Religion, and do resolve, by the help of
Almighty God, therein to continue to the last moment of my life. Nor can it be
any but Papists, and their Instruments, that would broach this Fable; who do it
only to render me suspected to Protestants, and thereby sully the esteem of my
Evidence against themselves. And therefore if hereafter any shall maliciously
spread such stories, I shall not be wanting to vindicate my self, and punish
their Extravagance by such Remedies as the Law allows me.

Sixthly, Having thus wiped off the Scandals of professed Enemies, I must now
take leave to rectify certain Mistakes of a Friend in a Pamphlet entitled,
The Narrative of William Boys: The Penman of which has committed some Errors,
or at least represented things so as they may be liable to Misconstructions; as
p. 5, and 6. where he seems with many words to tell a story, as if I had not
made the discovery of Godfries Murder till the 12th or 13th of January; and
that he the said Mr. Boys was the first man in the World that I revealed it to.
Whereas in truth I had many days before acquainted both the Committee of Lords,
and the Lords of the Council therewith; and Green, Berry, and Hill were
thereupon in Prison, as before herein is set forth. And the real Truth of the
matter that he talks of is only thus: That sometime after I had made such
discovery, the closeness of the Prison (though I were used otherwise with
Civility enough) occasioned my falling sick, and being in a Fever, I might
perhaps (as is usual in such cases) being then Lightheaded, use some
extravagant expressions; and in that condition, when Questions were asked me,
might (as he observes p. 5.) never answer to the purpose. Whereupon Mr. Boyce
being know to be very well acquainted and familiar with me, was ordered by the
Lords of the Committee on the 10th of January to come to me, and keep me
Company; which he did for several days: And as soon as I recovered any
competent degree of health, and was able to talk reasonably, I did declare to
him the manner of Sir Edm. Godfry's Murder, and confirm what before my
sickness I had discovered to the Lords. And though what he did was by Order,
yet I acknowledge my Obligations to Mr. Boyce for his Society and Converse,
which was very acceptable to me in that condition; nor were the Lords wanting
to satisfy him for his time expended in attending me, but became (as appears in
his Paper p. 7.) suitors to his Majesty, on the 29th. of the same January for
30 l. for him, which I understand he received, and I suppose will not deny it
to have been a bountiful Reward for about 19 days going up and down.

But from this Discourse of his I am apt to believe the Contrivers of Celliers
Libel might take the Hint to time that Story of her hearing me Racked, for he
having published, that he came to me the Tenth of January, and that I did not
make any Confession till some days after; these subtle Forgers lay the scene
of their Torturing Tragedy on the 9, 10, and 11 days, as you have heard, to
make it seem the more probable that my Confession proceeded from some ill
usage. I would not hereby be misunderstood to insinuate, That Mr. Boyce had any
bad Design, or were in Confederacy with Gellier and her Gang, for I have far
better thoughts of him, but only I say, it is probable they might take the
advantage thence to six the business precisely on the Ninth of January. But as
to the cruelty of Racking Mr. Boyce, p. 8. does very honestly and justly attest
that there was no such thing, which might, were there occasion, be confirmed by
twenty others. P. 10. He tells the World, That he took me and my Wife home to
his House for a Month; I conceive my old Friend has no intent (as he has little
reason) by these words to upbraid me with his kindness, It Is true, we did lie
at her House about a Month, but as in that time we provided a great part of our
Diet; so at our going away, I gave Mrs. Boyce 5 l. for the trouble we had given
their House, and never heard but they were therewith well satisfied.

At the end of the same Page, it is said, That my Wife her self went to her
sister Sherburn, a zealous Papist, and cunningly informed her that the time was
now come to be Revenged upon Mr. Boyce for being instrument in the discovery of
the Murder of Sir E.G. for that I and he were fallen out. As to this, First, I do
not understand, that if we had been indeed fallen out, how this could have
contributed to their taking Revenge on Mr. Boyce, for I bless God though we had
a long acquaintance, yet we never had any dangerous secrets between us, whereby
either party might be able to prejudice the other, if he should have so much
ill nature, or malice as to endeavor it. Secondly, If my Wife did so cunningly
inform her Sister of this, I suppose 'twas secretly; and if so, how came Mr.
Boyce to know of it? And thirdly, If he did know her to be of so treacherous
and dissembling a Spirit (for no Neighbor or Friend could show more kindness
than she always did to Mr. Boyce and all his Family,) it is a wonder that he
would after this, send for her to his House, and desire her to sit up two days
and a night with his Wife in her sickness.

P. 15. Mr. Boyce seems to take it ill, because I gave him some notice that he
was to be examined in January last; I did not tell him what it was about, but
this it is to be offended with me for not being a Conjurer, for I knew it not
my self; nor do I remember that I said any thing to him, of his having talked at
a strange rate of things of high and great Concernment, having no reason, that
I know of, to use such an Expression. In a word, as I have heen long and
intimately acquainted with Mr. Boyce, so I shall never be ungrateful for any
kindnesses. But there are some people in the World that sully their Courtesies
with an importune ostentation, who never think their Obligations canceled, and
upbraid their Friends with their good Offices so much and so long that they
lose almost all their luster, and the Cackling proves more troublesome than the
Egg was valuable.

Seventhly, A Neighbor of mine, one Mr. Salisbury being questioned for some
words, whilst this was preparing for the Press, alleged to have been spoken by
him, though I did no more than what I was obliged unto both in Duty, and for my
own safety in that Affair, yet some people have misrepresented it, and thence
raised false Reports to my prejudice, and therefore I shall presume to annex an
Account thereof, being thus, On Thursday, Sept. 23. instant, I heard a Rumor,
That the said Mr. Salisbury on the Tuesday before had to his Journey-man spoken
words of dangerous Consequence; and that a Boy related to me, and boarding in
my House heard him, and did Report it. Hereupon I having a long time known the
said Mr. Salisbury, and never observed any thing by him, but that he was a very
Civil peaceable man, took the Boy to task, threatening him for reporting such
false things, enough to ruin an honest man, the Boy persisted that he did hear
him say such words; and desired me to ask the Journey-man, whether it were not
true; which I did, who seemed to own that there was some such like words passed
between them, though not the same that the Boy (who heard them at some
distance) had reported, but that they were qualified with certain other
circumstances and expressions. Hereupon the noise increasing, and several
persons directing their discourse to me about it, though the man were a
Neighbor, and one I had a kindness for; yet where my King is concerned, I know
no Friend, and had it been never so near a Relation, I should have thought my
self bound in duty to give notice of it, That the matter might be examined; and
accordingly I did acquaint the Right Honorable the Earl of Sunderland, one of
the principal Secretaries of State, with what I had heard reported, who
commanded me to attend the Council, and there it was ordered that Mr. Salisbury
should be taken into a Messengers hands, and on Wednesday last the matter being
heard before the Honorable Board, I did acquaint their Lordships, That I knew
nothing of my own knowledge of the words, for I heard them not. That Mr.
Salisbury had been diverse years my Neighbor, and had always behaved himself
very civilly amongst us, and that I had always looked upon him as an honest man
and good Subject. Then the Witnesses were Examined, and the words appearing to
have been in part misapprehended by the Boy, and the occasion and circumstances
of speaking them being declared by the other Witness, it was looked upon but as
impertinent Chat, and Mr. Salisbury was discharged. In which affair I am
confident no discreet man or good Subject will blame me: For besides my
Obligations by my Allegiance, my particular circumstances obliged me to it, for
how did, or do I still know, but the Report might be fomented by some Papists
underhand, and especially Addressed to me, that if I had not speedily informed
Authority, they might have had matter of Accusation against me?

I shall conclude the whole with this solemn Protestation in the presence of
Almighty God, That I was never in any kind Racked or put to Torture by any
persons during my Confinement; nor by any threatenings, or other ill means
induced to the Discoveries I have made; and that what I have set forth thereof,
and the Evidence I have given thereof against Green, Bury, and Hill, or against
any other person or persons relating thereunto, or to the Plot in General, or
for being Priests, is true; and that I have not been swayed therein by Malice,
Revenge, hopes of profit, or any other sinister end whatsoever. In Testimony
whereof I have hereunto subscribed my Hand.

Miles Prance.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe World I conceive is by this time pretty well satisfied in the Character of
the famous Mrs. Cellier; yet to divert the Reader, we would have him take a
little further notice of her two Cardinal virtues, Ambitious Impudence, and a
prodigious knack of Counterfeiting.

As for Impudence (to wave the History of her lewd Life) her whole Libel is a
sufficient Instance, particularly p. 29. where she has the Forehead to say of
the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, That they asked her
many Trepanning Questions to ensnare her; What a mighty Woman would this be
counted, as if their Honors would turn Treppans to ensnare (forsooth) such a
Draggle-tail'd Prattle-box; So p. 35. she intimates her politic officiousness,
That she carried the names of four Persons to the D. in hopes to have them put
into the Commission of the Peace, which might conduce much to the breaking of
the measures of the Factious -- [that is, no doubt, being Translated out of the
Catholic Cant into honest English -- Conduce much to diverting the prosecution
against Popish Traitors.] Now was not she (think you) a rare Gentlewoman to be
a Justice-maker? In pursuance of which vain ranting Humor, after she was
questioned for her Libel, she had the confidence to quarrel with the King's
Messenger that discovered it, For having some time before stopped a Weekly
Pamphlet of Intelligence, intended to have been published by Mr. Roger
L'Estrange; Saying (as I am credibly informed) that the said Messenger did very
ill in suppressing the same (though he acted only pursuant to his Majesty's
Royal Proclamation) and further told him, That she would have it Revived, and
go on, for it would be a thing of great use; mentioning the said Mr. L'Estrange
very familiarly, and pretending then to send her Imps Grange and Sing up and
down to him; Though for all her vain Boasting, it cannot (I think) be imagined
that so worthy a Gentleman, and so much a Protestant, as he has shown himself
by his late Learned Pamphlets; And one that is, (as I am told) of late a
Justice of the Peace, would have any Correspondence with such a notorious
Popish Baggage, especially since his Marriage, for before it might lie in her
way perhaps (had he been willing) to have obliged him.

As for her Counterfeiting Intrigues and Sham-tricks, her whole Life has been
but one continued scene of Legerdemain, so that all the Gusmans, and Gypsies in
Europe are but Novices to her, and therefore most fit she was to be chosen
Tutress to the Younglings of St. Omers. It would be too tedious to reckon up
half the Stratagems she has invented in her days; only because the Adventure
of the sanguine Bladder will do well in after Ages to be joined to that of the
Meal-tub, I shall here oblige the World with a brief Relation on it.

After she had lately received her Sentence to stand 3 days on the Pillory,
etc. Some of the Officers of the College wherein her Ladyship at present
resides, knowing her to be a Woman of Intregue, and resolving to observe how
she would behave her self, gave her intimation on Thursday the 16th. instant,
that she was to stand the next day. Hereupon, to prevent the worst, she got in
her Armor of defense, and a Cap, of Maintenance made of trusty Bull-hide,
(the very same which her brother Giles lately made use of on the like
occasion;) but with all provided her self of a Vomit, so that (having timed the
taking of it conveniently,) when they (to carry on the humor) came up the next
morning as if to call her down; she was most busily casting up her Accounts, as
if she would have disgorg'd a Thousand Sham-Plots, and protested it was a
distemper had just then seized her, they smiled at the pretty contrivance and
left her; but when she found they had but made a fool of her, and caused her to
take her Physic a day too soon and troubled her stomach to no purpose, she
could with all her heart have spewed in their Chaps.

However understanding that afternoon that she was to stand in good earnest on
the morrow, being Saturday, she knew there was no repeating the same Artifice,
and so studied another, declaring her self with Child, and every minute
expecting the unlucky hour, when she should bless Newgate with a Catholic
Babe: This appeared very improbable in a person of her reverend years, and one
Midwife being sent to her retorn'd a Non Inventus on her Belly; but another
being called at her importunity, she dealt so, effectually with a small
Argument in hand, and promises to prefer her to be Midwife to a certain great
Lady, that the good Woman was prevailed with to justify her pregnancy. The
Cheat being thus far advanced, on the Saturday morning, her Maid (fit for such
a Mistress) very early cried out to the Keepers, and acquainted them that her
Mistress was extreme Ill; and some time after Captain R. sending her up word,
that she must prepare to go forth to the Wooden Engine, she, in dying tone
replied, that they might do what they would with her, but she was not able to
stir out of her Bed; whereupon he ordered 3 or 4 honest Women to go up and
dress her, charging them to handle her with all tenderness, and let the Maid be
by, for he knew she would be ready enough to swear he had Rackt and Tortured
her. They accordingly with much ado Accoutred her, but then she would not stir
a foot, so two men very gingerly brought her down, and would have seated her in
a Chair; but she tumbled her self all along on the floor, and roared out, O my
back; hold my back, hold my sides, I am in Labor, call some Women, for modesty
sake let the Men be gone, use not a Woman in my Condition more barbarously then
Heathens; more Savagely than Turks and Indians, etc. By this time some of her
female popish Gang were got about her, and all agreed, that she was just on
point of delivery; nay so far had she deluded them, that it is said, some of
them went to a Magistrate and offered to swear it; and the Shreiffs Officers
she had so satisfied that they were loath to meddle with carrying her abroad.

She bellowed out so hideously that one of the Popish Priests was overheard to
say she over-acts it, and some of the spectators thought her possessed, and were
ready to call Father Marshall to try (according to the laudable practice of
their Church) his skill in Conjuring and exorcising upon her; but others more
prudent alleged, that Monks were better versed in raising Evil Spirits, than
laying them, and more fit to put the Devil into such a Woman than cast him out.

At last after a world of Groanings (worse than those of a Soul in Purgatory)
and a thousand most bewitching wry faces, an able Physician and several
discreet Women being sent for, they searched her so narrowly, that they
discovered the whole Cheat, and found that the good Lady was no more with Bearn
than the Town-bull, but only having overnight privately gotten a Bladder of
Blood, had used her skill in creating the necessary symptoms, and preparing
certain Clotts of it, and put them into her Body, (some of which sort designed
for a fresh supply, were also found elsewhere about her.)

Thus (for I would not grate modest Ears with insisting on so fulsome a story,)
our politic Madam was delivered only of a Moon-Calfe or (if you please) a few
Abortive Blackamores; nor is it any wonder, that the Birth should prove
prodigious, for almost a Twelve month ago, coming in a Coach from Whitehall
(when she thought she might shortly be Hanged,) she very solemnly declared to
an Officer that came with her, that just then she Quickened; and since a Lioness
is said to go with young 10 years, why may we not allow 13 or 14 months to such
a teeming Bear of fifty odd.

The Sham being thus detected, she was carried to the place of Exaltation. How
she behaved her self there every body knows; and though she were sufficiently
defended by a numerous Guard and her own Armor, so that really she received no
hurt from the Multitude, yet she pretended her self half-Martyr'd; and it is
said, had the silly confidence to send diverse of the Stones that were cast at
her to New Market; which, if she did, I verily believe the Return scarce
answered the Freight. However, to carry on the Cheat at home, though she were
up early the next Morning (being Sunday) and briskly walking up and down her
Chamber, and busy in writing Letters, etc. yet about Noon, (when she began to
expect Visiters,) she put off her Clothes and went to Bed, lying all the
Afternoon roaring and complaining of her terrible bruises, and that she was not
able to stir; which raised such Compassion in abundance of devout Catholics,
that they could not forbear watering their Plants; nor she (sure) choose but
smile in conceit (amongst all her outward Lamentations,) to think, how neatly
she imposed upon their foolish Credulity.

These matters of Fact are notoriously true, and ready to be justified; and
therefore I would entreat all modest Papists (if there be any such) to reflect,
what a Championess they have got, and what an honor she is like to prove to
their Cause: A Person who makes no Conscience of any thing she does or says,
who confesses and denies things with the same breath; and mocks God and abuses
the World with counterfeiting Childbirth-pains, and this by such immodest
Practices as are a reproach to Nature, and a shame to all her Sex. In a word,
What wickedness might not such a Creature be fit to attempt? What Conspiracy
not apt to engage in? What Villainy not ready to execute? Whose Head is giddy
with Ambition; her Heart rancour'd with Malice; her Tongue tipped with Lies; her
very Soul a Juggle, and her Complexion all over Brass.

FINIS.

