A SERMON PREACHED At Rolesbye in Norfolk, on Wednesday the 12th. of January,
1680/81. AT THE FUNERAL OF Madam ANNA GLEANE, The Late WIFE of THOMAS GLEANE,
Esquire The only Son of Sir Peter Gleane of Hardwick in Norfolk Baronet.

By ROBERT PRATTANT, M. A. and Rector of Thrigbye in Norfolk.

LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1682.

JOB 14.14. If a Man dye shall he live again? All the days of my appointed time
will I wait till my change come.
WE had the sad Occasion this day of meeting at the house of Mourning to assist
at the Funeral Solemnity a young Lady lately deceasd (of whom I think my self
bound to speak more hereafter) and are at length come to perform the last
Rights of Parentation, and to leave her body in the silent Dormitory of a
Grave, in the sure hopes and Expectation of a Glorious and Joyful Resurrection.

But before we come to that last Office of Humanity and Christian Kindness to
the dead, it may not be disadvantageous to us the Melancholy Surviving, who
must shortly follow, and make our bed with her in the dust, to make some
suitable Use and Improvement from the Solemn Occasion now before us, and which
(I have reason to believe) was the main and only intent of this Person when
living, if at any time she spoke of a Sermon to be preached at her Funeral.

No doubt but it was but of Charity to the living when (as to my knowledge) she
was a Person of that Judgment and singular Modesty, that as she was assured
that no Circumstance or Action of ours could concern her, so neither did she
Affect any vain Praises or bigg Elogies when dead, who stood so little in need
of any artificial dawbing, or flattering Commendation whilst living.

And according to this Caution and having bespoke your Candor on this behalf, I
shall (without offering any Apology for my self) betake me to the Office that
is at present assigned me, and to the part which is allotted me at this sad
Solemnity.

And certainly the occasion it self is a prompt and speaking one, and gives you
a fuller and plainer Funeral Sermon, a nearer Prospect of Mortality, and of the
Instability and uncertainty of humane Life, then all the labored Art of the
most exquisite Preacher is able to do.

For if we Consider and make Remarques as we ought, if we Apply this instance
home to our selves, we shall be sufficiently Convinced of the tottering
Condition of Man here in this World, and that even in his best Estate he is
altogether subject to Vanity.

For would you be satisfied of the Lastingness and Perpetuity of these things
which are by most owned to Aggrandize the Fortunes and Conditions of Men here
in this World, to make them to be looked upon and admired by their fellow
Mortals, and you shall find that the most Considerable (though not all of them)
have had their termination and fatal period some little time since in the
Person here before us, and who was not arrived to the Age of two and thirty.

If you enquire after Beauty, Affability and Candor of mind, the most native
Sweetness and Obligingness, the most innocent Freedom and unsuspected Mirth,
(which was not often neither) whether you Consider the advantages of the Body,
or inward Graces and Beauties of the mind, you will find that all of them have
had their fatal period in this Person whose early Funerals we now Celebrate,
and whom we have reason to believe is removed into the peaceable Regions of
Eternal Rest.

They are all ceased and vanished as to us, ghastlines takes up the room of
Beauty, and all that was once Lovely and Charming is withdrawn and shrouded
under a dark Cloud cast over her Body, by the indispensible Law of Mortality.

But that I may the better Assist your Meditations and direct you to the Use
that ought to be made of this, and all such like Occasions, I shall betake my
self to a Consideration of the Pious and steadfast Resolution of Holy Job here;
all the days etc:

Now that which put him, and ought to put all Wise and Considering Men into
this devout Frame and Posture of mind, of a Constant and Serious Watching
against the day of Change and Desolution, was the Consideration of the misery
and shortness of Life here, and the firm belief of a State hereafter.

He Learnt this Wisdom from his Faith, and from a Consideration of the
Afflictions that he himself had undergone, and at present Labors under (with
which he had been thick surrounded) having lived formerly in the greatest
Prosperity, and from a deep sense of the misery and shortness of Life, and
Certainty of Death, he resolved to Continue in a Constant and settled
Preparation for it, and patiently to wait that happy Change and alteration
which should set him free, and disengage him from all the Miseries and
Distractions of this Life.

He lays down the shortness and withal the certain Miseries of Man's Life, Verse.
1. Man that is born of a Woman etc: And forasmuch as he is assured how that
time once past is never to be recalled, and that there is no returning to Life
here again, therefore he resolves to live in a Constant expectation of that
happy Change, that should set him free from the Tedders and gross Bonds of the
Body, and gain him an happy Liberty and Freedom.

It Is true, soles occidere and redire possint, the Sun that sets to us may
reneuw its Circling Course, and visit our Horizon again; and plants, as Job
here Philosophically argues, may, nay oftimes do revive and sprout again; but
it is not so with Man; when his Sun sets, it will be a Constant gloomy night
with him, and when his Trunk be once cut down, it it will lie sapless and
wither, and not take root and flourish again while the Restitution of all
things, and that the Heavens shall be no more. If a Man die shall etc.

Yea doubtless, he shall live again, but not here, and it was in Expectation of
that, that the Author of these Words, an eminent Instance of humane Misery and
Sorrows, resolved patiently to wait till such time as that happy Change should
be, for he assures us elsewhere with the most Heroic and Illustrious Faith, I
know that my Redeemer lives, etc.

It was from this Principle that he not only waited for, but even Courted the
Approach of death, and longed for the Grave more then some Men do for deep hid
Treasures. It was not out of any false or mistaken Principle, not like to any
doubtful Platonic Hypothesis, or out of any sullen Passion or Discontent
(though he lay under strong Temptations to it from afflicting Circumstances he
was in) But it was from the true Theory of the Divine Nature, and Attributes,
and from thence an Assurance fetched of an After-State wherein he should
receive the reward of all his sufferings and hard Measure here.

I was from the true Religion that he had an early acquaintance with, that he
was taught to expect Death with Patience and Resolution, and to welcome its
approach not only with Courage, but with Delight and Satisfaction of mind.

And alas! How hopeless, how far short of this true Wisdom and Philosophy comes
all the sublimest discourses of the most refined Heathens, Christ being raised
from the dead, d^eth no more, and becomes the first fruits of them that slept,
gives us a clearer Evidence and account of the Resurrection and Future State of
the Soul, then ever any the most Labored Discourse of the most searching
Philosopher was able to do

They were so far from giving a satisfactory Account of the Future State of the
Soul, such as others might rely on, and found their belief upon, and be
encouraged to undergo the the worst of Evils and Disapointments here, and with
Content and Patience to sustain the unwelcome addresses of Death; they were so
far, I say, from satisfying others herein, that they could not maintain
themselves upon such aerie food, or be induced to quit the Enjoyments of this
Life for the hopes of a better.

Their utmost Essays this way amounted no farther then to a bare or
possibility, seeming probability of the Resurrection of the Body, and
Immortality of the Soul. And here too they were entangled and overcome with
great Perplexities. Sometimes they Contradicted themselves, and at other times
delivered themselves very suspenslly and doubting about it, and that too even
immediately before their deaths.

To instance in one or two of the most eminent of them. Socrates the famed
Introducer of Morality, who was worthily followed and admired be the better
part of the Gentile World, and whose Case herein is very notorious, had strange
Misgivings as to what should be his State in another World; and whether his
Soul should Survive or no, he durst not determine, only tells those that were
about him, just as he was about to suffer Death, that he should shortly
experience the Certainty of it, but was not (if it did) so kind, that we read
of, to return back to inform them.

And Tully, though in his Cato Major, in his somnio Scipionis and in other
places, he speaks powerfully and well of the Immortality of the Soul, and
expresses a wounderful joyful Resentment of the day of Death, feelingly, Crying
out, O praeclarum diem, cum ad illud Divinorum animorum Concilium Coetumque
proficiscar etc. Rejoicing above all that thereby he should be admitted into
the Society and presence of his beloved and admired Cato, besides those other
excellent personages that he had before mentioned, who had some time since
expired; yet after all, I remember that in some other places of his Writings,
he propounds Annihilation with a great deal of Indifferency, and seems to be
Content to allow that, as well as the post-existence of the Soul, and leaves it
in equal doubt and debate.

And we read in his Life, that when the fatal Executioner came to apprehend
him, and that he found that he was discovered, that he presented himself as it
were already half-ghosted with fear; and by the last Circumstances we may
guess; that he tamely yielded himself more out of design, and an hasty desire
to get free of the troubles of this Life, then out of any Confidence he had of
entering into a better State hereafter.

And Cyrus in his famous Speech, or Oration made immediately before his Death
to his Sons and Persian Nobles, (if that were really his which we find at large
in Zenophon; and some part of it, as to what Concerns the Immortality and
Future State of the Soul,) translated by Cicero in the latter part of his Cato
Major forequoted) though there he largely and freely discourses the Future
Subsistence of the Soul, and the reasons he had to incline him to the belief of
it, and that after the most manly rate: Yet I take notice that in the latter
part of that his dying Speech, he takes his leave of the Bystanders in
expressions equally granting the Existence or Future Reduction, and
Annihilation of the Soul. For these are his Words, (As Zenophon there makes him
to speak) Whether I shall be with the Divine Nature, with the Pure and Eternal
Essenses, or vapor into Air, and be reduced to nothing: Yet upon either of
those Accounts, let those that accompany me to the Sepulcher congratulate my
Excit and happy deliverance from the Body, being not Capable any longer of
suffering any Grief or Evil.

Now all this that I have instanced in, is only to show is how unable the
Learned and Wisest of the Heathen Philosophers were (only by the light of
Nature without any higher revelation) to demonstrate, and make good the
reasonableness of the post-existence of the Soul of Man; and to make appear
from what an higher discovery it was, that the inspired Author of these Words,
was not only induced to wish for Death, and that in some sudden Fit, or
Passion, but likewise taught to expect it with the most strictness and
resolution. All the days of my etc.

He went upon far higher Principles than ever any the most Celebrated Pagan
essayed to do, and it was not only from a Contempt of this World, and the
slighting Afflictions of it, but also from the grounded Revelation he had of
entering into an immortal State, after this Life was ended, and that to be
attended with the most constant and uninterrupted Joy.

And this latter Consideration it was that put him upon his Constant Watch and
Guard, resolving not to omit for the least moment or interval of time, All the
days of my etc. But we may very well suppose that it was the shortness of this
Life that had a powerful influence over Job, and disposed him to this Lesson of
diligent Attendance, and patiently to expect that happy Change, that blessed
moment that should give him his Quiet from all the Afflicting Discontents, and
from the throng of Sorrows of this Life; and gain him an happy freedom into
those Regions, where no Storms can ruffle or disturb the Soul of Man.

And indeed my Brethren, the sorrowful si Conderations of the dividing Cares
and Troubles that are inseparable attendments even of the most happy and
prosperous here in this World, together with the undoubted Certainty and
Experience of the shortness of Man's Life, should be sufficient for every one of
us, to be upon our Guard that we may not through a drowzy and careless neglect
be excluded from the mansions of Happiness hereafter.

Alas, what is more Obvious and Evident to us, than that the Tyrant Death dogs
us, and overtakes us every where, in variety of Accidents and Circumstances.

We can flee no where from his diligent persuit. He Commits daily rapes upon
some or other of the Mortal offspring and calls us oft-times home, to be
eyewitnesses of his Conquests gained over some or other of our near
Accquaintance and Relations: As at this time we are of his Conquest over this
Lady who lays the silent Trophy of his Victory.

But yet she speaks to us from the bed of Dust, shortly to expect the same
Change that she has so lately undergone, and to provide for it.

And sure it is but reasonable that we should be warned from such a Memento,
when a Person not yet arrived to the prime of her years, of still blooming
youth; of the greatest Innocence and Modesty and of the most universal Kindness
and Obligingness amongst all she Conversed, has sometime since had her fatal
summons, and is at present withdrawn to the Chambers of Death.

Besides we ought to think our selves the more nearly Concerned in this
accident (and that if it had happened to any Body (as of late it has done to a
Considerable and Known number here amongst us) Death being usually the more
apprehended and regarded by us, when we observe him to be advanced into the
neighborhood, and that we know not how soon he may Call at our own houses, and
visit our particular beds.

And from this Consideration let me briefly recommend to you all that at
present I designed from this Subject, and from this Occasion; that you live in
a Constant and fixed preparation of mind, of welcoming Death, when or
wheresoever he Comes to you; that you put not off your Conversion and
Repentance while a more Convenient season; Knowing that it will be too late for
that, when we once Come into the State into which the Person now before us, is
entered, when that the faint Tapers are lighted, and that Blacks and Cyprus
adorn our Funerals.

Let us duly wait for our Change, all the days of etc before the night
approaches wherein no Man can Work, before we be invelop'd with darkness and a
sable Cloud, and overtaken with the Shadow of Death, and we find our selves
possessed of the Land where all are things forgotten.

I have now finished what I intended to the living, but I have some reason to
fear that I shall not be just to the memory of the dead; If I premise not some
particulars touching this Excellent and Virtuous Personage.

And here I shall not detain this Audience by tracing up things, and viewing
her innocent Behavior and Carriage from her Infancy and Cradle; which I had
not the power, or opportunity of knowing, and therefore am not fit to declare
them to others; nor shall I mix any thing that is in the least to me doubtful
or uncertain, but shall only present you with a just and impartial Account of
some of the most Considerable particulars which I took notice of during the
time I lived in the family, of which She was one of the nearest Relations: And
which upon being an Eye-witnest and upon my own Observation I know, and
therefore dare publish to be true.

As for her Birth and Extraction, which was more than ordinary, for her
grateful Comeliness and Behavior, as She her self did not desire they should
be taken notice of whilst living, nor valued her self upon the score of them,
so neither shall I now She is dead, Call them over to your Remembrance: Knowing
that we are beholden to others for those and such like Advantages, and
therefore do not deserve to reap any unjust Commendations from them, they
having never been in our power.

I shall therefore Consider her in the Capacity of a Christian, and as to her
natural disposition, which doubtless She had much improved from the Rules of
her Holy Religion.

She was very Constant as to the Exercises and Offices of Religion:
very.exemplary as to her Piety and Devotion, and would not willingly omit any
Opportunity of attending at Gods Sanctuary,

She would often utter her dislike of the Dissenting Parties from the Church of
England, and had all such been of her happy Temper, of so great Humility and
Self-denial, of such Condescension and Dove-like Simplicity, the Jars and
Struglings that are amongst us had long since Ceased, and we had remained an
happy People, United in Charity and Discipline, as well as in Faith. Nor did
her Religion set loosely by her, like that of too many, who show it self only
in outward forms, in external Pomp and Gaudiness, but it was Solid and Real,
and if any of late have been endowed with the Ornaments of a meek and humble
Spirit, She was One.

Nor was her Devotion only to be taken notice of, when in the public Temple,
and in the view of a great Number; but it was remarkable at home, and my self
have taken notice (Ministering the Office of Prayer in the Family) that if at
any time She had escaped the Opportunity of joining in that Holy Duty, (which
was very rarely, and then too through a mistake of the time, or some other
Occasion that was not her fault,) She would put on the greatest seeming anger
and displeasure, that I have observed in her at any time, which discovered, how
that She looked upon it to be a more grievous Disapointment to be absent from
their Company at that time, when they were about that Solemn and Religious
Exercise, than at any other.

Nor were her more retired and Closet Devotions less Constant and Frequent; and
I have sometimes taken notice, that she has privately withdrawn, when their
company have been that otherwise She approved of; which could be for no other
Reason, then that in solitude She might enjoy far better Company: by fervent
Prayer and Meditation maintaining an humble Familiarity and Converse with
Heaven; which I ever looked upon to be a rare Instance in one of her years, and
fortune.

Nor was her Duty only toward God remarkable, but likewise, (as the effects of
that,) toward her natural Parents, which I have heard them oft-times express
with the most Joyful and Concerned Resentments. Nor do I Remember that ever I
heard her taxt for Disobedience by them in any particular; but always applauded
for her Constant Affection and Duty, which was as Early as She was Capable of
Understanding, what Obligations She lay under to them, and sometime before that.

And though She did not experience that Reward promised to Obedience under the
Old Law, of having her days lengthned out here on Earth, yet we need not
question but that will be made good to her by vast Immortality in a far better
State.

What shall I say more? for neither the Time, nor yet my Temper or Capacity
will allow me at present, to enter into the Common places of Rhetoric, or to
Expatiate on her just praises:

She was the most Obsequious and Respective Wise, her Love to her Husband was
wonderful, surpassing the Love of most Women: And his to here is equal; so that I
dare here declare, the Lovingest Couple I knew are here parted.

And as a farther Argument of her Love to him, the Care and Indulgence to her
Children (as many as Providence was pleased to let live with her) was
extraordinary, and giving place to none.

To sum up all in this short Character of her, She was of the most Bountiful,
Liberal and Courteous Temper, of a Generous, Obliging Nature; She never
willingly Disobliged any, nor did she provoke and to be her Enemies, though (to
their shame be it spoke) She met with too many: As the Sweetest and Mildest
Tempers are oft-times Observed to be requited in this barbarous and ill natured
World with the greatest Spire and Contradiction.

She was every way Modest and reserved, and yet Easy and Familiar; But above
all, her reservedness as to her speech was singular, and fit to be propounded
for Imitation in this Uncharitable and Censorious Age, wherein the Liberty of
the Tongue has not only blasted private Persons but has been Isntrumental
almost to the undoing of a Nation the Second time. She was very slow to
Conceive or utter any ill of others; I scarce remember that I ever heard her
speak detracting of any Body, though to my Knowledge she had often had sufficient
provocations so to do, having met with harsh and uncivil treatment from the
malicious and unruly Tongues of others.

One would have thought that so much goodness mixed with so Innocent and
Harmless a Countenance should have guarded her from the rudeness and ill nature
of the World. But alas; Innocence is a While that Malice Shoots all its darts
at, and Virtue is of so different a Complexion from Vice, that no wonder that
it is singled out and Persecuted by the Conspiring World, too fond of its
Extreme.

Her Shape, and the Air of her Face were beautiful and attracting, and seemed
to have a near Resemblance and to be exactly fitted to the bright Soul that
dwelt within. Her Countenance was so innocent and inoffensive, that it might
have bespoke Kindness and Compassion even amongst the Salvages.

If there be any here, out of Curiosity expect to be informed as to the
Circumstances of this Person in her late Sickness, before the immediate
approach of Death, I shall only acquaint them that I had not the Opportunity of
attending her, or Ministering to her in that last Trial, when the Sorrowful
Agonies of Death beset lier. And if She discovered any disorder and tumult (as
the brightest Soul may sometimes be overcast, and especially in that season,
when the Faculties are weak and impaired, the Understanding benighted, and
unable to rally up sufficient forces against the power of Temptations,) yet as
I have been Gredibly Informed by that Worthy and Reverend Relation of Hers who
was her chiest and best Confessor in time of her sickness; the storm went off,
and there was naught else discernablea fter but Calm and Sunshine, a settled
and peacable composed Conscience; A happy presage of her being now arrived at
the Peaceable and Blessed Haven, where both I and you have reason to believe
She is. Besides to give you my sense hereof, if it were necessary to declare
positively, I would sooner conceive well of the happiness of this Person in
another State, whose foregoing Life had been so Innocent, and not stained with
any considerable Vices, than trust to the late Vows, and resolutions of a
Deathbed, tho accompanied with the most formal and Ceremonious notes of Sorrow
and Repentance.

And now leaving Her to slumber in the Dust (Death being compared to sleep not
only in profane Authors but in the Divine Books of Scripture:) Let me address
my self to you whom I espy the principal Mourners here, and personate the
chiefest parts of this sorrowful and Melancholy Scene; and from me do you
bespeak those other near Relations whom I suppose extreme Grief has kept from
appearing here; Let me advise both you and them, not to sorrow as them without
hope; For tho I allow not a Stoical Apathy, and think it not Commensurate to
Humanity, nor yet serviceable to Religion, yet immoderate grief equally offends
against both and argues the Weakness, if not the Nullity of out Faiths.

Weep not for the Deceased, but weep for your selves, Knowing that she entered
into that happy State, where, Job expresses it, C. 3. v. 17.18. The wicked
cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest: Where the Prisoners rest
together, and hear not the Voice of the Oppressor. She is gone but a little
before, we are all moving apace, and it will not be long before we be enclosed
behind the same Scene of Mourning, the solitary apartment of a Grave.

Her Grave will prove but her better Tiring Room, from whence She shall one day
come viz. in the Morning of the Resurrection, decked with the brightest Attire,
when this Mortal Body of hers shall have put on Immortality.

To show forth inordinate Sorrow would blemish her Funerals as far as lay in
you, and seem to argue that you envy her peaceable and blessed Repose, and are
against the privilege of this her far more advantageous Birth: And so the Death
of the Martyrs were by the Primitive Writers Styled their Birthdayes inasmuch
as then they began in the most eminent manner to live.

Therefore let me bespeak you on her behalf, and in her stead, as the great
Cyrus in the beginning of his admired speech cited before, giving command to his
Sons and those about him who should Survive him, (...), that is to Think,
Speak, and Act all things, to Behave your selves with that Unconcernedness, as
may argue that you are not in the least, doubtful or sollicitous, but that She
is in an happy condition, and that She has met with a Glorious and Blessed
Change.

And may we have all Grace so to apply this occasion, that we may all the Days
of our appointed time wait till our Change Come: So that it may prove no other
to us.

Now to the Invisible God, and to our most Merciful Savior, who have brought
Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel, together with the Eternal
Spirit be ascribed all Might, Majesty, Dignity, Dominion, and Thansgiving from
this time forth and for Evermore.

Amen, amen.

