THE SERASQVIER BASSA: AN Historical NOVEL OF THE TIMES.

Containing all that passed AT THE SIEGE of BVDA.

Out of FRENCH.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, next Door to the Swan Tavern, near
Brides-Lane in Fleet Street.

TO MADAM THE DAVPHINESS.
MADAM,
I Present you a Book, composed of a Mixture of real Facts and gallant
Intrigues. It bears the Name of the Serasquier: In the mean time, this General
is only the Hero of the Romance, My Lord Elector of Bavaria being the real
Hero. The Glory he has acquired at the raising the Siege of Vienna, and the
great Actions he did before Buda, in the frequent Sallies he opposed, and the
several Combats, in which he repelled the Serasquier, show that he is animated
with the Blood of the famous Emperor Rodulphus, one of your Ancestors, who so
often made the Ottoman Empire tremble. I believed, Madam, you would be well
pleased to read in repose the Particular of so worthy a Brother's glorious
Actions, which have given you so many Alarms; and this only Reason obliged me
to this Work, to assure you, that I am, with a most profound Respect,

Madam, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant.

TO THE READER.
HAVING given you The Grand Vizier, and The Illustrious Genouese, Two Novels,
mixed with Incidents of the Times, which have been favorably received by every
one, I present you with The Serasquier Bassa of the same Author, hoping you
will be no less satisfied with it, than you were with his two first Works. This
last contains nothing but what is grounded on faithful Memoirs, in respect of
Zouglan's Fortune, and his Elevation to the Office of Serasquier. As to the
Circumstances of the Siege of Buda, you will find them here such, as the
exactest Relations have Published them.

THE SERASQVIER BASSA: An Historical Novel OF THE TIMES.
IT has ever been a Maxim with the Ottoman Emperors to Educate in the Seraglio
a great Number of Young Persons, without any Distinction of Birth or Country.
The Education, they receive, is so conformable to the Interests of the State;
that all these Young Men, acknowledging no Kindred, propose to themselves no
other aim, but the Empire's Grandeur, and the Sultan's Glory. At their going
out of the Seraglio, they are usually put into the Troops with very small Pay,
having neither Goods, Protection, nor any other Refuge, but the Hopes of
Meriting Rewards by their Service. Those, that want Wit and Address to raise
themselves, pass their Lives in a Condition, unhappy enough; whereas those, who
have Merit, attain sometimes to the greatest Dignities of the State. It is
certain, that the most considerable Officers of the Ottoman Empire, have had
this Beginning; which is the Cause, that the Turks, who are in the first
Stations, are ordinarily Men of Active Spirits, and full of Address, although
for the most part of an insatiable Avarice, which obscures all their good
Qualities.

Zouglan, who is at this day so well known in Hungary by the Name of the
Serasquier Bassa, was Educated in this Manner. He was Handsome, very Generous,
and full of high Thoughts; but so Proud, that being yet in the Seraglio, he
disdained the greatest part of his Commarades, which much contributed to the
getting him Enemies. It very often happens, that these Young Men, uncertain of
their future Lot, join themselves five or six together, making a kind of Union
or Society, whereby they reciprocally engage themselves to a mutual
Participation, of Estates and Fortunes, if they have one day the Happiness of
being advanced: which promise is afterward performed with very much fidelity.
Zouglan would never enter into any such Engagements with any one. Ibrahim was
the only Person of his Comarades, whom he esteemed, and familiarly conversed
with. He lived in so great a Confidence of his Fortune, that he many times
promised Ibrahim to contribute to his Advancement, without troubling himself to
require from him the same Condition. In fine Zouglan, at his going forth from
the Seraglio, went to serve at Sea, where he gave Proofs of his Courage on many
Occasions, meriting the Applause of his Generals; but foreseeing, he could at
most arrive to be only Bey, or Captain of a Galley, because the great employs
of the Sea were given only to very experienced Officers, so limited a Charge
not being capable to satisfy his Ambition, he resolved to serve on Land,
putting himself in the Army, the Grand Seignior had on foot against Poland. He
was not long there, e're he acquired a great deal of Glory. His Name became
Famous in the Ottoman Army, and they spoke of him in all the Frontier Places,
as of an Adventurer, that knew no dangers.

These happy Successes augmented his natural Haughtiness and also gave a
jealousy to many Officers of the Army. Cabstan Bassa, who commanded the
Cavalry, hindering one day his going forth of the Camp with an hundred Horse, he
had chosen for a very bold Attempt; Zouglan showed himself not a little
discontented at it, saying publicly, That he would complain to the Grand
Vizier of Cabstan Bassa's having made him lose a favorable Occasion to destroy
the Enemies of the Port. Cabstan Bassa, informed of it, sent to seek him in his
Tent, and after having spoken to him in very outrageous Terms, threatened to
treat him very severely, if he ever happened to fail of the Respect he owed
him. The fierce Zouglan, penetrated with Spite, and Choler, laid his Hand on
his Sabre. The Bassa would have killed him on the Place, had he not been stayed
by some other Officers, that were near him. Zouglan was Arrested, and the whole
Army blamed his Action. The Bassa would not however have it brought before the
Council of War, being contented with sending him Prisoner to the Castle of
Temisouar, of which Selim Aga was at that time Governor. He was a Man of
Service, who had acquired a great Estate by the Favor of the Sultaness Valida,
his Protectress. He had a great Authority in his Government, living more like a
Bassa, than a particular Governor. He had only one fair Daughter, whom he loved
with extreme Tenderness: She being born in Hungary, he bred her up after the
manner of the Country, making her always eat with him, and not Subjecting her
to the particular, and retired Life of the Turkish Women.

Zouglan being arrived at the Castle of Temisouar, Selim, who knew his
Reputation, treated him with a great deal of Respect, and seeking to sweeten
the Discontents, the loss of his Liberty might have caused in him, gave him a
Chamber, commodious enough in the Castle, where he was so strictly Guarded,
that none was permitted to see him. Selim trusted no body with him but himself,
scarce suffering his Keaia or Intendent, though he were a Man, in whom he
confided, to enter with him into his Prisoners Chamber.

Zaratima (this is the Name of Selim's Daughter) having often heard her Father
speak of Zouglan's Courage, and the Gallant Actions he had done, was touched
with his Disgrace, through a Sentiment, natural to Persons of her Sex, who
always bemoan the Illustrious Unfortunate. His Prison not being far from her
Apartment, this gave her an extreme Curiosity to see him: which the great
Precautions, her Father used in Guarding him, hindered her many days from
satisfying: But seeing in fine, that he remitted a little of this first
Exactness, trusting his Keaia with the Care of his Prisoner, she Addressed her
self to this Keaia, instantly desiring him to put her in some place, where she
might see Zouglan without being seen by him. The Keaia, who had a great deal
of Respect and Complacency for his Masters Daughter, and who foresaw not any
Inconvenience in giving her this Satisfaction, promised her to do what she
defired, and disposed a Corner in Zouglan's Antichamber, where he so placed
Zaratima, that it was easy for her to see him, and attentively examine him,
without the Prisoners having the lest Knowledge of it: She found him very
Handsome, the Discontent, that appeared upon his Face, having been so far from
any way diminishing his good Mien, that it gave him an Air of Fierceness, which
was not displeasing to Zaratima. This view augmented the Compassion she already
had for his Misfortune; and perhaps she was not far from passing to other
Sentiments, when she reflected, That it was not fit for a Person of her Birth,
whom her Father destined to so great Establishments, to concern her self so
much with the Affairs of an Adventurer. She was ashamed of her Curiosity, and
rejected even all her Compassion had hitherto inspired her with, in Favor of
this unhapyy one,

In the mean time Zouglan's Friends labored soeffectually with Ca^st^^^ Bassa,
that he promised them in fine to show him Favor, on Condition he would ask him
pardon in the Head of his Troops. Selim Aga took a pleasure in acquainting his
Prisoner with this good News, exaggerating to him the Indulgence of Cabstan,
who would not let this Affair come before the Council of War; but he was very
much surpised at the haughty Answer of Zouglan, who declared to him, That he
had rather die, than do so mean an Action in the presence of the Army. Selim
represented to him, That he ought to take the Benefit of the Bassa's good Will,
and submit to the Counsels of his Friends. His Remonstrances were to no
purpose. Zouglan, persisting in his first Sentiments, answered, That he had not
desired to live, but for the acquiring of Glory, and that he should think
himself unworthy to bear the Name of a Soldier, should he ransom his Life,
with the loss of his Honor. As Soon as Cabstan Bassa was informed of Zouglan's
Resolution he made his Complaint to the Council of War, and soon after a Cadi
was sent to Temisouar, to interrogate the Prisoner; which made every one judge,
he would be condemned to lose his Head. Selim spoke of it to his Officers with
sorrow, not being able to forbear giving Encomiums to the Greatness of
Zouglan's Soul.

Zaratima hearing them daily Discourse of Zouglan's Affairs, that he could not
escape losing his Life, had her first Sentiments awaked by this sorrowful News,
and it was impossible for her, notwithstanding the Resolution she had made, to
resist the Motions of Compassion, inspired to her by the sad Destiny of a Man,
of whom there were such great Hopes, and who appeared worthy a better Fortune.
At first she had a thought of giving him Means to escape by seizing with
Address on the Keys of his Prison; but her natural Haughtiness, and the great
distance, she faw between her Fortune, and the unhappy Condition of the
Prisoner, made her reject this thought. She apprehended also, that Zouglan, who
was already very presumptuous, might give another Interpretation to her
Generosity, and dare to impute to more tender Sentiments, what was purely an
Effect of her Compassion. These Reflections made her waver along time; but in
fine vanquished by the recital, she heard of Zouglan's Noble Resolution, and
touched with the Pleasure a Gallant Mind finds in doing a Generous Action, she
determined to procure him his Liberty, and took such fit Measures, that she
entered into his Chamber, without being perceived by any one, telling him, that,
To save the Life of a Man of his Merit, she had been willing to do an Action,
unsuitable to her Sex. Zouglan, who expected only an Executioner to Strangle
him, was so agreeably surpised, both with the obliging Discourse, and charming
Beauty of Zaratima, That he believed her at first to be one of those Angels,
who watch over the Consecration of Men, and of whom Mahomet speaks in his
Alcoran; but Zaratima pressing him to be gone, and not to lose his Time in
useless Discourses, he told her, he would have an Eternal Acknowledgement of so
particular a Favor, and that he would make Advantage of the Life, she gave him,
only to employ it in her Service. Zaratima interrupted him, telling him, that
she quitted him of his Acknowledgement, and giving him withal to understand,
that she was Selim's Daughter, that she had no less Courage than he, and that
she knew how to make use of it for supporting, as she ought, the Glory of her
Birth, if she saw him pretend to any Advantage for the future, from what she
had now done to save him: She would not so much as hear his Answer, but
retired, after she had informed him, what he must necessarily do to secure
himself.

Zouglan, being in Confusion at the Obligations, he had to Zaratima, and having
his Imagination filled with her extraordinary Beauty, repaired to
Constantinople, where he found his old Comarade, Ibrahim, in favor with the
Sultan, and possessed of one of the chiefest Offices of the Court. Ibrahim, who
had heard of Zouglan's Gallant Actions, expressed a great deal of Joy to see him,
receiving him with all the Testimonies of a sincere Amity. Zouglan informed him
of his Adventure, and the manner of his Deliverance. Ibrahim made him hope, he
would employ the Credit of his Friends to stifle this Affair, procuring him in
the mean time a considerable employ in an Army, which the Grand Seignior sent
against the Morlaques, who had refused to pay him the ordinary Tribute, and
also made Inrodes into the Lands of the Turks. Zouglan, finding no real
Satisfaction; but in seeking how to testify his Acknowledgement to the fair
Person, that had saved his Life, had at first, no small Repugnance to accept an
employ, which removed him from Temisouar: Nevertheless, since he could not
return into Hungary, without exposing himself to the revenge of Cabstan Bassa,
who was very powerful, he resolved to pass into Dalmatia, where he did such
extraordinary Actions; that the Soldiers, wondering at the happy Success of his
Valor, called him nothing but Cheitan, which signifies Devil. He, who commanded
these Forces, being killed in an Ambush, which the Rebels laid for him. Zouglan
Cheitan, by the Credit of his Friend, or favored by his own Reputation, had
order to command in Chief, and to finish this War withal the speed he could,
because the Grand Seignior had elsewhere occasion for his Troops. He
accomplished this with so much Courage, and Conduct, that he reestablished the
revolted Province in its first Tranquillity, and brought to the Grand Seignior,
who was then at Adrianople, the Heads of those, who had occasioned all this
Disorder.

These happy Successes gained Zouglan a great Reputation, in which his Friend
Ibrahim took as much Pleasure, as if himself had vanquished the Rebels. Zouglan
alone was insensible of the Applause, that was given him on all sides, living
perpetually in great Inquietude. He represented to himself every Moment his
Obligation to Selim's Daughter, and the Remembrance of her Beauty augmented the
Ardor and Impatience, he had to give her Marks of his Acknowledgement. He met
about that time an Officer of the Army in Hungary, who told him, that Cabstan
Bassa, unmeasurably incensed at his Escape, had turned all his Resentment
against Selim Aga, whom he had got condemned to pay him a great Sum of Money,
or to restore him his Prisoner; that he also had the Credit to disposess him of
his Government, till he had satisfied him. Zouglan was sensibly afflicted at
the Infelicities, he had drawn upon Selim; which obliged him to inform himself
more exactly of the particulars of this Affair. All, that the Officer had told
him, was confirmed to him, and he learned farther, That Selim Aga had been a
long time at the Port, soliciting his re-establishment, without being able to
effect it; That he had brought his Daughter to the Sultaness Valida, at whose
Feet he had cast himself, desiring her Protection; and that this Sultaness,
charmed with the Beauty of Zaratima, would have her Father leave her with her,
till his Affairs were finished. The Generous Zouglan, being inconsolable for
his having made Selim lose the Government of Temisouar, sought him hastily out,
and delayed not to put himself again into his Hands, and make himself once more
his Prisoner. Selim, though very much astonished at so extraordinary and bold an
Action, failed not to make Advantage of it, and to demand Reparation for all
the Calumnies, Cabstan had advanced against him. Zaratima, who, being with the
Sultaness Valida, had confusedly learned, that Selim's Affairs were in the most
favorable Disposition, he could desire, had at first an extreme Joy to know,
that her Father was in Condition to justify his Innocence; but when she was
informed of the Generous Proceeding of Zouglan, she had a secret Inquietude for
him, blaming within her Soul his overgreat Generosity in an Occasion, where he
hazarded no less than his Life. Ibrahim having acquainted the Grand Seignior
with this Affair, and with the great Actions, Zouglan had done against the
Polanders, and the Rebellious Morlaques, the Sultan, who remembered to have
heard him spoken of with Esteem, caused him to be set at Liberty, and having
forbidden any farther mention of Cabstan's Affair, ordered Selim to be
re-establishld in the Government of Temisouar. But the Sultaness Valida, who
was much pleased with Zaratima, seeing that her Father retired in the depth of
Winter, would not consent, she should return into Hungary; but promised Selim
to send her back to him in a Season, less incommodious for the making of long
Voyages. Zouglan's Affair made a great deal of noise at the Port, which failed
not to be very Glorious to him, as occasioning every one to learn the
Particulars of his worthy Actions.

The Sultaness Valida, who was full of Wit and Address, had still kept a great
share in the Government. As her Authority was very great, so she wholly
employed it in procuring all manner of Advantages to her second Son Soliman,
for whom she had an incredible Tenderness. She had caused him to be educated
with extraordinary Care, and had often stood in need of all her Skill, to avoid
this Prince's giving Jealousy to the Emperor Mahomet, his Brother, who would
on many Occasions have Sacrificed him to his own security, and particularly
when Sultan Mustapha his Son was born; but the Sultaness Valida had always the
Dexterity to hinder it, and knew so well to manage the Sultan's Spirit, that he
determined in fine, through his Mothers Importunities, to settle a Revenue upon
Soliman, and consented also, that he should retire to Bursa, which is a strong
Place; that was given him with all its Dependences. The Sultaness Valida,
having provided for the security of her Son Soliman, took every day new
Precautions to preserve him from the Snares, that might be laid for him. She
gave him for his Guard five Thousand of the bravest Janisaries of the Empire,
and spared neither Care nor Cost, to fix in his Service a great number of
Experienced, Valiant, and Courageous Officers. As she lost not any opportunity
of giving this dear Son faithful Servants, the Merit of Zouglan, and what she
daily learned to his Advantage, bred in her a desire of engaging him in the
Service of Soliman.

Tho it appears by all the Relations we have seen of the Seraglio, that the
Sultaness's Apartment is inaccessible to Men, Valida, who being a Woman of
great Abilities, had for a long time governed the Empire, during the Minority
of her Son Mahomet, now reigning, had acquired an Authority, which no other
Sultanesses had ever had; and whether she took no great Care to subject her
self to the Custom, or that the Sultan, who is not over violently inclined to
Ladies, was not so Jealous of his Seraglio, as his Predecessors had been, it is
certain, that Valida admitted Men into her Apartment without any Obstacle. She
sent also for Zouglan, to propose to him the taking Engagements with her, and
fixing himself in the Service of her Son Soliman, whose Guard of Janisaries he
should Command.

This Princess spoke with so much Wit, and accompanied, whatever she said, with
so agreeable an Air, that it was impossible to resist her when she attempted
any thing. Zouglan, who knew, that Zaratima was with Valida, flattered himself,
that the Relation, he should have to the Sultaness, might facilitate to him the
means of seeing this fair Person, and perhaps of giving her some Mark of his
Acknowledgement. At this view he promised Valida all she would require of him.
The Sultaness assured him, that she would make him find so many Advantages,
that he should never have Cause to repent the Attachment, he had for her; and
as her Addresses were very great, and that she knew how to engage Men, by
whatever might most sensibly touch them, she showed him a great number of fine
Young Women, which were about her, giving him to understand, that she took a
Pleasure in educating them to recompense those, who should serve her faithfully.

All these Maids, who had heard Zouglan spoken of to Valida in very
Advantageous Terms, testified a Joy in seeing a Man of so great a Reputation.
Zaratima did not at first comprehend, that Zouglan Cheitan was the same
Zouglan, whose life she had saved, and who had nevertheless so frankly put
himself again into her Fathers Hands. Judge the greatness of her Joy, when she
came to know him. The Pleasure, she felt, was so much the more real, as that
she imagined her self to have a great share in the glory he had gotten; she
also from that very Moment took a particular Interest in his Person. Zouglan,
who easily singled her out, had not the least Thought of casting his Eyes upon
the Sultanesses other Maids, and letting Zaratima know by the Attention, with
which he beheld her, that nothing could equal his Acknowledgement. He was about
to unsay all he had promised Valida, and to tell her, that he could not enter
into any manner of Engagement without the Participation of Zaratima, whose
Right it was to dispose of a Life, he owed to her Generosity, but the Fear he
had of displeasing this fair Person, hindered him, and he was obliged, by his
Respect for Valida, to go forth at that very time, when his Eyes began to make
Zaratima understand the Sentiments of his Heart.

He failed not to inform Ibrahim, of the Conversation he had with the
Sultaness; but durst not speak to him of Zaratima, nor of all the Secret
Motions, he felt in favor of that charming Person. Ibrahim, who saw, that all
the People, and even the Janisaries, bare a great Affection to Soliman, and who
was very glad, if there should happen any Revolution, to have a powerful
Protector with that Prince, was not sorry, that his Friend applied himself to
his Service; but was so far from deturning him, that he gave him new Reasons to
confirm him in his Resolution. Zouglan had nevertheless a great deal of
difficulty to remove from Adrianople, because Zaratima dwelt there. In the mean
time as he expected all things from Valida's Protection, he imagined, that
Zaratima might be the Recompense of the Services he should do Soliman. This
sole Thought so agreeably flattered his Love and his Hopes, that no longer
delaying his Departure, he was in a short time after at Bursa.

Bursa was heretofore the seat of the Bithynian Kings, and is at this day the
Appennage of the Ottoman Princes, when they are so happy, as not to be Victims
to the cruel Policy of the Turkish Emperors, who ordinarily cause their
Brethren to be strangled, to take away from the People all Pretexts of Sedition
and Revolt. Soliman, who had a great many Persons of Merit in his Service, led
there a Life sufficiently pleasant. His Revenue, which was already very
considerable, increased daily by the care Valida took to give him whatever she
could handsomely lay up; and as his Place was one of the strongest in the
Empire; he feared not being assaulted, since he was moreover assured both of
the Peoples, and the Janissaries Affection. In the mean time, tho he were in
Condition to live at an height, suitable to his Quality, yet through the
Counsel of his Mother, he was contented to live safe, and retired, not
troubling himself with Pomp, but always avoiding, whatever might give a
jealousy to his Brother, the Sultan. Soliman, who knew the Reputation of
Zouglan, and was over and above particularly informed of his Merit by the
Letters of Valida, received him with all the Testimonies of esteem he could
expect from a great Prince. He also took a singular pleasure in hearing him
discourse of Military matters, and several times obliged him to give him a
particular Account of the Combats, in which he had been. Zouglan, loving only
true Glory, and seeking to shun the Fault, into which false Bravoes ordinarily
fall, spoke of all the Actions, he had seen, giving a thousand Commendations to
those, that had accompanied him, and scarce ever saying any thing of himself;
which if he were at any time constrained to do, he attributed to Fortune the
happy Successes, that were due only to his Valor, and Courage. Soliman, who has
a very delicate Wit, was so charmed with his Modesty, that it augmented the
Esteem, and good Opinion, he already had of him, and engaged him to give him
all the Satisfactions he could expect in a Court, so peaceable, and limited, as
that.

Zouglan had now been near six Months at Bursa, and was already seeking some
Pretense to make a Journey to Adrianople, in hopes to see there the fair
Zaratima, when he received a Letter from Ibrahim, by which he acquainted him,
that he was become passionately amorous of a very fair Person; that he had used
all endeavors to gain his Satisfaction, without being able to effect it; that
he had just learnt, how this same Person was returning to her Parents, and that
she would pass by Bursa, or thereabouts; which obliged him to desire Zouglan to
keep his Janisaries in readiness, that he might seize on her, and afterward
send her back to him, the most secretly he could, to Adrionaple, assuring him,
that he could never do him a more agreeable Service. Those, that know, how
Cavalierlike the Turks Act with Ladies, will not wonder at Ibrahim's
Proceeding, which is not extraordinary for a Turk. Zouglan, who was very glad
to have an Occasion of doing his Friend a Pleasure, sent Janisaries into all
Places, through which he judged Ibrahim's Mistress might pass; and two days
after he was advertised, that she had been stopped within three Leagues of Bursa.
Whether it were, that he might take all Measures necessary for the conducting
her secretly, and without noise; or whether he was very desirous to see that
fair Person, which had wounded his Friends Heart, he went to the Place, where
she was; but before he saw her, he disposed all things for her immediate
departure, and gave order, she should have notice to be in readiness, not being
willing to delay the Satisfaction, his Friend might receive by the return of
what he loved. He entered some time after into her Chamber, where he found a
Person in despair, that melted into Tears between the Arms of two Women, which
served her. The Disorder in which she was, hindered him from observing her
Countenance; but the disconsolate Lady cried out so loud at the sight of him,
that Zouglan was surprised at it, and approached to view her a little nearer.
The Lady saved him from the Labor; for advancing toward him with
Precipitation, she called him Coward, Traitor, and Monster of Ingratitude.
Zouglan knew his fair Zaratima, and was so seized with Sorrow, Joy, and a
thousand other confused Motions, that he continued a long time in a maze, not
having the power to speak one word to her. In fine being inconsolable for
having given so much discontent to a Person, to whom he was indebted for his
Life, he cast himself at her Feet, acknowledging, that he should Merit all the
Reproaches she heapt upon him, were he guilty of any thing, but having had too
much Complacency for a Friend. He endeavored consequently to let her know,
that, if he had been advertised of her Journey, he would not have failed being
on the way to serve her, and receive her Orders, adding, That he was not
capable of ever being deficient in his respect to her; and to let her see, that
she alone possessed all his thoughts, he told her farther, That he had so much
indifference for all other Persons in the World, that he would not go one step
to enjoy the fairest Princess on the Earth. He presented her his Friends
Letter, beseeching her to look into it, to the end it might the better serve to
justify what he told her. Zaratima, judging by Zouglan's Submissions, and the
good opinion she already had of him, that he spoke sincerely to her, found her
self less unhappy, than she thought, for Zouglan was overjoyed to see her
Choler dissipated, and went a little after forth of her Chamber, that being
alone with her Women, she might more easily recover out of the disorder, in
which he left her. As soon as he was alone, he made a thousand Reflections upon
his adventure, which appeared to him very singular. The remembrance, of what he
owed to Ibrahim, put him at first in a great perplexity. It was difficult for
him to resolve to fail him. His particular Interest, and the Sentiments, he had
for the fair Zaratima, appeared to him of too feeble importance, to hinder him
from doing his Friend the Service, he expected from his cares. But when he
represented to himself, what he owed to Zaratima, and made reflection, That he
should never have known this Friend, had she not given him the means by
delivering him out of the danger he had been in, he no longer questioned the
putting himself on her side, believing, he embraced it only through a pure
motive of acknowledgment. The Pleasure he took in deceiving himself, making him
shut his Eyes against the different motives, that shared in his Resolution, he
revoked all the Orders, he had already given, and willing to draw some
advantage from his Error, he magnificently treated Zaratima, causing her to be
served, with what ever could be found most rare in Bithynia. He afterward
desired her to give him leave to wait upon her to Temisouar with a Guard of
five hundred Janisaries, to secure her from all Attempts, her extraordinary
Beauty might inspire into those, that should see her. Zaratima was so satisfied
to see, that Zouglan gave not himself the Lie by any of his Actions, and that
she was not deceived in the Advantageous Judgments, she had made of him, that
she let him in fine understand, she perceived his Care, and that he might
assure himself, she should always be disposed to render Justice to his Merit.
Zouglan, who had never dared speak to her of his Love, acquainted her, that he
had very passionate Sentiments for her from the first Moment, he saw her,
making use of the strongest Expressions Love could furnish him with, to
demonstrate to her, That his Life would be insupportable to him without the
hopes he had to employ it for her Service. Zaratima, persuaded of his Love, and
mollified by these last words, spoke to him in very obliging Terms. In the mean
time she forbad him going along with her, refusing also the Guard, he offered
her; but Zouglan was too much interested in her safety, to let her go without
being well attended. The Prohibition, she had made him, was to no purpose. He
caused her to be followed by thirty Janisaries, of whose Fidelity, and Valor he
was assured, ordering them not to leave her, till she was near Temisouar.
Zaratima departed, very well satisfied with her Lovers Conduct, and so far from
being displeased with his not having obeyed her, that the Care he had of making
her be guarded, tho against her Will, finished the convincing her of his
Passion, and confirmed her in the favorable Sentiments, she already had for
him: So true it is, That there are Occurrences, in which Indiscretion passes
with Ladies for Merit. Zouglan in the mean time was not a little disquieted.
The Letter, he had received from his Friend, obliged him to give him an Account
of what he had done, and at the same time to set himself right in his Opinion;
but not being able to resolve on the making use of any Artifice, to disguise
the Truth to him, he chose rather not to write. Ibrahim some time after sent
him word that he believed he had not received his Letter, since he made him no
Answer about a matter, for which he relied on him, being thoroughly persuaded,
that he wanted not good Will to serve him, when Occasion offered. Zouglan,
without descending any farther into particulars, answered him. That he did him
Justice in holding himself assured of the Zeal, he had for his Interests.

About this time died the Sultaness Valida, which wrought a great Change in the
Affairs of the Port. The Ministers, who feared her, had very great Respects for
her, not daring to decide any thing in important Matters, without demanding her
Advice. Kislar Agasi governed within the Seragli^, and stood very fair in the
Grand Seignior's Opinion. Cara Mustapha, the Grand Vizier, regulated all State
Affairs. Ibrahim Caimacan had the Direction of the Finances, subordinate to the
Grand Vizier; and Soliman Aga, Master of the Horse, was the Privado of the
Sultan's Pleasures, and kept a perfect Intelligence, with the other Ministers.
However, as they all knew the Address of Valida, and were sensible, how great
an Ascendant she had over the Grand Seignior's Spirit, when she would give her
self the Trouble to cultivate it, they lived with great Circumspection toward
her, and testified to her abundance of Attachment and Respect, always fearing,
she would cause some Revolution in favor of her second Son Soliman; but after
the Death of that Sultaness, they no longer kept Measures with this Prince. His
Party became in a little time very weak; and as he had not any Relation with
the Ministers, to advance his Creatures, the most part abandoned him to follow
the Grand Vizier. There was soon after a Discourse of War; and Cara Mustapha,
who, during the Life of Valida, durst not stir from the Port, declared, That at
the beginning of the Spring he would go into the Campaign at the Head of a
powerful Army.

Zouglan, who was accustomed to the Fatigues of War, and to lead a Tumultuous
Life, very opposite to the Tranquillity, in which he was with Soliman, without
hope of seeing his Mistress, and far from Opportunities of acquiring Glory,
fell into a Languishment, which daily decayed his Health. His Generosity, and
the Remembrance, of what he had promised Valida, obliged him to force his
Temper, and to suffer all the Incommodities, which the Violence, he did
himself, rendered inevitable to him; but the Rumors of War, which were spread
about on every side, awaked his first Ardor, and gave him new Inquietudes. He
represented to himself, that being engaged in the Service of Soliman, he could
not abandon that Prince, without offending his Honor, and particularly, since
it was every where said, That the vast Designs of Valida would come to nothing,
and that this Reason had already made Soliman lose many of his Creatures.
Zouglan was continually tormented with these Reflections, not being able to
resolve either upon living any longer without the sight of his Mistress, or
upon quitting the Service of Soliman. He was ashamed of the Idleness, he lived
in at a time, when the whole Ottoman Empire was preparing for War. Zaratima
continually came into his Mind, his Love reproached him with his Laziness, and
he seemed to himself unworthy to Love so fair a Person, since he was able to
live so long away from her. The greatness of his Courage, and the Attachment,
he had for Soliman, combated these Sentiments, and he would perhaps have dyed
without taking any Resolution, and overwhelmed with his Perplexities, if the
Prince himself had not observed his Melancholy, which the Change of his
Countenance rendered but too visible. This obliged him to ask the Cause of it.
Zouglan was incapable to make use of any Artifice. He could not therefore
conceal from the Prince, how he felt himself of too stirring a Temper to
accommode himself to a quiet Life, and that the Rumors of War, which were
dispersed about, had made so strong an Impression on his Mind, that he was
necessitated to call his Duty to Succor, and to remember himself of the
inviolable Attachment, he had sworn to his Service, to be able to resist it.
Soliman, who was persuaded of Zouglan's sincerity, and who could not disapprove
of such Noble Sentiments, testified, That it would be very displeasant to him
to lose him, but yet that he had rather consent to his Departure, than deprive
the Ottoman Empire of a Man of his Merit, who was in Condition to do the Sultan
important Services. Zouglan, touched with the Prince's Goodness, defended
himself a long time from accepting the Permission he gave him to depart; but
Soliman having let him know, that he was so far from not being content with it,
that he would absolutely have him make use of the Occasion, which presented it
self, Zouglan kissed the Hem of his Garment, assuring him, that he would be no
less his in the Army, than at Bursa, since he regarded the Empire, as a good,
which might one day appertain to him, and that he should believe he still
served him, whilst he was laboring to extend the Limits of that same Empire,
in which he had so great a share. Soliman was the first to hasten his
departure, that he might go solicit Employs at the Port, before the Grand
Vizier had disposed of them, and to show the Satisfaction, he had in his
Services, he made him considerable Presents.

Zouglan, being arrived at Adrianople, gave an account to Ibrahim Caimacam, his
Protector and Friend, of all, that had passed between him and Soliman, and in
what manner he retired from that Prince; but always avoided speaking to him of
Zaratima. He desired him afterward to employ his Credit with the Grand Vizier,
to get him employed in the War, he designed against the Germans. This Minister,
who already bragged of exterminating all the Christians, would himself alone
have the whole Glory of that War, and therefore knowing Zouglan's Reputation,
apprehended, that, if he should make use of his Service, the Public would
attribute to him the good Success of the War. This Reason obliged him to reject
the Caimacan's Proposition; but Ibrahim, who had abundance of Wit, penetrating
the Cause of this Refusal, proposed a new to the Grand Vizier, the employing of
Zouglan upon the Frontiers of Persia. The Vizier promised to satisfy him; but
withal told him, That he could not send any Troops toward Asia, till he had
first seen, whether those, he designed for Europe, were complete. The Caimacan
was contented with this Answer, of which he advertised his Friend, who was mean
while in great Impatience to see his Mistress. Judging therefore, that the
Troops, which were levying in so great number through the whole extent of the
Ottoman Empire, could not be ready of a long time, he resolved to take
advantage of this Interval for the making a Journey to the place of Zaratima's
abode. Having told the Caimacan, that he was going to divert himself in the
Country, he repaired with great diligence to Temisouar, to endeavor there the
seeing of this fair Person. Though the Turks never quit the Turban, Love, which
works many other Miracles, and the Difficulties Zouglan foresaw, he might meet
with in seeing his Mistress, made him resolve to disguise himself like a
Christian, and to put on a Peruke, and an Hat; and since it very often happens,
that Christian Cavaliers, traveling into the Lands under the Grand Seignior's
Obedience, carry, without being Merchants, many Curiosities, with which they
furnish themselves in Europe, to make use of an Occasion, Zouglan made
Provision of these sorts of Curiosities at Belgrade, particularly of Stones,
set in work with singular Perfection. He gave so liberally to all those, who
could facilitate the success of his Design, that he was without any difficulty
introduced to Zaratima, under pretense of showing her his choicest Rareties. He
took Care to disguise his Voice, feigning, That with much difficulty he
understood the Turkish Language. All these Precautions so well deceived his
fair Mistress, that she did not know him. She admired the Jewels, and thought
only of chosing such, as she most fancied. Having set aside many pieces, that
pleased her, she asked their price: The Stranger answered her, That he was not
skilled in the Merchant's Trade. This Answer troubled Zaratima, who already
feared his taking back the Jewels, she had chosen; but the counterfeit
Christian told her, she might keep them, and that he would take others in
Exchange, or whatever she pleased to give him. Zaratima, who had many old
Pieces, of which she made no use, was glad to find a man of so Commodious a
Commerce; but what more surpised her, was the Strangers Easiness, who
contented himself with an old Ruby, and some other Trifles, for many Jewels,
she had taken, which were exactly fair. He offered also, if she thought good,
to bring her on the morrow some other very curious things. Zaratima gave him
leave to come again, telling him, he would oblige her in letting her see,
whatever he had, that was curious. He retired, having had the Satisfaction to
be some time with this amiable Person, and to get her to accept of some
Presents, which her Scrupulosity would have caused her to refuse, had they been
made her in any other way. Zaratima, tho very well skilled in Jewels,
distrusted nevertheless her own Judgment in this rencounter, wherefore she sent
for a Jewess, that was verst in this sort of Traffic. The little, which the
pretended Merchant had taken in Exchange, for what he left her, made her fear,
he had cheated her, and that the Stones she had of him were false; but the
Jewess assured her, they were right, and even of greater Value, than she
thought for. All these Circumstances redoubled her amazement, and she was
impatient to see this Man again, who set so little by things, that appeared to
her of so great Price. Zouglan had too much love, to forget, what he had
promised her. He came again on the morrow, and presented her with new Jewels.
Zaratima, after she had for a Moment considered them, fixed her Eye with an
entire Attention upon him, that brought them. She examined his Features, and
his Voice, which he endeavored to disguise, hindered her not from finding
under an Habit, so little suitable to a Turk, what the day before she had been
so far from seeking. It was difficult for her to resist the first Transports of
Joy, which this agreeable surprise caused in her; but fearing, lest some Motion
of Tenderness might escape from her in presence of her Women, she dexterously
rid her self of those, that were about her, and then manifested to Zouglan the
sensible Pleasure, she received from the obliging manner, he had found out of
testifying to her his Love. They gave one another, a mutual Account of their
Affairs, and Zouglan told Zaratima, he could not resolve on his departure to go
and command the Troops on the side of Asia, without first taking leave of her
Zaratima was greatly afflicted, that they were to be so remote one from the
other, but he assured her, that after the Success of this Compaign, of which
the Grand Vizier, promised himself so great Advantages, he would demand some
employ in Europe, protesting to her, that in what State soever his Fortune
should be, he would seek only to merit her Esteem, and to do some Action, which
might render him worthy of her. Zaratima conjured him, no more to expose
himself to so many hazards, since he had already given Proofs enough of his
Valor. Their Conversation was very tender: Zouglan gave her his Word to return
to her, as soon as ever his Honor could permit it; and Zaratima, after she had
assured him of making Vows incessantly for his speedy return, promised him, on
her side, that nothing should be capable to diminish the Sentiments of
Tenderness, of which she would have him rest secure. One of her Women coming
back, hindered their proceeding, and they no longer spoke of any thing, but the
Stones. Zaratima, who would not propose the giving him back the Present, he had
made her with so much Address, presented him with a Bracelet of her Hair. He
received it with a great deal of Pleasure, pretending in presence of his
Mistress's Women, that such Works were very rare in his Country. Tho the time
pressed him, he having none to lose, that he might arrive at Adrianople before
the departure of the Troops; yet was it impossible for him to resolve upon
removing from Zaratima, without making her a third Visit. They gave one another
reciprocal Assurances of ever continuing in a mutual Love, affirming, they
should never have happy Moments, whilst distance of places deprived them of the
Joy of seeing each other; but Zaratima who was very tender, foreseeing, that
her Tears might betray her in the presence of her Women, left Zouglan, without
having the Power to bid him adieu, and being privately withdrawn, she caused
him a moment after to be advertised, that he should take back his Jewels. He
departed on the morrow, hasting with extreme diligence to Adrianople, where he
found Ibrahim in very great pain for him; because the Grand Vizier, who had
already made his Army March, would have him Assemble all the Militia, he could
raise, and form a Camp of them, to Guard the Frontiers of the Empire, lying
toward, Persia. Zouglan, after he had made his Acknowledgement to the Caimacan,
put himself in Condition to execute the Grand Visier's Orders, and having
assembled the Militia, which he found in very great disorder, he joined them to
a small Body of regulated Troops, that his Friend Ibrahim had caused to be
given him. 'Twas time he should be on his March, since the Persians began to
appear, persuaded, they might without fear ravage the Provinces of this
Neighborhood. He not only drove them from the Frontiers of the Empire, but
entered also into their Country, hindered them from keeping the Field, and made
himself Master of the Province of Seruan, which he abandoned, after he had
taken Measures to render it tributary to the Sultan.

Whilst Zouglan made War with so advantageous a Success, the Grand Vizier, who
was at the head of two hundred Thousand Men, threatened all Christendom, and had
also besieged Vienna, which is the Metropolis of Austria, and the seat of the
German Emperors. But as the having of numerous Troops is not enough to make one
Succeed in his Enterprises, there being required also an Head, who has
experience, Valor, and Conduct, the Grand Vizier took his Measures so ill, or
perhaps, to speak more justly, the Besieged defended themselves with so much
Resolution, that they gave the Christian Army, tho very weak, time to come to
their Assistance, and to appear upon the Hills about Vienna. This so astonished
the Grand Vizier, that consulting only his own Fear, he shamefully raised the
Siege. All the World knows, that, to retreat with the less danger, he abandoned
his heaviest Baggage, and Sacrificed to the Christians Resentment five hundred
Janisaries, that guarded the Trenches; which hindered not his being pursued by
the Germans and Polonians, who pillaged, what Baggage was left him, defeated
his Rear, and carried off a very great Number of Prisoners. Amidst the Vexation
of so much ill Success the Vizier forgot nothing, that might preserve him the
good Will of the Sultan, his Master, with which he held himself assured to
repair all he had left. In this Design he gave him account of all things with
great Exactness, but in so dexterous a Manner, that he cast all the
Infellicities of this Compaign upon the Bassa of Buda, and Count Tekely, whom
he endeavored to render suspected to the Grand Seignior, by accusing him of
Intelligence with the Christians. His Artifice succeeded to his Expectation.
The Grand Seignior testified, that he was very well satisfied with his Grand
Visier's Conduct, and sent him also a great Standard with all the Marks of
Esteem, and Acknowledgement, this Minister could have hoped for, had he taken
Vienna. In the mean time the Christians gaining daily new Advantages over the
Turks, and the Grand Vizier not making any Motion to repel them, they began
secretly to murmur against him at Adrianople: And Count Tekely, who was wont to
receive great Subsidies from the Port, having about the Sultan Spies, which
gave him notice of all, that passed, knowing, that he had been rendered
suspicious to the Grand Seignior, and that they spoke no more of sending him
the usual Aids, forgot not to justify himself by Letters; but it was in Vain.
His Letters did not undeceive the Ministers of the Port, who remained
persuaded, that he held Correspondence with the Germans. Tekely, seeing no
Medium between being ruined, or justified, took a Resolution extremely
dangerous. He went himself incognito to the Port, and having found Means, by
the Credit of the Kislar Agasi, who was his particular Friend, to have an
Audience of the Grand Seignior, before whom he prostrated himself with his Face
to the Ground, he told him, that he brought him his Head, chosing rather to
lose it, than to be exposed to the Calumnies of his Enemies, and the disfavor
of his Lord and Protector. Tekely's Boldness was happily successful to him. The
Sultan heard his Reasons, and judged by the Recital, he made him, that all the
Misfortunes, arrived during the fiege, ought to be imputed to the Grand
Visier's ill Conduct. He permitted Tekely to return, assuring him of the
Protection, he demanded, and engaging to send him such powerful Assistance,
that he should soon be in Condition to repair with advantage all the losses, he
had suffered. They began afresh to make Complaints against the Vizier. Every
one blamed him, and no body was any longer afraid to decry his Conduct, against
which they murmured publicly. Kislar Agasi, who had a long time expected an
opportunity to do the Grand Vizier ill Offices, finding the Sultan favorably
disposed to hear all, that was said against him, informed him of the
Complaints, that were made openly, and having acquainted him with the
particulars of the Advantages, the Christians had newly gained over the Ottoman
Troops through the Visier's Sole negligence, he let him understand, it was to
be feared, that the hatred, which not only the People, but the Janisaries also,
bore this Minister, might give Occasion to a general revolt. The Sultan, who
since his Conversation with Tekely, was already much prepossest against Cara
Mustapha, determined, tho with difficulty enough, to sacrifice him to the
public Vengeance, and dispatched two Agaes, who went to Belgrade, where he
was, and cut off his Head.

The Visier's Death gave a new Face to the Affairs of the Empire. The Grand
Seignior, who got sixteen Millions by it, refused to give consent, they should
be employed in paying the Troops, and re-establishing the Affairs of Hungary,
although the whole Divan was of that Opinion. He also obstinately persisted in not
permitting his Treasure, which is the great Spring of the Ottoman Emperors, to
be opened, answering those, who represented him the Necessity, there was of
opening it, to remedy the Disorder, there was in Affairs, that they must make
use of the ordinary Revenues; and if they were not sufficient to resettle all
things, it was for his Council to find other Funds, to supply the defect. The
Sultan's Humor, and the difficulty, they foresaw, there would be in bringing
the Affairs of the Empire again into a good State, abated the Eagerness of
those, that had Right of pretending to the Office of Grand Vizier. The Kislar
Agasi, who had always a great deal of Credit, and who imagined, tho without any
Ground; that the Grand Seignior thought of putting him into this Post, declared
before hand, that he would not accept this great Charge, well knowing, he had
not Capacity enough to support the Burden, of it. Soliman Aga, Master of the
Horse, who was the Grand Senior's true Favorite, judging, he should always be
powerful enough, as long as he had his Masters Favor, told the Sultan, who
offered to make him Grand Vizier, that all his Ambition was to please him, and
that he much more desired to be solely attached to his Person, than to share
his Cares between the Prince, and the State, as he should be obliged to do, if
he accepted the Charge, with which he would honor him. So obliging a Refusal
augmented the Esteem, and Affection, the Grand Seignior had for him, and
determined him to name for Grand Vizier, Ibrahim Aga, who before was Caimacan.

In the mean time there came Advice, that the Christians, who daily made new
Progresses in Hungary, had besieged Vicegrade. The decay of Affairs obliged the
Grand Vister often to affemble the Divan, to resolve on the means of breaking
the Effect of this Enterprise. Many Expedients were proposed; but the new Grand
Vizier was of Opinion to abandon the Frontiers of Hungary, and asserting, that
his Predecessor Mustapha had unjustly declared War against the Germans, he
concluded it much more reasonable to turn their Arms against the Polonians, who
had without any Reason broken the Truce, which the redoubtable Port had granted
them. The Sultan, who had promised Tekely, he would never abandon him, was of a
contrary Sentiment to the Grand Vizier; which hindered not this Minister from
bringing other Reasons for to support his first Opinion. This was to resist the
Sultan's Pleasure, which made him enter into so great a Fury against him, that
he rose up with a Design to punish him. He pardoned him nevertheless at the
Petition of his Favorite Soliman, and this Affair, gave Occasion to the report,
which at that time ran through all Europe, that the new Grand Vizier was
strangled.

There arrived at that time a Courier at Adrianople, by whom they understood,
That the Germans had taken Vicegradt; that Cabstan Bassa, who advanced to
relieve that Place, had been beaten by Prince Charles of Lorrain, and that in
this dispute the Turks had lost eight hundred Janisaries, several Colors, and
the greatest part of their Canon. They learned almost at the same time that the
Prince of Lorrain, taking advantage of the Disorder, the Turks were in, had
attacked Weitzen, a Place situated upon one of the Arms of the Danow, which
form the Isle of St. Andrew, and that the Garrison, terrified by the Report of
the Turks defeat, has made but a very weak Resistance, yielding upon
Discretion, tho it was composed of five hundred Janisaries, commanded by an
Aga, who were all made Prisoners of War, and sent to Gran. This ill News
augmented the Confusion of Affairs at the Port. But the Grand Seignior, who
continually looked with contempt on all, he learned of the Progress, the
Christians made in Hungary, troubled himself neither at the loss of Weitzen,
nor the defeat of his Troops; but went a Hunting on the side of the black
Forest, with so much earnestness, that he passed several days without
unclothing himself. The Grand Vizier, who saw himself alone charged with the
Conduct of the State, forbore not laboring with a great deal of Application, to
prevent the Ruin, which seemed to threaten the Ottoman Empire. War, being the
most important Affair of his Ministry, he who had no Design of removing from
the Port, to put himself at the head of an Army, resolved to give this employ
to Zouglan, whom he regarded as his other self, and whom he had already sent
for to be near him; but well knowing, that the Generals of Armies often lose
good Occasions, because they dare not hazard the Events of Affairs without
particular Orders from the Prince, he desired, Zouglan, whose Fidelity and
Valor were known to him, should have a general Power, which might set him above
Governors, Bassa's, and Berglerbegs themselves. Now since among the Turks, the
Grand Visiers alone are in Possession of this Despotick Authority, he expected
the Grand Seignior's return, to get his consent to a Project, he was meditating
in favor of his Friend.

Whilst Zouglan, who was extremely impatient to pass again into Hungary, that
he might see his Mistress, expected the Effect of the Grand Visier's good Will,
Zaratima was in continual Alarms, and hastened by her Desires the happy time of
his Return. Cabstan Bassa, who after the Death of Cara Mustapha had the General
Command in Hungary, being informed of Selim's great Wealth, and of the Design,
he had to give it his Daughter at her Marriage, resolved not to lose so
favorable an opportunity of securing it to himself, with the Possession of a
very fair Lady. In prospect of this he sought a Reaccommodation with Selim,
after which he showed him all the signs of Consideration and Esteem he could
desire, not taking any Resolution in matters of War, without demanding his
Advice. Selim sensible of this General's kind Usage, and persuaded he would
continue to Command in Hungary, offered, as a mark of his Acknowledgment, to
give him his Daughter with all his Estate. Cabstan, glad of his having been
prevented by Selim's Offers, embraced him with the Testimonies of a very strict
Amity. From that time he always called him his Father, and they remained of
accord, that the Bassa should espouse Zaratima, as soon as the Christians Army,
which gave him a great deal of Disquiet, should have manifested their Design,
either by their Retreat, or by their Sitting down before some one of the Places
which were menaced. Selim informed his Daughter of the Honor the Bassa would do
her, and of the Measures they had already taken together upon this Alliance.
Zaratima, surpised and troubled at so precipitate an Engagement, conjured her
Father not to press her Marriage; but to be pleased, she might continue some
time longer with him. But Selim, attributing to his Daughters Modesty, all the
Reasons she gave him to oblige him to grant her the Delays, she desired, told
her, without being touched with her Tears, That as soon as the Christians were
retired, he would put her into the Bassa's Hands. This cruel Resolution
sensibly afflicted Zaratima, who, tho she were determined to expel all sorts of
Extremities, even Death it self, if it were Necessary, rather than prove false
to Zouglan, yet failed not to send him a Person in whom she confided, with
order to put into his hands the following Billet.

HAsten your Departure, if you still love me: my Father is resolved to deliver
me to Cabstan Bassa, and tho I can answer you for my Heart, I fear all from so
Potent a Man, supported by the Authority of a Father: for, methinks, the Death,
I should without delay give my self, to prevent his Violence, would be but a
sad Comfort to you.

The Grand Seignior, who was on his return to Adrianople, learnt at his arrival
there, that the Germans daily made new Conquests upon him, and that there was
so general a Dread amongst the Ottoman Troops, that upon the Report, which was
spread abroad, of Prince Charles of Lorrain's having a Design to Besiege Pest,
the Garrison had abandoned that Place, after they had set it on Fire, and were
retired with diligence to to Buda.

The Grand Vizier, taking advantage of the Disorder of Affairs in Hungary for
the advancement of his Friend, procured of the Grand Seignior, in favor of
Zouglan, the reviving the Office of Serasquier, which had been several years
suppressed, being much like that of Constable in France. Zouglan was preparing to
pass into Hungary, to Command there with so resplendent a Dignity, when he
received Zaratima's Billet. He was ready to die with Grief, understanding, that
his most cruel Enemy was going to deprive him of his Mistress at the time, when
he found himself in Condition to demand her of her Father, without danger of
being refused. Had he followed the Motions of his Love and of his Courage, he
would have parted immediately to go to his dear Zaratima; but his new Dignity
obliged him to manage himself, and to take other Measures before his Departure.
Nevertheless, since he was not sensible of the Greatness of his Fortune, but
through Relation to his Love, preferring his fair Mistress before all the Goods
of the Earth, he resolved to put his Mind in repose, and obtained upon other
Pretenses, an Order from the Grand Vizier for Arresting Cabstan Bassa, and
causing him to be conducted to the Castle of Zighet. He afterward finished the
Regulation of his Affairs with all the speed he could, and parted soon after
from Adrianople to repair to Belgrads.

Whilst he was in his March, Prince Charles of Lorrain, who had a Design to
Besiege Buda, caused a Bridge of Boats to be built over the Danow, in the place
where that River is separated into two Arms, which form the Isle of St. Andrew.
The Bridge being finished the Tenth of July, 1684. the Imperial Troops passed
thither the same day in very good Order. The Turks, who had not been able to
imagine, that the Christians durst attack Buda, charged very vigorously the
Vauntguard of the Imperial Army, persuaded, that it was only a Detachment; but
they soon knew, they had to do with the whole Army; which obliged them to
retire in disorder, and with the Loss of a great number of their Men, which
were slain by the Imperialists Artillery. In the mean time the Count de
Staremberg, Marshall General of the Camp, approacht Buda, setting men to work
on the Preparatives, necessary for the Siege. The Imperialists at first possessed
themselves of the Fauxbourgs, maugre the great Fire, those of the Place made to
hinder them. Three days after the Turks set the Lower Town on Fire, retiring
themselves into the Upper, which is defended by a well-fortify'd Castle. The
same day the Imperialists began to play their Canon, and made themselves
Masters of the first Ditch, and of Mount St. Gerard, which commands the Town.
On the Twenty second the Turks made a vigorous Sally, in which they lost a
great many Men, and killed Four hundred of the Imperialists. Prince Charles of
Lorrain, having learnt at that time that the Turks were assembling the Body of
an Army about Hanschabec, leaving Count Staremberg Foot and Horse, necessary to
continue the Siege, marched all the Night with the rest of the Horse, and a
thousand Foot. He came by break of day within half a League of the Turks Camp,
in a place, whence he might plainly discover them. He judged them to be about
Twenty thousand Men, and saw them make Motions, which caused him to believe
they had advice of his March. They would have fallen on the Imperialists Flank,
but they found every where a great Resistance, and Prince Charles of Lorrain
charged them so home, and with so much Success, that the Turks were obliged to
make a furious Retreat. The Imperialists killed them above Four thousand Men
upon the place, wounded a great number, and took many Prisoners. The Turks lost
also all their Baggage, and their Canon. Prince Charles of Lorrain returned
again before Buda, and having acquainted the Besieged with the Advantages he
had gained over the Turks, summoned them to yield; but they testified by their
Answer, That they were resolved to defend themselves to the utmost extremity.

Zouglan, who already knew of the Siege of Buda, was at his arrival at Belgrade
informed of the Turks Defeat, and of the great Consternation all their Troops
were in. He applied himself with extraordinary care to give order for all
things; and the sole Hope of speedily seeing his Mistress, comforted him for
the ill Condition, in which he found all the Affairs of Hungary. He was already
preparing himself to go to her, whilst the Troops, he destined for the Relief
of Buda, were drawing together, when he learnt, that Cara Mahomet, Bassa of
Mesopotamia, who commanded in Buda, being sick at the time, he was advertised
that the Christians thought to attack him, had sent order to Selim, Disdar or
Governor of Temisouar, of whose Valor and Experience he was satisfied, to come
and assist him with his Counsels, and Command in the Place, if his Sickness
continued; and that the Disdar, to answer the Bassa's Confidence, and show him
that he feared not the Christians was gone to join him, having taken with him
whatever he had most precious, and also his Daughter Zaratima, judging, she
would be in greater Security with him, than any where else. This News was not a
little displeasing to the Serasquier, who saw his Hopes frustrated by it, and
his Mistress exposed to all the Perils and Incommodities, that are suffered in
a Besieged Town. This Reason augmented the Hatred, he already had for the
Christians, and made him redouble his Cares speedily to relieve the Place. He
wrote (...) Grand Vizier, to acquaint (...) the State of Affairs, and to (...)
him new Succors. He sent Couriers on all sides, to press the March of the
Troops, he would assemble. He visited all the Places, to the end he might see,
whether he could not draw out a Party from the Garrisons, without exposing them
to be assaulted, and distributed also store of Money, to make Recruits. His
great Reputation, his Liberalities, and the Confidence, that appeared in all
his Actions, greatly contributed to raise the fallen Courage of the Ottoman
Troops. In the mean time, tho he were a Man of very great Merit, the Newness of
his Office of Serasquier, failed not to impose upon the People, who were so
prepossest in his favor, that they spoke of him as the Restorer of the Empires
Affairs, even before he had attempted any thing. Being arrived at Zighet, he
went to visit Cabstan Bassa in his Prison, and having asked him, whether he knew
him, the Bassa, who was already informed of his Advancement, and persuaded he
would cause him to be Strangled, answered him fiercely, That he must not expect
to see him guilty of so much Mean-spiritedness, as to ask him a Life, he well
knew, he had resolved to deprive him of, as himself would not have failed to
treat him in the same manner, had he not escaped from him at Temisouar; but
that Fortune having disposed it otherwise, it was reasonable he should be
punished, since he was the most unfortunate. The Serasquier, surpised at so
haughty an Answer, and so beseeming a Man of War, gave him his hand, and told
him, That the only Revenge he would take of him, was to desire his Amity, and
to give him the Command of an Army, for to put a great Convoy into Caminiec,
and to oppose the Attempts the Polonians might make upon that Place. He would
not so much as require of him any Condition, as to oblige him to think no more
of Zaratima, being thoroughly persuaded, that his Love and his Fortune would
cause him to be preferred before his Rivals. Cabstan, confounded at the
Serasquier's Generosity, kissed the Hem of his Garment, assuring him; he should
have an eternal Acknowledgment of the Favor he did him.

The Serasquier, being departed from Zighet to go to Alba Regalis, learnt by
the way that he must no longer expect to receive any Succor from the Bassa of
Possega: because Count Lesly at the Head of an Army, he had raised in Croatia,
had besieged the Fortress of Wierovitza, the taking of which facilitated that
of the Bridge of Esseck: which had obliged the Bassa of Possega, who knew of
what Importance the conservation of that Fortress was to them, to draw together
all the Troops that were in the neighboring Places, and to endeavor the Relief
of Wierevitza; but that the Imperialists had repelled him, and constrained him
to retire, after he had lost the greatest part of his Troops: which had so much
intimidated the Garrison of Wierovitza, that they had Surrendered on the single
Summons of the Christian General. The Serasquier was sensibly afflicted at this
ill News. He learnt others at his arrival at Alba Regalis, which comforted him
for the loss of Wierovitza: for he had advice, That Cara Mahomet Bassa, who
commanded in Buda, was perfectly recovered, since the Christians had besieged
his Place; That he wanted neither Victuals, nor Ammunitions; That he had Seven
thousand Men of the old Troops, not counting the Inhabitants and Jews, who did
almost as much Service as the Soldiers; and in fine, that he made vigorous
Sallies, which much incommoded the Besiegers. These Advices made the Serasquier
judge, he should have time to get together Troops, sufficient to relieve the
Place; but when he made reflection on the Inquietudes of his Mistress, who was
in a besieged Town, and had not of a very long time heard from him, he was
ashamed, he had so long delayed to let her know his Arrival, and determined
immediately to write her the following Billet.

I Was come to be near you, with a Design of never parting from you. I learnt
at my arrival, you were at Buda with your Father, and that the Christians had
besieged that Place. I will never pardon them the sensible discontent, they
have given me, in depriving me of the Pleasure to see you, to speak to you of
my Love, and to give you account of all, I have suffered, being away from you.
I hope to punish these Infidels, and to make them experiment, what a man can
do, who at the same time serves his Prince, and defends what he loves. I also
flatter my self, that your Father will put some difference between Cabstan and
me, and that he will not find me altogether unworthy of you.


He would not send her word of his new Dignity of Serasquier, either through
Modesty, or perhaps to surprise her more agreeably, when he should see her. He
forbad also a dextrous Renegado, who was got out of Buda, and who undertook to
return thither, to tell Zaratima that it was the Serasquier, who gave him that
Billet. His Love hindered him not from making use of this Occasion to exhort
Cara Mahomet to a sedulous Performance of his Devoir, telling him, that he had
already given an account to the Grand Vizier of the Resolution, he testified to
make a good Defense of his Place; that he could assure him, he should soon be
relieved; but that he prayed him to remember, that, if the Christians should
succeed in their pernicious Enterprises, the Mosques of the great Allas most
intimate Friend would be profaned by his most inveterate Enemies, and that the
important Place of Buda, where the Ottoman Emperors had formerly made their
Residence, would no longer be inhabited but by Infidels. He added farther, That
well knowing, he writ to a Man, who to a great Valor joined no less Wit and
Penetration, he forbear to mention many other Reasons, which should oblige him
rather to Die, than Surrender the Place: since it was to be feared, the Grand
Seignior, being inconsolable for such a Loss, would Sacrifice to his just
Resentment him, that should prefer an infamous Life to the Glory he might
acquire by finishing his Days in the Bed of Honor. These two Letters, which
were punctually delivered, had all the Effect, the Serasquier could desire.
Zaratima, who was in cruel Inquietudes for having no News of Zouglan, and
equally feared the good or bad Success of the Siege, persuaded, that her Father
would deliver her to Cabstan Bassa, as soon as the Christians were retired, or
the Place should have capitulated, received with all the Joy imaginable her
Lover's Letter. She bid the Renegado, who brought it her, give her notice, when
he should return to the Musulmens Camp, and comforted her self for all the
Discontents, the Absence of Zouglan had caused her, by the Pleasure, she had,
in reading over his Letter a thousand times.

Tho Cara Mahomet was resolved to defend his Place to the utmost Extremity, the
Serasquier's Letter made so much Impression on his Mind, that Prince Charles of
Lorrain sending him the next day an Officer to Summon him to yield, and to
inform him of the Turks Defeat, and the taking of Wierovitza by Count Lesly, he
answered fiercely, That he pretended to revenge upon the Christians, that were
before Buda, the Losses, those of his Party had received at Vicegrade, Pest,
and other Places, of which the Christians had lately seized. He declared at the
same time, That he would not accept any Quarter for himself, or his Garrison,
being resolved not to give any to the Christians which should fall into his
hands: and to the end he might persuade him by Effects of the Truth, of what he
said, he caused Forty German Prisoners to be brought upon the Ramparts, and
their Heads to be cut off in presence of the Officer, telling him, he wished it
were in his power to do as much to all the Christian Army. The same day, after
the Officer was gone back, the Besieged made a vigorous Sally, and would have
cleans'd the Trenches, and filled up the Works, had not Prince Charles of
Lorrain run thither himself, accompanied with several Volunteers, and obliged
them to retreat, after a very obstinate Fight, and very Bloody for both
Parties. The Count d' Harrach, the Count de Nassaw, the Count de Furstemberg,
and many other Volunteers were Killed upon this occasion. The Turks lost there
above Three hundred Men: which hindered them not from continuing to make such
frequent Sallies, that the Imperialists were obliged to have always a double
Guard in the Trenches, to repel them. They had advice about this time, that
Cara Mahomet Bassa was Killed by a Canon Shot; but Selim Aga, Father to
Zaratima, who succeed him, testified no less Resolution of holding out, than
his Predecessor had done. He assured the Garrison, That the Serasquier was
taking care to relieve them; and to show that he did not fear the Germans, nor
would keep any Measure with them, he cut off the Heads of all the Prisoners,
which had the unhappiness to fall into his Hands.

In the mean time the Serasquier received Letters from the Grand Vizier, who
fent him word, he could not possibly give him the Succor he demanded, because
he had been obliged to send all the good Troops he had left to the Dardanelles,
to Tenedos, and the Isle of Chio, to hinder the Descent of the Venetian Forces,
which had already taken St. Maure. He conjured him in suit to supply all things
by his Vigilance, and Industry, and to hazard all, rather than let Buda be
lost. The Serasquier assembled his Troops about Alba Regalis, and prepared to
put Relief into the Place, persuaded, that the Christian Army, which was very
much weakened by the length of the Siege, and the frequent Sallies of the
Besieged, would not be in condition to hinder him; but the Elector of Bavaria's
Arrival at the Christian Camp raised the Courage and Hopes of the Imperialists.
This Prince, having Landed his Forces, caused them to march in Battalia on a
Line, which made a great Front that they might appear more numerous to the
Besieged. He visited afterward all the Works, and chose the Place, that
appeared to him most proper for the making an Attack, which he began the same
day by his Troops. They carried it on so far by the Care and Example of this
young Prince, that they were obliged to stay, till that of the Imperialists was
sufficiently advanced, to the end they might make Lines of Communication
between the two Attacks. But during all this Interval, their Courage remained
not unexercis'd: for the T^^^k's, wondering to see an Attack so forward, made
such vigorous Sallies upon them, that they would infallibly have been driven
from their Post, had not the Prince supported them by his firmness, and his
Orders for the advancing of other Troops, which were in better condition to
fight. Selim, perceiving that the Elector of Bavaria's Arrival, and the Vigor
his Forces showed in their Attack, had disquieted the Garrison, and that the
Janisaries began to draw together, and speak of Surrendering the Place, had the
Address to persuade them, That he had new Assurances, they should be relieved
within three Days; and to the end he might take out of their Minds those
flattering Hopes of Capitulation, which the Soldiers promised themselves after
a long Siege, he bethought himself of telling them, he knew from good hands,
That the Christians in prejudice of the Articles they had granted the Garrison
of Wierovitza, had pillaged all their Baggage, and afterward put them all to
the Sword; that the same Lot attended them, since they had to do with the same
Enemies; and that it was for them to choose, whether they would live by giving
the Serasquier time to relieve them, or perish by delivering themselves to the
Perfidious Christians. This Artifice, tho it had no other Ground, but the
Falsehood of five or six Croats, who pillaged and ill entreated some Turks, that
were strayed in a Wood, failed not to prove advantageous to Selim. All the
Garrison engaged by new Oaths to defend themselves to the utmost Extremity, and
consented, That the first, who should speak of Capitulating, should be
immediately Strangled.

Prince Charles of Lorrain, having notice that the Serasquier was drawing
together an Army of Fifty thousand Men for the Relief of Buda, caused
Retrenchments to be made along the Lines, to the end he might hinder them from
being assaulted by the Turks, and gave all the Orders necessary for their good
Reception, if they presented themselves.

Whilst the Serasquier was making an end to assemble his Troops, he
understood, That Selim, who commanded in Buda, was slain; and that the Eldest
Aga had taken the Command in his place. This News much discontented him,
foreseeing that his Mistress would be afflicted at it, and fearing besides,
lest the Loss of a Man of his Merit might diminish the Ardor of the Besieged.
Scarce had he received this Advice, when the Renegado, who had already formerly
brought him News from Buda, presented himself before him, and after he had
confirmed the Death of Selim, gave him a Billet from Zaratima, which was
written in these terms:

MY Father's Death has sensibly afflicted me. I Fear also, lest Cabstan Bassa
pretend to take advantage of the Consent, he had given him to Marry me. I find
no Consolation, but in thinking, your Love will furnish you with Means to
preserve me from his Violence. In the mean time I counsel you to secure your
self of the famous Serasquier 's Protection: for if he has all the good
Qualities they tell us of here, he will not suffer Cabstan to hinder me
disposing of an Heart my Love has destined you.


The Serasquier, having read this Billet with all imaginable Joy, made her the
following Answer:

SElim 's Death much troubled me, because of the Grief, I know, it has been to
you. Quiet your Mind, and fear nothing from Cabstan Bassa. Assured of your
Heart, all the Powers of the Earth cannot hinder my being happy. I am well
enough with the Serasquier, to be able to answer you before hand, that he will
with pleasure employ all the Authority his Office gives him, and his Life it
self, if it be necessary, to execute all your Desires. He is resolved to use
extraordinary Endeavors, to force the Christians Lines, relieve the Place, and
raise the Siege. His Design cannot fail of Success: for methinks, it will be
impossible to resist us, when we shall act to vanquish the Difficulties, that
separate me from you.


The Serasquier gave the Renegado Marks of Liberality, and promised him great
Recompenses; if he could deliver this last Letter with the same Felicity he had
done the precedent. He ordered him also to assure the Commander of Buda, he was
upon his March, to approach the Place, and that he might reckon, he should be
succor'd on the Morrow, during all the Day. In Effect, his Impatience to see
his Mistress, and his Fear, lest this new Governor might not defend himself
with the same Resolution, his Predecessors had done, obliged him to make his
Army march the same day. He had already sent many Parties to tire the
Besiegers, and to endeavor the cutting off their Foragers. In fine, on the
Twenty second of September he drew near the Christians Camp about Break of day,
and perceiving it was fortified with good Retrenchments, and that all the Army
appeared in a Disposition to fight well, he detached several Squadrons, which
advanced as far as the Circumvallation on the side of Count Maximilian de
Staremberg. The Imperialists, who were in Battalia received them with much
vigor; but they had only Skirmishes, which lasted long enough, and the Turks,
who were advanced too forward, lost a great many more Men, than the
Imperialists. In the mean time the Serasquier, who had viewed the Camp, whether
he found new Difficulties in relieving the Place, or that he expected his Foot,
which were not yet come up, thought fit to retreat, and took no Benefit of
three Sallies of above Fifteen hundred Men, which the Besieged made on the side
of the Imperialists Attack at the time he approached the Camp. They had at
first some Advantage, advancing as far as one of the Batteries, which they
overthrew in a little time; but the Elector of Bavaria, who lost no opportunity
to give Marks of his Courage, running thither at the Head of several
Volunteers, and three Squadrons of his Troops, repelled them with so much
Valor, that they were obliged to Retreat, abandoning two Pieces of Canon, they
had began to bring thither. The Turks lost above Three hundred Men on this
occasion. The Germans loss would not have been so considerable, had not Count
de Tilly, and other Persons of Quality been then slain. On the Twenty third the
Serasquier attackt again the Christians Camp, at the Head of all his Horse, but
was beaten back with much vigor, losing also two Standards. The Troops of
Bavaria, who had supported the Turks Efforts for many hours, were scarce entered
into their Lines, when they were charged by the Garrison, which made upon them
a great Sally of Horse and Foot; but the Bavarians, animated by the Example of
their brave Prince, who gave them his Orders himself with a Resolution above
his Age, defended themselves a long time, and the Imperialists coming to their
Assistance, the Turks were in fine beaten back. On the Twenty fifth the
Serasquier presented himself again before the Lines, and disposed his Troops in
Battalia, making a show, as if he would fight. Whilst the Imperialists were
preparing to resist him, he detached Four thousand Horse, which he made march
along an Hill, to gain a Passage, which was not guarded, because the
Imperialists judged it inaccessible. They with much difficulty possessed
themselves of it, and fell afterward upon a Quarter of the Imperialists, which
was guarded only by two Regiments of Horse, and two Battallions of Foot. They
charged them, before they had time to look about them. During this Disorder,
the Serasquier, who aimed only to deceive the Imperialists Vigilance, that he
might get Relief into Buda, detached about Twelve hundred Foot, which, slipping
along the Hill, got into the Place by favor of a Sally, the Besieged made at
the same time. In the mean time Major General Dunewald ran to assist the
Regiments, that were envelop'd by the Turks. He hindered their being quite
routed, and charged the Infidels so home, that he defeated them five Squadrons,
Killing above Three hundred Men. The Serasquier, satisfied with having relieved
the Place, would no longer expose his Troops, but retreated in very good order.
On the Morrow the Elector of Bavaria and Prince Charles of Lorrain, who
expected the Serasquier would not retire without Fighting, marched forth to go
attack him in his Camp; but the Serasquier, having advice of it, decamped about
Midnight, and went to encamp so advantageously between Alba Regalis, and a
great Marsh, that the Christians, judging it impossible to force him in so
advantageous a Post, were obliged to return to their Camp. Tho the Besieged
wanted many Necessaries, and particularly Forage, it is manifest, the Succor
they received, failed not to comfort them, and to give them great Hopes, they
being persuaded, That, since the Serasquier had put Troops into the Place, he
would find a Means to get in abundantly all things, of which they might have
need. They also flattered themselves, that the Christians would raise the
Siege, without expecting the Serasquier should force them to it by giving them
Battle.

Zaratima, who had received her Lover's Billet, took a great share in the
public Joy. Yet neither Zouglan's Letter, nor all, she heard in commendation
of the Serasquier, who had the Reputation not to suffer any Injustice, could
re-assure her. She thought her Lover flattered himself, and that his Passion
gave him this great Confidence, she remarkt in his Letters. Cabstan perpetually
troubled her, and she feared the last day of the Siege would be the Beginning
of her Misfortunes, prepossest, that this Bassa would seize of all her Father's
Estate, and of her self too, without her being able to hinder it, since her
Father died in that Will. Zouglan appeared to her a weak Protector against a
Bassa, so authorized. Her Love and her Fear made her see a thousand Dangers in
the Assistance she might expect from her Lover: for she doubted not, but he had
Resolution enough to kill Cabstan; but she foresaw, he would be immediately
punished for it, and that she should still equally lose him. All these
Reflections cruelly perplexed her, and she saw some Moments, when she knew not,
whether she ought to desire the raising of the Siege. In fine, after having a
long time tormented her self, she found some Consolation in thinking, she might
avoid Cabstan, by casting her self at the feet of the generous Serasquier,
asking him his Protection, and informing him of the particular Reasons she had
to prefer Zouglan before this Bassa. Animated with this Hope, she failed not to
wish, the Siege were ended, and was already meditating upon all she should say
to the Serasquier, that she might incline him to her Interest, when one of her
Slaves acquainted her, That her House was guarded by Fifty Janisaries, and that
the Aga, who commanded them, desired to speak with her. Her Fear, or rather her
Love alarmed, made her presently judge, they were Cabstan Bassa's Emissaries,
who would secure themselves of her Father's Succession, and perhaps of her
Person; but the Aga, presenting himself before her, told her, He was of the
number of those, that entered into the Place the day before, and that he had
Orders from the Serasquier Bassa to continue near her Person with Fifty
Janisaries, and to obey, whatever she would command him; and if through
Misfortune the Place should be assaulted by the Christians, which was not
probable, not to abandon her, but rather to be all cut in pieces, than to let
her fall into their hands. Zaratima was extremely surpised at the Aga's
Discourse, not being able to comprehend, through what Motive the Serasquier
should so much concern himself for a Person, he had never seen. Having reasoned
long within her self, to divine the cause of it, she imagined the Serasquier
had perhaps heard something to her Advantage, and that he was without doubt of
the same Humor with the greatest part of the Turks, who always begin to
satisfy their Love, before they declare their Passion to the Person, that
causes it. This Thought gave her a thousand Horrors, and engaged her to make
Reflections on the unhappy Condition of the Turkish Women, who are rather their
Husband's Slaves, than Companions. She was troubled at the Education her Father
had taken so much Care to give her: since it served only to make her more
severely feel the Infelicity of her State. She thought nevertheless, she should
be the most happy Person of her Sex, if she might pass her Life with her Lover;
and maugre all the Reasonings, she had made, she found a sensible Pleasure in
reading over again Zouglan's Letter, judging also, that, if it were true, the
Serasquier had a Merit proportioned to his Reputation, it was not impossible,
he might be her Lover's particular Friend, and might seek to give him an
essential Proof of it, by the Care he took of a Person, which was not
indifferent to him.

Whilst Zaratima was busied with such like Thoughts, the Elector of Bavaria,
who was vexed that he could not fight the Serasquier, visited the Attack of his
Troops, and finding it very much advanced, made them mount to the Assault. The
Breach, which was not sufficient, obliged them to retreat, and expect, till a
Mine, that was to be sprung, had made a greater. Tho the Christians Army began
to want Victuals and Ammunition, and was extremely diminisht by the frequent
Combats, they had with the Turks, by the ordinary Fatigues of so long a Siege,
and by the continual Sallies, they were forced to oppose; yet were they not
rebutted. The Duke of Bavaria also declared, That he would not raise the Siege
till the last Extremity, sending to his States for other Troops, for Munitions
of War, and Mouth, and for Cloths, to keep the Soldiers from the Cold, which
began to incommode them. A French Engenier, who had served in the King's
Armies, being at that time arrived in the Imperialists Camp, gave them new
Hopes, they being persuaded, that a Man, which had made War under a Monarch,
who never undertook Siege without Success, might facilitate their taking of the
Place. The Count Bielk, whom we have seen Ambassador from Swedeland in France,
and who was a Voluntier in the Imperial Army, presented this Engenier to the
Elector of Bavaria. This Prince, who neglected nothing, that might contribute
to the taking of Buda, gave him Employ the same Day. He wrought to make a great
Mine, of which the Effect would have been infallible, had it not been overflown
by the running in of Water from the Town. The Turks, who from the Beginning of
the Siege foresaw, that the Christians might take from them the Water of the
Danow, dug a prodigious number of Pits, which were afterward very
serviceable to them: for the Elector of Bavaria, persuaded of his Engeniers
Capacity, had already disposed his Troops, to go up to the Assault, as soon as
this great Mine should be Sprung; but at the time, when they no longer doubted
of Success, word was brought them, that many of these Pits were broken into the
Miners Work, and had quite drowned it. This hindered not the Elector of Bavaria,
whom all these Difficulties could not rebut, to give immediately new Orders for
beginning a Mine on another side.

In the mean time the Serasquier, having received a Reinforcement of Troops,
and seeing, that the Besiegers Army daily decreased, appeared before the
Christians Camp at the Head of a great Body of Horse. The Besieged made at the
same time a vigorous Sally. Whilst a Part of the Imperial Army was busied in
repelling it, and the Serasquier amused the Horse by Skirmishes, eight great
Boats, laden with Men and Provisions, sent by the Bassa of Agria, passed the
Danow above Pest. A Detachment of these Turks, having charged a a small number
of Imperialists, who guarded the Redoubts, drove them away without much
difficulty, because all the Troops were employed another way; which was the
Cause, this Relief got easily into the Place. Nevertheless this hindered not the
Imperialists, who expected great Effects from their Mines, to dispose all
things for the giving a general Assault; but a Deserter of the Imperial Troops,
being at that time got into Buda, discovered to the Besieged the Place where
the Mines were, telling them also, That, if they had their Effect, it was
impossible to avoid the Places being taken. This Advice gave no little Disquiet
to the Turks, and obliged them to work with an extreme Diligence, to discover
the Mines by opening the Earth in many different places, to meet with the
Besiegers Works. Tho they had labored a whole day to no purpose, yet did not
this ill Success discourage them, They resolved on the contrary to hazard all,
that they might hinder the Effect of these Mines, and having made a Sally with
all the Troops they had left in a Condition to fight, they drove the
Imperialists as far as the Batteries, after having Killed them above Two
hundred Men. A great Number of Laborers, who were come out of the Place, got in
the mean time to the Mouth of the Mines, and drew out the Powder. All the
Imperial Army took Arms, to repel this great Sally. The Elector of Bavaria ran
thither in Person, and animated all things by his Example. Many Squadrons were
made to March. The Turks, who would give their Laborers time to draw out the
Powder, made many Discharges, before they retreated. They lost a great many Men
upon this occasion; but they reentred not into the Place, till after the Mines
were emptied, and the Imperialists Works entirely ruined.

Prince Charles of Lorrain; seeing, that the Army was very much weakened, that
the Soldiers were discouraged by so long a Siege, that the Serasquier
continued to tire them out by such frequent Alarms, and that the Cold and
continual Rains would quite destroy the Troops, called a Council of War, to
deliberate upon the Resolutions, they ought to take in so contrary
Conjunctures. Some of the General Officers were for a continuation of the
Siege, as expecting yet a good Effect from a new Mine, the Troops of Bavaria
had made; but the most part were of Opinion, That they ought to retreat in the
best order they possibly could, to save the Remainder of the Army. The Elector
of Bavaria, who hearkened only to his Glory, made a great Difficulty of
consenting to it. General Serini, who commanded this Prince's Troops, seeing,
that the Imperialists were determined to retreat, represented to him, that he
was not responsible for the the Success of the Siege of Buda, since it was not
he that undertook it, who only went to assist the Imperial Troops, moved by the
Zeal, he had for Religion; That he ought to be very well contented with the
Actions, he had done in the frequent Sallies, his Troops had born, and in the
several Combats, in which they had beaten back the Serasquier; That he might
also assure himself, the whole World would do him Justice, not having had less
Ardor to take Buda, than he had shown the year before to drive the Infidels
from the Gates of Vienna; That, if the Success had not been equal, his Glory
was not therefore less, since it is certain, That if the other Princes of
Germany had imitated his Example, they might not only have taken Buda, and
chased the Turks out of all the Places they held in Hungary, but have driven
them also as far as Constantinople, and made the whole Ottoman Empire tremble;
That after all, great Princes are often exposed to lose Forces, but that the
Glory they have acquired, is immortal, and continues always with them, and that
they find Means to raise other Armies in their States; That in fine, an Assault
was no longer to be thought of, since they could not give it without exposing
themselves to be all lost, nor avoid fighting between two Fires, the Garrison,
which had made good Retrenchments, being yet very strong, and the Serasquier
always ready to charge the Christians, as soon as they should make any Motion
to give a general Assault.

The young Prince, maugre the Heat of his Courage, let himself be persuaded by
such good Reasons. Orders were given for Transporting, by the means of a Bridge
of Boats, Eight thousand Sick and Wounded, with the Artillery, and heavy
Baggage into the Isle of St. Andrew. All the Army, about Thirty thousand
strong, Decampt afterward, and having passed the Danow, took their March by
old Buda, for to go to Gran.

The Serasquier, who held it for a Maxim, That one must make a Bridge of Gold
for his Enemy, when they will retire, and who had an extreme Impatience to see
his dear Zaratima, made not any Motion to charge the Imperialists in their
Retreat, but entered into Buda, as soon as the Christians had passed the Dahow.
He was received with Acclamations and Shouts of Joy, which for a very long time
hindered him from being able to make himself heard. He gave a thousand
Commendations to the Garrison and Inhabitants, and forgot nothing to persuade
the Aga, who commanded, that he might expect all manner of Recompense for the
great Service he had done the whole Ottoman Empire. He found every where good
Retrenchments, which made him judge, that the Germans had ruined their Army, if
they had given a general Assault, as they would have done. He got rid with all
the speed, he possibly could, of the Aga, and other Officers, and feigning, he
would honor the Memory of Selim, who had so well defended the Place, caused
himself to be conducted to his Daughter Zaratima, who was preparing to go forth
of her House, to cast her self at the Serasquier's Feet, and desire his
Protection against Cabstan Bassa; but as soon as she faw Zouglan appear, the
Presence of this dear Lover re-assur'd her. She thought no longer of visiting
the Serasquier; she had even a great deal of Difficulty to conceal the
Transports of Joy she felt, and to keep up in presence of the Officers, that
environed this General, the Personage, she represented, of a Daughter,
afflicted for the Death of her Father. She was so busied with her Love, and
found so much Pleasure in seeing her Lover after so many Alarms, and so long an
Absence, that she perceived not the Respects, every one gave Zouglan, who
having an Infinity of Orders to give, was obliged to quit his Mistress, and to
delay till another time the giving her account of his Elevation to the Office
of Serasquier, and of all other things, that had befallen him, since he saw
her. Zaratima let him go out, persuaded she should soon see him again. She
began to relish without constraint the Joy, this agreeable Interview had caused
in her, when a Letter was brought her from Cabstan Bassa, who writ to her, That
not doubting, but she was in the Resolution to execute Selim's last Will, he
sent her a Man, in whom he confided, who should take care of all her Affairs,
and should Conduct her to Temisouar, where he promised to meet her, as soon as
the Campaign was over. Zaratima, who always foresaw, that Cabstan Bassa would
give her some Trouble, would not see the Man, he sent her, determining to
follow her first Thought, and secure her self of the Serasquier's Protection,
to deliver her self by this General's Authority from the Bassa's Pursuits. In
the mean time it being already late, and all being yet in Confusion in the
Town, she delayed her Visit till the Morning, pleasing her self beforehand
with imagining, she should by this Step show her Lover the strong Passion she
had for him. Tho she reckoned much on the Serasquier's Generosity, she ceased
not to take care of her Adornment, persuaded that fair Persons have great
Advantages to obtain what they desire. There was already a great number of
Officers and considerable Persons with the Serasquier, when Zaratima arrived
there, attended by many of her Slaves. The Serasquier, advertised, that Selim's
Daughter desired to speak with him, found himself at first very much
embarrass'd. He went forth nevertheless to receive her, accompanied by a Crowd
of Officers, who gave him great Respects. Zaratima, seeing Zouglan come to meet
her, was no less perplexed than he, foreseeing, her Modesty would have much to
suffer, if she must speak to the Serasquier in presence of her Lover. She told
him, she had newly received a Letter from Cabstan Bassa, which extremely
troubled her, and that to shelter her self from his Violence, she was
determined to desire the Protection of the generous Serasquier. Zouglan
answered her, smiling, that she might be assured, the Serasquier would give her
a favorable Audience. Zaratima, observing, that the Guards were at their Arms,
and that every one was in a profound respect, looked about for the Serasquier,
and saw only her Lover, who acted as Master, and desired her to go into another
Chamber, where he told her, she might see the Serasquier. Zaratima being
entered, every one retired, except one of her Slaves, who continued with her.
Then Zouglan, penetrated with Love and Joy, asked Pardon of his Mistress, that
he had no sooner informed her of his Exaltation, telling her, That himself was
the Serasquier, and that he was obliged to her alone for this great Fortune,
since he had always believed himself unworthy of her, whilst he should have
only ordinary Employs, which are daily given to other Bassa's, and that the
Violence of his Passion had made him attempt all, that he might come to be
Serasquier, and merit by it her Esteem and Love. Zaratima, astonished, and
ravished at such furprizing News, wept for joy, assuring him nevertheless, that,
Tho he should be Master of all the Crowns in the Universe, it could add nothing
to the Tenderness she had for Zouglan. The Serasquier, touched with so obliging
an Answer, promised her, Time should never change the respectuous Sentiments he
had for her, and that he would regard her all his life, as his Divinity, and
Liberatress. They said a thousand tender and passionate things to each other.
Afterward the Serasquier proposed to her the going out of Buda, where she saw
only funest Objects, and offered to accompany her to Alba Regalis, where they
might celebrate the Ceremony of their Marriage with all sort of Magnificence.
Zaratima consented to it with Joy, and retired to dispose her self for her
Departure the day following.

The Serasquier, having given the necessary Orders for re-establishing the
Fortifications of Buda, accompanied Zaratima to Alba Regalis, declaring
publicly, That he prepared to Marry her. Cabstan Bassa, who loved Zaratima,
only in consideration of her Father's great Wealth, thought no more of her, as
soon as he understood he had so redoubtable a Rival; but the Serasquier, who
had always before his Eyes the great Obligations he had to the Grand Vizier
Ibrahim, remembering, that this Vizier, loved Zaratima, and that he had
heretofore written to him to Bursa, to make him the Confident of his Passion,
and desire him to seize this fair Person, made a scruple of Marrying her,
believing he could not do it without betraying his Friend, and rendering himself
unworthy his Amity. This cruel Reflection cast him into Irresolutions, which
gave him great Inquietudes. His Love pressed him to satisfy himself, and to
hearken to nothing, since it was in his own power to be happy, and to give
Marks of his Tenderness and Acknowledgment to the fair Zaratima, who had saved
his Life, and loved him with so much Passion; but when he represented to
himself, that the Grand Vizier might think, his Letter had given him occasion
to see Zaratima, to become amorous of her, and consequently to Marry her,
without remembering his Friend's Interest, and that he might perhaps one day
reproach him with his Perfidiousness, the sole thought of this imaginary
Reproach struck an horror in him; and maugre the violence of his Passion, he
determined, before he Married Zaratima, to write to the Grand Vizier, to
acquaint him with the Obligations he had to Selim's Daughter, and to give him
an exact account of his Love, and of all the Progress he had made in his
Mistresses Mind, assuring him, That he loved her above his Life; and that he
believed, he could not give a more essential Proof of the Attachment, he had
for him, than the having delayed his Marriage, till he was assured, he might do
it without fear of exposing himself to sose the Esteem of so perfect a Friend.
He sent a Courier to the Port with this Letter, promising to reward him
liberally, if he returned within a very short time he set him. Tho Zaratima was
very well satisfied with the Cares of her Lover, and with the Honors every one
paid her, since he had declared his Design to Marry her; she could not
comprehend why he delayed the Ceremony, and what Reason he had to speak no more
to her of it. Her Modesty made her support her Discontent, during five or six
Days, without showing any thing of it; but seeing, that the Serasquier still
testified to her abundance of Love and Respect, and that nevertheless he spoke
no more of Marriage, she entered into so great a Despair, that it was impossible
for her to conceal it. The Serasquier, who in the Transports of his Love often
repented the necessity he had imposed upon himself, to expect his Friend's
Answer before he espoused Zaratima, avoided entering into any discourse with her
about it, not daring to tell her the Reasons, which obliged him to delay his
Marriage. There was stopped at this time upon the Danow an Austrian Lady, who was
a very handsome Person, and of very great Quality, as she was going to see her
Husband at Pest, where he lay Sick. She was conducted to Alba Regalis. The
Serasquier, who has much Respect for Ladies, visited her, and gave her all the
Marks of Consideration, she could desire in the State, in which she was.
Zaratima, who perpetually tormented her self to penetrate the Reasons of her
Lovers pretended Indifference, believed, that he loved her not, and imagined,
he had perhaps some particular Attachment for the German Lady, who had the
Reputation to be a very fine Woman. Zaratima was in these Perplexities, when
the Serasquier, who found no true Pleasure, but in seeing his dear Mistress,
came to her, and told her, That he had been so touched with the strong Passion,
the Captive Lady testified for her Husband, that he had not been able to
resolve any longer to deprive her of the Pleasure to see him, but had caused
her to be conducted to Pest, without expecting her Ransom, which he was obliged
to Pay for her to the Soldiers, that had stayed her. Zaratima, judging by this
Discourse, that her Suspicions were unjust, had a fecret Shame of the
disadvatageous Judgments, she had made of her Lover, and not being able to
support any longer the thought of his Infidelity, acknowledged to him with
blushing, That the small Earnestness, he had shown since their Arrival at Alba
Regalis to finish their Marriage, had a little troubled her. The Serasquier,
who never made use of any Artifice to disguise his veritable Sentiments,
entirely imparted to her the Letter he had written to the Grand Vizier, and the
Reasons, he had to show this Deference to so faithful a Friend. You love me but
with a very faint Passion, replied Zaratima in choler, since you could resolve
to expect from the Grand Vizier 's Generosity an Happiness, which depends only
on your self. Tears and Sighs hindered her going on. She retired into her
Chamber, refusing to hear what her Lover said to appease her. As soon as she
was alone, her Imagination, ingenious to torment her, represented to her the
Serasquier, as an Ambitious Spirit, who sacrificed his Love to his Fortune, and
who troubled not himself at displeasing his Mistress, for to have occasion to
make his Court to the Grand Vizier. She passed all the Night in cruel
Inquietudes, and tho there were Moments, in which her Lover appeared to her
less culpable, her Love could not relish any Reasons, which might serve to
justify him, and she remained still very much offended at her Lover's
Proceeding. The Serasquier, who was in no more Repose, than his Mistress, had
an Answer from the Grand Vizier much sooner, than he expected. This first
Minister, who had just learnt with all imaginable Joy, that the Imperialists
had raised the Siege of Buda, sent the Serasquier word, he was much troubled,
that he had for his Sake delayed his Felicity, and that in the Consideration he
had of his Services, he not only consented he should Marry Zaratima, but
offered also to send him the fairest Persons of his Seraglio, if he desired it.
The Serasquier, who was extremely impatient to make his Peace with his dear
Zaratima, went to her, as soon as he had received this Answer, and told her,
wholly transported with Joy, That he was in fine at the height of his Wishes,
since he saw no longer any thing that could hinder his Happiness. He presented
her at the same time the Grand Visier's Letter, but she refused to see it,
telling him, She had seriously reflected, on what she ought to her Father's
Memory, and that she saw, according to all the Precepts of the Alcoran, she
could not dispense with her self from executing his Last Will, and Marrying
Cabstan Bassa. The Serasquier, surpised at so little expected an Answer,
flattered himself nevertheless, that his Mistress acted only through a Motion
of Choler, and that she spoke against her own Sentiments. He conjured her to
Pardon him, and no more to remember any thing, but their Love. I am but too
much possessed with it, replied Zaratima; since I am resolved, before I take
any Party, to make a Journey to Mecha, to the end I may consult the Great Cheq,
to know, whether I can with a safe Conscience Marry you. The Serasquier,
frighted at a Resolution, so contrary to his Love, made use in vain of all his
Eloquence, to deturn her from this Voyage, and was obliged through respect to
retire, without being able to obtain any thing. He was ready to die for Grief,
when he reflected, That he had lost all the Merit of a long and tender Passion
through a Nicety, ill enough grounded; and without examining any farther,
whether he had reason to write to the Grand Vizier, he believed himself very
culpable, because he had the Unhappiness to displease his dear Zaratima, to
whom he had so great Obligations. He reproacht himself a thousand times with
his Ingratitude, and not seeing any Torment more cruel for him, than to live,
without being loved by his Mistress, he returned to her with a Design to Punish
himself, and dye at her Feet, if she persisted in her first Resolution.
Zaratima, observing the Discontent which appeared in her Lover's Face,
repented, she had put him in despair. The Serasquier told her, He pretended no
more to oppose her Will, since he well saw, that he merited the Infelicities,
which oppressed him: he assured her also, that his Return to her was only to put
himself to death before her eyes, and to sacrifice to her a Life, she had
heretofore preserved. Zaratima, mollify'd by her Lover's Discourse, and by the
Despair, which appeared in all his Actions, had not the power to see him any
longer in so sorrowful a Condition, but let him understand, she was touched with
his Repentance. The amorous Serasquier embraced her Knees with all the
Transports of Joy imaginable, and conjured her with so much instance, no longer
to delay his Happiness, that Zaratima permitted him in fine to dispose all
things for their Marriage, which was celebrated a short time after with as much
Magnificence, as if the Serasquier had espoused a Princess of the Ottoman Blood.

FINIS.

