THE AMORS OF Count TECKELI And the LADY Aurora Veronica DE SERINI. Containing
his first Inducements to make War with the Emperor, and to enter into the
Turkish Interests, against the Christians.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1686.

LICENSED,

December 2. 1685. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

THE AMORS OF Count TECKELI And the LADY Aurora Veronica DE SERINI.
HUNGARY had been always an Elective Kingdom, before the Crown came into the
possession of the Princes of the House of Austria. And the Hungarians had yet
preserved some sort of Liberty, by means of the Privileges which had been
granted to them by their first Kings, and of which they made the Observation be
sworn to, by all that came to that Crown. The chief points of which were, That
no matter of great Importance should be proceeded upon, without the Advice and
Consent of the Diet, which should be always called once in three years. That
they should be Governed by a Palatine, who should have the administration of
all the Affairs of War, Government, and Justice. That this Palatine should
always be of their own Nation: That he should be Named by the States, and
Confirmed by the King. That none of the Offices of the Kingdom should be given
to any but natural Hungarians; That no Foreign Forces should be admitted into
any of their Places; and that they themselves should have the charge of
defending their own Country. The Princes of the House of Austria, which having
also the Imperial Dignity, with that of Kings of Hungary and Bohemia, and a
great Authority, endeavored, by little and little, to take away these
Privileges, and chiefly the Emperor Leopold Ignatius, who now Reigns. This
bred very ill Blood amongst all the Nobility, and it chiefly provoked Count
Wesselini, who was then Palatine, who resolved to shake off a yoke, which
seemed too heavy to him; but he could not put so great a Design in execution by
his own Power, he therefore resolved to engage all the other Lords of his
Country; and principally the Protestants, taking for a pretense, that the
Emperor, by the Advice of his Evil Ministers, disturbed them in the exercise
of their Religion. Wesselini, who knew Love to be the great Spring which moves
the greatest Affairs, resolved to make use of it for the executing of his
design. Aurora Veronica, Daughter to Count Peter de Serini, seemed to him very
proper to act so important a part. She had Beauty, a penetrating Wit, and a way
so insinuating, that it was capable of gaining the most Rebellious of Hearts.
Besides, having been bred up in the House of Katherine Frangipani, her Mother,
who was one of the most Ambitious Women in Europe, it was impossible for her
not to be inspired with some of the same Thoughts. Count Serini was newly made
Ban or Viceroy of Croatia, which Employment the Emperor gave him, upon the
vacancy of it, by the Death of Nicholas de Serini, his Brother, which made him
absolute Master of that whole Province. But this Count being dissatisfied with
the Court, for having refused him the Government of Carolstad, the Capital City
of his Government, and the Command of a separate Body of an Army, to serve
against the Turks. These were all favorable Conjunctures, to draw him into the
Confederacy which the Palatine was plotting. Wesselini had a Son, well made in
his Person, Amorous, and very likely to excite Love; he was called Vladislaus.
The Palatine resolved to make use of him, to gain Madam de Serini to his Party,
and having communicated to him the design which he had of Marrying him to this
lovely Person he commanded him to go to Lapsina, a Castle belonging to Count
Serini, three Leagues from Schachstorn, in Croatia, where he went to spend the
Summer with all his Family, upon pretense of giving that Count advice of the
Designs which the Turks had upon the Places of his Government, and recommended
to him chiefly, to endeavor, during his stay at Lapsina, to gain the Love of
the Beautiful Aurora Veronica, assuring him, that if he could engage the Heart
of the young Lady, he would go himself to request her from her Father for him.
Vladislaus, who had hitherto kept his Liberty, easily submitted to his Father's
Commands, and went, within a few days to Lapsina, where he was very well
received by Count Serini, who was over-joyed to show to the Palatine, in the
Person of his Son, the Esteem which he had for him. He found with Madam Serini,
only Joshua, a young Gentleman of the Neighborhood, who had been bred near
her, and for whom she had, for this reason, a great deal of Complaisance.
Vladislaus soon perceived Joshua was in Love with Aurora Veronica, by the
uneasiness which his assiduous visits to her, caused in him; but he dissembled
the knowledge of it, being fully persuaded, that the Competition of a Man of a
Quality so inferior to his, would not be capable of overthrowing his Designs.
Joshua did not keep the same moderation; for every one being apt to flatter
himself in Love, he had taken the Civility which my Lady Veronica had showed to
him for Love, and looked upon any Complaisance, which she showed for young
Wesselini, as a breach of Faith toward him. He thought, at first, that she
would take notice of his trouble, and that she would change her behavior
toward him. But seeing she did not heed it, and that she suffered him to be
devoured by his secret Afflictions, without making the least excuse to her, he
thought he was obliged, at length, to break silence. Having, one Evening, found
Madam de Serini alone with her Daughter, in Lapsini Gardens, whilst Vladislaus
was gone out to Hunt with Count Serini, he approached her, and speaking softly,
You came, without doubt, (said he to her) to think of him, whom you are not
allowed to see this day. My Lady Veronica, having no inclination for Wesselini,
would not break with Joshua, who contributed sometimes to her Diversion, by his
lively Wit, pretended not to understand him. I assure you, (replied she) I mind
Men so little, that the moment they are not with me, I think to more of them;
But yet I thought, (replied Joshua with a tender and passionate Air) you missed
me sometimes heretofore, when I was from you; but since -- That happened so
seldom, (said my Lady Veronica, interrupting him pleasantly) that I had not the
time to examine my self, whether your Absence made me uneasy. If you have not
made these Reflections, in relation to me. (replied, abruptly, Joshua) it is,
it may be, because you have a greater Concern for Count Wesselini. As Joshua
was speaking these words, Vladislaus, who was come into the Garden, at his
return from the Chase, came toward Aurora Veronica. She turned immediately to
him, and speaking with the same airiness, You are come in a very good time, my
Lord, (pursued she) to answer a Question, which was asked me by this Gentleman,
pointing at Joshua. He asks me if I am not uneasy, when you are not with me;
what do you think of it? I should account my self very happy, (replied
Wesselini,) if that were true. You should not long enjoy this Happiness,
(replied Joshua, looking upon his Rival with Eyes wherein his Jealousy was
flaming). And who should disturb my Happiness? (answered Vladislaus with a
scornful Air) would you? Methinks our Birth makes a difference great enough
between us, for me not to have any cause of fearing your Competition. You thing
(replied Joshua sharply) you are yet in Hungary; but I desire you will remember
we are in Croatia, and if a man be born a Gentleman, and have Courage, he may
account himself equal to all that are not Princes. If you were elsewhere, you
should, it may be, not have reason to doubt of what I say; but I know the
respect which is due to my Lady, and I shall take a better time to Convince you
of it. Finishing these words he went out of the Garden, without waiting for his
Rival's Answer.

My Lady Veronica informed her Father of what had passed between these two
Rivals, and the Count immediately caused Joshua to be searched for with care;
but it was impossible to find him. He remained concealed, for eight days, near
the Castle, and took his time so well, that, one morning, when he was no more
thought of, Wesselini being gone out of the Castle, to walk in the cool of the
Morning, he came out of his Ambuscade, and coming up fiercely to the Palatine's
Son, forced him to draw his Sword. They both fighting with great eagerness, the
Combat would have been fatal to one or the other, and it may be to both, if
Count Serini had not come to part them. He caused Wesselini to be carried to
the Castle, he being wounded in many places. But Joshua, who was least hurt,
went a way with all speed, no body discovering which way he took. Madam de
Serini, did not in along time hear any news of this desperate Lover, and found
him not again until ten years after this time, by a strange surprising
Accident, which I shall relate in the end of this following Discourse.

Count Serini having given an Account to the Palatine, of his Sons being
wounded, he came over immediately to Lapsina, and was glad by discharging this
natural Obligation, to be able to lay the foundation of a Plot, which he had in
his Head. He found his Son in a pretty good Condition, by the Care which had
been taken of him, and therefore he would no longer defer, breaking the Matter
to the Countess of Serini. The first time he found himself alone with her, he
entrusted her with the thoughts he had, of delivering Hungary from the Bondage,
under which the Emperor kept the Nobility and Commonalty. The Palatine had no
sooner made this overture, but she promised to concur with him, with all her
Power, and to speak of it to her Husband, and to Count Frangipani her Brother,
who was to be at Lapsina within two days. The Countess performed her promise to
the Palatine, and represented to her Husband, who was dissatisfied at the
refusal which had been made to him, of the Government, of Carolstad, that he
might by the means of this League, make himself Sovereign of Croatia. The Count
was caught by this Bait, and finding his Brother-in-Law of the same mind, they
conferred both with the Palatine, by the means of the Countess. The only thing
which staid the Execution of their Design, was to find out a Fond great
enough, to raise and maintain the Forces, which they should be obliged to have
on foot. The Countess, being an Italian Lady, could not want Expedients,
proposed engaging in their Party, Prince Ragotski, whose Father, who had been
Prince of Transylvania, had heaped up great Riches, which his Widow kept at
Mencatz, a strong Place in upper Hungary, and that not to fail of what would be
absolutely necessary for their undertaking, it would be convenient to marry the
young Lady Serini to that Prince. The Palatine having relished this
Proposition, told the Company, that this Prince intended to go for a Month to
Drontheim, to take the Waters, and it was resolved that the Countess should go
thither with her Daughter, to show her to the Prince, and endeavor to make him
in Love with her.

Whilst these four Persons took measures for the making of War. Count Teckeli,
who was Wesselini's Friend, having heard of his Duel, and of his Wounds, at the
Castle of Kuss, being then with his Father, came to Lapsina, to give him a
visit. The Countess, to whom his Courage was known, knew that it would be of
great Advantage to the Conspirators, for them to get this Young Count to enter
into the Confederacy. To succeed in this Design, she thought, she ought to make
Love be of use to Ambition, and commanded her Daughter to make use of all her
Charms, to endeavor to please Teckeli. She could not command a more pleasant
thing to Lady Veronica, for the first time she had seen Count Teckeli, she had
felt some Inclination toward him, and did wish he loved her. Teckeli on his
part, had had the same thoughts, and they passed some days without explaining
themselves, than by their Looks, and emotions of their Hearts. Teckeli being
very familiar with young Wesselini, he asked him the ground of his Quarrel with
Joshua, and Vladislaus made no difficulty of trusting him with it, he added
also, that his Father was come, on purpose to Lapsina, to conclude a marriage
between him and Lady Veronica de Serini, and that he believed she would consent
to it, without much repugnance, because she had always shown to him a great
deal of Favor, since he had been at the Castle.

Teckeli seemed struck, as witha Thunderbolt, when he heard this news; and in
the fear wherein he was, that Wesselini should perceive his Concern, he went
out of the Room, upon a pretense which he made upon the sudden. Teckeli, since
this fatal Confidence, fell into a deep Melancholy, which surpised every body
at Lapsina. Lady Veronica, who had a greater share in it than the others, was
most earnest to clear her doubts. One Night as Teckeli led her, walking with
her, she could not forbear saying to him, seeing him wrapped up in so deep a
study, I see, my Lord, you are weary of Lapsina, and you are troubled at your
having quitted the Diversions which you had in Hungary, to come into Croatia,
where you find none of those Sports. From whence comes it, Madam, (replied the
Count) that you make this judgment of me? Do you think I have so little
understanding, as to be tired with a Place where you are? It looks as if you
found little satisfaction in my Company, (replied Lady Veronica) since you
speak to me only, when Civility forces you to answer me, and I am forced to
keep up the Conversation, which you suffer to fall every moment, you must
necessarily have your mind prepossest with some trouble. It is not, replied the
Count sending forth a sigh, for my having abandoned my self to the Pleasure
which I took at Lapsina, and for having suffered my self to be deceived by
flattering Hopes, that I have fallen into the despairing Condition wherein you
see me. Adieu, Madam; do not force me to tell you more, I should it may be,
attract your hatred, and I should yet be more unfortunate than I am. Wesselini
ending these words, took his leave of Lady Veronica, leaving her in a great
disorder of mind. She did not find, that he could by loving her commit so great
a Crime, as not to dare to make a Confession of it to her, and she could not
imagine what he found himself Guilty of.

Count Teckeli on his side, found it so very difficult to hide from his
Mistress, the trouble with which his mind was perplexed, that at last with the
force he had used to himself, he fell into so violent a Fever, that the third
day his life was despared of. Lady Veronica went to give him a Visit, and
having pressed him extremely, to tell her the cause of his Melancholy; he
confessed to her, that from the first moment that he had seen her, he had been
so stricken with her Charms, and not being capable of hoping ever to possess
her, since she was designed for Count Wesselini, it would be no regret to him,
to part with his life, which could not be tolerable to him without her.
Lady Veronica undeceived him, and told him that if Wesselini had any design
upon her, he had never let her know it, and that he had not so much as
proposed any thing concerning such an Affair to her Relations, and that he
might assure himself, that if she had the freedom of her Choice, he should be
no longer unhappy. This flattering Discourse had more effect than all the
Physicians Remedies. The joy which this caused in Teckeli, soon cured his
Disease, and in a few days his Fever left him. The Countess of Serini, to whom
the Daughter gave an Account of Tecklei's Discourse, went to see him, so soon
as she heard she might discourse with him, without prejudicing his Health, and
after having given him to understand, that Count Serini would think himself
honored by an Alliance with him, she hinted to him something of the
Conspiracy. Teckeli, who wished with passion, for an opportunity of doing Count
Serini some important Service, which might oblige him to prefer him before
other Pretenders, in the choice of a Son-in-Law, promised the Countess to
return to Kus, so soon as he was in a condition to sit on Horseback, and to
use all his skill and endeavors to bring his Father into this League.

On another hand, Wesselini, being perfectly cured of his Wounds, desired the
Palatine to Request for him Lady Veronica from her Parents; but he was
strangely astonished, when his Father told him, he ought to think no more of
her, for she was designed for Prince Ragotski. Vladislaus in vain represented
to his Father, the violent Passion which he had for Lady Veronica Serini, and
that he himself had kindled the Fire which Consumed him. This severe old Man
answered his Son, with a Tone which exacted Obedience, that Persons of his Age
and Quality, ought to be sensible of no other Passion but Ambition; that his
Design was to make him Reign in Hungary, and to assure him a Crown, which the
Princes of the House of Austria intended to perpetuate in their Family,
contrary to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. He then explained to him the
measures which he had taken with Count Serini, and the necessity which there
was of engaging Prince Ragotski in his Party, by the Alliance which he had
projected. But fearing lest a longer stay might increase his Son's Passion, and
hinder him from obeying his Commands, he resolved to depart from thence the
next day, to return to Murano, and took with him this unfortunate Lover.

Count Teckeli made little stay after the departure of the Palatine, to take
his leave of Lady Veronica, that he might be quickly with his Father, to
persuade him to enter into the Confederacy. The farewell he took of Aurora, was
tender and passionate on both sides, and she promised the Count, that provided
he could get the consent of her Parents, he should find no Obstacle on her
side, and that she should obey, without reluctance, the Commands they should
lay upon her of marrying him. She told him, she was within a Month to go with
them to Drontheim, to drink the Waters. And Teckeli promised to meet her there,
and to give her an account of his Negotiation. Scarce was Teckeli gone from
Lapsina, when the Count of Tachtembach came thither, to increase the number of
the Conquests of Lady Veronica Serini. He is one of the greatest men of Stiria,
handsome enough, magnificent in all his Actions, but Voluptuous, without being
Amorous. The very first day he saw my Lady Veronica, he told her, without any
difficulty, in plain terms he loved her, and desired her of her Father for his
Wife, not doubting but that his offer would be embraced, they knowing his
Estate and Birth. Count Serini received the Proposition very civily; but not
intending to refuse it, nor yet to engage himself to him, he answered him only,
that he ought to give himself time to be acquainted with his Daughter, and let
her know his Humor, to see if they were proper for each other; and changing at
the same time the Subject of their discourse, to free himself from
Tachtembach's Persecutions, who would absolutely complete the marriage, before
he left Lapsina, he told him of the report which was very hot, that the King of
Spain was dead, and that the Emperor intending to go to take possession of
that Crown, the Empress was to govern in his absence the Hereditary Provinces,
with the Title of Regent. If this news be true, added Count Serini, we should
be very unhappy, to be reduced to submit to the Government of a Woman. Tachten
bach, who affected to be Gallant, answered, that Men were born only to obey the
fair Sex. There is a great deal of difference, replied Count Serini, between an
Obedience which is voluntarily paid to a Person one loves, and that which one
is forced to pay to a Sovereign Princess. Whilst Count Serini was speaking
thus, the Countess his Wilfe came into them, and he being willing to let her
finish what he had but rough drawn, he added, he would be judged by the
Countess, and having informed her in few words, of the Subject of their
Discourse, he engaged her to tell his Friend. The Countess, who had a great
deal of subtle wit, and that so well turned, that she described so livelily to
Tachtembach, the shame it was, to live in such a slavery as the Princes of the
House of Austria had reduced the Hungarians to, that it raised in him an
earnest desire to throw off so heavy a Yoke, and then taking up again her
pleasant Air, she told him that the Count her Husband, being like to be
suddenly King of Croatia, she would not marry her Daughter to any but a
Sovereign Prince, and that he should consider with himself, whether he had
Courage enough to make himself Master of Stiria.

The Conversation was carried no farther this day, but Count Serini had many
other discourses with Tachtembach, wherein they discussed this matter to the
Bottom. Tachtembach objected several diffidulties, viz. the Number of the
Forces fit to be raised, the money necessary to keep them up, and what Places
could be had convenient to retire into. Count Serini answered all these
Objections, and told him he was Master of Schachthorn, the Palatine of Murano;
and that Ragotski, whom they intended to get into the Confederacy, would
deliver up Mencatz, and would raise Forces with the Money which his Father had
gathered, and kept in that Castle; that therefore Tachtembach should only need
to make himself Master of Gratz. In that he knew so well how to manage this
Counts humor, that he made him sign a Treaty, of which he had drawn a Project
with the Palatine, before he went away. Tachtembach, after having been a
fortnight at Lapsina, took leave of Count Serini, and desired him to come to
see him, at the Castle of Krantzfield, with the Countess his Wife, and the
Charming Aurora Veronica; which the Count easily promised him, being desirous
to keep him in the good disposition into which he brought him.

The season for drinking the Waters drawing near, Count Serini thought it
requisite not to defer, any longer, his Journey to Krantzfield, that he might
afterward go to Drontheim, without passing by Lapsina again. Tachtembach
having had notice, by a Letter from Count Serini, that he was setting out to go
to visit him with all his Family, prepared to entertain him with his usual
Magnificence; and having sent for Actors and Violins to Gratz, he set out at
the head of fifty Gentlemen very richly dressed, and bravely mounted, and went
to meet Count Serini, as far as Puttow, which is the last Town of Stiria,
toward Croatia. He then conducted this lovely Company, which came to visit
him, to Krantzfield, always riding by the Coach side, entertaining the Ladies.
During the eight days which Count Serini remained at this Castle, Tachtembach
invented every day some new Divertisement, sometimes Hunting, another time
Fishing, or Hawking; sometimes the wrestling of Peasants, or the running of
Boat-men at each other upon a great Canal; giving every Night a Play and a
Ball, with very pleasant Masquerades and Music in Recitativo. I do not mention
good Cheer, that being the usual Regale of the Germans; and it may be said,
that there was never seen so great an abundance, and so many Delicacies on the
Emperor's Table, as there were at Krantzfield, whilst this entertainment
lasted. But Tachtembach, loving Debauchery a little too much, when the Ladies
were retired to their Chambers, they fell to drinking, which they continued the
greatest part of the Night. It is easy to imagine, that after excesses of this
kind, Tachtembach could not make his Court agreeably to his Mistress, and that
he chose rather to absent himself from her, than let her perceive his sighs
smelled too much of Wine.

In the height of all these Diversions, Aurora Veronica began to be weary of
Krantzfield, whether because the behavior of Tachtembach was unpleasing to
her, or that she was impatient to see Teckeli again. She said every moment to
the Countess, that the season of the Waters was going over, and prevailed with
her at last to go to Drontheim. She found there Teckeli, who was one of the
first come thither, and who was as much in love as at Lapsina; he complained of
her having deferred coming so long, but she obligingly gave him to understand,
that if the day of her departure had depended upon her own will, she would not
have stayed so long from thence. Prince Ragotski was also come thither, with
the Princess his Mother, and having heard of the arrival of the Countess of
Serini, he went to give her a visit; he was not less Charmed with the Beauty
and the Wit of this young Lady, than the other Lords which had seen her,
saying, like a Courtier, to these Ladies, that although it might make him pass
for an undutiful Son, he could not be sorry for the troubles which this Journey
cost to his Mother, since they had furnished him with an opportunity of making
so agreeable an acquaintance; they rallied a long time upon the effect of the
Waters: The Countess said, that she was of opinion, that the Diversions of
these places, where they went to drink them, contributed more to the restoring
of Health, than the virtue of them. Prince Ragotski added, that he very much
doubted, whether the coldness of the Vitriol, with which the Waters were
tinged, would be able to put out that flame, with which he of late found
himself consumed. The Countess rallied this Prince, for this pleasant way of
declaring his Love, and told him, that certainly he was very easy to be
inflamed, if any fair Lady had already kindled in his Heart so great a Flame.
But Aurora Veronica did not concern her self in this Conversation, and seemed
always very reserved. After Ragotski was gone, the Countess asked her Daughter,
why she had been so serious, and commanded her to look upon this Prince as a
Man that was designed by her Relations to be her Husband.

Lady Veronica was extremely surprised at her Mother's discourse, and not being
willing to discover to her her real thoughts, she made some slight
indisposition her excuse. So soon as she could have opportunity of discoursing
with Teckeli in private, she did not fail of letting him know what force they
intended to put upon her inclinations; but she not engaging her self so far as
to disobey her Fathers orders, the Count accused her for being more sensible of
Ambition than Love, and swore to her, that if she would always be faithful to
him, he would set a Crown upon her Head, otherwise he would dye in the
execution of his design. But although he said at the same time to her, the most
passionate things in the World, he could obtain nothing more of her.

Ragotski, whose passion grew greater every moment, did not fail of asking Lady
Veronica, the first time he had the opportunity of discoursing with her in
private, whether she would give any ear to his Suit, and whether she would
allow him to make his Propositions to her Father? Although the amiable Veronica
answered him with great indifferency; yet he spoke to Count Serini concerning
this Affair, who seemed to him, to be very glad that he should seek his
Alliance; that he could not let him have his Daughter, unless he would enter
into the League which was made against the Emperor, and promised him, that he
would seize upon Mencatz, and of his Fathers Treasures, which was extremely
necessary to make so great a design succeed. Ragotski was too much in Love, to
refuse any thing to Count Serini; he promised him to follow blindly his Orders;
and being assured of his Consent to the Marriage of his Daughter, he went to
make the same Proposition to the Princess his Mother, who knowing the
advantages that would accrue to her Son, by this alliance, easily consented to
it. It is true, she knew nothing of the Terms which Count Serini had imposed
upon her Son, which had she done, she would never have agreed to them, she
being entirely of the Emperor's Party.

Ragotski, whose Love could not endure any delay, gave an account to the Father
of Veronica, of the thoughts which he found his Mother had, and desired him he
would not defer his happiness any longer. The Count, to satisfy him, spoke
immediately to his Daughter, telling her of the engagement he had lately made
with Ragotski, and commanded her to dispose her self to Marry him within three
days. Lady Veronica endeavored to make some opposition, but the Count spoke to
her with so much Authority, that she did not dare any more to resist such
pressing Orders; all that she could do, was to manage a private Conference with
Teckeli, to let him know the trouble it was to her, to lose him. But this Count
perceived, through all the marks of her Love, that the Quality which Ragotski
would by marrying her, make her possess, would soon comfort her for the loss of
a beloved Lover.

Ragotski's Marriage was performed without pomp. Count Serini not thinking it
proper that this Marriage should be public, until he had put his other designs
into a condition of succeeding happily; but the Palatine's Death, which happened
a little while afterward, soon broke all their Measures. So soon as Ragotski
had brought his Wife home to Schachthorn, where she was to pass the Winter; he
took his measure how to make himself Master of Mencatz, but he was not able to
surprise that place, as he was resolved, nor to seize upon his Fathers
Treasures, because his Mother, having discovered his design, got thither before
him, and took so well her precaution, that she even hindered him from being
received into the Town. This enterprise failing, made an end of putting the
Conspirators into disorder.

Before this News was brought to Count Serini, Tachtembach prevailed with him,
to come to pass the Carnaval at Gratz, and to bring with him thither, the
Countess and the Princess Ragotski, of whose marriage he was yet ignorant.
Count Serini, would not refuse him the satisfaction, came into Stiria on the
first Wednesday of the Carnaval. Tachtembach, who was always very magnificent,
did, as he was used, endeavor to divert his Guest, the best that was possible
for him to do, and made one of the last days of the Carnaval a Wirschaaf, which
is a sort of Masquerade, wherein every one puts on the Habit of a different
Nation, or Profession. Tachtembach was in the Habit of a Mountebank, and
distributed to the Ladies of the Hall, Bills, wherein were written Verses,
which discovered his Love.

All these Diversions were disturbed by the coming in of a Gentleman, whom
Prince Ragotski had dispatched to Count Serini, to acquaint him with the
unfortunate success of his Enterprise. Count Serini immediately took his leave
of Tachtembach, to return to Scachthorn, that he might give out his orders, for
the raising of Forces, recommending very earnestly to this Count, his making
himself Master of Gratz. Tachtembach, in his turn, being ignorant of Prince
Ragotski's marriage with Count Serini's Daughter, desired this Count to reserve
for him this lovely Person, as his reward, for what he was going to undertake
for the service of the Party; to which Count Serini answered, that he should
always have a grateful sense of what he should do upon this occasion, and that
he would neglect nothing which might contribute toward his satisfaction.
Tachtembach, who was of no very quick Parts, took this civility for current,
and believed that he might ground upon these words a certain hope of seeing his
love gratified. Whilst Count Serini prepared all things which were necessary
for the beginning of the War in the Spring, Tachtembach was not asleep, he sent
to Count Serini his first Valet de Chamber, by whom he let him know, that he
intended within a fortnight, to come, toward the closing of the Evening, with
five Wagons filled with Turks, to the Gates of Gratz; and that as soon as one
had passed over the Bridge, one of the wheels should fall off, and overturn the
Wagon, to stop the Gate, and hinder it from being shut, and that at the same
time the Turks should come out of the other Wagons, and put to the Sword, all
those they should find in the Corpse de Guard; but that it might not be possible
for the Undertaking to fail, it was necessary for him to advance with some
Forces which he should conceal near the Town, staying till he had notice of the
success of this great Design.

Count Serini promised this Valet de Chamber, to do what his Master desired,
and they agreed together of all the Circumstances. But by misfortune this young
man had heard, from some of Count Serini's Servants, of his Daughter's marriage
with Prince Ragotski, and informed Tachtembach of it. This Brutish Count,
instead of rewarding the Honesty of this Servant, in the despair into which
this news had cast him, sent him to Prison, accusing him of Robbery, to revenge
himself upon him, for the deceit which had been used toward him, as if he had
been guilty of it.

This unfortunate young man, after having suffered his imprisonment some days,
hoping that his Master would come back from his injustice; but when he saw that
he continued to persecute him, he resolved to recover his liberty, by his
destruction; and having yet about him, the instruction which Tachtembach had
given him, written with his own hand, when he had sent him to Schachthorn, he
put them into the hands of Francis Will, Country Provost, who gave it to Barron
Oker, Chancellor of the Kingdom, and by these means the Emperor was informed
of the Secret of the whole Conspiracy; his Imperial Majesty immediately sent
Orders to Oker, to feize upon the Person of Tachtembach, which he did in this
manner. This Count, who suspected nothing, returned to Gratz, and going to take
his Seat in the Sovereign Council, as he was accustomed to do, President Punii
sent the Clerk to amuze him in the Antichamber, waiting till he had taken the
measures necessary for the seizing of his Person; a little while afterward,
the Judge of the Town came to demand his Sword, having made ten or twelve
Soldiers which had been sent for, conveyed him to the Castle, where he was kept
very strictly.

As soon as the Emperor knew that Tachtembach was in hold, he sent General
Spankaw with 6000 men, two pieces of great Canon, and 16 Field pieces, with
Orders to march against Count Serini, and to take the Castle of Schachthorn;
this Count having notice of it, sent a Gentleman to Vienna, to give his
Imperial Majesty assurances of his Loyalty; but although his submission was
received, Spankaw did notwithstanding besiege Scachthorn; Count Serini and
Frangipani his Brother-in-Law, not finding themselves in a Condition to make
any defense, left all that they had in the Town, and went out of it by a secret
Salli-Port, and went toward Vienna, hoping to clear themselves; where they
were no sooner arrived, but their Persons were seized, and sent Prisoners to
the Castle, from whence they were afterward conveyed to Niewstadt.

In the mean time, General Spankaw, having taken Scachthorn, seized upon all
the goods of these two imprisoned Counts, imprisoning the Countess of Serini,
and the Princess her Daughter; but Prince Ragotski having made his peace, by
the intercession of his Mother, who had very good interest in the Imperial
Court, obtained his Wifes liberty, upon Condition that he would receive a
German Garrison in Mencatz.

Count Teckely's Father died during these revolutions in his Castle of Kuz, but
it being known that he had a hand in the Conspiracy, his Son was,
notwithstanding his Death besieged in this Place, but so soon as he heard of
the March of the Imperial Army, he retreated by Night to Licora, an important
place in upper Hungary, upon the Frontiers of Transylvania, with Kirzi,
Paragotzi and Baragotzi, who were three of the bravest men in this Kingdom, and
of the same Age with Teckeli, they defended themselves like Lions, but a Bombe
having set fire to their Magazeen of Powder, and Baragotzi being taken in a
salley, the two others escaped with Teckely; and after having marched in the
dark through private ways, without meeting any ill accident, they arrived at
Hue, a strong Castle at the entrance into Transylvania, and after having
remained some days, they went for Sanctuary to Prince Abafti's Court, who was
then Sovereign of this Country, and under the Protection of the Turk.

There remained now no place but Murano, where the Palatine's Widow had lived,
since the death of her Husband, with her Son, and Count Paul Wesselini her
Brother-in-Law, the Emperor sent Prince Charles of Lorrain to take it; and the
two Wesselini's not finding themselves in a Condition to hold out a Siege,
retired also into Transylvania, to Prince Abaftie's Court, and the Palatine's
Widow opened the Gates of the Town to the Imperial Forces.

The Troubles of Hungary having been thus appeased, the Counts de Serini and
Frangipani were prosecuted, and at last sentenced to lose their Heads. There
were two Jesuits sent to them, to prepare them for death, and Count Serini was
very much amazed, to know one of them to be Joshua, who had been in love with
his Daughter, and fought for her with the Palatine's Son. They could neither of
them hold from Tears, seeing each other after so long an Absence. Count Serini
entrusted, before he went to Execution, Joshua with a Letter to carry to his
Wife, in which he bad her farewell, and this Monk took it from him by consent of
the Imperial Commissioners, who were sent to Larolstadt to see the Sentence put
in Execution upon the two Counts.

Immediately after their Execution, Father Joshua went by his Superiors
Permission to Gratz, where the Countess was a Prisoner, and she was not less
surprised, when she knew this Monk, than she was at his telling her the
Tragical end of her Husband. Father Joshua lived at Gratz, until the death of
Tachtembach, who had a like Fate with that of the Counts. He also entrusted
this Jesuit with a Letter to Princess Bagotski, the Contents whereof were as
follow.

I Am now going to dye for having obeyed you with too much exactness. I should
give up my Life without reluctance, if I were assured you were satisfied; but I
can scarce believe you love Greatness so much as to think it a happiness, when
it costs you a Father and an Uncle. I will not put amongst the misfortunes,
which this unfortunate Conspiracy has caused to you, the loss of a Lover; but
you would not be to be pitied wholly, if Prince Ragotski has for you the strong
Passion which has been preserved for you to the Grave, notwithstanding your
Infidelity, by the unfortunate

Tachtembach.


Immediately after the Execution of this Count, Father Joshua went to carry the
Letter to Princess Ragotski, who was still at Mencatz, he found her yet in an
extreme affliction, for the Death of her Father. Tachtembach's Letter renewed
yet more her Grief; and she answered Joshua only by a Torrent of Tears; she was
so taken up by her Grief, that she had looked upon this Jesuit without knowing
him, until after the first Motions of her Passion were passed, she remembered
his Face, and asked him how this change of his Condition had happened. It was,
Madam, replied Joshua, because I was not able to prevail with you to love me;
but you had reason not to lessen your self so much as to stoop to such a Man as
I am, since Fortune reserved you for a Quality, to which it was not in my Power
to raise you. Alas! replied the Princess sighing, it is not greatness which
makes our happiness I am of opinion that the condition of a Shepherdess is to
be preferred before mine. Is it Prince Ragotski, replied Joshua that -- This
unjust Husband, continued the Princess, interrupting him, has used me with the
greatest scorn, since my Father's Misfortunes. He keeps always Mistresses, and
I dare not complain; and the Princess his Mother is always up braiding me with
my being the Daughter of a Rebel; and far from sweetning this Princes mind,
when he is angry with me, she foments the Division, and feeds a flame, which
she ought to endeavor to extinguish. Father Joshua endeavored as much as he
could to comfort the Princess; and the Prince her Husband being sick, he was
resolved not to leave her, until he saw the success of this sickness. Ragotski,
after having languished two Months, at length died with great trouble to leave
his Wife, whose Virtue he very well knew, by the care she took of him, during
the whole time that he kept his Bed by reason of his sickness.

After the Death of Ragotski, the Princess his Widow rekindled the Fires of
Joshua's Love. He had not yet professed himself, according to the Custom of the
Jesuits, who do not make their Profession till very late. She allowed him to
hope she would reward his Constancy, upon the Condition he would revenge the
Death of her Father. Joshua, flattered with these sweet hopes, promised to
undertake any thing to satisfy her; and they resolved together, that he should
go to the Heads of the Malcontents, which were retired, and that he should
seek out with them the means of raising an oppressed Party.

The Princess gave to Joshua all the Money and Jewels which she had, and he
departed immediately for Mencatz, to set on foot again this great Design. He
bought, at the next Town, a good Horfe, and Arms, with Clothes fit for a
Soldier, and went with all speed to Alba Julia, where Prince Abasti commonly
kept his Court.

He there found all the Malcontents, which were retired thither, and
represented to them so well the disposition, wherein the People of Hungary were
to recover their Freedom, and especially the Protestants, that he engaged them
to take up Arms. Prince Abafti allowed them to raise Forces in his Countries.
Count Paul Wesselini was named to Command the Army. The Count de Forvall took
upon him the Journey to Peland, from whence he hoped to bring considerable
Succors. For his Majesty of Poland having made Peace with the Grand Signior,
had disbanded a great many of his Forces. Joshua took upon him the charge of
going to Buda, there to get from the Bassa some Turks. Count Teckeli remained
alone at Alba Julia, telling his Companions, that he should be most useful to
them in Transylvania, because he hoped to dispose Prince Abafti, by the
Interest he had gained with him, to declare War against the Emperor. In
effect, he represented to him that the late Prince Ragotski had yielded up to
the Emperor, by the last Treaty of Peace which they had made, the Countries of
Zathmar and Kalo, which were Ancient Dependants upon Transylvania, and
prevailed with him to send a famous Embassy to the Emperor to demand them,
with Protestation, that in case they were refused to him, he would put himself
into a Posture to recover them by force of Arms.

Joshua being returned from Buda, after having joined the Turks, sent by the
Bassa to reinforce the Transilvanians and Hungarians, which Wesselini
Commanded, resolved to return to Mencatz, to give an account to Princess
Ragotski of what he had done, in the execution of her Orders; and that he might
have the easier access to her, he took upon him again the Habit of a Jesuit. He
told her first what he had done at Alba Julia; but he not speaking of Teckeli,
she inquired for him. Joshua, who had heard of the Inclination which she had
shown to this Count, before her Marriage, told her maliciously, that he was
kept at Alba Julia, by the Charms of Princess Euphrosina, Daughter to Prince
Abafti; and that the report was in that Court, that he would shortly be
Son-in-Law to his Master. Princess Ragotski was struck with the perfideousness
of her Lover, that she fell into a deep study, out of which it was impossible
for Joshua to rescue her all that day; and even afterward she was constrained,
by his Presence, that obliged him to leave Mencatz, whether because she was not
willing to have him a Witness of her weakness, or that she suspected him for
having invented this story to destroy in her mind a Rival that was loved by
her. Joshua, who was well assured that this news would be confirmed from
several places, this report being very common at Alba Julia, returned to the
Army to give her leisure to take her resolution.

Count Teckeli had nothing to do at Alba Julia, until the Ambassador which
Prince Abafti had sent to the Emperor, was returned, so that he resolved to
take this time, to go to see Princess Ragotski, who was not less dear to him,
than before her Marriage. When he was arrived at Licora, which is not far from
Mencatz, he dressed himself like a Pedlar, and having, put a little Pack upon
his Back, and immediately went to the Town, where his Princess most commonly
lived. He found ways to be admitted into the Palace, and having opened his Pack
and having showed her several Toys, he presented to her, her Picture in
Minature, which she had given to him at his departure from Lapsina, and which
he had enchased in a Golden Box, set with Diamonds of great value. The Princess
surprised with so extraordinary an accident, looked earnestly upon the Pedlar,
and knew him under his Disguise, but she pretended she did not, and asked him
from whence he had that Picture? Teckeli, taking at the same time out of his
Pack, his own Picture, which he had caused to be drawn at Alba Julia for him,
told her that the Gentleman, whose Picture that was, had given him the Picture
she enquired about. Where is at present; rereplied the Princess, pretending
still not to know him, he that made you so great a Present? He is at Alba
Julia, replied the Pedlar, preparing to enter into Hungary with a strong Army,
to revenge the death of Count Serini. Say rather, replied the Princess, he is
at the feet of Princess Euphrosina; that, forgetting what he ows to his Honor,
her Person, and his own Engagements, he swears to her, that he lives for her. I
know not Madam, replied the Count angrily, who has thus mis-inform'd you; but
if a poor Pedlar may speak of the Affairs of the Court, he has stayed at Alba
Julia, solely for the Service of his Party, and for the beautiful Person, which
triumphed over his Heart in Hungary, who is yet Mistress of it. Whilst Teckeli
was speaking thus, the Princess, who had looked over all his Pictures, she
fixed her Eyes upon that of Princess Euphrosina, and asked him the Name of the
Person whose Picture that was. This is, replied the Pedlar, the Person, who you
say has made the Gentleman, of whom we have now spoken, false. The Princess,
without returning any answer, took this last Picture, and having given order to
one of her Maids, to pay the Pedlar for what she had bought, she went into her
Closet, without allowing any body to follow her, and left the Count in a
Consternation, hardly to be conceived, unless one has loved as he did. He
stayed a fortnight at Mencatz, hoping to find an opportunity of conversing with
the Princess, and justifying himself; but she took so much care to avoid him,
that all his endeavors were in vain. He endeavored to find out in his mind,
during his stay at Mencatz, the cause of his disfavour, and endeavored to
guess who could have sowed these suspicions in the mind of the Princess. He had
no other Rivals, but Wesselini and Joshua, and therefore he could accuse but
one of them, and he resolved to clear his doubts, as soon as he came to the
Army.

Whilst he was agitated with these different thoughts, the Princess was not in
greater quiet. If the Count, said she to her self, had any passion for the
Princess Euphrosina, he would not have come to Mencatz in so much danger, and
in a habit so unfit for his Quality; and he would not have gone so far from
her, to give some Rival the opportunity of making an advantage by his Absence.
But she took her self up again, a moment afterward. Would he be so guilty, as
he seems to me, should he be led away by the Charms of the Princess of
Transylvania? I was married to another, and had forsaken him to marry Prince
Ragotski, after having engaged him in a Conspiracy which had made him lose all
his Estate, and had forced him to banish himself from his Country. He found in
a strange Country a fair Person, who offered him a Crown together with her
Hand. He would have been unfurnished of all reason, if he had let slip so fair
an opportunity, of reparing all his losses. And yet so soon as he hears I am a
Widow, and in a Condition to dispose of my Person; he renounces all his fair
hopes, and comes to make a Sacrifice of them to me, what can I desire more?

Princess Ragotski settled her self so firmly in this last thought, that she
resolved to explain her self to Count Teckeli; she caused him to be looked for
in the whole Town, but in vain. He had ordered one of his Gentlemen to give him
notice at Mencatz, when the Ambassador, which Prince Abafti had sent to the
Imperial Court, should return to Alba Julia. He heard by this Officer, that the
Emperor had refused to restore the Counties of Zathmar and Kalo, and that they
stayed only for him, to begin the Campaign, which forced him to depart with
great speed.

So soon as he was returned to Alba Julia, he made the Forces of Transylvania
march, and the first of the Acts of Hostilities which they committed, was the
siege of Zathmar; in less than a Fortnight, he reduced this Town to such
extremity, as would have forced it to capitulate, had not Prince Abafti sent
him orders to come back, to oppose one of the greatest Lords of all
Transylvania, called Pedi Pol; who having been invested with this Principality
by the Grand Seignior, and had made a considerable Party in the Country, which
intended to dispossess their Sovereign, Count Teckeli was too grateful, to
abandon his Benefactor in so imminent a danger; he no sooner had notice of it,
but he raised the siege of Zathmar, and returned to Transylvania, not only with
the Army which he commanded, but also with the Auxiliary Forces, which Forval
had conducted thither, under the command of the Count of Boham, and who had
newly beaten a Detachement out of the Imperial Army, commanded by Major General
Smith. Count Teckeli met Pedi Pol, going to besiege Zebin, and having charged
him, without giving him time to know his strength, he put him to slight, and
forced him to retreat into Walachia, with the Chancellor Berthlaeus, who had
embraced his side.

It was not enough, that Teckeli delivered Prince Abafti from so powerful a
Competitour; but it was also necessary to hinder the Grand Signior from taking
Pedi Pol's part. Teckeli, who thought nothing impossible, when the Service of
his Friends required any thing, and who had not less Skill in managing Affairs
of the Closet, than Valor to beat his Enemies, when he is at the Head of an
Army, offered Prince Abafti to go to Constantinople, to defend there his Cause:
His Offers being accepted of, he departed immediately, laden with very rich
Presents for the Chief Officers of the Ottoman Court.

As soon as he was arrived at Constantinople, he desired Audience. The Grand
Vizier Kara Mustapha, who was so pleased with his Wit, that after two or three
Conferences, he entrusted him with his most secret Affairs, and confessed to
him that Sultaness Valide, Mother to the Grand Signior, for whom he had but a
bare indifferency, and that he had disposed of all his Inclinations to the
Princess Basclari, Sister to his Highness, and Widow to Aslam Bassa Beglierby
of Asia; but that the Jealousy of Sultaness Valide was an Obstacle to all his
Pleasures, but that there now came into his mind, a way of freeing himself from
the Importunities of this Princess, which was to afford her Love another
Object; that for this it was necessary it should be a Man endowed with the
Graces of the Body, as well as the Charms of the Mind, and that all this
Concurring in his Person, he desired him to go in his place the night following
to an assignation appointed with him by the Sultaness. The Proposition was
nice, and he ventured his Life, in case he was discovered, but the desire of so
powerful a Minister as this was, were commands to him.

This last consideration outweighed the first. Teckeli showed he thought
himself honored with the Viziers trust, and protested he was ready to obey his
Commands. This Minister having given him the Instructions necessary for getting
the Doors opened, and how to deceive the Kistler Agasi, who had the chief care
of the Seraglio, disposed himself to venture his Fortune, and abandoned himself
to it, which was so favorable to him, that he got, without opposition, to the
Apartment of Sultaness Valide; she was surprised to see an Unknown Person come
in; but she being informed of the Intrigue between the Vizier and the Princess
Basclari, she easily understood, that he had a mind to put the change upon her;
but Count Teckeli's Person not displeasing her, she was willing to spare him so
difficult a Complement as his Circumstances obliged him to make. She told him
she saw very well, that he came in the room of Kara Mustapha, who, probably,
had more important Affairs upon his hands, than that of making his Court to
her; and that she was very willing to pardon the scorn he showed of her
Goodness, since he gave her an opportunity of so happily recovering the loss
which she made, by being deprived of his Company. Teckeli endeavored to excuse
him, by reason of the weight of Affairs which he was under, being charged with
all the Affairs of the Ottoman Empire. The Sultaness soon passed from this
Discourse to another sort more tender, and remained so well satisfied with
Teckeli, that she often desired to see him. This Count had soon learned the way
of making Love in the Seraglio, and how Selams were to be composed, which are
the Love Letters made use of in this Amorous Commerce; he made one as tender,
as if he had lived all his time at Constantinople, and received, in Answer,
Musk, Amber, and other Aromatic Gums, by which he might perceive his Services
were acceptable; but he had Affairs which were more pressing than this Amor.
It was necessary to destroy Pedi Pol's Faction, and it was to this he applied
himself with so much diligence, that the Vizier granted him whatsoever he
pleased.

Although Teckeli's Person pleased Sultaness Valide extremely, yet she did not
forget the Vizier's Perfideousness; and to be revenged of him, she persuaded
the Grand Signior to marry Basclari to the Bassa of Buda. This Prince, who did
not penetrate into the motives which induced his Mother to this Affair, easily
consented to what she had proposed, and gave, at her request, Count Teckeli the
Charge of Conducting his Sister into Hungary. The Count's Affairs being now
finished, and it not being now safe for him to stay longer in Constantinople,
without doing a prejudice to his Party, she would not keep him longer, and
thought that Teckeli being very handsome, might, in this long Journey, affect
the Heart of her Rival, and blot out of it the Image of Kara Mustapha.

Teckeli would not, notwithstanding, leave Constantinople, without acquainting
the Vizier with the Employment which had been given to him. This unfortunate
Lover was seized with a violent Grief, when he learned the trick that Sultaness
Valide had played him; he, however, comforted himself with the hopes, that he
might preserve a Correspondence with Basclari, by the means of Count Teckeli,
and that it would not be hard for him, in the Post wherein he was, and the
Credit his Office gave him, to ruin the Bassa of Buda, and to restore Basclari
to her former Liberty.

Count Teckeli during the whole Journey discoursed with the Princess concerning
Kara Mustapha, and found her very much afflicted to see her self married to any
other but this Minister. She desired the Count to visit her often, upon
pretense of endeavoring to obtain assistance for his Party, to the end they
might together take means which might one day join her Fate with that of the
Vizier.

This Behavior will seem without doubt, very Criminal to some, and it will
hardly be conceived, how a Woman, just going to be married, thinks at the same
time of getting another Husband; but this is not extraordinary to these
Princesses, who take Husbands only to enrich themselves with their Spoils, and
who sometimes have had three or four before they are of Age, to consummate the
Marriage. Every Nation has its Customs, and that which seems most to be blamed
in one Country, is commendable in another. But this is enough of Moral
Reflections, let us return to Count Teckeli.

When he had put Basclari into the Hands of the Bassa of Buda, he took leave of
both, after having written to the Vizier, to give him an account of the
thoughts of the Sultaness, and returned to Alba Julia, where he heard Pedi Pol
had been defeated a second time, and taken Prisoner; and there being nothing
more now to be feared from the Port, every thing remained in Peace.

In the Spring Teckeli took the Field again with the Transilvanian Forces, and
having entered Hungary, he went to join the Army of the Malcontents, near
Lassovia, which he found commanded by Count Vladislaus Wesselini, who had
succeeded his Uncle, Count Paul Wesselini, in that Command. Teckeli could not
brook obeying his Rival, and a Rival by whom he thought himself ruined in the
thoughts of his Mistress; and Wesselini would not yield it to Count Teckeli.
Upon this these two Heads of the Faction quarrelled; the Army took parts with
their Generals, and in a moment a private Quarrel became a General Battle. The
Hungarians were soon forced to yield to the Transilvanians; Wesselini seeing
his Body broken, took flight, accompanied by some few of his Party. Teckeli
caused him to be pursued by Count Thekaioli, who commanded his right Wing; he
was soon overtaken, and brought back to his Rival, who sent him Prisoner to
Zelin. This Tumult ceased with the taking of Wesselini; and Teckeli was
immediately acknowledged General by both Armies.

Some days after Teckeli sent Thekaioli into Croatia with the Recruits from
Poland, and some Hungarians. The Count having charged a Party of the
Imperialists, took Count Serini Prisoner, who commanded them. Princess Ragotski
having heard of her Brother's misfortune, whom she loved very dearly, resolved
to write to Teckeli to obtain his Liberty from him; but at the same time she
was willing to make him believe she had no kindness for him. Her Letter was in
the following Terms, which which were to express such contrary thoughts.

IT is very grievous to me to see a Man, whom I should not have thought
unworthy of my Esteem, ruin his own Country, and tear from me, what remains of
most dear to me: You may imagine I mean my Brother. My Mother died at Gratz,
before she could obtain her Liberty; and Count Serini is your Prisoner. Believe
me, leave a course which cannot fail of bringing ruin upon you, return to your
Obedience to your Sovereign, and I promise you to obtain the restitution of all
your Estate. Nay, I will oblige my self to tie you a little faster to me, to
marry you to Prince Ragotski 's Sister. I shall know by your answer what
thoughts you have, in relation to,

A. V. de Serini.


He that Princess Ragotski had entrusted with the Letter, having heard that
Count Serini was Thekaioli's Prisoner, believed, the Letter was directed to
him, and being mistaken by the likeness of the sound of their Names, gave the
Letter to this Count, who being willing to make an advantage of the mistake,
returned with this Messenger to Mencatz, and carried thither Count Serini. He
had entrusted Joshua, who served in his Army, with this Adventure, he being his
particular Friend; Joshua resolved to accompany him, and having put the change
upon him, conducted him to the Princess Ragotski the Dowager; who, hoping to do
a great service to the Emperor, if she could make these two Heads of the
Party, who were in great consideration with them, leave the Malecontent Party;
promised Thekaioli he should marry her Daughter, if he could bring over the
Army which he commanded, to the the Emperor's Party, and conducted him her
self to Cunegonda her Daughters Chamber, by whom he was very kindly received.

Whilst Thekaioli endeavored to please the late Prince Ragotski's Sister,
Joshua went to visit the Widow, and make an end of ruining Teckeli in her
thoughts, told her, that he would neither answer her Letter, nor grant Count
Serini liberty; that by good luck, he was with Teckeli when he received the
Letter, and not being able to suffer so much Ingratitude, he had treated
himself with Thekaioli, and had engaged him to bring back to her, her Brother.
Although the Princess was sensibly grieved, at the scorn Teckeli seemed to have
of her, yet she took no notice of it to Joshua, and contented her self, with
protesting to him, that she should always acknowledge the service which he had
done for her. Joshua, who was not satisfied with bare Civilities, pressed
extremely the Princess to reward his faithfulness and Constancy: This
earnestness made her suspect something, and she was desirous to clear her
doubts. She took one night her Brother aside, and asked him so many questions,
as well as her Messenger, that at last she found Jashua was a Cheat. The
Artifice which he had used upon this last occasion to surprise her kindness,
made her make reflections upon what he had told her of the Amors of Teckeli,
with Princess Euphrosina, and thinking she was to give no more heed to what a
Man said who once intended to deceive her, she was very much pleased, to be
able to believe her Lover innocent, and resolved to undertake any thing which
might procure her an interview with him.

In the mean while, Joshua, who easily perceived that the Princess had
discovered his Cheat, fearing he should be arrested at Mencatz, returned to the
Army with Thekaioli. The Officers of the Army, who had heard that the Count
came from a Place, which ought to be suspected by them, would not acknowledge
him any more for their General, until they first knew Count Teckeli's thoughts,
which forced him to go to Vienna with Joshua. This last made there his peace;
but the Dowager Princess Ragotski, would not now accept of him for her
Son-in-Law, he having no more the Command which he had of those Forces, which
he commanded before.

Thekaioli, seeing his measures broken on all sides, went into Transylvania,
and having given a Visit to Count Wesselini in his Prison; he told him Joshua's
Treachery, and all he had said to Princess Ragotski, to persuade her that
Teckeli was in love with Princess Euphrosina. Wesselini who had heard that the
principal Cause of his Confinement, was, that Teckeli was jealous; that it was
he who had made this false report to Princess Ragotski, let him know that
Joshua was the Author of it. Count Teckeli would not at first believe Wesselini
upon his bare word only, but by good luck the Prisoner, Joshua commanding a
Party of the Imperialists, fell into an Ambuscade, and was brought to Count
Teckeli, who interrogated him, in particular concerning this Treachery. Joshua,
to whom life was become burdensome, since he had lost the hopes of possessing
the Princess, confessed all to his Rival, who sent him to the Council of War.
His Sentence was soon passed, he was found with Arms in his hands, against the
Malcontents, of which Party he had been a long time, and so he was looked upon
as a Rebel, and condemned to be beheaded, which Sentence was immediately
executed upon him.

Count Teckeli, who valued himself upon his strict justice, thought he ought
not to defer any longer the setting Wesselini at Liberty, after having punished
the Person who was alone guilty of the Crime, whereof he had accused Wesselini.
He therefore recalled Thekaioli, because he had given him the opportunity of
discovering a truth, the clearing of which was of the greatest consequence
imaginable to him. But it was not enough to know from whence his Disease
proceeded, but it was necessary for him to cure it, and to undeceive Princess
Ragotski. But now he could not leave the Army without hazarding his Person, and
the Interests of his Party. In this perplexity he cast his Eyes up on
Thekaioli, who seemed proper to him to manage this Negotiation: He was known to
the Princess, he had been already at Mencatz, he had a pretense of returning
thither, which was his Marriage with the Princess Cunigunda; and there was no
reason which might render him suspicious to this unfortunate Lover. When
Thekaioli was returned to the Army, Teakeli informed him of his Intentions, and
having given him a Letter to the Princess, he sent him away with all speed to
Meneatz.

Thekaioli arriving there, found the Dowager Princess Ragotski dead, which gave
him a more easy access to her Daughter-in-Law, he desired he might have
Audience, and having obtained his Request, presented to her Count Teckeli's
Letter, wherein she read that which follows.

I did not know, Madam, what occasion I ever gave to deserve the coldness which
you showed toward me the last year, when I went to see you at Mencatz; that
which I had undertaken, without considering the Danger to which I was going to
expose my self, to have the Pleasure of seeing you. And yet you would not
answer the assurances of my Constancy and Faithfulness; and I have heard you
accuse me of having paid elsewhere Vows which I have never offered but unto
you. Favor me so much as to let me know if you are not changed in your
thoughts toward me, and if you will allow me to come my self to swear to you
an inviolable Constancy, and to receive your promises to me.


The Princess would not defer giving Teckeli the satisfaction of letting him
know he had fully cleared himself to her, she immediately took the pen in her
hand, and answered him in these Terms.

I Confess, I have doubted of your Constancy, but rather out of a niceness of
thoughts, than any evil impression, which would have been given to me, of your
behavior in relation to me. My heart took so well your part, that it convinced
me of your innocence, and I should have made you my excuses, for the
indifferency with which I used you, if you had been to be found in the Town
when I sent to look for you. I am notwithstanding very glad to learn from your
self, that my Reasoning was just, and that I did not suffer my self to be
carried away by the Inclination which I had, to think you true, and the desire
I had you should be so. But yet I cannot be yours, whilst you are in Arms
against your Sovereign, obtain me from the Emperor, or put your Conquests so
far, as not to depend on any one but your self.


Count Teckeli had no sooner read the Letter, but he thought how to remove the
Obstacles which opposed his happiness. He sent Deputies to the Emperor, to
promise him he would return to his Obedience, upon Condition he would consent
to his Marriage with Princess Ragotski; but this Prince having caused this
Proposition to be considered of by his Council, he was advised not to accept of
it, for fear lest Teckeli might become too powerful by this Alliance, and that
being pushed on by Princess Ragotski, who had without doubt inherited the
ambitious thoughts of her Mother, he should undertake some more dangerous
Enterprise than the former.

Count Teckeli seeing all gentle ways stopped, thought of assuring himself by
his Arms, of the happiness which was refused to him, and to make himself King
of Hungary, that he might marry without the Emperors consent. He thought it
necessary for the putting this design in execution, to make a stricter Alliance
with the Grand Vizier; and as he could not do it without flattering the Passion
which he had for Basclari, he sent him word it was necessary to engage the
Grand Signior to declare War against the Emperor, and that he should send an
Order to the Bassa of Buda to join his Army to his, because then it might be
easy to make the Bassa's hehaviour suspected by his Master.

Teckeli did not find it difficult to persuade the Vizier, what he so much
wished for, because he looked upon the War of Hungary, as a means for him to
be near his Princess. He made it be approved of by the Grand Signior, and sent
orders to the Bassa of Buda, to act as he should receive directions from Count
Teckeli.

Toward the end of the Campaign, the Count did not fail of writing to the
Grand Vizier, that he had not been well seconded by the Bassa of Buda, and that
he had infallibly taken Zathmar and Calo, if this Bassa had come to him at the
time he directed him. The Vizier showed the Letter to the Grand Signior, and
persuaded him to send for the Bassa and Teckeli to Constantinople, that he
might hear the Complaints and Excuses of each, and know better which of them
was in the right.

They both obeyed the Grand Signior's Commands. But although the Grand Vizier
supported strongly Teckeli's Complaints, the Sultaness Valide knew so cunningly
how to avert the Storm, which threatened Ibrahim Bassa of Buda, whom the Grand
Signior sent back to his Government, with order only to follow diligently,
Count Teckeli's Directions. In the mean while, the Vizier, who would not be
ungrateful to this Count, commanded him by the Grand Signior's Order, to make
himself be Crowned King of Hungary in Buda, with all the Pomp and Magnificence
which could be; Teckeli showed his gratefulness to this Minister, and promised
him to continue his Services for him, to the Princess Basclari. After he had
taken his leave of the Vizier, he rerurned to Buda with the Bassa, and being
come thither, gave an account to the Princess Ragotski, and Prince Abafti, of
the success of his Journey. Ibrahim on his side made known to all the Bassas of
Hungary, the orders which he had received from the Grand Signior, and commanded
them to repair immediately to Buda, to assist at the Coronation of Count
Teckeli. He prepared in the mean time a Throne, in the great Hall of the
Palace, wherein the Ancient Kings of Hungary recided heretofore, and having
ordered it to be furnished with his richest Hangings, he fixed the Day of this
Ceremony, to be upon the first day of November; and having seated all the
Bassas upon Benches on each side of the Throne; he deputed two of them to wait
upon Count Teckeli in his Appartment, and conduct him; so soon as he appeared,
Ibrahim who was seated upon the Throne with Princess Basclari, who came to the
Ceremony (contrary to the Customs of the Turks, which forbids their Women ever
to appear in public) and to show the more respect to the Count, came down from
the Throne, and went forwards to meet him. He at the same time, took off his
Hungarian Bonnet, and put on his Head a Turbant, to signify that he submitted
himself to the Grand Signior, and that he held the Crown of Hungary but by his
liberality. He then put the Scepter into his right hand, and a Mace of Arms in
his left hand, whilst the Bassa of Buda threw over his Shoulders the Royal
Mantles. Basclari came afterward down to the lowest afterward down to the
lowest step of the Throne, and having made a sign to Teckeli to draw near, and
having given him her Hand, made him come up into the place which Ibrahim had
left empty. At the same time all the Hungarian Officers, which had accompanied
the new King to this Ceremony, came to swear Fealty to him, kneeling with one
Knee on the Ground, and to kiss his Hand. After this he was waited upon back
into his own Apartment, by the same Officers, and by several Bassas. As soon as
he was freed from this troublesome throng of People, he took a Pen in his Hand,
and wrote to Princess Ragotski the following Letter.

I Am now King, Madam, and I depend now upon none but God and my Sword; this is
the Condition wherein you wished me: But I cannot be happy, if you will not
share with me in the Condition to which Fortune has now raised me, since I have
only desired a Crown that I might lay it at your Feet. Let me know if nothing
opposes my Happiness, and if I may come to offer you my Scepter, with my Vows
of Faithfulness and Constancy.


He sent this Letter to her by Thekaioli, and Princess Ragotski returned him at
the same time this Answer.

IF Fortune has lately Crowned you, it is Love must settle your Throne. You
have Subjects, but you have not any Town, where you can keep your Court. You
may come to Mencatz when you will, and settle there the Seat of your Empire.
You shall reign, wherever I am, Sovereign. Since you have been so long the
Master of my Heart, it is but just you should be so of my Dominions.


Although Count Teckeli was extremely fatisfied to find Princess Ragotski in this
Disposition, it troubled him inwardly, that the Princess so cunningly twitted
him, with his having only the Name of a King. Although the season was not very
proper to make War in, he drew together as many Turks, Malecontent Hungarians
and Transilvanians as he could, and went to besiege Cassovia, which he took
within a few days; and having forced Esperies, and many other places, to
acknowledge him for their Sovereign, he assembled the Diet at Cassovia the
first day of February, that he might exercise all the rights of Sovereignty,
and afterward went to Mencatz, wherein Princess Ragotski, suffered him to put
a Garrison, as also into all other places which belonged to her Husband, and he
afterward married this Princess with great Pomp and Ceremony some days after
Easter. In the Month of May the Grand Vizier came to Buda, where Count Teckeli
came to wait upon him. A little while afterward the Grand Signior came to
Belgrade, where the Siege of Vienna was resolved upon. Kara Mustapha went into
the Field in the beginning of June, and he afterward, as it is said, invested
that place with an Army of near two hundred thousand Men, but with what success
we all know.

FINIS.
Some Books printed, and sold by R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden.
BEaumont and Fletchers Plays: in all 51, in large Fol. Mr. Shakespeare's Plays:
in one large Fol. Volume. Containing 43 Plays. Bishop Brownrig's Sermons, in
Fol. Dr. Comber's Companion to the Temple and Altar: In Fol. Dr. Alistry's 40
Sermons: In Fol. Towerson on the Creed: In Fol. Hudebras Complete: In 8 vo.
Present State of England: In two Vol. in Twelves. Enter into the Closet: 12.
Mr. Evelyn's Calendarium Hortens. in 8 vo. Rules of Civility: in 12. Mauger's
French Grammar: the Twelfth Edition: in Octavo. French Common Prayer: In 12.
French Psalms: in 12. French Testament and Psalm. in 12. Moral Essays, in 4 Vol.
in 12. Plato's Apology of Socrates in 8 vo. Natural Hist. of the Passions in 8
vo. Dr. Whitby of Idolatry: In 8 vo. Dr. Whitby of Host-worship: In 8 vo. Dr.
Whitby's Answer to D. Cressey: In 8 vo. Prospect of Humane Misery: in 12.
Cornelius Agrippa's Vanity of Arts and Sciences: 8 vo. Bp. Andrew's Devotions:
In 12. -- His Manual for the sick in 12. Perswasives to the Commun. By the
Author of Enter into thy Closet: in 12.

