The Present Alteration in Religion IN FRANCE.

DISCOURSED OF In TWO LETTERS, THE ONE From a Peson of Quality to an Abbot.

THE OTHER The Abbot's Answer thereunto.

Which may serve as an APPENDIX to the MYSTERY of JESVITISME.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Janeway. 1682.

The Present Alteration in Religion IN FRANCE.
SIR,
I Have not hitherto appeared scrupulous to you, yet I fear I shall now become
so; and if you wonder at that, you will much more at my choosing you my Casuist;
for it is to you that I will declare a Doubt of Conscience, not knowing whom
else to consult. If you conceive your selt unable to resolve it, I confide so
much in your Prudence and Friendship, that you will give your self the trouble
to procure me an Illumination from some of your Learned Friends, who will
instruct me what I am to think of all that we see, which I understand not. You
know that I have always sought after Men of worth to conduct me; and by reason
thereof I fixed my self to the Direction of Messiers de St. Sulpice, whose
Piety all the World knows. They have taken great care to conduct me into the
Simplicity of the Faith, without embroiling me in the Disputes of the Times;
and above all, to continue firm by a perfect Submission to the Pope, without
examining his Decrees, or making distinction or exception in what he commands
(seeing the liberty that some take in this matter) being the true Mark whereby
to know Heretics, and all such as have an ill Opinion in Matters of Faith.
Such persons were then criminally proceeded against, not excepting Bishops
themselves, that dared to expound the Popes Bulls; and I was told we are
obliged to believe that the Pope was Infallible in Matters of Fact as well as
Matters of Faith, though we daily saw Writings which proved the contrary. I
read some of them out of curiosity, which had like to have done me harm; for,
they were so well cleared, that they fully persuaded my Reason. But I fought
against this false Light, which would have captivated my Understanding, by
answering my self with that which my Confessor often told me, That in Matters, of
Faith we must not seek for Evidence, and that we ought to contain our selves
within this Holy Ignorance, which instructs our Knowledge to submit, and not to
dispute upon the Word of Jesus Christ; whoo tells St. Peter and his Successors,
This Spirit will teach you all things. There I acquiesced with much
satisfaction until the last year: But I must tell you truly, I know not where I
now am since that time. There are daily Edicts of Parliament, published against
the Popes Briefs, and there is publicly maintained in these Edicts Maxims and
Opinions altogether like unto those which were heretofore attributed to the
Jansenists, and for which they were treated as Heretics and Rebels to the
Church. I have asked my Confessor, What the meaning was of this change? He gave
me only for Answer, That it was Interest of State which obliged us to carry our
selves differently according to the Times, and that this did not concern me at
all. This quieted my Conscience never a whit, but on the contrary I find it
much: perplexed; for I ought surely to know what I must hold, and Religion is
not to change with the Times. I do indifferent well apprehend that these Humane
Interests do often times change the, Conduct of Princes; but the Prelates of the
Church in these Occurrences use to speak their Sentiments. Here quite contrary,
the Bishops of France support the Edicts; no body contradicts them neither in
the Chairs, nor Schools, nor even in the Tribunal, of Confession, where Men
might under the Seal of Secrecy speak their Sentiments with freedom; and where
the Confessor would be more obliged not to suffer that to be a Doubt in the
Soul, which formerly they established as the Foundation of Faith; which was the
Obligation to believe, and in all things to obey the Vicar of Jesus Christ, who
supplies his place upon Earth. What then shall we think of all this? and you
your self, Sir, what do you think of it? Those that said heretofore that which
is now publicly said, were counted Heretics; and it was so thoroughly believed,
that we believe it still. In the mean time the King, the Parliament, and all
the Bishops, say the same things now. Are they changing of Religion? Are they
going over to them? But there is no likelihood of that, for they are as much
persecuted as ever. Who can then unfold so incomprehensible a matter? I conjure
you therefore to seek out some Light herein, and to let me share in it; for in,
good earnest in a matter concerning Salvation, I would not remain in any doubt
whether I hold the Right or the Wrong. And notwithstanding all my Confessors
prohibitions, I resolve to seek after the Light, and shall endeavor to discern
where the Truth lies; seeing there is no sfety but in following it. You will
lay the greatest obligation in the World on me Sir, if you will please to
contribute thereunto, and I shall be a thousand times more all my life long

Your most humble and Obedient Servant.

THE Answer to the Precedent Letter.
I Have, Madam, observed so much good Sense, and excellent Ingenuity in the
Letter which you confided to me, that the Person that wrote it, is her self
able enough to decide the Case of Conscience which she proposed, though it
includes things so contradictory, and which can so hardly be reconciled. It Is
true, That the Pope's Infallibility was maintained some years since as an
Article of Faith, both in Matters of Fact and in Matters of Right; and that all
those were treated as Heretics that were of another Mind, the Bishops not
excepted, who were as much distinguished by their Piety, as by their Doctrine.
But now all is changed. The Pope's Bulls, heretofore so sacred and so
inviolable, are highly condemned by Arrest of Parliament, and those Decrees are
supported by Authority of the Clergy of France. The Vicar of Jesus Christ is no
longer Infallible, and many other Maxims are Establishing, which were formerly
charged only upon the Jansenists. This is it, Madam, which troubles your
Illustrious Friend, she would willingly have some body so well enlightened as to
prescribe her the manner how she ought to demean her self in so strange a
confusion. She has consulted her Confessor, and is not yet satisfied. I assure
you, Madam, that I pity her, and wish nothing more than to draw her out of
those snares wherein she is held. But as I cannot do it by my own Light, I
conclude I shall do it possibly by that of others, and it will be hard if I
find not in Paris some able man to resolve this difficulty, which gives her so
much disturbance. As I was considering whither to repair, it came into my
thoughts to go to the Carmelites, and ask for Father Caesar. You know, Madam,
the great reputation he has. The great Caesar, who vanquished the Gauls,
brought not more under his Empire, than this man has drawn persons of Quality
under his Direction. It is true, nevertheless, that I am not satisfied: He
answers me nothing else but that we must keep to the Body of the Tree. I
understand you Father, said I, the Body of the Tree is the Pope; why then does
the Parliament and Clergy separate from him? Why then do they question his
Infallibility? Can this be done without Heresy? I enter not, said he, into
these Disputes, it belongs not to me to judge of those who are set to judge
others. But I will ever maintain with the peril or my life, that we must keep
to the Body of the Tree. It Is well done, said I, it appears to me that you are
well fixed to it, and that all the Powers on Earth cannot make you waver. When I
saw he would not explain himself farther, I took my leave, and in returning I
bethought my self of going to the (Je^uits) College of Clermont, where I was
certain of finding men of easy access. It is the place where the ablest
Casuists are bred, and where men are refined and purified daily more and more.
I asked for him who taught Cases of Conscience, but he was gone forth; I was
then advertised of another Father, who came to me with a Gravity haughty
enough, yet mixed with some sweetness. I went toward him at the same time with
a submissive respect. (For at this day all Ecclesiastics of what quality
soever, Abbots, Bishops, and Archbishops, do creep to these Gentlemen, else
they expose themselves to their indignation, and pass for Jansenists) so after
I had made my homage to the Reverend Father, I let him understand, whereby to
be the more favorably heard, that I came on behalf of a Lady of Principal
Quality, whose Conscience is troubled about all these Affairs that pass at this
time in the Church. And to the end he might be better informed, and answer more
accurately to every particular* I showed him the Letter you had sent me, He
read it with good attention, and after he had commended the facile and natural
manner wherewith it is written, he told me (with great ostentation, as venting
a Profound Doctrine; and with that great disdain which it inspires toward the
ignorant) that he did not see in the least any shadow of difficulty in the
thing, and that it was drowning ones self in a drop of water. I told him
however that it is not this Lady alone that drowns her self, Father Caesar that
great Guide and Confessor (who doubtless is known to you) drowns himself too,
though he thinks he has saved himself very happily, by telling me a hundred
times, that we must keep to the Body of the Tree. This Father did not much
wonder at the Name of Father Caesar, He is a good Man, said he, smiling to
himself, and shaking his Head. Perceiving this Father speak with so much Zeal,
and so good an Opinion of himself, I expected that he would speak nothing but
Oracles. How happy am I (said I, Sir) to have met with you! for I even imagine
you will let me see the Heavens open: Pray therefore do me the favor to tell
me how you reconcile all that we see now adays, to that which passed formerly?
O very easily, Sir, said he: You know, heretofore that it was, of importance
for the honor of our Society (which one may well say are the surest Pillars of
the Church) to establish the Infallibility of the Pope as an Article of Faith,
that so we might get him on our side, and oblige him to use all his Spiritual
Power for us against the Jansenists, who then made a cruel War upon us, and you
see, God be praised, how we have succeeded. They have done their utmost Efforts
to ruin our Doctrine, and rendered our Morals ridiculous and extravagant; and
though in appearance they would needs bear us down with the Authority of the
Fathers, Councils, and the Scriptures, we have nevertheless managed things so
well, that they themselves have been declared Heretics. In fine, that
dangerous Cabal has been dissipated (said he) and are become Wanderers and
Vagabonds, and can very hardly sind any place of safety for themselves upon
Earth. Now, as at present there is nothing to be feared from that side, and
that other Affairs have occurred wherein we judged it our Interest not to have
so great respect for the Pope, and to have much for the King, to whom we are
infinitely obliged: We have believed that to maintain the Rights of his Crown,
and to preserve our selves continually in his Grace and Favor; we might follow
the Opinion of many Doctors, who believe that the Pope may be deceived: so that
you must not wonder if in diverse times we believe different things. But Father,
said I, does Religion then change with the Times? You deceive your self, said
he, it changes not for all that, it remains ever the same, and is
unchangeable; though according to diverse occurrences we are sometimes of one
Opinion, and sometimes of another. There lies the Miracle of the Doctrine of
Probability, which far from shaking the Tenets of Religion, does confirm it;
and no body knows better the value and price of it than our selves, by the most
frequent use we make of it. For by this means it is that we have spread
Christianity almost through the whole World, and established it without any
great contradiction in the midst of the most savage and barbarous. People, by
suddenly suppressing what ever might quash or give any aversion or distaste. It
is well known what we have done for the Glory of Jesus Christ in China: his
Death and Sufferings Preached there, caused horror and exposed us to all sorts
of outrages and violence. We believed therefore that Probably we might not tell
them a word of it, and that it would suffice us to preach up his Miracles, his
triumphant Ascension into Heaven, and all that, that might give them a pleasing
and advantageous Idea. You cannot imagine, Sir, the progress that we have made,
and do daily make, by means of this most Divine Doctrine of Probability, and
that God has doubtless inspired it into us, that we might labor more
Profitably, and with less danger to our persons, in the Conversion of so great
a number of Infidels. Whilst the Father was thus talking, I admired to him the
conduct of those new Apostles, and compared them to those of the first
Christians, who preached not the Gospel with so much precaution, and who had
not for their guidance in their Mission, this Probability, which would have
saved them much Blood: But it pleased not God to Inspire them with it. This
Grace was reserved for these last Vessels of Election, who were to carry his
Name more remote in the World, and render their labors more illustrious. But
as this Father spoke with much zeal and sincerity, so I declared my self much
satisfied. I am even ravished (said I) Sir, with all that you have told me, and
if I understand it aright, it seems to me that the Popes Infallibillity is but
a Probable Opinion, upon which one may choose whether to be either for or
against it, as it pleases one best. You are in the right, said he. Then give
me leave, Reverend Father, said I, to ask you a little Question upon it, Can
one impute a probable Opinion to any as a Heresy? Yea doubtless, said he, if
the Opinion be probably Heretical. Then replied I, Father, It is an Opinion
with those of your Society, That it is probably Heretical not to believe the
Pope's Infallibility, for that is one of the greatest Heresies which you charge
the Jansenists with; and by consequence you must now look upon, and shun all as
Heretical, who have the same Sentiment: that is to say, the Gentlemen of the
Parliament, and all the Bishops of France. You are too quick, said he, you have
already forgotten that which we have newly established as a thing indisputable;
and which you learn in our ablest Casuists, That in respect of a Probable
Opinion, one may choose Pro or Con, which side you like best. Argue therefore a
little more equally upon that Principle (said he) and draw your Consequences
thence better. For if it be probable, That it is a Heresy not to believe the
Infallibility, it is also Probable that it is no Heresy. Men have their choice
to say either Yea, or Nay, as it is most advantageous to them. So then, Father
(said I) though the Bishops, the Parliament, and the Jansenists do not differ
upon the Subject of Infallibility; and though they all believe the same thing,
it being of the highest Importance to you to lead and manage the Bishops and
Parliament, you declare, them to be most Orthodox. But for the Jansenists, who
are so contrary to you, you will ever declare them Heretics. Yes, it is so,
said he, which we can do with a good Conscience, by directing our Intentions as
we ought; and therein mind nothing but the glory of God, and that of our
Society. But Father (said I) what would you do, if the Clergy and Parliament
should contend with, or differ from you; would you spare them any more than the
Jansenists? We would beware (said he) of engaging two such powerful Bodies
against us; we would take such measures as might not hurt us. Prudence would
suggest to us a Thousand Expedients to conjure down that Tempest. It were then
convenient to dissemble for some time, and as occasion should offer to fall
soul upon some of them, and render them suspect, to deter others. Are you
ignorant of what we have done (continued he) to other Prelates, that dared to
clash with us? I could name you a sufficient number, whose Doctrine and Conduct
we have cried down. I remember it, Father (said I) we cannot tax you with
being wanting in that. Death it self extinguisheth not your Resentments, so
just are they. And to speak only of the late Bishop de Pamiez, all the World
knows you reserve those Resentments still against him; and that not being able
to exercize your Zeal against his person* you employ it to hinder (as one may
say) his repose in his Grave; by rendering his Memory hateful. You, the Fathers
of Pamiez, have particularly signalized your selves herein. For the People
running to the Sepulcher of this Prelate, and giving him the honors as to a
Saint, you labored with might and main to persuade them that he was damned,
because he had Excommunicated Three of your Society. It Is in effect a Crime
never to be remitted, neither in this World, nor in the World to come. Mock not
(said he) every Prelate that Excommunicates us, is himself Excommunicated (ipso
facto;) and if he repairs not this injury before he dies, and asks us not
Pardon for his Timerity, it is impossible that he an be saved. But not to stray
too far from our Subject, be persuaded (continued he) that there is nothing so
commodious as our Doctrine of Probability; and notwithstanding all the
Endeavors the Pope has used against it, it shall ever continue firm with us.
It Is in vain to oppose it, it is of absolute necessity in the World. What means
else is there to reconcile so many things which seem incompatible? And how can
we ever resolve the Case of Conscience of your Marchioness or Duchess? If
after all this there remains any Scruple with her, let her but take the pains
to come and see me, and I am confident she will be freed of all her Doubts.
This Madam, is all the Solution I could draw from this Father; if it be not
satisfactory, I see no better means than to accept his Offers; he is full out
as willing as able; and I am, Madam,

Your most humble and most obedient Servant, The Abbot of --

FINIS.

