The CHASTE SERAGLIAN novell.


The Chaste Seraglian: OR, YOLANDA OF SICILY. A NOVEL.

IN TWO PARTS.

Done out of French by T.H. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street near
Covent Garden. MDCLXXXV.

To the Honorable Sir William Kenricke BARONET.
SIR,
THe famed Gallantry of Your Family has invited this Ladies Addresses for Your
Favor and Protection. Misery proves often, at least gains the Consideration of
Merit, and is never baro'd Refuge by the Brave and Generous: And since Misery
and Merit concur so highly in this Lady, as to make her the Object of the
Compassion of those that are the least guilty of Tenderness, no doubt but Your
Hereditary Goodness will open her an Asyle. Her Misfortunes and her Charms
afford Title sufficient for a Sanctuary; but she has still that of a Stranger
to plead on her behalf. She Is sensible, so much Goodnature as You are owned to
stand possessed of, will not require so many Qualifications for a favorable
Reception: For all the noted Advantages of Your several Ancestors seem
rendezvous'd in Your Person, though in each there shined the Qualities that make
a Gallant Man. She fancies the Circumstances and Beauties of her Story to be
such, as to furnish your Diversion, at the same time they move Your Pity. But
having Vsher'd her into Your Presence, I Will leave her to acquaint You with her
Case, and enlarge this Trouble no further than the Assurances of my being with
the deepest Zeal and most profound Respect,

SIR, Your most Humble and THO. HAYES.

YOLANDA OF SICILY.
SIcily is a famous Island in the Mediterranean, at the farther end of Italy.
Its Extent, the Fertility of its Soil, and the ^ecurity of its Ports, render
it, without contradiction, the most conside^able of that Sea. All these
Advan^ges, which ought to make it a hap^y Kingdom, have only served to under
it the Prey of all the Nations (...) Africa and Europe, between which ^wo Parts
of the World it is situated ^he Greeks, the Carthaginians, the ^omans, and
Saracens, made it for a long time the Stage of War. The Kings of Naples of the
House of Anjou, and the Kings of Aragon, did afterward dispute the Possession
of it with the highest obstinacy: The Sicilian Vespers rendered the latter the
Masters of this Realm, the Partisans of the House of Anjou having been sor the
most part exterminated in that fatal Day, and the Spanish Policy having since
taken care to extinguish all that remained of that Party.

The House of Cigala was one of the most considerable of those which bore an
affection to the French Name; but the Spaniards being peaceable Possessors of
the Island, that Illustrious Family saw it self upon the point of being
destroyed, when it was seen to rise again by an Accident altogether
extraordinary.

Some Turkish Corsaires having made a Descent into Sicily, they carried away
from thence several Slaves, amongst whom was the Head of the House of Cigala,
with an only Son of about seven or eight years of age. The Father being dead
in Chains, the Son was by the Turks put into the Seraglio, where he perfected
himself in all the Exercises which are taught the Youth. The vivacity of his
Wit, which had gained him the good Opinion and Favor of the Grand Seignior,
obtained him immediately considerable Employments at the Port; and his Merit
made him afterward attain to the principal Charges of the Ottoman Empire. He
it was who rendered himself so Famous under the Name of Bashaw Cigala. The
remembrance of his Extraction, and the Sentiments of a Religion which the Turks
had not been able to extinguish in his Heart, though he quitted it in a very
tender Age, created in him often a Desire of returning into his own Country:
But these Impressions would not have been strong enough to have made him take
that Resolution, if he had not been determined to it by an extraordinary
Occasion.

The Custom of the Turks allowing 'em to have several Wives, there happened to be
one amongst those of the Bashaw who had been taken upon the Coasts of Italy,
being a Person of Quality, and very much wedded to her Religion. She reinflamed
in the Bosom of Cigala all that had been left therein of his first Education,
which made him at length resolve to return with her into his Native Country. He
landed at Messina, with immense Riches, after having escaped with a great deal
of difficulty from the Vigilance of the Turks. Being thus re-entred into the
Religion of his Forefathers, he quickly reunited to his Family most of the
Lands which had been alienated from it. His Riches, and the Splendor of this
Life, began to revive the Jealousy of the Spaniards, when that the change of
Climate put a period to the Days of this Great Man. He left but one Son by his
Marriage; and this Son, who was called Don Bernardin, was brought up hy his
Mother with all the Care imaginable. No sooner was he out of his Infancy, than
that he resolved to court Glory in the Field of War: The emulation he had for
that which his Father had acquired therein, made him follow that Noble Calling
with a great deal fo Success; and he would without doubt have made great
progress in that Career, if the Jealousy of the Spaniards, whom the Fathers
Merit had given but too much umbrage, had not deprived him of the Means. They
would have made sure of Don Bernardin, by engaging him to mary a young Lady of
their Nation; but all their Practices were in vain, and Don Bernardin, who had
no less aversion for them than his Predecessors, and who sought to gain a
considerable Support against 'em, married a Roman Princess of the Noble Family
of the Vrsins. The Grandeur of this Alliance, and the Union of Don Bernardin to
a House that had ever been wedded to the French Party, already gave umbrage to
the Spaniards: But having discovered in several Rencounters their Ill Will, and
remarked their Inclination contrary to his Family, he did not doubt but that
the same Reasons would make 'em seek out the Means of ruining it a second time;
and knowing by experience how dangerous it is to incur the Indignation of his
Masters, he resolved to avoid the Occasions of giving them any Jealousy in
vain, and to withdraw into a Country House, far from all Commerce, where he
spent some Years, waiting till Time should furnish him with the Occasions of
showing 'em his Resentment. The Power of the House of Austria being weakened at
that time by the happy Success of the Arms of the French, Don Bernardin judged
that this might give Occasion to some Motion in the Dominions which the King of
Spain possesses in Intaly: He was not mistaken in his Conjectures. The Kingdom
of Naples being revolted, and the Malcontents having called in the Duke of
Guise to assure themselves of a Head, Don Bernadin thought that time proper for
the Designs he had meditated. He took Measures with that Duke, and set Cabals
on foot in the Island. The Spaniards had some suspicion of these Practices, and
though all his Cabals were not come to their knowledge, they discovered enough of
'em to take the Resolution of destroying Cigala. Cardinal Trivulce being then
Vice Roy of Sicily, received order from Spain to take him into Custody; and
though this Enterprise was somewhat difficult, this Cardinal, who was one of the
most able Politicians of his time, executed it with so much cunning, that Don
Bernardin was taken, and carried to the Castle of S. Sauveur; the Viceroy
having had the Precaution to send out of the way part of Cigala's Friends, to
engage others in his Interests, and to amuse' em all, by assuring 'em, that the
Court proceeed only in that manner to take away all pretext from the Duke of
Guise, from publishing in Naples, as he did, That he had a great Party in
Sicily, and that all the Kingdom would suddenly declare infavour of him. When
Don Bernardin was taken into Custody, he had an only Daughter of about five or
six Years of age, called Yolanda: The Duke of Guise, having had the misfortune
of falling into the Hands of the Spaniards, was carried into Spain; and the
Disorders of Naples were quickly ended by severe Punishments. The Spaniards
having no more reason to fear any Rising or Revolt in Sicily, the Friends of
the House of Cigala were in hopes that Don Bernardin would be set at liberty;
but they expected it in vain.

The Senate of Messina, that interressed it self in the Preservation of a Man
with whose Merit they were so well acquainted, and who besides judged, that a
perpetual Imprisonment, upon mere Suspicions, would be of a dangerous Example
to the most Considerable Persons of the Kingdom, caused his Releasment to be
demanded of the King of Spain: But very far from obtaining this Request, their
pressing Solicitations did so exasperate the Council, and the King took it so
ill that the Senate should make the Business of a Private Person its own, that
it was resolved from that time to suppress its, Authority. And indeed all the
Governors, who have been since sent to Messina, have had secret Memoires to
endeavor the Execution of this Design. This is the true beginning and source
of the Misfortunes which have oppressed that. City in these latter Times. Don
Bernardin was still strictly kept in Prison: His best Friends advised him to
dissemble his Resentment, and to comply with Time by making great Submissions
to the Spaniards. A Counsel so opposite to his natural. Inclination, and the
grandeur of a Courage which knew not how to bend, put him at first to as much
pain as his Imprisonment, not being able to promise what he perceived it would
be difficult for him to keep, but in short, this Advice was too healing to be
neglected, and he was forced to comply with it, after a great many Conflicts.
The Duke of Salvonella, who succeeded Cardinal Trivulce in the Viceroy ship of
Sicily, and whom the Friends of Don Bernardin had engaged in his Interests, was
overjoyed to see him in Sentiments conformable to their Counsels: He wrote into
Spain in favor of this Prisoner, and hopes were given him that regard should
be had to his Remonstranees. But whether that there still remained some
Mistrust in the Minds of the Ministers, or that he had had secret Enemies who
opposed his Releasment, he remained still a Prisoner.

The Spaniards commonly seek to make sure of the Fidelity of Families the most
Considerable in the States subject to their Government; and have not found a
more assured Means of bringing that about, than that of having brought up at
Madrid Children of the Highest Quality, whom they detain at Court as Hostages
of their Parents Servitude: They engage 'em afterward in Marriages with
Spanish Ladies, who often bring no other Portion into those Families than the
Hopes alone of a Government suitable to their Extraction. The Prince of
Escaletta, and Don Augustine Gregorio, both of 'em Messineses, were then at
Madrid, in quality of Meninos or Children of Honor to the King of Spain. The
Duke of Salmonetta, who forgot nothing that might usefully serve Don Bernardin,
advised him to send into Spain Yolanda his only Daughter, to be brought up
there near the Queen: and that this Mark of Trust might both promote his
Liberty, and afterward procure him several other Favors Don Bernardin
resisted a long while the Reasons of the Viceroy; the Tenderness he had for
his Daughter, was a great Obstacle to this Separation. But what would he not
have don, to see himself free after so long an Imprisonment? He suffered
himself to be persuaded, and consented that the Duchess of Salmonetta, who was
returning into Spain, should take Yolanda with her thither. This young Lady was
about ten years of age; and as she had an extreme repugnance to part from her
Parents, who had already inspired into her the Sentiments of their Family
against the Spaniards, she did not love 'em at all. Thus was she very loath to
go this Voyage; yet they knew so well how to take advantage of the weakness of
her Infancy, that she suffered her felf at length to be conducted to Madrid,
where she was received into the number of the Queens Maids of Honor, or Damas
de Palacio.

After such a Sacrifice, Don Bernardin thought he might with right press the
Court to grant him his Liberty. He made new Instances, and employed all his
Friends, without obtaining any thing more than Words, in which he could not put
any confidence, because they had failed him already several times. He was
besides afraid, that the Council of Spain had resolved upon his Ruin. Certain
it is, that he died in a short while after in the Prison, and without its ever
yet being fully known if his Death were Natural. However, as on these occasions
People are ever inclined to believe the worst, no Body but suspected they had
hastened his Days; and all the Nobility of Messina had in such abhorrence so
barbarous an Action, that since that time they have ever looked upon the
Spaniards as downright Enemies, who cannot endure those who are Eminent, either
for their Quality, or their Merit. The Wife of Don Bernardin died in a short
while after. Thus Yolanda finding herself an Orphan at twelve Years of age, the
Queen, who bore her a tender Love, endeavored to comfort her with fair
Promises.

Yolanda sometimes saw the Prince of Escaletta and Don August in Gregorio.
These two young Cavaliers, who spoke to her without constraint, acquainted her
with the Rumors which ran of her Fathers Death being hastened, and the
Indignation which all the Nobility of Messina had conceived upon that account.
As she had a great deal of Wit, and more Sagacity than Maidens of that Age
usually have, this News did so highly augment her Aversion to the Spaniards,
that she could not forbear showing it upon occasion. She durst not however give
it vent before the World; but when she found her self alone with the Prince of
Escaletta and D. Augustine, she abandoned her self to all her Griefs, and spoke
no less than of revenging the Death of her Father, and of giving her self
afterward for a Reward to him who should free her Country from the Government
of the Spaniards. They both partook with her in her Resentment; but the Prince
of Escaletta, who was the oldest of the two, assured her, That he should esteem
himself very happy, if he could contribute to her Revenge; and that he would
perish with delight in so glorious a Design. Yolanda took this very kindly at
his Hands, and desired him to be mindful of his Engagement. This Gonversation
ended by Assurances of a great deal of Acknowledgement in Yolanda, and of an
eternal Devotion on the part of the Prince of Escaletta.

Such like Entertainments created in 'em a great Esteem for one another; and as
there is no great distance from this Sentiment to Love, the Prince of Escaletta
found himself in a short while passionately enamored of Yolanda. She was at
fourteen years of age the most perfect Beauty of all Spain: She had a delicate
and advantageous Shape; her Complexion was of a surprising White and
Incarnation; never was there finer Eyes than hers; they were full, black, and
passionate to such a point, as it was impossible to look upon 'em without being
filled with Wonder and Adoration; her Nose was well proportioned, her Mouth
somewhat large, but set off with Lips of a wonderful Color; her Teeth
perfectly fine, the turn of her Face accomplished, her Neck well formed for her
Age; and besides all this, the Qualities of her Mind much surpassing those of
her beautiful Body. The Queen was so satisfied with her Person, and had so much
Kindness for her, that she had several times refused to her Relations the
Permission for her returning to Messina, and had declared to them, That she did
not in the least design to deprive her self so soon of so lovely a Person. And
that she Might suffer this kind of Imprisonment with the less impatience, she
was allowed little Liberties, which are not used to be granted to the Maids of
Honor. The young Prince of Escaletta, and Don Augustine Gregorio, were
sometimes allowed to vist her, because they were of the same Country. The first
found his Passion to augment every day: Yet as it is a Crime in Spain to speak
of Love to one of the Queens Maids of Honor, and that to be banished away from
thence is inevitable, if that one be discovered, every time that the Prince
called to mind, that he could not give any Tokens of his Passion to Yolanda,
without exposing himself to the being separated from her, he had no longer the
power to speak. This Consideration would perhaps for a long while have detained
him in silence, if Don Augustine had not one day made known to him, by his
Discourses, that Yolanda seemed to him so charming, that he began to entertain
for her something more strong than Friendship. The Prince very much surprised
at this Account, contented himself at that time with telling his Friend, That
it was very dangerous for him to confide in any other less discreet Friend the
Sentiments he had for Yolanda, desiring him very earnestly to be reserved upon
that Point, for fear they should be both forbid to see her. Don Augustine
yielded to these Reasons, and promised to follow his Counsels. The Prince being
afraid that his Rival speaking first, might establish himself in the Heart of
Yolanda, resolved to declare to her his Passion, whenever he met with her alone.

The Design which set him on to seek for that Occasion, made his Looks seem to
be in some perplexity; which Yolanda perceiving, she asked him the Cause
thereof. The Prince, who would never have dared to have told her his Sentiments
for her, became more bold through the Curiosity she had showed, and made her
Answer, That one of his Friends, who was passionately in love with one of the
Queens Maids of Honor, had happened to speak of his Passion to her who had
produced it; that she had threatened to give the Queen notice thereof; and that
his Friend was in the greatest Consternation imaginable, fearing to be
separated from her he loved; That he desired her to tell him if she approved of
such violent Sentiments in a Beautiful Person, for whom his Friend had a
Passion full of Respect, which he explained, it being no longer in his power to
conceal it. Yolanda, without making him any Answer to his Question, desired him
to tell her that Ladies Name. The Prince, pretending not to name it out of
discretion for his Friend, drew the Pourtraict of Yolanda, and thereby made
known to her his Passion. As she had a great deal of Wit, she easily knew what
he had a mind to give her to understand: I am very glad, said she to him,
something disordered, that you your self have taught me beforehand what my
Duty is: I should be afraid you might have an ill Opinion of me, if I did not
follow your Counsels, by complaining to the Queen of your Boldness. A
troublesome Under-Governess, coming in at that time, deprived them of the means
of continuing that Conversation. The Prince before he parted told her in the
Sicilian Tongue, That having devoted himself entirely to her Service, he
desired her to be mindful that she could not sacrifice him, without losing the
Man who endeavored to revenge her. But the Air wherewith she left him, having
given him to understand, that she was not displeased at his Boldness, he
withdrew very much satisfied with having discovered to her a Secret which he
had found so painful to conceal from her.

Yolanda, who had never felt any other Desire than that of being revenged, and
who was not yet acquainted with Love, was very much surprised at what she had
just learnt from the Prince of Escaletta, and making Reflection upon all the
Care and Pains he had taken to please her, she judged that his Passion must of
necessity be very violent. At first the austerity of her Virtue made her repent
the having showed so little Anger at their parting; but what she owed her
Father, coming to present it self to her Imagination, she resolved not to
discourage that Prince. Perhaps she did to satisfy her Inclination, what she
thought she afforded to the Hopes of being revenged.

The Prince on his side courted the Occasions of discoursing her, that he might
the more clearly make her explain her Mind: However, fearing he could not be
alone with her, he asked her in the presence of Don Augustine, if the Anger of
her Companion did still continue. Yolanda, who understood his Thoughts, made
him answer, That the Person had upon her desire pardoned the Offense that had
been done her; nay, that she allowed his Friend to love her, upon condition he
would never tell it her again. Don Augustine, who understood nothing of this
Language, was very impatient to be alone with his Friend, to inform himself of
the Matter; and having pressed him to acquaint him with the Business, the
Prince was obliged to tell him, That one of the Maids of Honor would have
complained to the Queen, for that her Lover had entertained her with some
Amorous Discourses; and that Yolanda had had the Goodness to hinder her from so
doing. I am overjoyed, said Don Augustine immediately, that she is so indulgent;
and I mean to morrow to speak to her of my Passion. Have a care of what you do,
replied the Prince; People do not always practice the Counsels they give: and
though Yolanda has blamed the Injustice of her Companion, I know not what she
would do if she were in her Place. Don Augustine was a long while before he came
to any Determination; but his Love having got the mastery over all his
Reasonings, he resolved to speak. He was younger than his Friend: His Birth was
not indeed so considerable, but his Beauty was extraordinary; and the great
Opinion he had of his good Mien, made him believe he should be heard. Having
declared his Resolution to the Prince, who could never divert him from it, he
went all alone to see Yolanda. After some moments of Conversation, he owned to
her very ingenuously, That he found himself very much puzzled to begin to her a
Discourse, which he had resolved to entertain her with. Yolanda, thinking of
nothing less than of what Don Augustine meant to tell her, pressed him to speak,
Don Augustine having exacted that she should not be angry, declared to her at
length his being in love with her. Yolanda not having so seriously conversed
with Don Augustine as with the Prince, yet could not forbear blushing a little;
however, being quickly recollected, she turned the thing into Raillery, and
laughed at him for having used so much Ceremony to tell her so trivial a
Matter. They parted in a short while after.

The Prince of Escaletta being under the greatest impatience imaginable to know
the Success of that Visit, began to grow uneasy; when Don Augustine told him
all that had passed. On the morrow they went both together to see her; and the
Prince desiring to pry into the Sentiment of Yolanda for Don Augustine, told
her, after a rallying manner. That Don Augustine was very much concerned to tell
her that he loved her, and that he took it very ill she did not take it
seriously. You are too obliging to your Friends, answered Yolanda; think only
of giving good Counsels to him whom we spoke of last of all: You will have
business enough, without concerning your self in the Affairs of Don Augustine.

Yolanda spent some Months longer in this manner, not troubling her self about
the Passion of Don Augustine, and taking a secret delight in that of the Prince.
Don Augustine being discouraged by finding her always insensible, thought of her
no more. The Prince of Escaletta applied himself still more and more to please
her; she listened to him in the beginning, thinking she might do it without
hazarding any thing of her own, and without any Sentiments escaping from her
against her will. Her Confidence was not overwell founded: As all yields to any
real Love, and that it is a hard matter to think ones self tenderly beloved,
without taking a particular Interest in People; Yolanda was prevailed upon by
the Addresses of the Prince, and soon perceived thereby how dangerous it is to
allow of the Passion of a well-bred Man, when a Woman means not to engage her
Heart. The Prince having taken notice of this happy Change, by the Discourses
and good Treatments of his Mistress, abandoned himself before her to such
Transports as made her acquainted with the excess of his Love.

The Satisfaction of the two Lovers was too visible, and the pleasure they took
in being together, made them seek with too much care the Occasions of
discoursing one another, in a Court where People live with so much
circumspection. In fine, the Prince was forbid seeing her. This Prohibition,
which sensibly afflicted him, did more promote his Affairs, than long Services
could have done: For Yolanda being irritated by this Order, which they found so
much the more Tyrannical, in that it came from People whom she respected
against her will, and whom she ever looked upon as the Persecutors and
Disturbers of her Family, and of many others of that ancient and most renowned
Kingdom of Sicily, this made her resolve to love him all her Life with an
inseparable Love, in spite of all the Obstacles and Impediments that might be
brought to hinder her so doing.

In the mean while, all the Court talked and discoursed daily of this Beauty,
extolled even to the first Rank above all others. Her Birth was also very well
known by all the Nobility; and though she had a vast Estate in the Kingdom of
Sicily, the common Rumor made it much more than it really was. Several
Grandees of Spain thought of her, as of one of the most considerable Matches of
that Illustrious and Numerous Court: And one of the Principal Ministers had
several times employed his Credit with the Queen to have her married to the
Marquis of Castel-Rodrigo, who was a Person of much Merit and high Quality, and
a great Favorite of the Kings; but who, on the other side, had but a very
small share in the Blessings of Fortune.

The Marchioness of Villa Franca, Lady of Honor to the Queen, who was very
much beloved in the Court for her fine Qualities, had had the same thoughts for
the Duke of Fernandina her Son, and had also spoken thereof to the Queen: But
her Majesty not being able to part with a Person she loved from her very Heart,
still deferred coming to a Determination. The Marchioness's Place obliging her
to be at at Palace, she took advantage of the Convenience of seeing Yolanda
every Hour, did her a thousand Kindnesses. And that young Person not knowing
whither all these Caresses tended, made such Returns as spoke a great deal of
Acknowledgement. This made the Marchioness conceive such good hopes for the
Success of her Sons Marriage, that she spoke thereof one day, as of an Affair
without difficulty, to a Lady of Sicily who had been recommended to her, and
who at that time solicited some Pretensions at the Court. This Sicilian
extolled extremely the Quality and Riches of the House of Cigala; and the
Marchioness desired her earnestly to keep the Business secret. Nevertheless, as
most of the Sicilians do naturally hate the Spaniards, as soon as the Countess
of Castelmara (so is the Ladies Name) found the Prince of Escaletta, she
acquainted him with all the Discourse she had had with the Marchioness of
Villa-Franca, showing too a great deal of Grief, in that a Spaniard carried
away the richest Heiress of her Country.

The Prince, who had already heard talk confusedly of Castel-Rodrigo's
Pretension, was cruelly alarmed to hear moreover of the Practices of the
Marchioness of Villa-Franca. Two days after, the Countess of Castelmara told
him, That the Marchioness had presented her to Yolanda, and that she had
desired her to go see her often, and insinuate into her, That the Marriage of
the Duke of Fernandina would be more to her advantage, than all those that
could be proposed to her. And what Answer did you make her? interrupted the
Prince. I promised to take my time to speak to her thereof, replied the
Countess. Is this then, continued he, the Grief which you told me you had to
see Yolanda carried away by a Spaniard? And can you disapprove of a thing which
you mean to be the Mediatrix in? The Countess finding more Heat in this
Discourse of the Prince, than could well proceed from he Interest alone of his
Nation, I have already told you my Thoughts, added she; but having occasion for
the Marchioness, I could not refuse her what she has exacted from me: However,
if you love Yolanda, as it seems to me you do by your Discourses, be assured,
that I know how to set the difference I ought between you and a Spaniard. The
Prince gave her a thousand thanks, and engaged her, before the Conversation was
at an end, to give a Letter from him to Yolanda, which he withdrew to write
accordingly.

The Countess, who was obliged to improve the Marchioness's Favor, upon the
account of the Concerns which had brought her to Madrid, began to repent of her
Engagement, when that the Prince returned with his Letter; and finding her
irresolved, he desired her anew, with so much earnestness, that she promised
him at length to keep with him her Word: Whereupon she sought out the
Expedients of delivering it to Yolanda after such a manner as might never
expose her to the being discovered, and without Yolanda's perceiving she had
taken upon her the Commission. This seemed something difficult; yet as there be
few Difficulties of that nature, but which the Cunning of a Woman does
surmount, when she applies her Mind to the thing, the Countess, after having
thought of it for some time, bethought her self of making a Packet of several
Letters which she had newly received from Sicily, amongst which she put that
from the Prince of Escaletta, and having given this Packet to one of her
Servants, with order to pretend he had newly fetched it from the Post House,
and to bring it to her to the Palace, in the Apartment of the Marchioness of
Villa-Franca. The Countess having opened her Packet in the presence of the
Marchioness and Yolanda, gave her the Princes, pretending not to know from whom
it was, because she had not yet read her own. The Marchioness withdrew, out of
discretion, to give them time to read their Letters, being persuaded that her
Friend would effectually do her Devoirs, when she found an opportunity of
speaking in favor of the Duke of Fernandina. She was not mistaken; for the
Countess not being willing to expose Yolanda to the disorder which she easily
foresaw the reading of her Lovers Letter would create in her, took that time to
extol to her the great Advantages of the Alliance of the Duke of Fernandina,
who was then General of the Galleys of Naples, nay, and was in hopes, by the
Credit of his Mother, to succeed Don Pedro d' Aragon in the Viceroy-ship of
that Kingdom. The Marchioness being returned into her Chamber, was overjoyed to
find 'em engaged in this Conversation, and would have gone back, not to
interrupt it, pretending not to have taken notice thereof: But Yolanda having
perceived her, took occasion to follow her, and so free her self from the
troublesome Conversation of the Countess.

As soon as Yolanda found her self alone, she was impatient to read her Letter,
wherein she saw, with a great deal of surprise, the Name of the Prince of
Escaletta; and not being able to comprehend by what hazard this Letter had come
through the Countess's Hands, whom she thought so opposite to the Interests of
her Lover, her Passion made her fear he might have been sent back into Sicily:
But these Disquiets were at an end, when that reading the Letter, she found
therein these Words.

BEing assured of your Heart, I did not believe I could ever have fallen under
any sensible Misfortune: Nevertheless, I find my self the most miserable of all
Men. I am forbidden to see you, and I just now learn the fatal News of the
Marriage to which they mean to force you. I tremble for fear you should at
length yield to the Artifices of those who take over you so unjust an
Authority. Give 'em all the Reasons which may divert them from this Design, and
if it be possible, take 'em all from your Passion: If it be too weak, remember
at least what you are owing to your Revenge, and never doubt of the Fidelity of
the Prince of Escaletta. Yolanda was very glad to have seen by this Letter that
her Lover was in the Sentiments she desired he might have, though the delicacy of
her Passion found it self somewhat wounded by the Princes Distrusts; but not
daring to trust any Body, being uncertain if the Countess knew of their
Correspondence, she bethought herself at length of another Artifice, and
resolved to hazard an Answer by the same way. On the morrow she told the
Countess, That the Letter she had delivered her was from the Prince of
Escaletta's Sister, and then desired her to deliver the Answer to her Brother,
that he might send it to Sicily in his Packet. The Countess admiring the
Industry of Yolanda, seemed to believe her in good earnest, and charged her
self with this Letter, which she delivered faithfully to the Prince, wherein
was written,

I Know not why I am so sensible to the Testimonies of your Remembrance, in a
time you let me see you entertain such injurious Distrusts. I should hardly
pardon you 'em, if I did not look upon 'em as Effects of your Passion. True it
is, that I have offered me considerable Matches: But can you believe, that
having a Father to revenge, and having known you, I can confide in any other
the Secret of my Vengeance, after having abandoned to you that of my Love? No,
never doubt in the least, and be persuaded, that nothing but Death can ravish
from you, your Yolanda. The Prince was filled with all the Joy imaginable at
the reading of so tender a Letter; but having the Indiscretion of most young
People, and believing that his Happiness would not be complete if some other
had not the knowledge of it, he imparted his Secret to Don Augustine Gregorio,
and showed him the Letter he had newly received, well knowing he loved another
Lady, and no longer thought of Yolanda. Don Augustine dissembling his true
Sentiments, by a piece of Cunning above his Age, though most common to People of
his Country, testified a great deal of Joy for the Happiness of his Friend; but
indeed the Passion he had had for Yolanda being revived at the reading of this
Letter, he resolved to make his Addresses to her anew. The small hopes he had
had of rendering her sensible, had discouraged him from prosecuting that Amor;
but being undeceived by the Experience of his Friend, and having found that no
Woman is Proof against a very real Passion, and a long Perseverance, he
repented a thousand times his disengaging himself so easily, and took a strong
Resolution of putting all in practice to gain a Heart which he fancied he had
lost through his impatience. As he was perfectly handsome, and well made, and that
it is rare to see in Spain young men of so great a Beauty, he attracted upon
him the Eyes of all the Ladies: Nay, and he had observed too, that one of those
of the Palace, a little superannuated, whose Name I will conceal under that of
Donna Ignes, affected to do him Favors which are not commonly done to
indifferent Persons. Love, which is ingenious, inspired him with the Design to
make use of the Ministry of this Woman, for the giving Yolanda to understand
the Sentiments he had for her; and the Facilities he had already met with in
another, made him hope he should easily bring Donna Ignes into his Interest,
since she showed him so much Good Will.

What self-love soever there might be in this thought, the Consequences let him
see that he was not mistaken, and Donna Ignes did not suffer him long to make
her Advances with Impunity. She endeavored on her side to embarque Don
Augustine, and they were quickly in a perfect good Intelligence. She was so
satisfied with having at her Age a Lover with so good a Mien, and loved him
with so much trasport, that it was no longer in the power of Don Augustine to
speak to any Woman, without giving Jealousy to Donna Ignes; and far from
daring to make her the Confident of his Passion for Yolanda, he was obliged to
conceal it from her with more care than from his Rival. This gave him extreme
disquiets; and no longer being able to continue feigning a Passion which he did
not feel, he sought out for a Pretext to break off so wearisom a Commerce; when
that Donna Ignes, who on her side only thought to make sure of a Lover so
worthy of being beloved, and who was afraid a young Person might rob her of her
Conquest, proposed to him the putting himself into Woman's Clothes, and to go
with her into the Palace, where she would make him pass for her Niece,
promising to disguise him so well, that he should never be known again, and
assuring him, for to engage him to it, that he should partake in all the
Pleasures of the Maids of Honor, and in all the secret Divertisements of the
Palace.

Don Augustine overjoyed at a Proposition which so strongly flattered his
Passion for Yolanda, redoubled his feigned Addresses to Ignes; and making a
show of not being able to refuse any thing to his Love, he consented to all she
desired. Having afterward given out, that he was going to see one of his
Friends, he entered by Night so well travestied into the Palace, that no body
doubted but that it was the Niece of Donna Ignes, newly arrived from Sevil, as
that pretended Virtuous Lady told all he was. Don Augustine so well maintained
his Personage by his Beauty, and counterfeited with so good a grace the
Innocence and Modesty of a Lady who begins to appear at Court, that he deceived
all the World.

As Beautiful Persons have a secret Jealousy against all those who may dispute
with 'em that Advantage, and that a fair young Lady is rarely seen to come to
Court, without incurring the Envy of all the Ladies who pretend to the being
handsome; Yolanda, who had heard talk with admiration of the Beauty of this
young Lady, went to Donna Ignes Apartment, to know if the Renown which augments
every thing, did Justice to the Niece of that Lady; and finding her more
beautiful than she had been described to her, (perhaps at the Emotion which
appeared in the Face of Don Augustine at the sight of Yolanda) she let her know
how overjoyed she should be to contract a Friendship with so lovely a Person.
Donna Ignes could not bear without a great deal of pain all these little
Engagements, covering her Jealousy with the fear she had of her Lover's being
discovered: However, not to make him too uneasy, she could not deny him the
taking him along with her to Yolanda's Lodgings, under the pretext of paying
her a Visit; but she never left him, and gave not time to the amorous Don
Augustine to discover himself to Yolanda. This Constraint augmenting his
Impatience, he could no longer support the violence of a Passion which became
every day more strong than other, by the Presence of Yolanda.

One day that Donna Ignes was employed about the Queen, he took that time to
enter into Yolanda's Lodgings, and having found her alone, he spoke to her in
the Sicilian Tongue, and made himself known to her, exaggerating to her his
Love, with Words the most soft and tender imaginable. Yolanda was in so great a
surprise to see Don Augustine in such a posture, that she remained for some time
without making him any Answer; nut finding her self offended at his Liberty,
her Indignation prevailed over all her Motions, and she was going to complain
to the Queen, and inform her of his Disguise, for fear People should believe
she had any share therein; when that Don Augustine, who had Wit, and knew that
Curiosity is the weak side of all Women, told her, to stay her, that Donna
Ignes had a much greater part in what he did, than he himself. This Artifice of
his had the Success suitable to his Expectations; for Yolanda was so desirous
to know the Intrigues of a Woman she had ever looked upon as hypocritically
Virtuous, though always set as an Example to the Maids of Honor, that she almost
forgot her Anger.

Don Augustine acquainted her with all she desired to know; and she pardoned
him, upon condition he would see her no more. In this Conversation Yolanda
spoke to him after such a manner, as deprived him of all Hopes from thence
forward; and setting before his Eyes his Treachery in this Action to his
Friend, she saw in him so much remorse, that she did not think she ran any
risque, by ordering him to tell the Prince of Escaletta, That she would ever be
faithful to him.

This Conversation having lasted something too long, Donna Ignes was returned
to her Apartment, and not finding Don Augustine, she sought him out on all
sides, and surprised him at length in Yolanda's Lodgings. The disorder her
presence put those two young persons in, making her judge that they were of
intelligence, she could hardly forbear bursting out immediately into a fury:
She dissembled her Jealousy, took back with her her pretended Niece, and as
soon as they were alone, charged him to some purpose with injurious Language.
Don Augustine, wearied out with the Tyranny of this Woman, and having no more
hopes as to Yolanda, he began to grow weary of his Disguise, and to show a
great deal of uneasiness. Donna Ignes, who observed him with care, and no
longer finding in him his first Transports, whether feigned or real, was so
strangely concerned, that she grew distracted; she committed a hundred
Extravagancies in the Palace, nay, and afterward went and complained to the
Queen of the little Fervency of her Lover. People easily perceived that her
Brains were cracked; and as she confounded in her Discourses her Lover with her
Niece, and Don Augustine with her faithless Gallant, the Queen had the Curiosity
to dive into this Affair; and having sent for that pretended Niece, Don
Augustine fell into so great a confusion at the extravagant Discourses of
distracted Ignes, that he was easily known to be whom he really was. The Queen
being extremely offended at such a piece of Boldness, had him immediately taken
into Custody, with design to punish him severely. Poor Ignes was confined, and
gave occasion to the Rumor which ran over all Europe at that time, That a
Woman of Quality in Spain was become mad through Jealousy.

Yolanda having heard talk of this unhappy Adventure, was under cruel
Disquiets, for fear of being brought into it; and as this was of the highest
Consequence for her, especially in a Country where People are very susceptible
of Impressions disadvantageous to Women, she carefully inquired into all the
Circumstances of this Affair, but was so happy as not to be named.

The Prince of Escaletta, who had already repented himself more than once of
his having showed his Letter to Don Augustine, suspected that Yolanda had more
share in this Disguise than Ignes, and the Jealousy of this latter confirmed
him in his Error. The Queen in the mean while was very much irritated against
against Don Augustine; yet as a Crime of Love does ever meet with Partisans, so
many several Persons employed their Credit in his Favor, that they obtained at
length his Pardon of the Queen, upon condition, however, that he should be
carried back to Messina, in the same Posture he had been surprised in, in the
Palace; and that he should be kept a Month in the Castle of S. Sauveur, still
in the Garb of a Woman; her Majesty being resolved to punish him with the shame
that this Disguise would bring upon him in his own Country. His Friends having
had leave to see him before his departure, the Prince of Escaletta went
immediately to him, and Don Augustine seeing him come in, embraced him with all
the Testimonies of a real Friendship: He owned to him sincerely all that had
passed, without concealing from him, that his Passion for Yolanda had engaged
him to feign a Love to Ignes; but that he had found her so far from ever
listening to any other Passion than that of the P. of Escaletta, that despairing
of being ever able to make her change her Sentiment, he contented himself with
obtaining for a Favor, that she would not discover him; which Yolanda had
granted with some difficulty, upon condition, however, he should never see her
more, and that he would go and assure from her the Prince of Escaletta, That
she would be faithful to him until death. Judge now, after this, continued he,
if you be not the most happy of all Men. The Prince well knowing that Don
Augustine spoke to him in good earnest, was very well satisfied with hearing all
these Circumstances, and was cured by this faithful Testimony of all the
Mistrusts which his Friends Disguise had raised in him.

New Endeavors were again used to prevail with the Queen to abate of her
Severity, and grant an absolute Pardon to Don Augustine; but her Majesty would
not hear of any thing more in his favor: He was conducted under Guard to
Barcelona, where he was embarked in the first Ship that departed for Sicily,
accompanied with a severe Guide, who had express Orders to see the Queens
Pleasure punctually executed. The second Day of their embarquing, they were
surprised by a furious Tempest, which cast 'em upon the Coasts of Barbary,
where they were upon the point of perishing, the Mainmast of the Ship broken,
and most of the Tackling shattered. They spent a whole Night between Death and
Life. On the morrow, it was no sooner day, than that they were discovered by a
Turkish Ship, who taking notice of the ill Condition the Tempest had reduced
them to, attaqued 'em, and took 'em after a weak Resistance. Don Augustine being
become a Slave, thought that his Disguise would be to his advantage, well
knowing, that amongst the Nations the most Barbarous they have Regards for the
Fair Sex. He was not mistaken; for the Corsair who took 'em finding this
pretended Maiden very much to his mind, he treated her with more Lenity than is
usual to those of his Profession. He was not long without making known to him
his Passion; but the Resistance of Don Augustine having but augmented it, he
thought he could not free himself from his Importunities, but by declaring to
him the truth of his Sex. Nevertheless, this Confession did not produce upon
the Spirit of the Corsair the Effect Don Augustine expected it would have done.

Whilst that Don Augustine was exposed to the Injustice of this Barbarian, the
Prince of Escaletta was not without Employ at Madrid. The Countess of
Castelmara being gained by the good Offices the Marchioness of Villa-Franca had
rendered her at Court, had espoused her Interests, and out of acknowledgment
gave her notice of the Passion which the Prince of Escaletta had for Yolanda,
and of the perfect Understanding of those two Persons; assuring her however, if
she could by her Credit send away the Prince, she might hope in a short time to
gain the Consent of Yolanda. The Marchioness approving of this Advice, put all
in practice, to oblige the Court to send back the Prince into Sicily. She found
therein such Difficulties as she had not foreseen, and perceived that the Chief
Minister, who was willing to keep some Measures with a Nobleman of that
Quality, was disposed to gratify him with one Employ or other before his
departure. The Marchioness fearing the Business might be deferred, labored for
him with the same eagerness she could have done for the Interests of her own
Son: She obtained, in favor of him, a Regiment of Foot in Sicily. The Prince
very much surprised at a Boon that was granted him, without his having
solicited it, had a secret Vexation at this Mark of Esteem which he thought he
was honored with by the Court; and thought this Employment did agreeably
flatter his Ambition, he could not resolve to accept a Favor which separated
him from the Person in the World he loved with most Passion: But Decency and
his Courage not allowing him to refuse an Occasion which would afford him the
Means of distinguishing himself from the young Persons of his Age, he resolved
to depart, that so he might not render himself unworthy of the kind
Dispositions of the Court. Nevertheless, not being able to determine himself to
this departure without taking leave of Yolanda, he in vain tried several Means
to obtain leave to make her a Visit: The Marchioness of Villa-Franca making it
her Business to hinder this Interview, rendered the thing impossible; and the
enamoured Prince despairing of bringing it about, addressed himself to the
Countess of Castelmara, and in short desired her to deliver one Letter more
from him to Yolanda. This perfidious Lady, after having made a great deal ado
to excuse her from meddling in that matter, pretending at length to be moved and
overcome by the excess of his Passion, promised him to take upon her to do it;
and the Prince overjoyed with having gained her, in hopes she would acquit her
self of it with the same Fidelity she had done in the former, gave her this
Letter.

I Go away in the highest despair. I am forced to accept of an Employment,
which I cannot refuse without dishonouring my self, or without discovering the
Charm which stays me at the Court. Though I saw you not there, I found a sensible
pleasure in being in the same Place, and of waiting with some small hopes the
Occasions of speaking to you a Moment. I will do all I can to revenge your
Quarrel, and my own. I Will never pardon the Spaniards, either the Death of your
Father, or the Honor they do me in giving me an Employment which separates me
from you. I am not worthy to love you, and I refer all to my Heart. I abandon
my self to my Passion with so extreme a Resignation, that I cannot fear you
should forget me. I shall think of you every moment of my Life, and shall never
have a happy Minute but when I see you. As soon as the Prince was departed, the
Countess, in stead of carrying his Letter to Yolanda, as she had engaged her
self to do, sacrificed it to the Marchioness of Villa-Franca; who judging by
the passionate Terms in which it was conceived, that the Prince stood in no ill
terms in Yolanda's Breast, applied all her Cares to break off this Commerce:
Nay, she was upon the point of showing this Letter to the Queen, to irritate
her Majesty against the Prince; but she was diverted from it through the fear she
had of giving some disadvantageous Impression of Yolanda's Conduct, whom she
already looked upon as her Daughter-in-Law. She was so satisfied with the
Offices of the Countess of Castelmara, that she procured her several Occasions
of seeing Yolanda, and of contracting a particular Friendship with her; which
was easy for her to do, under the color of discoursing her upon the Affairs
of Sicily. One day that they were alone, the Countess cunningly let the
Discourse fall upon the Princes departure: she spoke of his Merit with all the
Esteem and Consideration that the best of his Friends could have done. Yolanda,
deceived by this Artifice, and overjoyed to see the Countess in Sentiments so
conformable to her own, loved her the more for it, and always made her a kind
Reception from that time. The Countess acquainted the Marchioness with this
happy beginning, and with all the Discourse she had entertained Yolanda with in
favor of the Prince, for the gaining her Confidence, and for the being
afterward in a better state to injure her Lover. The Marchioness approved of
her Cunning. They had several Conferences to concert the Means for the
well-managing of their Project. The experience they both had in such like
Affairs, made 'em both judge that Jealousy was an infallible Expedient to
alter the good Intelligence of those two Lovers, and that if they could instill
it into Yolanda, it would contribute much toward the promoting of their
Design. To bring this about the more easily, the Marchioness cast her Eyes upon
a Maid of Honor who had been brought up near her, and having persuaded her
that the Countess of Castelmara and she had only a mind to put a Sham upon
Yolanda, to divert 'emselves thereby afterward, when they should have
discovered her real Sentiments for the Prince of Escaletta, and that it
imported 'em, for the bringing this about, to persuade her she had a Rival;
this young Lady, being overjoyed to find an occasion of making her self merry,
promised the Marchioness to play the Part she desired. After this Engagement,
they bethought themselves of changing the Cover of the Letter which the Prince
had left for Yolanda, to counterfeit the Superscription the best they were
able, and to address it to Donna Theresa Gomes (which is the Name of the
pretended Rival.) These two Women having so well disposed all things, the
Countess, who had already acquired a great deal of Credit in Yolanda's good
Opinion, still pretending of her never having taken notice of the Good will she
had for the Prince, told her one day, out of a kind of Confidence, That she was
very much mistaken if the Prince of Escaletta had not an Intrigue with one of
the Maids of Honor; nay, and that since his departure, she had observed a
certain Curiosity, mingled with a great deal of Disquiet, in one of her
Companions, which confirmed her in her Opinion. This Artifice had the hoped for
Effect; for Yolanda falling into this Snare, showed her self very earnest to
know the Name of her Rival, and to be informed of the Circumstances of this
Intrigue. The Countess cunningly managing this Affair, told her, That perhaps
she made a rash Judgment, and that she would dive into the Truth, before she
acquainted her with any thing further. This Reservedness augmenting the
impatient Curiosity of Yolanda, she desired her nevertheless to tell her what
she knew thereof; but the Countess persisting not to do it, for fear, said she,
of wounding her Conscience, by affirming a thing which she was not very sure
of; Yolanda, without being so contented, conjured her to acquaint her at least
with the Name of the Person. Then the Countess, pretending that she could no
longer resist her pressing Importunities, owned to her at length, that it was
Donna Theresa, beseeching her that she would rest her self so satisfied, in the
assurance that she gave her, carefully to apply her self to discover if she
were not mistaken. Thereupon she retired; and Yolanda being alone, was racked
with a hundred several Suspicions. After several Conflicts, wherein her Love
had much ado to comfort her against her Jealousy, she resolved to suspend her
Resentment, and to wait until the Countess, in whom she had an entire
Confidence, had sifted into this Affair. Two days after, the Countess having
met with Yolanda, told her, That she had wherewith to content her Curiosity,
having learnt things which she should not dare to tell her, unless she was
assured of being secret. Yolanda having passed her word she would, the Countess
added, That since she had seen her last, she had insinuated her self further
into the Confidence of Donna Theresa, who had owned to her the perfect
Intelligence which was between her and the Prince of Escaletta; nay, that she
had shown her a Letter which she had received from him. I must own to you,
continued the Countess, that I was a little surprised at a Secret of this
nature; seeing nevertheless that she did not blush, I thought I might dispense
my self from blushing for her. This, my Fair One, is all I have learnt of the
Affairs of the Prince of Escaletta. Yolanda had much ado to conceal her
Jealousy, and forbear exclaiming against the Prince, whom she thought
unfaithful. By good luck, other Persons came into the Place where they were
talking, which gave Yolanda occasion to withdraw. The Countess observing the
great Effect which this forged Secret had produced upon the Mind of the too
credulous Yolanda, went to rejoice with the Marchioness for the happy Success
of their Artifice, advising her to finish what they had so happily begun, to
see the new Donna Theresa, and to put into her Hands the Princes Letter, that
she might oblige her to show the Writing of it to Yolanda, yet without
suffering her to read what it contained, not to give her any occasion of
suspecting their Cheat. The Marchioness knowing of what Consequence it was to
her, for the success of her Designs, to follow the Counsels of the Countess,
spoke thereof to Donna Theresa, who promised her to do all she prescribed to
her, not distrusting that the Marchioness, who was her great Friend, and who
flattered her sometimes with the Hopes that she might be her Daughter-in-Law,
would exact any thing from her which could do her any injury.

It would be a hard matter to express the dolorous Estate that Yolanda was
reduced to, when she no longer doubted of the Infidelity of her Lover. Spite,
Anger, and Revenge, did equally rend her Breast. Love, which in such like
Occasions always speaks in favor of the absent, in vain endeavored to
represent to her the Prince less culpable; not being able to resolve to banish
him from her Heart, though being persuaded of his Crime, she sought for at least
some Pretext that might help to deceive her. After a thousand different
Thoughts, she at length came to this Determination, by a last effort of her
Passion, to inform her self with her own Eyes, and to see often Donna Theresa,
flattering her self, that she would show her that Criminal Letter, since she
had made no difficulty of showing it to the Countess. As soon as she had taken
this Resolution, her Thoughts were wholly bent upon putting it in execution.
Donna Theresa, on her side, being desirous to please the Countess, by
acquitting her self handsomely of the Engagements she was under, watched too for
Opportunities of meeting alone with Yolanda. Having both the same Design, it
was no hard matter for them to meet. They discoursed for a pretty while upon
indifferent things, each endeavoring to cover her Design. Donna Theresa, whose
Thoughts were more disengaged, asked her if she had not seen a very fine Song,
which was much esteemed by all the Court? Yolanda, whose Heart and Mind were
extremely possessed, made her answer coldly, That she was no Lover of Poetry:
But a Reflection made her perceive that it became her not to seem so concerned;
she asked to see it, and Donna Theresa pretending to take it out of her Pocket,
to give it her to read, presented her the Letter of the Prince of Escaletta.
Yolanda knowing the Hand again at the first blush, was seized with such
Motions, that Donna Theresa, pretending to perceive her Error, by the
astonishment of her Companion, snatched the Letter hastily out of her Hands,
and gave her the Sonet in the stead of it, affecting a formal Confusion, in
having mistaken the one for the other. There needed no more absolutely to ruin
the unfortunate Yolanda; she could hardly hold from giving excessive marks of
her Despair, after having seen so convincing a Proof of her Lovers Infidelity;
and though before hand she had thought she had prepared her self for all the
Events of that dangerous Scrutiny, she could not however forbear telling her
Rival, That knowing the inconstant Humors of the Cavaliers of her Nation, she
was willing to put her in mind not to rely much upon the Fidelity of the Prince
of Escaletta, Donna Theresa being willing to push on her Artifice, replied,
That she was not at all uneasy upon the matter, and was well assured of the
sincerity of his Sentiments. Yolanda being no longer able to support so painful
a Conversation, and perceiving that her Tears would betray her, if she delayed
withdrawing, desired Donna Theresa to leave with her that Sonet to copy it, and
under that pretense she shut her self up in her Chamber, where she abandoned
her self to Grief. She saw no Condition more unhappy than hers, when she
represented to her self the aversion she had to the Spaniards, the Reasons she
thought obliged her to be revenged on them, and the Promise the Prince of
Escaletta had made her, of espousing her Resentment, which had formerly held
the first place in her Heart, were incomparably below the Despair which the
Inconstancy of her Lover created in her. It is impossible to express the
piteous Estate these Considerations reduced her to; deprived of her Parents and
Relations, exiled, as I may say, amongst her Enemies, without resource, without
hopes: all yielded to the horror of not being beloved, and of seeing her self
deceived by a Man whom she thought so worthy of her Affections.

In the mean while the Marchioness, who had been informed by Donna Theresa,
took new measures with the Countess; and as she knew, that when a Lady is fully
persuaded that she has been failed, that time is the most proper to speak in
favor of another, they resolved to make use of that occasion to propose the
Marriage of the Duke of Fernandina. The Countess charged her self with all, and
having visited Yolanda, whom she found very sad, she held her a long Discourse
upon the State of the Affairs of Sicily, and upon the particular Misfortunes of
the House of Cigala, and concluded with the necessity she was in to support it,
to marry a Man of Merit, who stood well at Court, and who might by his Credit
re-establish it in its former Splendor. Yolanda was so oppressed with grief,
that she hearkened to this Discourse with as much indifference, as if she had no
share therein. The Countess thinking by her silence that she relished her
Reasons, continued, extolling the Birth, Personal Merit, and Authority of the
Duke of Fernandina, (who perhaps would suddenly be nominated Viceroy of
Sicily) adding, That she saw no Man that was a fitter Match for her, nor who
was more capable of raising up again the Grandeur of her Family. Yolanda being
afraid she would never have done, interrupted her with saying. That it was to
no purpose to tell her of all those great Advantages, since she had an
intention to spend her Life in a Convent. The Countess attributing this Answer
to the first Motion of spite which she knew Yolanda must needs have for the
pretended Infidelity of her Lover, and Yolanda having declared that she was
obliged to be at the Queens Apartment, an end was put to this Conversation,
without the Countess knowing her self what there was to hope or fear.

While that all this passed at Madrid, the Prince of Escaletta was at Messina,
where he was continually thinking on the means of seeing again his Mistress.
The Nobility of the City had frequent Conferences at that time with the
Senators, to endeavor together the preserving the Authority of the Senate,
which the Governor diminished every day. After several Deliberations, they
found no means more lawful to prevent the Consequences of it, than that of
having recourse to their Sovereign, and resolved to send some one or other into
Spain, for the carrying their Complaints to the King, against the Usurpations
of the Governor, for to penetrate once for all, if all the Means which the
Governors used to debase 'em, proceeded from a particular Hatred which they
had against 'em, or from an Order of the Court. The Prince of Escaletta seeing
that Disposition, employed all his Friends to obtain that Employment, in hopes
that being Ambassador, they could no longer deny to let him see his Mistress;
but the remembrance of the ill Treatments the House of Cigala had received from
the Spaniards, and the hatred they nourished upon that account in their Hearts,
made 'em prefer Don Philip Cigala, Yolanda's Uncle, before the Prince of
Escaletta, in an Employment wherein the main Business was to maintain their
Liberty, and oppose the Jealousy of the Spaniards. The Prince having notice
hereof, comforted himself for the Refusal he had met with, in hopes that Don
Philip, who espoused his Interests, and was his particular Friend, would
suddenly bring back his Niece. He was the first to congratulate this new
Ambassador, and press him forthwith to depart. Don Philip embarked shortly
after, and promised the Prince to do his good Offices in his favor with
Yolanda. But the Countess of Castelmara having had notice of this Messinese's
departure, gave the Marchioness of Villa-Franca to understand, That it was of
the greatest consequence to her, to prepossess the Ministers as to this Voyage,
and to traverse the Negotiation of Don Philip, because she had received notice,
That this Ambassador came away with design to carry back his Niece, which would
absolutely ruin the Project of the Duke of Fernandina's Match. The Countess
found it no hard matter to persuade the Ministers, the Council of Spain having
long before taken the resolution to destroy the Senate of Messina, because of
the resistance the Spanish Governors met with in that Community.

Don Philip being arrived at Madrid, they took the Pretext not to to receive
him, by refusing him the Quality of Ambassador. though they had never made any
difficulty to give that Title to the Deputies of the City of Messina; and far
from harkening to the Remonstrances and Submissions, it was taken into
deliberation, whether the Ambassador should be taken into custody. Don Philip
having had secret notice hereof, gave 'em not time to execute their Designs,
and retired in all haste, without so much as having seen his Niece, not daring
to venture going to the Palace, for fear of being seized on. The Messineses
seeing Don Philip return with so little satisfaction, were so provoked by the
Contempt the Spaniards had of their Submissions, that they no longer doubted of
the ill will of the Spaniards, whom they looked upon as Persecutors; and since
that time, the Troubles of Messina have ever been augmenting.

What share soever that the Prince of Escaletta took in the Public Affairs,
hearing of the ill success of his Friends Voyage, the Interest of his Love
contributed very much to the making him detest the unjust Proceedings of the
Spaniards. He complained thereof to all the World, and spoke of it in such
Terms as sufficiently gave to understand, that he interested himself in this
Business after another manner than what concerned the Public. The fear of
seeing a Spaniard Possessor of his Mistress, gave him continual Alarms; and
only thinking how to hinder this Misfortune, he had several Conferences with
the Relations of the House of Cigala, who gave with delight their Consent to
his Marriage with Yolanda. There was now nothing more to do, than to have her
brought back from Spain; and this was what troubled the Prince most, upon the
Difficulties he foresaw in this Return. He would not have stuck returning to
Madrid, and demanding her of the Queen, seconded with the Consent of her
Relations, which he could easily have obtained in Writing; but the knowledge he
had of the Spanish Policy, made him with reason fear, that his Love would be
made in him a Crime of State, and that perhaps it might be laid hold on for an
occasion of taking him into custody, for having abandoned without Order the
Employment which the Court had confided in him the Year foregoing. All these
Reasonings augmented his Disquiets, and his Passion was too strong to permit
him to be calm, being separated from what he loved, with so little likelihood
of meeting in a good while.

Don Thomas Caraffo, who had married a Lady of the House of Cigala, by whom he
had several Children, and who by his Quality, his Age, and his Credit, was the
Person who gave most weight to all the Deliberations of the Family, for the
bringing about the Pretensions of the Prince of Escaletta, was of opinion to
interpose the Authority of the Prince of Ligne, at that time Viceroy of Sicily,
and very much beloved by the Messineses, for the knowledge they had of his
Equity, and of his Humor, an Enemy to all Violences. The Sentiment of Don
Thomas Caraffo having been approved of, he himself had in charge to go to
Palermo, to desire the Viceroy to write to Spain, for the demanding the return
of Yolanda. The Prince de Ligne received him very obligingly, and wrote
accordingly to the Queen in Terms very pressing, beseeching Her Majesty to send
back Yolanda to her Relations, who passionately desired it, looking upon her as
the Resource and Comfort of all their Family; and concluded, That if her
Majesty thought fitting, Yolanda might repass into Italy with the new Duchess
of Ossuna, who was going to her Husband in his Government of Milan. The hopes
the Prince had of obtaining some Advantage by the Viceroys Intercession, gave
some kind of Allay to his corroding Thoughts.

The Queen having received the Prince of Ligne's Letter, was at first willing
to grant him his Demand; nay, she spoke thereof to Yolanda, declaring to her,
that she was loath to consent to her departure, out of the affection she had to
her Person. But this Business coming to the Ears of the Marchioness of
Villa-Franca, she set so many Machins a going to hinder it, that the Affair was
put into deliberation. She infused into the Ministers, That Yolanda being one
of the richest Matches, and of one of the Principal Families of Sicily, it did
extremely import the King's Interest to have her married to a Spaniard, who
might with such considerable Riches render great Services to the State, and
dissipate by his Presence, and by his Cares, all the Cabals which began already
to be formed at Messina against the Service of the King of Spain. The Reasons
of the Marchioness were so probable, that she easily persuaded what she
desired, and it was resolved in the Council, That the Queen should make answer
to the Viceroy of Sicily, and let him know, That she would have agreed to
Yolanda's return to her Relations, but that being satisfied with her Services,
she thought her self bound, out of acknowledgment, to detain her some time
longer, not being able to resolve to suffer her to depart from the Court,
without giving her Testimonies of her Esteem; and that she was in hopes to
procure her quickly a Husband, who should be worthy of her, and with whom her
Relations should have ever reason to be satisfied.

The Prince de Ligne having received this Answer, sent it to Don Thomas
Caraffo, who imparted it to the other Relations; they quickly concluded, that
it had been concerted in the Council, and that the Spaniards thought less of
giving a grateful Establishment to Yolanda, than of hindering her Riches from
falling into a suspected Family. They meant to conceal this ill. News from the
Prince of Escaletta; but his Love, which made him fear the worst, had given him
secret pre-sentiments of this Answer. He had like to have died of grief, when
Yolanda's Relations told him the truth of the matter: They resolved, for his
comfort, that Don Philip Cigala should write a Letter to his Niece, in the Name
of all the Family, by which he should let her know the extreme desire that all
her Family had to see her married to the Prince of Escaletta, and that they
hoped, from the goodness of her Disposition, that she would defere to the
Choice of her Relations; nay, that she would represent to the Queen this
Engagement, if it happened that her Majesty would propose to her any other Match.
Though all these Paces were feeble enough, the Prince, who could do nothing
better in the present state, and who still reckoned upon the Inclination which
his Mistress had for him, flattered himself, that this Letter would produce a
good Effect, and that at least it might help Yolanda to defend her self, upon
this pretext, from engaging her self to any body without the Consent of her
Relations, for fear of incurring the anger of Heaven, which the Spaniards never
fail of threatening their disobedient Children with, and which they always give
for a Pretext to their Designs.

There happened at that time great Broils between the Spaniards and the
Messineses, the Nobility having strongly opposed some Novelty, which the
Governor of the City would have introduced, without the participation of the
Senate: But this Disorder was quickly appeased by the Care and Vigilance of the
Prince de Ligne, who still diverted the Storm, and perhaps that if he had been
believed, the affairs of Messina would not have run so counter to the
Spaniards, having several times given the Court notice of the Humors of the
Sicilians, who are the People in the World the most jealous of the Preservation
of their Privileges: But no Ear was given to his Advices, and the Council of
Spain, that had for a long while projected the Ruin of the Senate of Messina,
as I have already said, taking new Umbrages from the Union of the Senators with
the Nobility, thought of executing this Design; and not being willing to employ
main Force, lest they should alarm the other Cities of the Kingdom, they
thought they might more easily bring it about by Artifice: For that purpose
they stood in need of a Man of Wit, who knew well how to dissemble his real
Sentiments: And as in all sorts of Nations there are not wanting Persons of
that Character, those who were of the Secret proposed several Persons, whom
they judged very proper for the bringing about this Design. Don Lewis de Loya,
whose Genius was known, and who in such like Occasions had, given Marks of his
Ability, was preferred before all the others, and was sent to Messina in
Quality of Stratico, (so call they the Governor.) This Charge, which after
that of Viceroy is the most considerable of the Kingdom of Sicily, having been
confided in Don Lewis de Loya, with secret Memoires of the Intentions of the
Court, he departed secure of the Protection of the Ministers, and full of the
great Hopes that were given him, in case he compassed the destroying the Senate
of Messina by his Cunning. He had given him all the Powers necessary for
acting, neither were they sparing of great Sums of Money for the facilitating
all things to him. The Viceroy of Sicily had Order not to meddle at all with
the particular Affairs of Messina, and to suffer Don Lewis to act as he should
think convenient. This new Governor being arrived at Messina, applied himself
forthwith to grow well acquainted with the Humor and Inclinations of those
with whom he had to do, trusting in that case only to his own knowledge. Having
observed, that the People of that Country suffer themselves sometimes to their
disadvantage, to be deceived by the Appearances of Piety, he fancied he might
easily insinuate himself into their good Opinion, by feigning a great Probity,
seconded by an exemplary Devotion. There is no sort of Hypocrisy but which he
bethought himself of, for the bringing this about: He often visited the
Churches, frequented the Sacraments; in short, exercised such a Piety as
altogether resembles that which is practiced by People who are really Devout.
And to take away all pretext of Detraction, and hold from those who knew him to
the bottom, of blaming so holy a Conduct, he maintained his Hypocrisy with
several considerable Alms, which he knew how to distribute with more Cunning
than Piety, employing for that use the Money that was given him at his
Departure. His Artifices had immediately the Effect he had promised to himself;
for the People, who never dive into any thing, and judge of all things by the
Appearances, looked upon Don Lewis as the Defender of Justice. He knew so well
how to behave himself in his Dissimulation, with so much artifice, that in a
short while the Public was as fully persuaded of the sincerity of his
Intentions, as it was already of his Virtue.

As soon as Don Lewis found himself in the good Opinion of the Common People to
his Hearts desire, he made use of the Credit which his Artifices had acquired
him, for to inspire into 'em an Aversion against the Senate, and against the
Nobility. The Senators being well informed of the Designs of Don Lewis,
neglected nothing for the destroying his ill Intentions. They let those see,
who were not prepossessed, that Don Lewis made it his whole Business to
disunite the Nobility and the People, only that he might with the more ease
crush 'em both afterward.

While that the Affairs of Messina were in this ill disposition, Yolanda was in
no more tranquillity in the midst of the Court, than her Relations amidst
Tumults and Seditions. She had received a Letter from Don Philip Cigala her
Uncle, which had given her some Comfort, as much as her Love alarmed was
capable of Consolation, in the unhappy Circumstances which the Intrigues of the
Marchioness of Villa-Franca, and of the Countess of Castelmara, had reduced her
to. Repassing in her Mind all the Circumstances of that Letter, she judged that
her Relations were desirous of a Match between her and the Prince of Escaletta,
out of Reasons of Interest or Decency, perhaps unknown to the Prince, or at
least perhaps without that Love had any share therein. These Reflections
augmented her anxiety, and the remembrance of her Lover's Infidelity put her in
despair. The Countess was become suspected to her, through the Interest she had
seen she took in her Marriage with the Duke of Fernandina. She was surrounded
with People whom she hated, and she had not a Person of trust, to whom she
could discover the real Sentiments of her Heart, which much contributed to the
rendering her Misfortunes the more sensible; nothing in the World being so
proper to allay our Evils, and principally Amorous Pains, as imparting 'em to a
Confident. The Tears she shed, and the Affliction which almost ever appeared in
her Face, were not capable of bringing any great change to her Beauty, which
was so perfect, that all the Court spoke of it with admiration. Those who knew
her not, were extremely desirous to see her, and she was commonly called The
Beautiful Sicilian. Several young Persons of the Court sighed for her, but not
any of 'em had ever declared to her his Passion, by reason of the difficulty
there was of coming at her, and by the little opportunity she afforded for so
doing. In short, never did a Beautiful Person spend more unpleasantly the first
Years of her Youth; and those happy Times which two Lovers enjoy, who are not
disturbed in their Passion, had only lasted for her as long as was necessary
to make her the more lively sensible of the unhappy Estate she was in.

The End of the First Part.
YOLANDA OF SICILY A NOVEL.

THE SECOND PART.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street near
Covent Garden. MDCLXXXV.

YOLANDA OF SICILY.
PART II.
THe Marchioness of Villa-Franca, whom Yolanda's Contempt neither made to
despond, nor cease prosecuting her Design, which she was still in hopes of
effecting, either by Cunning or Compulsion, made fresh Instances to the
Ministers, to insinuate into their Minds the Marriage of the Duke of Fernandina
with Yolanda, as an Affair of State. The favorable Circumstances of the
Troubles of Messina, which augmented every day, contributed very much to the
engaging on her Side the Count de Pennaranda, President of the Council of
Italy. The Count being persuaded, that nothing could be done better for the
Service of the King of Spain, and for the common Interest of the Nation, than
to make the Spaniards enter into the Alliance of the Principal Families of
Sicily, took the liberty to press the Business hard to the Queen; and seeing
her Majesty had a repugnance to give her Consent, without consulting the mind
of Yolanda, Penneranda represented to her, That Persons of a Great Rank do
never marry by their Choice, since that the very Princesses of Sovereign
Families are often Sacrifices to the Interests of the State, and become the
Wives of those whom they had looked upon as Enemies; so that Yolanda's
Inclination ought not to be any Impediment in this Business: That she was
perhaps of the humor of most young Women, who propose to 'emselves nothing
more in their establishment, than the satisfying their present Passion, and who
never fail of being unhappy, when that their Fondness and Transports being
cooled and diminished, they come to consider the state they are in, and the
state they might have been in, if they had defered to the Sentiments of those
who were not prepossessed, as they were. The Count perceiving that the Queen
was satisfied with his Reasons, added, That the Duke of Fernandina had so many
good Qualities, that he did not doubt but that Yolanda would love him, as soon
as that she knew him. There needed no more to persuade the Queen fully. The
Marriage was resolved on, and the Queen took upon her self to acquaint Yolanda
with this News, who had long expected some such like business. Her Majesty
spoke to her thereof, and let her know, that her Affection, and the desire of
seeing her well settled, had made her desirous to see her united to the Duke of
Fernandina, assuring her, That in favor of this Match, she would give 'em both
Testimonies of her Kindness, and of the satisfaction she took therein. Yolanda,
dissembling out of respect the Spite which these Tidings created in her,
thanked the Queen for her Goodness, and answered, That she had nothing to reply
to what her Majesty commanded her; nevertheless, that she most humbly beseeched
her to give her time to procure the Consent of her Relations, that so she might
not incur the Anger of Heaven by so manifect a neglect. The Queen gave her
leave to write to 'em thereof, and ordered her nevertheless to prepare her self
to depart within three Months, to go to the Duke of Fernandina at Naples. The
Countess of Castelmara, pretending a great surprise at so sudden a Resolution,
went to Yolanda, to sift her Mind upon the matter: But she made her answer with
so much reservedness, that the Countess found it very difficult to pry into her
real Sentiments. Then she used extraordinary Efforts, to make her resolve to
obey with a good Grace: But Yolanda, who had prepared her self for these
Violences, had at first took her Resolution, and was determined to die, when
that she should see there was no more resource, and to conceal in the mean
while her Resolution, hoping that Time, her Relations, or perhaps the Prince of
Escaletta, might work some Change. Thus she did not vent her Resentment into
impertinent Discourses, but made the Countess answer, and all those who made
her Complements upon this Marriage, that she expected with submission the
Answer of the Will of her Relations. The Marchioness of Villa-Franca would
needs make and give a noble Present to this fair future Bride. Yolanda, without
refusing it, desired her to give her leave not to receive it, until the Consent
of her Family was arrived. The Marchioness could not take offense at so prudent
an Answer, and Yolanda, by so handsome a Conduct, deceived the Vigilance of
those who watched her, and found means to give her Relations an Account of the
state she was in, and of the Design she had to prefer Death, before the
Marriage that was proposed to her.

As soon as her Relations knew the Resolution that was taken in Spain, they had
diverse Conferences for the contriving the Means of hindering this Marriage, and
of delivering Yolanda. All the Nobility joined with them, and complained
publicly of this Injustice. The Governor, pretending he would appease 'em,
went to the Palace where the Senate does assemble, and having caused the
Senators to come thither, he caused the Gates to be shut up, with design to
have 'em all put to death. Don Antonio Caraffo having notice of the Peril which
menaced his Father, went to the Palace, with a Resolution either to free him,
or to perish. He was followed with so numerous a Populace, that the Captain of
the Governor's Guards was afraid that all was upon the point of being lost,
and that they were going to set fire to the Palace, if the Senators were not
quickly set at liberty. He gave notice thereof to the Governor, who caused the
Gates to be opened, and sent 'em all back.

The Prince of Escaletta, impatient to know what would be the Issue of all
these Disorders, knowing that the term of his Mistresses departure did
approach, and not being able to imagine a greater Misfortune, than to see her
in the Arms of his Rival, was incessantly contriving the means of securing her
from this Violence. His Friends and her Relations were so taken up to defend
themselves against the Insults of the Spaniards, and to detain the Populace,
provoked by the Chears of the Governor, that they had not time to think of
giving succor to Yolanda, nor assist with their Counsels the Prince of
Escaletta. Thus this unhappy Lover, having no more prospect of any resource,
abandoned himself to all the Expedients which his Despair inspired him with;
and having made Provision of Money and Jewels, he went away for Algiers, and
put himself into the Hands of the famous Corsair Trik, whom he endeavored to
engage in his Interests, by the Presents which he heaped upon him, and by the
Discourses, filled with Flattery, wherewith he accompanied his Liberalities,
owning to him sincerely, that the Reputation of his Valor had obliged him to
court his Protection, for the delivering his Mistress from the Oppression of
the Spaniards. This Corsair immediately promised to serve him, with assurances,
that he should quickly know, that he was not deceived in the good Opinion which
he had conceived of him.

Whereupon he armed two good Ships, and put to Sea, with a resolution of
waiting for Yolanda, and of taking her when she should pass into Italy. That
Lovely Person was in the mean while under inconceivable Disquiets: The hideous
Idea she had formed to her self of the Prince of Escaletta's Infidelity, had
determined her to put her self to death, when she could no longer defer being
the Wife of the Duke of Fernandina. Being upon the point of departing from
Madrid, she went to take leave of her Companions. Donna Theresa de Gomez, who
had long been in love with the Duke of Fernandina, had always flattered her
self with marrying him; and seeing Yolanda was ready to depart, vexed that a
Stranger was going to frustrate her of her Hopes, by robbing her of the Man she
loved; and imagining that the Marchioness of Villa-Franca had joined with
Yolanda to deceive her, when that they had engaged her to feign her being
beloved by the Prince of Escaletta, the remembrance of this Injury, and the
regret of losing her Lover, touched her so to the quick, that she could not
forbear declaiming and tearing the Letter of the Prince of Escaletta,
reproaching Yolanda with her Perfidiousness, and complaining of her having been
betrayed. Yolanda surprised at this action, perceived by this Sally, and by the
other Discourses with which Donna Theresa held her, that they had been both
deceived. She endeavored to appease her, by a sincere confession of the Truth.
But Donna Theresa, who had her Mind prepossessed, and who regulated the
Sentiments of Yolanda for the Duke of Fernandina, by her own, not being able to
understand how that any other could hate a Man whom she found so amiable,
refused to hear her, and without entering into any further clearing of the
Point, she retired in disorder, having not the power to support the presence of
a Rival whom she thought happy.

After this Sally of Donna Theresa, Yolanda did no longer doubt but that her
Lover had ever been faithful to her; and this thought gave her the more horror
for the Marriage she was threatened with. In the mean while, she was
nevertheless forced to resolve on her departure. The Countess of Castelmara was
encharged with her Conduct. They embarked at Barcelona, in a Gally of Spain,
which had order to carry 'em into Sicily. The Disquiets of Yolanda augmented by
the same degrees that she approached her Country; and and though she was in great
hopes of the Love of the Prince of Escaletta, and of the Kindness of her
Relations, the Authority of the Duke of Fernandina made her fear the worst. She
was in these agitations when that the Ships of Trik gave the Alarm to the
Spanish Gally. The Efforts the Captain made to gain the Shore, were all to no
purpose; but the Corsair had taken such exact measures; that it was impossible
for the Spaniard to avoid the Combat. The Match at first seemed very unequal,
and there seemed to be temerity in resisting two Ships so well armed:
Nevertheless, the Captain, without being daunted by the Menaces of Trik, who
had declared he would sink him if he delayed yielding up the Gally, defended
himself with great Valor, and gave to understand by his vigorous Resistance,
that he would not suffer himself to be so easily taken as the Corsair had
imagined. The enamored Prince of Escaletta fearing that the obstinacy of this
Captain would prove the destruction of his Mistress, saw not one Broad side
given which gave not cruel Alarms to his Love: He represented to himself every
moment the Despair he should be reduced to, if by misfortune he was going to be
the Cause of Yolanda's Death; and not being willing to expose any longer a
Person whom he loved more than his own Life, he resolved at length to perish
himself, or to secure her without hazarding the losing her. This obliged him to
desire Trik to give him a Pinnace, with some Soldiers, to board the Gally with
Sabre in hand. The Corsair, who was irritated by the rash Resistance of the
Spaniards, made some difficulty, pretending he would not expose him to so
evident a danger, though in his Soul he was not sorry for it, in hopes of gaining
his Jewels, and perhaps that he might dispose of Yolanda according to his own
will and pleasure, of whom he had framed to himself an agreeable Idea, by the
Discourses of her Lover. The Prince having insisted in his demand of a Pinnace,
the Corsair seemed to be overcome with repugnance, and to yield to his
Importunities, and gave it him, with thirty resolute Soldiers, who boarded the
Gally in spite of all the firing of the Spaniards. The Prince having fixed upon
the Captain, whom he easily distinguished by his Valor, was so happy as to
disable him immediately; and imagining the Turks would without pain subdue the
others, the impatience he was in to see his Mistress, mingled with the
apprehension she might be dead, made him abandon the care of pursuing his
Victory, to learn news of her. What aversion soever Yolanda had for the Duke of
Fernandina, the Image of Death, and the fear of being in a little time the Prey
of a barbarous Corsair, had made her forget her Hatred, especially after the
Compassion she had for the Death of the Countess of Castelmara, who had been
killed with a Cannon-shot. She implored the Succors of Heaven with a great
Resignation, when that the Prince of Escaletta, who was descended into the
bottom of the Hole to see her, presented himself before her eyes. It is easy
to judge of Yolanda's surprise, who expected nothing more than Death, seeing in
that moment appear the only Person in the World who made her love Life. The
Prince finding her in a very deplorable estate, Fear nothing, Madam, said he to
her, I am here to deliver you. The surprise she was in at the sight of her
Lover, had like to have been more fatal to her than her Fear had been: She fell
into a Swoon in the Arms of her Women, and the Prince of Escaletta being
reassured at the sight of a Person who was so dear to him, thought of nothing
more than of rendering himself Master of the Gally, and returned again above
deck in all haste, without so much as perceiving Yolanda's being fallen into a
Swoon. He found that the Spaniards defended themselves with an extraordinary
Opiniativeness; and animated with that noble Ardour which his Love inspired him
with, he rushed in amongst 'em, and was so well seconded by the Turks, that in
a short time he found no more Resistance. But he could not gain so considerable
Advantage, without being wounded in several Places, though somewhat slightly.
Trik, who was just come on board the Gally, having perceived that the Prince
lost Blood, caused him to be carried away, in spite of his Resistance, and gave
order he should be carried into a Ship, where an able Surgeon searched his
Wounds.

The Corsair, in the mean while, searched all the Corners and Cranies of the
Gally, where he thought any Money might be hid, as often happens in such like
Occasions. Yolanda being recovered from her Swoon, and thinking to find the
Prince, was terribly frighted to see the Corsair approach, whose Mien alone
inspired Terror. Trik, struck with the Luster of so surprising a Beauty,
paused a moment to consider her; and though she seemed to him very amiable, his
Avarice prevailed over all the Motions of his Heart, and the desire of finding
Money, which the Turks are more greedy of than all other Nations, obliged him
to ask her if she knew not where the Captain of the Gally had concealed his
Treasure. Yolanda, in stead of making him any answer, abandoned her self to
Tears, no longer doubting but that she was a Slave, and imagining that the
excess of her Love had deceived her, when she fancied, she had seen the Prince
of Escaletta.

The Corsair, for his part, had his thoughts wholly bent on reaping the Spoils
of the Spanish Captain, by causing what was most precious in the Gally to be
transported into his Ships, the Gally being too much disabled to avoid
Shipwreck. He ordered that Yolanda should be carried into his own Ship, as well
as several Travelers who had taken that occasion of going into Italy. Yolanda
was hardly got into the Pinnace, than that the Gally-slaves were heard to cry
out after a lamentable manner. Then they all perceived that the Gally was upon
sinking. The Cries redoubled, and there arose a confusion of piteous Voices of
Persons who were going to perish, whereof several cast 'emselves into the Sea.
Nay, Trik himself ran a great risque, and saved himself by swimming, with some
difficulty. They had just done searching the Prince of Escaletta's Wounds,
which were found very slight, when that this doleful Noise struck his Ears. His
Love making him fear the worst, he crawled toward that side where the Gally
was, which he saw disappear in a moment; and not doubting but that his Mistress
was swallowed up by the Waves, because he knew not of her having been conveyed
into the other Ship, he only gave ear to his Despair, and precipitated himself
into the Sea, much less out of hopes of succouring her, than not to survive
her. His Men having cast 'emselves in after him, saved him against his will,
just in the nick of time he began no longer to be able to resist the violence
of the Billows, and carried him again on board, where he recovered his Spirits,
by the care they took to make him vomit up the Water he had swallowed. But his
Grief was not the less strong, and turning toward the Corsair, from whom he
thought he had received the Help he had newly given him, What have I done, too
generous Trik, said he to him, for to oblige you to deprive me of the only
Comfort I have left, of accompanying in Death that Person who alone rendered
Life supportable to me? Trik perceiving by this Discourse that the Prince was
prepossessed of Yolanda's being drowned, was not over-sorry at his Error, the
Charms of that Beautiful Person having already inspired him with Sentiments of
Love. He confirmed to him the Death of his Mistress, giving him to understand,
that he had in vain used his Endeavors to save her, but that the Gally sunk so
suddenly, that he himself had like to have been buried in the Billows. The
Prince finding his Grief renewed by the Discourse of the Corsair, would have
stole away the second time to have flounced into the Sea; but he was prevented
by his Men, who watched him with all the care imaginable, lest he should make
himself away. Trik in the mean while went into the other Ship, under color of
giving there the Orders necessary, covering perhaps with that pretext the
pressing desire he had of seeing Yolanda, and of preventing either she or the
Prince having any Tidings of one another. He found her more charming than she
had seemed to him the first time, and became passionately enamored. But as he
had got a habit of making all his Sentiments submit to those of his Avarice,
and judging by the excess of his Passion, of Yolanda's Beauty, he resolved to
carry her to Constantinople, where those Women are sold at a dear rate, as are
handsome enough to enter into the Seraglio of the Grand Seignior. The more he
saw her, the more he found her to abound in Charms. Yolanda in the mean while
recollected all that had happened to her in the Gally, and not being able to
undeceive her self, but that she had seen the Prince of Escaletta, she could
not understand how he had disappeared and vanished so soon. Trik accosting her,
sound her in a very deplorable condition, and endeavoring to speak to her, he
pretended to comfort her, and told her, That her Circumstances were not so
unhappy as she imagined, since she was fallen into the hands of a Man who had a
great respect for Ladies, and that he should be very sorry to do any thing to
displease her. Yolanda being desirous to inform her self whether she had seen
the Prince of Escaletta, or a Phantasm, thanked Trik for his Civility, and told
him, That the loss of her Liberty was not what afflicted her most, having been
long accustomed to Servitude; but that she fancied she had seen, before she was
brought on board that Ship, a Cavalier of her own Nation, in whom she took a
great deal of Interest, and whom she was afraid did perish in the Gally. If it
be the Prince of Escaletta you mean, said the Corsair to her, I partake with
you in the affliction for his death: He was my Friend, and I could not save him
from the Shipwreck, what Endeavors soever. I used, and what Care and Pains
soever I took to free him out of that Peril. He is then dead, and I was not
mistaken, cried the sad Yolanda: After which, Tears and Sobs stifled her Voice.
This News did so sensibly afflict her, that she would have drawn Compassion
from a Heart less hardened than that of a Corsair. This wicked Wretch, after
having given his Orders to the Officers, returned to the Ship wherein the
Prince was on board, in a condition much like to that of Yolanda, and as
cruelly tormented for the loss of his Mistress, as she had been afflicted at
the Tidings of her Lover's being cast away. Trik being already impatient to see
him gone, represented to him, That it was unbecoming so great a Courage, to
abandon himself to Grief; That he ought to resolve upon something without any
farther delay; and that he would show his Love much better by revenging his
Mistress, and by entertaining an irreconcilable Hatred against the Spaniards,
than by suffering himself to be led away by an useless Despair. The Prince had
a kind of scorn at the Turk's Remonstrances, and his Wounds not being so
considerable as to hinder him from acting, he came of a sudden to a
Determination, and resolved to return to Messina, with a design of making there
a cruel War upon the Spaniards, whom he looked upon as the Authors of Yolanda's
Death. He desired Trik to carry him into some Port where he might embarque for
Messina; but being told how difficult it was to get thither, by reason of the
opposition of some Spanish Ships which guarded the Coasts, to hinder any
Victuals or Provisions being carried into Messina, which they pretended to
reduce by Hunger, the Prince was obliged to embarque in a Ship which he met
with by chance, bound for Venice, where he arrived two days after. At Venice he
was informed, how that the Disorders of Messina augmented every day, and that
the Senate and Nobility, being reduced to extremity, had sent Deputies to Rome,
for the beseeching the Ambassador of Spain to implore in favor of 'em the
Clemency of the Queen Regent. The Prince extremely surprised at this News, went
Post-haste to Rome to hinder this Accommodation, which deprived him of the
Means and Occasions of being revenged on the Spaniards. He discovered at his
arrival at Rome, that Don Antonio Caraffo was there, with two Senators, and
that the Rumor which was spread abroad, of their being upon the point of an
Accommodation with the Ambassador of Spain, was an Invention of Caraffo, who
had found out that Expedient to make his Voyage with the more security, and to
amuse those who were still in the Spanish Party; though their Design was to take
Measures with the Cardinal and Duke d' Estrees, to sound if the Most Christian
King was willing to take the City of Messina into his Protection. The Prince of
Escaletta, overjoyed at hearing a Resolution so conformable to his Sentiments,
went to the House of the Ambassador of France, and having made himself known,
he was admitted to the secret Conferences which the Deputies of Messina had
with the Cardinal d' Estrees; but to no purpose, because that the Messineses,
who thought less to give 'emselves to the French, than to satisfy their great
and continual Hatred against the Spaniards, were still uncertain, the Division
being so great among 'em, that some revoked what the others had concluded.
Nevertheless, despairing of being reconciled with the Spaniards, Don Antonin
Caraffo had order from the Senate to go into France, to beseech his Most
Christian Majesty to succor the People of Messina. He found many Difficulties
in making his Voyage, because that the Spaniards, who are better served by
their Spies than by their Captains, having notice thereof, sent Scouts abroad,
and way laid him, for the having him seized. But he travestied himself so well,
that he deceived their Vigilance, and got into France, where he laid open the
Occasion of his Journey, and the Extremities the People of Messina were reduced
to, who were brought to eat Insects, after having consumed their Horses and
their Dogs, and could not avoid perishing either by Famine or by Rage, in the
Resolution they had taken, of preferring Death before the Spanish Tyranny.

Lewis the Great, who has no less Compassion for the Miserable, than he has
Rigor for those who dare oppose him, was so moved at the Oppression of these
poor People, that he gave 'em great Succors in a time when the numerous Armies
of the Allies in Flanders, that of the Germans upon the Rhine, the Forces of
the Spaniards in Catalonia, and the great Fleet of the Hollanders upon the
Coast of Britany, would have made a less courageous King think of the Defense
of his Territories, without sending his Troops and his Ships to the further
Ends of Europe, for the relieving an oppressed City, especially not being able
to foresee at that time, that the Conjuncture of Affairs would oblige him to
withdraw 'em.

In the mean while, News came to Messina of the pretended Shipwreck of Yolanda.
All the Nobility were equally concerned at it, some out of Interest of Blood,
and others out of the Compassion they had of the Destiny of a Person of her
Birth; and if they could have added any thing to the implacable Hatred they had
already against the Spaniards, her Death would have very much contributed to
augment it. All the Prince of Escaletta's Friends wrote to him to Rome Letters
of Consolation, which had the common Success of that sort of Epistles; and his
Relations, who had thought him dead, desired him to return to Messina, to
comfort 'em for the Affliction the News of his Death had created in 'em. He
began his Journey accordingly, but had the misfortune to be taken at Sea by a
Majorea Privatier, who having known him for a Messinese, delivered him
immediately to the Duke of Fernandina, who was at that time Viceroy of Sicily.
This generous Duke, who had formerly known the Prince of Escaletta, and had no
share in all the Artifices which his Mother made use of for the constraining
Yolanda to accept him for her Husband, was so touched at his Rival's
Misfortune, that very far from executing upon him the Order he had received
from Spain, to put to death all the Messineses who should fall into his Hands,
he went to see him in the Prison, under pretext of questioning him concerning
the Affairs of Messina, and comforted him in Terms very civil and obliging,
assuring him, that he needed not to be under any fear of his Life, and that he
would make known to him, that he had never merited his Hatred, though he had been
his Rival, adding with a kind of confusion, That he had but lately known the
Violence that had been done Yolanda upon his account, and that he would have
rather chosen to have lost her Fortune, than to have married her against her
will. The Prince of Escaletta, confused to find so much Generosity in a Man
whom the Interest of his Love had made him look upon as his most cruel Enemy,
was at first something touched by the Duke's obliging Discourses: But
representing to himself, that a great Courage finds much more satisfaction in a
suchlike Revenge, than in another more bloody, he fancied it would be a
poorness of Spirit in him to make shameful Submissions to his Rival, and made
him answer after a haughty manner, That it was in vain for him to do himself
the Honor to save his Life, which was not in his power, without disobeying the
Orders of Spain; That his present Circumstances would make him receive Death as
a Favor, having only survived Yolanda to revenge her, in contributing to
deliver his Country from the Insults of the Spaniards; and that at present,
that the French were entered into Messina, he had nothing more to desire. The
Duke of Fernandina, admiring this Generosity, replied, That he ought to have
more respectful Sentiments for his Lawful Prince; and then assured him, that
his Power was not so limited, but that he could preserve his Life, without
disobeying the King. The Consequences justified that he spoke to him with
sincerity; and he not only sweetened his Imprisonment, by several little
Liberties which he gave him, but he wrote also into Spain, That he had deferred
putting him to death, that so the Nobility of Sicily might not be wrought up to
perfect Despair, and to prevent the Cabals which his Relations, whose Power was
formidable, would have made in the other Cities of the Kingdom, which were
already sufficiently staggered by the Example of Messina; adding, That he was
in hopes usefully to employ the Ministry of that Prisoner, for the reducing the
Messineses to some Accommodation. The Court of Spain, fearing the Consequences
of this Revolt, abated of its former Rigor, upon the Viceroy's Remonstrances,
and returned him this Answer, That they relied upon his Prudence in that
Business, and that since he thought in convenient for the good of the present
State of Affairs, they remitted to him the Execution of that Prince. But we
must leave the Prince for some time in a Prison which is not over-rigorous, to
go in the mean while and learn Tidings of Yolanda.

As soon as the perfidious Trik had parted with the Prince, he thought of
nothing but of glutting his Avarice, by drawing a considerable Sum from the
Sale of Yolanda, and having carried her to the Port of Constantinople, he had
her proposed to the Bashaw who has the Superintendence of the Seraglio, as one
of the most Beautiful Persons in the World. This Bashaw having seen her, was
satisfied with her Beauty, though he could have rather wished she had been
perfectly Fair, because the Grand Seignior has more inclination to love those
who are so, than all others: Nevertheless, he bought her, and put her into the
Seraglio. So many several Descriptions have been seen of that House of Pleasure
of the Ottoman Emperors, that every one fancies he is perfectly well informed
of every Circumstance of the Place: yet the truth is, few have given an exact
Account of it, because that extraordinary care has been taken to hinder the
Public, and principally Strangers, from coming to the knowledge of what passes
therein: But let the Reader be pleased to take the following Relation of it,
which I have drawn out of Memoires which were given me for authentic.

The Seraglio is a very vast House, wherein there is almost an infinite number
of extraordinary fine Apartments, all distinguished by different Gardens. These
Lodgings are taken up by the Grand Seignior, by the Sultana's, and by several
Beautiful Persons, who are chosen out of all Nations in the World, without any
distinction of Birth or of Country, Beauty alone being required for their
admittance Nevertheless, they perform a kind of Noviceship, before they appear
before the Eyes of the Grand Seignior, and particular care is taken to teach
'em the Turkish Tongue, in case they understand it not, that if they have the
Honor of pleasing his Highness, they may be capable of answering him, without
robbing him of the Pleasure of Conversation, which is certainly what commonly
affords most delight. They are governed and served by Eunuchs, who for the most
part have but very little Complaisance, and treat 'em with a great deal of
severity. The first Year they enter the Seraglio is spent in learning diverse
Exercises, and the Salamelek, or the Reverence they are taught to make in
extraordinary Ceremonies. They are afterward admitted, or sent back, according
as they have Qualities necessary to please the Grand Seignior; and the Stories
which have run up and down Europe, of the Resistance his Highness met with in a
cruel Beauty, are so far from being true, that never any Lady was introduced to
the Emperor, until she had made solemn Protestations that she loved him, and
that she would never neglect endeavoring to please him. During the first Year,
they are shown every day in a great Hall as many Pourtraicts of the Grand
Seignior as he has Years, each of which represents how he was made and clothed
the first Day of that Year. Those who out of Principles of Virtue, or of
Modesty, resist the Cunning and Tricks of the Eunuchs, who are proposed to
inspire them with Love for the Grand Seignior, are shut up in a kind of
Monastery consecrated to Mahomet, wherein they observe several Vows, and
pricipally that of Chastity. And as the number of 'em is very small, they are
had in great veneration, the Turks calling 'em The Wives of their Great Prophet.

Yolanda having been conducted into the Seraglio, was under extreme Disquiets,
upon the consideration of her present Condition; and though the Death of her
Lover, and her other Misfortunes, had made her look with indifferency upon all
that could happen to her, the fear of the Violences which she imagined would be
done her, kept her in continual apprehensions, until that an European Eunuch,
who was her Master in the Turkish Tongue, had settled her Mind a little at rest,
by acquainting her with what was observed in the Seraglio. He assured her,
there was no Example of Force ever having been made use of, to constrain any
Lady to satisfy the Desires of the Grand Seignior; adding, with a kind of
Complaint, That the Seraglio was but too much filled up with the Cabals of
those who courted the Favor of the Sultana's, or the Protection of the Chief
of the Eunuchs, for to insinuate into the Emperor the Violence of their
Passion, and endeavor by such like Artifices to be preferred before their
Companions. Yolanda being insensibly disabused of the Terrors which she had
framed to her self of the Seraglio, applied her self very carefully to learn
the Turkish Tongue, and spent the time she did not bestow upon her Lessons, in
playing upon Instruments, whereof the she acquitted her self to admiration.
Having observed several times, that a young Eunuch eyed her attentively, nay,
and served her with more application and respect than the others, these
Distinctions began to render her uneasy, fearing perhaps that this Eunuch
might be an Emissary of the Grand Seignior's Pleasures, that plied about her
with some Design: But her Amazement was much greater, when that one day, being
alone in her Chamber, this Eunuch came in, with his Face all bathed in Tears,
and told her, That he had for a long while hesitated speaking to her, out of
the shame he had to make himself known, in the unhappy Estate he was reduced
to, which was a thousand times worse to him than Death: Nevertheless, what
repugnance soever he had thereto, the desire he had to render her Service, by
informing her of the Affairs of the Seraglio, which he had learnt by an
Experience of three years, had prevailed with him over the shame of his
Condition. Yolanda eyed him in the mean while, and had a confused Idea of the
Face of that Person, though she was entirely unacquainted with his Voice. The
Eunuch perceiving that she could not recall him to mind, and that she was in
some perplexity, It is not at all extraordinary that you know me not again,
pursued he, I am persuaded that there is a very great difference between Don
Augustine Gregorio, Yolanda 's Lover, and a sorry Eunuch of the Seraglio, and
you. The Tears which trickled from his Eyes in abundance, hindered hm from
proceeding. At length Yolanda knowing him again for Don Augustine, though she
found his Countenance very much changed, and his Voice wholly different,
immediately declared her self very joyful to see him; and not understanding,
perhaps, that there was so great a difference between an Eunuch and another
Man, she reproached him with his Despair, telling him, That it became him to
have more Christian Sentiments, and hope that Heaven would free him out of that
Slavery, by procuring him the Means of returning into Sicily. For your part,
you may still flatter your self with those Hopes, replied Don Augustine; and the
only Comfort I have left in my Misfortune, is, to hope that I may perhaps
contribute thereto by my Counsels. But for my part, who am only an unhappy
Wretch, and have nothing more of a Man than a false appearance, it is long
since I resolved upon my Course of Life, and have resigned my self to spend my
Days in the Employment you see me officiate. Yolanda, surprised at this
Discourse, did imagine that an Eunuch was some hideous sort of thing; but she
chose rather to remain in ignorance, than expose her self to the hearing an
Explication, as would perhaps have wounded her Modesty. After this first
Discovery, Don Augustine desired her to tell him. Tidings of the Prince of
Escaletta. This Name having renewed Yolanda's Grief, she let him know, by a
Torrent of Tears, which she could not keep in, that something fatal had happened
to him; and then told him after what manner she believed he was unhappily cast
away. Don Augustine perceived that Yolanda was extremely afflicted; the habit he
had got of bewailing, made him find her Tears so reasonable, that he had not
the power to comfort her, and withdrew without saying a Word more: But not
being willing too to abandon her in her Affliction, he entered into the
Apartment of another Lady, whom he knew to be of a very gay and facetious
Humor; he let her know, how he came fro leaving Yolanda in a piteous
Condition, and desired her to go into her Chamber, to help to dissipate her
doleful melancholy Reflections. As Ladies love to be obliging, and as Beautiful
Persons have commonly a Complaisance for one another, (when that the Interest
of the Jealousy of their Beauties has not yet changed their Temper) Zarabey
(so was the Lady's Name) went that very moment into Yolanda's Chamber, and made
use of all her good Humor to divert her. Yolanda was so sensibly pleased with
this generous Complaisance of Zarabey, that she suspended her Grief, to make
Returns to her Civilities. Don Augustine coming back a little while after; was
very glad to find the Conversation of Zarabey had produced the Effect he had
promised to himself. As he was well acquainted with the Seraglio, and had a
great Opinion of Zarabey, he counseled Yolanda to contract a Friendship with
her: and Yolanda found her own Inclination so disposed to follow his Counsel,
that she willingly made all the necessary Paces for the engaging this Commerce.
Zarabey was one of those perfect Beauties who have nothing but what is
admirable; she was fair, and just such a Person as was the very Hearts delight
of the Grand Seignior: Her gay Humor gave new Graces to the Charms which
abounded in her Face. She answered with so much acknowledgement the Testimonies
of Yolanda's Friendship, that in a little while they came to a perfect good
Understanding. The Eunuch, Don Augustine, contributed very much toward the
cementing this Union, by the advantageous Accounts he gave of Christendom to
Zarabey, and of Turkey to Yolanda. They met almost every Hour; and this great
Commerce having instilled into 'em a high esteem for one another, they lived in
the most endearing Terms imaginable. The Interest which Zarabey took already in
her Friend, made her desirous to learn by what Adventure she was come into the
Seraglio, being of so distant a Country. Yolanda, unwilling to refuse this
Token of the Confidence she had in her, gave her an exact Relation of all that
had happened to her, and not having been able to keep in her tears when that she
spoke to her of the loss of her Lover, and of the loss of her Liberty, Zarabey
seeming highly surprised to see her shed Tears, told her very ingenuously, That
she did not understand how she could complain of Evils which had had so happy
an Issue, and had procured her the Means of entering into the Seraglio, which is
the highest Flight of the Ambition of Women and the greatest Happiness that can
befall a Person of their Sex. Yolanda, much more amazed to see her have such
like Sentiments, than the other had been at her Grief, desired she would tell
her by what Circumstance the Condition of the Slaves of the Seraglio seemed to
her so happy. I perceive, reparteed Zarabey, that you have been brought up
amongst the Barbarians, since that being of a Sex which subjects you to the
Caprices of Men, who often, notwithstanding what Merit soever you may have,
prefer before you a wretched Slave, without Birth or Virtue, and ever confound
you with a number of other Women of all Humors, you can still complain of
being in the Seraglio, where we live in vast Plenty, and amidst Delights,
without any other Care than that of pleasing the Emperor of the World, and the
Greatest Man of the Universe. Yolanda judging by this Discourse of the unhappy
Condition of the Women of Turkey, where a Husband may have a number of Wives,
proportionable to the Estate he has to maintain 'em, would needs undeceive
Zarabey, by giving her to understand, that the Circumstances were not
altogether alike in Europe, where the Laws are more advantageous to the Ladies,
a Man not being allowed to marry more than one Wife, whom he was obliged to
consider as his Companion, without being permitted to have another while that
was living. This seemed so extraordinary to Zarabey, that she was persuaded
Yolanda sought to divert her, and make her self merry, by telling her such like
Stories, until that Don Augustine coming in, confirmed it to her very seriously,
and added too, That not only the Men of his Country had but one Wife, but that
it often happened too, that that Woman was the Mistress of several Men, without
her Husband's daring in any wise to complain.

Don Augustine had been so mingled in the Relation which Yolanda had given her
of what had happened to her in Spain, that Zarabey had an extreme Curiosity to
learn from him himself the Sequel of his Misfortunes. Yolanda had in vain
desired it of him several times; he had still excused himself, not daring to
expose himself to the Confusion he was afraid of receiving by a Relation whose
end was so Tragical to him. However, those two Beautiful Persons having desired
him very earnestly, what aversion soever his Circumstances gave him for Women,
the Consideration he had for Yolanda and for Zarabey prevailed over all his
other Motions; and being pressed beyond denial, he valued to 'em this Account
as the strongest Proof he could give 'em of his Complaisance: and after having
acquainted 'em with all that had befallen him until his going out of Spain, You
know, said he, addressing his Speech to Yolanda, that the Queen being highly
offended at my Audaciousness, was resolved to inflict on me an exemplary
Punishment; but was partly diverted from it by the earnest Supplications of my
Friends, who could not however hinder my being sent back into Sicily, with
order to him who had the Care to conduct me, to detain me a Month in the Castle
of S. Sauveur, and to show me there in the Garb and Habit which had disguised
me in the Palace, for to punish me in the very thing wherein my Crime
consisted. They made me embarque at Barcelona, in a Merchants Ship, freighted
with several Goods belonging to Genoueses. Hardly were we part of the way, but
that we were attaqued with a violent Tempest, which cast us upon the Coasts of
Barbary. A Turkish Corsair which scoured that Sea having discovered us, and
perceiving the sad pickle the Storm had reduced us to, attacked our Ship when
half in pieces, and easily rendered himself Master of it. The Severity wherewith
our Conqueror treated at first several Persons of our Ship, whom he put into
Chains, making me fear the like Treatment, determined me not to undeceive him
of the Error my Garb might lead him in, hoping he would have the more respect
for my Person. I succeeded but too well in this Design: The Corsair having
found me very much to his mind, treated me with a great deal of Civility, and
insensibly let me know I had made some impression upon his Heart. Shortly after
he spoke to me of his Passion, as a great Happiness for me, endeavoring still
to persuade me that he was my Slave, though by the Right of War I was his. My
Answer let him know, that I was very far from making Returns to all these
Addresses. But this was so far from making him cease his Pursuit, his Passion
augmented by my Resistances; and finding my self pressed by this furious Man, I
was constrained to free him out of the Error my Disguise had plunged him in,
by letting him know what I was. The Persons who accompanied me, having
confirmed to him my Words, I thought I should have been freed from his
Persecutions; but the knowledge hereof did put him in that rage against me that
he would needs immediately have me punished by fifty Blows of a Cudgel, which
he ordered should be given me immediately upon the Soals of my Feet, and which
I was only saved from by the arrival of an Officer from the Captain Bashaw, or
Admiral, who having heard talk of the Misfortune of our Ship, had sent this
Officer to receive the Share which was due to him by his Charge over all the
Prizes, before they had embezelled what was most precious, as often happens.
The Bashaw 's Envoy, after having visited all things with all possible
exactness, chose me, with two other Persons, for his Masters Share. This the
Corsair did not oppose, seeing that in consideration of my pretended Sex, and
of my good Mien, this Officer took me for a considerable Prize: He nevertheless
pretended to complain of his being robbed of the best of his Prize, and desired
him that he would at least leave the two others who were to accompany me; which
was granted him at length. I shall not amuse you with the impertinent
Particulars of my Voyage, nor with the Satisfaction which my Guide took in
carrying me along. He conducted me to Constantinople, and presented me to the
Captain Bashaw. This Turk, who under the appearance of a great deal of Probity,
concealed the most Cruel of all Men, seemed to be very well satisfied with me:
He told me in the Lingua Franca, ( which is a Language mixed with Italian, and
very easy to understand) That he easily perceived I was a Person of Quality,
and that I might assure my self he would distinguish me from his other Slaves.
I made him no other Answer than by a Curt'sie; and he then led me into an
Apartment, where the Slaves of my new Master received me with great
Demonstrations of Good Will, and with much more Humanity than I could have
hoped for from a Nation that had been represented to me so Barbarous. The next
day after my arrival, he had me clothed in Turkish Garments, which were extreme
neat, but not rich in the least. The Bashaw would needs I should serve him that
day at Dinner; He liked me so well in that Garb, that I began to be afraid, by
the satisfaction he let me know he took in me, that some new Disaster would
befall me. I was first thinking to prevent him, and had twenty times the Design
of laying my self at his Feet, for to declare to him what I was, before that my
Disguise had thrown me into new Perplexities; but I was still diverted from it
by the remembrance of the Corsairs Menaces, when I made to him the like
Confession. This unhappy Reflection created in me such a dread, that I resolved
to continue in my Disguise. The Bashaw treated me after such a manner, as
confirmed me in my apprehension; but I had not place left to doubt of my
Misfortune, when that calling for me one day, he told me, how he had a great
Esteem for me, nay, and that he found himself disposed to love me; That it was
my part to complete, by my Complaisance and Affection for his Person, what my
good Fortune had begun. The Trouble which appeared in my Looks after this
Declaration, having quickly let him know that this rendered me uneasy, he
continued speaking to me, and told me, That I needed not to stand in fear of
any Violence from him, not being of the Humor of other Patrons, who attain to
by main Force what is refused 'em out of Kindness; That very far from having
the thought of making use of the Authority he had over me as his Slave, he was
so nice in Love, he would be convinced I had an Inclination for him, before he
could resolve upon loving me. This last Discourse having encouraged me again,
he went away without staying for my Answer, and spent several days without
saying to me a word more. His Silence made me judge he had always spoke to me
with sincerity, until that having presented me with a very rich Robe, and very
different from that of the other Slaves, he told me, That he made me that
Present, to engage me to please him out of Acknowledgement, since I could not
do it out of Inclination. I made him answer, That I relied much upon his
Generosity, and that I was persuaded he would not force me to do any thing that
was contrary to my Religion and my Duty. Never fear it, replied he to me, my
Word is inviolable; I have given it you, and that is sufficient. I was so
persuaded of the great Generosity of my Bashaw, that I began to breathe, and
find my Condition less unhappy: However, a modest Air which I affected, for the
better maintaining my Personage, and the application I had to acquit my self of
such thing as were committed to my Care, perfectly inflamed him. The little
disposition he saw me have to love him, rendered him very pettish; and I
perceived that his Wives, who had all imaginable Complaisance for him,
endeavored to divert him all in vain. One of those whom he loved most, called
Salama, having perceived by his Sighs that he had some Passion in his Head,
knew so well how to make use of the good Opinion the Bashaw had of her, that he
owned to her at length, that I had inspired him with Love. As the Turkish Women
are accustomed to such like Infidelities, and that they are not so much as
allowed to show the least Jealousy, for fear of irritating their Husbands, by
opposing what they desire, Salama had not the least thought of blaming him. On
the contrary, she commended him in having made so good a choice, and promised
him to speak to me in his favor, for the letting me know of what consequence
it was to me to lay hold on my good Fortune. The Bashaw very much satisfied
with an Offer which so highly flattered his Desires, desired her to go about it
with all possible application, assuring her she could not give him a more
sensible Token of her Love. Salama called me into the Garden, where after
having cajolled and caressed me very highly, she spoke to me of the Bashaw 's
Passions, of his Merit, and of all the great Advantages I might hope for by
making Returns thereto. I own, that having been brought up in Europe, where the
Women are so nice upon this Matter, I was amazed to see with what Eloquence
Salama endeavored to persuade me to love her Husband; which made me suspect
that her Jealousy had inspired her to make use of this Artifice for the
discovering my Sentiments. I made her answer, That I thought the Bashaw a Man
of too good a Taste, and too much Sense, having so lovely a Wife as she, to
entertain any thoughts of an unfortunate Slave. I perceive, replied Salama,
that you are afraid of displeasing me, and that you perhaps apprehend that I
should trepan you; but that you may no longer have that thought, know, that the
Bashaw himself made known to me the Passion he has for you; and as I only seek
to satisfy him, I have taken upon me to spare him the trouble your Resistance
would have creattd in him. You are a Person of too much Reason, to bring so
Great a Man into Despair, out of a Delicacy which commonly proceeds only from
a false Principle of Modesty, wedded to our Sex, which ought never to be put in
practice, but when it serves to make Men set the greater Value upon us. I knew
by so free a Discourse the Sentiments which the Turks infuse into Women upon
the Point of Virtue, for the rendering 'em the more submissive to their Wills.
Salama did not press me any further; but two days after, having had me called
into the same Garden, she made me new Instances, and represented to me more
strongly than the first time, how much it did import me to receive a Fortune,
which so many others wish for to no purpose.

Though Salama was a perfect Beauty, and that the Bashaw distinguished her from
all his Wives; as she alone could not fulfill his Desires, she complied like a
Woman of Sense with his Inconstancy, and rendering her self complaisant to all
his Passions, she thereby preserved an Empire which her Beauty alone could not
have given her. These Reasons engaged her to solicit me with so much zeal and
fervency, as produced in me Motions very different from those she meant to
inspire. I began to have for Salama what she endeavored to instill into me for
her Husband. She exaggerated to me the Bashaw 's Love in such touching, melting
Terms, that I could not defend my self against all the Charms which she
displayed in that moment for to persuade me: Whereupon I determined to acquaint
her with what I was, without being able to unravel whether I did it to avoid
falling into the Inconveniences whereof I have already spoken, or out of hopes
of drawing some Advantage from the Discovery I made her. Never was Person more
surprised than Salama seemed to be, at her hearing so extraordinary a piece of
News. She was for some time without making me any Answer, and pretending not to
believe what I had told her, I made use of her affected Ignorance, and took
Liberties with her which are allowed of in Persons of the same Sex. Having
succeeded in this Trial, and believing to find in her all the Correspondence I
could desire, whether she found in me something she liked, or that she was
tempted by the easiness of a Commerce which could never be suspected, she made
tender Returns to my Transports, and I nicked the Occasion.

Now our whole thoughts were only how to keep the Bashaw in his Error, and
seek the Means of seeing one another often. The Pretext she took to speak to me
in favor of her Husband, furnished her with Occasions enough; yet she was now
and then forced to give Reasons for my Resistance, sometimes making my Modesty
the Impediment, and at others my bad Health. We amused the Bashaw for above
three Months with such like Artifices, and I began to be pretty well satisfied
with my Captivity, by the Care Salama took to sweeten it, and by the Promise
she made me, That as soon as the Bashaw was put to Sea for to command the Ships
which were to depart in a short time for Meccha, she would find the means of
flying away with me into my own Country.

Full of these Hopes, I redoubled my Transports and Addresses to Salama; when
that the Bashaw, impatient in his Love, would needs inquire himself into what
he was to hope from me; and suspecting perhaps his Wife did not use her Efforts
to prevail with me to comply with his Desires, he resolved to watch us
narrowly. The most usual Place of our Conversations was a Grotto at the end of
a Garden, whither People could not come without being perceived by those who
were in it. The Bashaw having stole cunningly into that Place, hid himself
there before that we came. The Impatience of seeing one another without
Witnesses, did not allow us to take any long Walk. As soon as we were got into
that Grotto, we abandoned our selves to our Love with all the Confidence of two
Lovers, who think they have nothing to fear; and the Bashaw surprised us in a
Condition as cleared all Doubts of what I was, and laid open the Treachery of
his Wife. His Rage inspired him forthwith with what Course he was to take; and
having called for a Slave whom he knew proper for executing the Design which
his Jealousy suggested to him, he rendered me incapable of ever making any one
jealous for the future.

The Tears which the remembrance of so barbarous an Action drew from poor Don
Augustine, stifled his Voice, and hindered him from being able to continue. What
Compassion soever so piteous a Story did create in Yolanda and Zarabey, they
could not refuse their Sex feeling a Contempt for Don Augustine, nor laughing at
the State this cruel Accident had reduced that unhappy Person to. The Disorder
he was in, hindered him from perceiving it; and they were so earnest with him to
tell 'em the Destiny of Salama, that he was obliged to continue his Discourse
in these Terms.

The unfortunate Salama, who was forced by her Husband to assist at the
execution of his Orders, resolved to prevent the Reproaches and Cruelties of
that Barbarian, by seizing a Poniard which the Bashaw wore by his Side, with
which she endeavored to kill her self; but her Hand having too weakly seconded
her despair, she only gave her self a slight Wound; and the Bashaw surprised
at her Resolution, had her carried away. I was for above eight days in hopes
Death would deliver me from my Ignominy; however, my Youth, and the Care that
was taken to please the Bashaw, who had recommended that nothing should be
spared for my Health and Recovery (perhaps out of the pleasure he proposed to
himself in insulting over my Misfortune) contributed so much to my Cure, that
in a short time I was in good Health, notwithstanding the regret I had to live.
My Despair did not hinder me from interessing my self in the Fortune of Salama,
and I had a kind of Consolation to learn, that the Bashaw, touched with her
Repentance, and compassionating the Weakness of her Sex, had pardoned her at
length.

The Bashaw having bethought himself of diverting the Grand Vizier by the
Account of his Cruelties and my Misfortunes, this Minister had the Curiosity to
see me; and having found in me all the Lines and Features of that Beauty which
had been so fatal to me, he made known to the Bashaw that the Grand Seignior
would be glad to hear this Story, and advised him to present me to his
Highness, for to serve him in the Seraglio, which the Bashaw promised him to do
in my presence; nay, and I looked upon this Employment as a Blessing, since it
would free me from the sight of my Executioner. But before I had that feeble
Comfort, he would needs give a new Regale to his Revenge, having called me to
serve him at Supper in my Garb of an Eunuch. I was extremely surprised to see
Salama, who was eating with him, and diverted him with a very gay and facetious
Conversation. The pleasure which I observed she took in doing it, confirmed to
me what I had often heard say of the Levity of Persons of her Sex, who are
easily comforted for the loss of those whom they have loved with most
Affection. But when that, of her own Motion, I saw that s;he excited the Bashaw
to look upon me, and to laugh, I perceived I had been all my Life long mistaken
in the good Opinion I had had of the feigned tenderness of such like Persons:
For my State was so far from raising her Compassion, that she insulted over me
with several Railleries, The Bashaw was so satisfied with her Complaisance,
that he desired her to relate to him what Artifices I had made use of to seduce
her. She obeyed him without repugnance, and affected so much Contempt for me,
that I cannot remember you are of the Sex of that perfidious Person, without
having some resentment against you.

This last Circumstance caused so much Grief in Don Augustine, that he went away
in haste, without listening to the Prayers of Yolanda and of Zarabey, who would
have still detained him.

Don Augustine was hardly gone out, when that a Black Eunuch came in, to give
those two beautiful Persons notice to be at a Sarao, or Dance, which was held
in the Apartment of the Chief of the Eunuchs. Yolanda, who was no longer
sensible to Pleasures, would willingly have dispensed her self from going
thither; but she had the Complaisance of accompanying Zarabey, who loved those
Divertisements, and who besides was overjoyed to be at those kind of
Assemblies, to observe if there was any Lady who could dispute with her the
Advantages wherewith she was so liberally gifted by Nature. She came also away
from thence very well satisfied, having either had the Happiness or Cunning to
gain a rich Necklace of Pearl, which was the Reward appointed for her who
should acquit her self of that Dance with the best Grace. Yolanda was none of
the last to congratulate her upon this Occasion; and as she had not any design
to please in the Seraglio, she was very glad to see that her Friend
distinguished her self. They lived in a strict Union; and Don Augustine,
contrary to the Custom of other Eunuchs, had so much Complaisance for 'em, that
he facilitated to 'em the means of seeing and entertaining one another very
often, though that these Conversations be not allowed 'em but certain Days of the
Week. Yolanda had so great an Affection for Zarabey, as made her desirous to be
acquainted with her Circumstances, of which she one day took occasion to speak
to her, and desired her to acquaint her how she came into the Seraglio, and if
her Relations had given their Consent thereto, or if she had been taken by
violence from their House. I should pardon any other Person so gross an Error,
interrupted Zarabey, laughing; but you who have so much Wit, may easily
believe, that there be such unjust Parents as to oppose the Happiness of their
Children, when that they are chosen to enter into the Seraglio. I did not
remember, replied Yolanda, that you had already called me Barbarian in the like
Conversation; nay, I will own, since you will needs have it so, that I was in
the wrong, to ask you a Question so foreign to good sense; but in revenge no
longer defer acquainting me by what extraordinary good luck you have attained
to a Felicity which you so highly prize. The Eunuch, Don Augustine, has already
made me the same Request, said Zarabey; I Will pass my word to satisfy your
Curiosity, as soon as we are all together. Happily Don Augustine came in in that
very moment, and Zarabey began her Story in this manner.

The Name of my Grandfather has made so much noise in the East, that I may
without shame own to you my Extraction, if the last Action he did, in
renouncing our Great Prophet, had not defaced all his Glory. He was an
European, and of Christian Race: Nevertheless, he had been brought up at the
Port, and with so much happiness, that he had merited the Esteem of the Grand
Seignior, who gave him Testimonies thereof in all Occasions, The Worth and
Valor he had showed in several Employments he was trusted with, had caused his
Birth to be forgotten: He was treated as if he had been born a Mussulman, and
enjoyed the same Privileges with those who had that Advantage. I will not give
you here the Particulars of the Life of that Great Man, all the Histories of
his Time speak thereof sufficiently: It is enough, I tell you, that after
having spent forty years in the Emperor's Service, he had the Weakness so
usual to most Men, and wished to see again his Native Country. Yet as he was
much above the common rate of Persons, I can hardly believe he suffered himself
to be led away by such ordinary Sentiments; and it is much more probable, that
a Christian Slave whom he loved passionately in the declension of his Age, had
the Art to revive a Desire he had always had, of returning into the Religion of
his Forefathers, and determined him by her Importunities to a shameful Flight:
For having disposed his Affairs with great secrecy, he fitted out two good
Ships, and after having given part of his Riches to one of his Wives whom he
had ever loved, he embarked with that unhappy Slave, upon I know not what
pretext. A Rumor ran a long while after, that he was entered into a Port of the
Christians: This was confirmed from so many several Places, that the Truth of
it was no longer doubted of. You may judge with what surprise his Wives heard
these sad Tidings, and principally she whom he had ever distinguished, who
expected his Return with Impatience, which will be easy for you to imagine,
when you shall know, that she proved with Child, (and from that Great Belly
came my Father.) She represented to her self every moment the Joy her Husband
would receive, by learning, that at a time when he was almost out of hopes of
having Children, she was upon the point, perhaps, of bringing him a Successor,
who might one day maintain the Reputation of his Name, so noted in the Ottoman
Empire. But that which ought to have proved her Joy, did only serve to make
her the more dolefully sensible of his departure, or to say rather, the loss of
her Husband. This grieved her to such a degree, that she was brought to Bed
before her time. People talked variously of my Grandfathers Departure: His
Friends, who were very numerous, having an abhorrence of an Action so unworthy
that Great Captain, took care to give out he had been take by the Galleys of
Malta: And as the Truth is never well known of what passes at Sea, this
Artifice, which gave People occasion to doubt whether his Absence was
voluntary, has rendered his Memory less odious: And his Son, or my Father, if
you please, who in a tender Age was already strong and robust, was brought up
at the Grand Seignior 's Court. People were incessantly speaking to him of the
Glory which his Father had acquired; and before he was at an Age of going to
the War, he was already full of that noble Boldness so natural to Great
Warriors. As soon as he was allowed to be in Occasions wherein he could show
his Courage, he gained the Esteem of all those who saw him fight. As I do not
design to give you here his History, I Will content my self with telling you,
That after having had considerable Advantages over the Enemies of the Grand
Seignior, Love, that Tyrant, which particularly applies it self to the subduing
of Great Men, triumphed over him in his turn: He saw my Mother at his passing
through Adrianople; she was a Georgian, and one of the most beautiful Persons
of the World. He liked her so extremely well, that he made his Addresses to
her, and resolved to marry her. I will not give you an Account of the
Circumstances of their Amors, though attended with very singular
Particularities. At length, after abundance of Difficulties, which he
vanquished by his Perseverance, his Love was rewarded, and you see in me the
Fruit of the first Year of their Marriage. The Persians having at that time
brought on foot a numerous Army, which seemed to menace all the Ottoman Empire,
my Father was one of the first on the March for the opposing their unjust
Designs, having ever before his Eyes the Examples of his Father. He had the
misfortune to be killed in endeavoring to make appear that he was the Worthy
Son of the Famous Bashaw Cigala. Zarabey had no sooner named the Bashaw Cigala,
than that she observed a great change in the Faces of those who heard her; but
particularly in that of Yolanda, who perceiving by the Relation she had newly
heard, that Zarabey was of her Family, embraced her, without giving her time to
continue.

THE END.

