An APPEAL to each individual Member of the present Parliament and Army, in the
case of John Poyntz alias Morris, Mary his wife, Jsabella Smith, Leonard Darby
and John Harris: Who by the Power, Policy, Treacherous Insinuations, and
Scandalous Suggestions of John Brown, Clerk of the House of Lords (who have
combined with one Littleton) have been illegally Imprisoned in four several
Prisons, by Virtue of the Lords Order, for the space of twenty Months; and by
the Lords fined and sentenced, without Crime, without legal Hearing, without
Evidence; not being suffered to enjoy the benefit of Law or make their lawful
Defense, as by Law they ought.
SIR,
AS it is a known and approved maxim, That crimes are by so much the greater,
by how much the greater the Persons are that commit them; so it is as certain,
that that injustice is by so much the more superlatively great, which is
perpetrated under pretext of doing Justice.

Sir, John Poyner alias Morris, etc. has been imprisoned by the Lords, for a
pretended Forgery, upon the suggestion of John Brown, Clerk of the House of
Lords, and one William Littleton; upon whose complaint, the Lords contrary to
the Great Charter (which says, Noman shall be diseized of his Freehold,
Liberty, or Estate; nor be passed upon, save by the judgment of his Peers, or
by the Law of the Land,) proceeded to judgment against the said Poyntz alias
Morris, was never brought to the Lords Bar, to answer to what was objected
against him; by Virtue of which Sentence, the said Poyntz alias Morris, and
Mary his wife, Isabella Smith, Leonard Darby, have remained prisoners ever
since May was a twelvemonth; having an estate of above two thousand pound per
annum kept from him, by reason of the said illegal Sentence.

That we have not been wanting in our endeavors, both to obtain our Freedoms,
and clear our innocence, is apparent by our several Addresses made to the House
of Commons: the sum of all our desires being as follows.

That forasmuch, as it is apparently aggreeable to the Law of the Kingdom, That
all Offenders are to be tried for all supposed Crimes by a Judge sworn, to
proceed in an ordinary Court of Justice, according to Law, and a Jury of their
equals sworn to proceed according to evidence: And forasmuch, as
notwithstanding all our endeavors, we could never obtain so-much Justice, as
such a legal Trial, (being but that which Fellons or Murderers may challenge,
and do frequently enjoy:) but contrarily have been, and are destroyed by the
Lords (who are deluded by Master Browns false suggestions.) That therefore the
house of Commons would be pleased to free us from our fines and imprisonment,
by Virtue of the Lords Order. And that we might be brought unto a speedy Trial
per pares, for all Crimes that can be laid unto our charge; that by the Law we
might be acquitted or condemned.

Several Citizens having waited many days with our Petition, and delivered
several Papers to the Members, desiring a positive Resolution; whether they
would receive our Appeal or no. On Saturday November 1648. (Master Brown.
having been a pretty season in the House, before the sitting thereof,) our
Appeal was read and referred to a Committee, whercof Master Prynne, (Master
Browns special Friend, was to have the Charge,) by whose means, notwithstanding
multitudes of solicitations day after day, we could never get a Committee to
sit, but we are still left to be destroyed by a merciless and unjust
imprisonment.

Whereupon, seeing all Power and Authority perverted, and no possibility left
for our deliverance, we were as persons altogether without hope, until God was
pleased to open a door and let in comfort, by the appearance of his Excellency
Thomas Lord Fairfax, and the Forces under his Command, for the due execution of
Justice and Relief of the Oppressed: From whose Declarations and Actions, we
gathered encouragement, to represent our Grievances and Desires formerly
presented to the Parliament, together with these following Articles, exhibited
against Master John Erown; All which are ready to be made good by legal and
competent Witness, when ever the said Master John Brown, Clerk of the House of
Lords, shall be secured or called to account for the same.

The Copy of the Articles exhibited to his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax,
General, etc. against John Brown, Clerk of the house of Lords.
IMprimis, He the said John Brown, contrary to Law and a good Conscience, most
wickedly did combine and counsel one Sir Adam Littleton, who had laid claim to
the Estate of one John Poyntz alias Morris, Esquire; the said Littleton having
been several times overthrown by the said Poyntz alias Morris, viz. By four
several Offices in Essex and London, at he was found Heir apparent at Law to
the said Estate; although the Evidences and other Writings, by which his
Ancestors held and enjoyed the said Estate, be concealed and withheld. And
possession was given to the said Poyntz alias Morris, ac(...)ding to two
Injunctions given by Sir Rowland Wansford of the Court of Wards, and Turnment
made by the Tennants Farmers of the said Estate, upon their knowledge, his
Ancestors enjoying of the Estate above fifty years, and never in any (...)er
name to this day, but Poyntz alias Morris, since the 38 of Elizabeth.
Notwithstanding all which clear proofs, and many more, the which for brevity
sake, are not here inserted, (did Council) to bring the business into the Lords
House, promising and warranting the said Estate unto him the said Sir Adam
Littleton: In order to which, he the said John Brown caused the said Poyntz
alias Morris, Mary his wife, Leonard Darby, John Harris, and Isabella Smith, to
be sent for before the Lords, and accused them with a pretended forgery of a
Copy of an Act of Parliament, although the Copy of the said Act was delivered
to Leonard Darby, and Isabella Smith, with Master Browns hand to it, by one
Master William Hunt, (...)nd under Clerk of the House of Commons, and examined
in Master Browns Office; and by Mr. Brown himself, since acknowledged, but
since his said Combination with Sir Adam Littleton denied: And he the said
Master Brown, came to the (...)ouse of Poyntz alias Morris, and threatening,
That if he met with him, he would make him come short home.

2. Item, in pursuance of the ends aforesaid, he the said John Brown, having
upon his false accusation, obtained an Order from the Lords, for the
apprehending of Poyntz alias Morris, Mary his wife, Leonard Derby, John Harris
and Isabella (...)mith, came himself in person, together with one Frogmorton
his man, and Littleton and others, about eleven, a clock in the night, to the
house of Poyntz alias Morris; and he the said Master Brown, gave command to the
Constables to break open the doors of the house of the said Poyntz alias
Morris; and being asked by the Constables for his Warrant, Master Brown
replied, saying, I Will warrant you, but the Constables refused: whereupon, the
said Mr. Brown himself, and his followers, broken open three doors, with Bolts
and Locks, and entered the house, and not finding the Copy of the Act with
(...) hand to it; contrary to the Order of the Lords, seized upon all Poyntz
alias Morris, his Evidences and other Writings, and (...)ok of Accounts,
wherein the Tennants had set their hands, and made their Aturnment according to
Law, and gave them (...)leton their Adversary to read, saying, He was Clerk of
the Parliament, and what he had done, he could answer; and to us day keeps
them, having no Commission so to do, but his own will.

3. Item, he the said John Brown, having by virtue of the Lords Order, seized
upon the persons of Mary Poyntz alias Morris, Isabella Smith, and kept them in
custody three weeks, before he brought them before the Lords, giving command
(...) their Keepers, That they should not have a Copy of their Attachment;
notwithstanding the Lords Order, was immediate, and their persons, to be
brought forthwith before their Lordships.

4. Item, the said John Brown did cause the said Poyntz alias Morris to be
taken forcibly out of his house, with drawn (...)ords, threatening to be
sheathed in the guts of them that did resist, and by virtue of the Lords Order
put him under the (...)k Rod, from whence he the said M. Brown removed him to
the Kings Bench, and there entered an Action of a thousand (...)nd against him,
and declared in ten thousand pound for pretended words that the said Poyntz
alias Morris his wife should (...)k, but never brought him the said Poyntz
before the Lords to this day, to answer to what he had objected against him:
(...)he the said Mr. Brown did constantly oppose Poyntz alias Morris his
proceedings, and Petition delivered to the Lords, (...) showed them to
Littleton, so that no legal hearing could be had.

5. Item, he the said John Brown, having by virtue of the Lords Order, seized
upon the persons of Poyntz alias Morris, (...)y his wife, Leonard Darby, John
Harris, and Isabella Smith, he caused them to be committed close prisoners to
four (...)al prisons, viz. Kings Bench, Gatehouse Westminster, Ludgate,
Poultrey Counter, where they all remain prisoners to day; and he most
maliciously, and contrary to Law, and without any command, but his own will,
having them thus in (...)ance, went from prison to prison, threatening their
respective Keepers, That if they kept them not close prisoners, he (...)ld make
them lose their places.

6. Item, the said Master Brown, at another time urged the Keepers, That the
aforesaid prisoners might be so locked up, (...)t none might come at them; and
being told, that they would be starved for want of Bread, and eaten up with
Lice, the (...) Master Brown replied in words to this effect, saying, That if
they did perish they need take no notice of it, for it was (...)thing to them.

7. Item, he the said Master Brown, having denied his own hand to the said
Copy, before by him confessed, viz. in these (...)ds, Who dare deny it: In order
whereunto, for the better varnishing over of his most wicked practices, caused
the said Master Hunt, an under Clerk to the House of Commons, who delivered the
said Copy with Master Browns hand to it, to Leonard Darby, and Isabella Smith,
to put in an negative answer in writing, and not viva voce, as by law he ought,
viz. He did not remember the delivery of the Copy of the said Act; whereupon,
he the said Master Brown, by his power and prevalency with the Lords, got the
said Copy of the Act condemned, and Poyntz alias Morris, Mary his wife, Leonard
Darby, John Harris, and Isabella Smith, sentenced and fined, although Poyntz
alias Morris, Mary his wife, Leonard Darby, John Harris, and Isabella Smith,
were never suffered to make there lawful defense, in regard many of their
Friends, and their Witnesses, not daring to appear at the Lords Bar, for fear
of Master Brown, in respect of his continual threats and flanders.

8. Item, he the said Master Brown, knowing his own guilt, fearing he thould
not be able to delude the Lords to a belief (...) his false and flanderous
Accusation, endeavored to subborn and hire Witnesses, against Poyntz alias
Morris, Leonard (...)arby, and Isabella Smith: In order whereunto, he the said
John Brown, went unto one Godfrey Cade, who has been a prisoner in the Fleet,
and other places near twenty years, and gave him one pound and five shillings,
and promised, him five pounds more, with his enlargement, and other courtesies,
provided he would make oath before the Lords, That he the said Cade forged the
said Copy of an Act of Parliament, and counterfeited the said Browns hand to
it, for Leonard Darby, and Isabella Smith. In order to which end, he the said
Master Brown, caused the said Cade to be brought up to the Lords House
accordingly, as by the said Cade was confost several times since, before diverse
sufficient Witnesses.

9. Item, he the said John Brown, has from time to time, molested, standered,
and troubled all persons and friends, that did at any time appear in the behalf
of the said Poyntz alias Morris, Mary his wife, Leonard Darby, John Harris, and
Isabella Smith.

10. Item, he the said Master Brown, knowing and finding that Mr Audly, chief
Clerk and Master of the Treasury of Records, in the Court of Wards, had
delivered to Isabella Smith, in the presence of others, several Copies of
Records, attested under his hand, found by his Clerks in his Treasury at
Westminster, old and dusty, not to be read without sweeping, whereby the Title
of Morris to the said Estate was cleared, and the Act of Parliament manifested,
came to the said M^ Audly and threatened him with the loss of his place, if he
should dare to maintain any thing against him; and finding the said Master
Audly to persist in the justification of himself, in the delivery of Copies to
Isabella Smith, concerning the Estate, of Poyntz alias Morris, be the said
Master Brown, caused the said Master Audly to be brought to the Lords Bar, and
endeavored to have him fined, and to lose his place for the same.

11. Item, the said Master Brown felloniously has caused all the said Records
lately remaining in the Treasury of the Court of Wards, and in the Tower,
concerning the Estate of Poyntz alias Morris, to be removed and delivered into
his own custody, and also the Copy of the Act with his own hand to it,
delivered by Mr. Hunt, but then in the hand of Master Twisden, a Council for
Poyntz alias Morris, which by Law is felony, as appears by the Statute of the
8 of H.6 chap. 12. to remove, condemn, or cancel Records.

12. Item, he the said Mr. Brown has unjustly and maliciously, upon a
slanderous suggestion, caused one Mr. Pendred, who appeared in the business, to
be imprisoned for pretended words, by virtue of a pretended Order of the Lords,
directed by him, the said Mr. Brown, to one Justice Manly of Westminster, unto
which Warrant of Commitment, the said Pendred put in sufficient bayl, before
Sir Edward Powel, another Justice for Westminster, and was released by the said
Sir Edward Powel; the which Mr. Brown hearing, immediately went with others
with him unto the said Justice, Sir Edward Powel, and told him he would cause
his Commission to be taken from him, if he did not immediately cause the said
Pendred to be attached again, upon which, the said Sir Edward Powel through
fear of his power, did accordingly by virtue of a Warrant from Sir John
Woollaston, attach the said Pendred in the City of London, the same day that he
had taken bayl, and carried him back to the Gatehause Westminster again, where
he has remained in prison many months, to his total ruin of his Estate, and
hazard of his life, by reason of much sickness, occasioned by his said
imprisonment.

13. Item, after the said Pendred had put in his Petition to the Lords,
certifying them of his hard usage, the said Master Brown opposed it, and said
that his bayl was Knights of the Post; by whose power and prevalency in the
House of Lords, he the said Pendred is still kept in durance in the Gatehouse,
and his bayl cannot be admitted to clear and vindicate themselves, of Mr.
Browns false slanders and accusations, by reason of his being protected by the
Lords.

14. Item, that though upon the Petition of Poyntz alias Morris, Mary his wife,
Leonard Darby, John Harris, and Isabella Smith, the Lords referred it to the
Judges, to consider and make their Report, Whether the said Pendred and the
rest, might be released from their imprisonment, in regard of the fines imposed
upon them by the Lords: Which Report was accordingly made by the Judges, that
they might be released from their imprisonment, notwithstanding the sines, in
regard that the Order for their commitment, was not for any fine, but till the
pleasure of the Lords were farther signified: Upon which, the said Mr. Brown,
openly opposed their enlargement in the House of Lords, by a Petition of his to
the-Lords; and thereupon keeps them still in durance, and absolutely refused
to sign a Copy of the Judges Report made to the Lords, for their enlargement,
whereby it might not be so authentike as otherwise it would.

15. Item, he the said John Brown, has brought many vexations and causeless
actious, upon many of the friends of Poyntz alias Morris, on purpose to heat
them of from their appearing in his behalf, the better to keep the said
Pendred, and the (...) in prison, and from a trial at Law.

16. Item, that the said John Brown, came to the house of Commons and
endeavored to his utmost power, to hinder the Petition and Appeal of Poyntz
alias Morris, and the rest, and c. from being delivered and read.

17. Item, these and many other high crimes, misdemeanors, and oppressions,
have been committed by the said John Brown, Clerk to the House of Lords; which
will be evidently proved by lawful and competent Witnesses, when ever your
Excellency shall please to appoint a Committee to receive the same, or
otherwise as your Excellency shall think meet.

And having proceeded thus far, give us leave, (being thereto emboldened with
the consideration of our innocence, and his tyranny) to appeal to God, and all
good men; and if there be any yet remaining, which have not made a covenant
with Iniquity, whose bearts God has kept upright in the pursuance of Justice:
to such we call and cry, and desire them to hear us, from our several Cells of
slavery: and as they expect the blessing of God upon their proceedings, Let
them as an evidence thereof, employ their power, to bring us to a Bar of
Justice, to be tried for all supposed Crimes laid to our charge. And although
we find the subtle and plausible suggestions of Mr. Brown, to be of too great
weight to delude you; yet we desire this may be the touchstone to try his truth
by. If as he pretends we be really guilty of such Crimes; we dare him in the
sight of God and good men, to bring us to a legal trial; nay, if we were guilty
we might by the Law challenge it, and it ought not to be denied. Oh therefore,
if you be Englishmen, or would evidence to the World, that you are no
respecters of persons, we are bold to challenge this justice of you, to free us
from our imprisonment by the Lords Order, and bring us to a legal trial, that
by the Law we may le acquitted or condemned. This is pure Justice, suffer us
not to perish in prison, while you may justly deliver, lest by your silence you
contract upon your selves, the guilt of other men's oppressions.

Justice, Justice, Justice, is the earnest prayer of John and Mary Poyntz,
Leonard Darby, John Harris, Isabella Smith, William Pendred.

Articles exhibited upon the 11. of December 1648. unto the Right Honorable
the Lord Fairfax his Excellency against John Brown Clerk of the Parliament. viz.
1. HE the said John Brown (contrary to the great trust reposed in him) has
actually invaded, and endeavored to overthrow the Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom; and by indirect, illegal, and arbitrary practices to delay, obstruct,
and pervert Justice, and infringe the Rights and Liberties of the People, to
the great damage and detriment of the whole Kingdom, and diverse persons and
families, viz. he the said John Brown by virtue of his Office, upon the 17. of
August last, did draw up an Order to conceal a horrid Act of injustice done by
a Court of Aldermen, sitting in Guildhall London about December 1647. for their
not bringing Henry Wollaston the Jailer of Newgate London, unto a legal trial
for many high crimes of wilful murder, and many other particulars of absolute
Felony charged upon the said Wollaston.

2. He the said John Brown (the better to stifle justice, and countenance the
said high crimes and injustice) did about the 24. of Ostober last, cause one
Richard Paris a late Member of the Army to be arrested, and imprisoned in the
Gate House Westminster, upon a vexatious Action of a thousand pound at the Suit
of the said John Brown, merely because Mr. Paris did prosecute the said crimes
and injustice, for the good of the Commonwealth.

3. He the said John Brown (utterly to destroy M. Paris for his fidelity to his
Country) did at his own charge remove Mr. Paris unto the Kings Bench Prison,
and there did cause two vexatious Actions more to be laid upon M. Paris, viz.
one in the name of the said John Brown of five thousand pound, and the other in
the name of one Glover, of fifty pound. And the said John Brown did likewise
give order unto the chief Bailiff of Westminster, and to the Lord chief Justice
Rolls that no Bail should be taken for M. Paris until he the said John Brown
had seen, and approved them, to the end that he might arrest and imprison them
upon the like vexatious actions.

4. He the said John Brown (further to express his countenancing of the said
crimes and injustice, and to molest M. Paris in the prosecution thereof) did
about the 16. of November last, procure a special Warrant to attach, and bring
the person of M. Paris and three of his Witnesses, viz. M. Clark, M. Neale, and
M. Ienks, before the said Lord chief Justice, and upon the said Warrant M.
Paris and M. Ienks were convented before the said Lord chief Justice upon the
20. of November last. But the Lord chief Justice did send them both away,
having neither Accuser or Witness to lay the least crime unto their charge,
only the said John Brown who did falsely and maliciously say they were a
company of Newgate birds.

5. He the said John Brown (after that he had stifled Justice above 14. weeks,
by countenancing the said horrid crimes of absolute Felony, and the aforesaid
injustice) did by virtue of his Office draw up an Order about the 20. of
November last, to recommend the Examination of the said crimes and injustice
unto the Parties accused themselves, viz. to the Court of Aldermen of London,
who are chiefly concerned in M. Paris his Appeal to the House of Lords for
their male administration of Justice.

RICHARD PARIS.


