THE PARABLE OF THE Bear-Baiting.
THE Proceedings by, and against Somebody of late, are not altogether unlike a
certain Parable; which, tho I cannot at present call to mind, where I read it;
yet I remember very well, the Substance of it was this, viz.

Once upon a time there was a Bear-Baiting appointed; a great overgrown French
Bear, the greatest in the World, to be baited by English and Dutch Mastiffs,
the best Mastiffs in the Universe: The Match was made between the most
Christian Lion of England and Holland, on one Hand; and the most Antichristian
Bear-ward of France, on the other Hand: And the Wager was no less, than the
whole Interest of the French Crown on one side; and the whole remaining
Interest of Europe, and the Liberty of all Christendom, on the other; in case
of a total Destruction, either of the Bear, or of the Mastiffs.

Whereupon the Great French Bear-ward, that Apocalyptick Beast, Ludovicus,
whose Name is the Number of the Beast in the Revelations, for the Numerical
Letters of his Name are Six hundred threescore and six: I say, this notorious
Beast of a Man, this cruel Tyrant, who retains nothing in him of a King, but
the Purple; this Bear-ward le Grand, spared no Costs nor Pains, to hearten,
cherish, and strengthen his Bear, against the time of Baiting; nay, he sent as
far as the Levant for strengthening Cordials, and Restoratives for his Bear.

Hereupon the wary Lion (who is, in his own Nature, as wise as a Serpent, and
yet, as innocent as a Dove) sent out Force enough, to intercept all those
Restoratives at the Streights-Mouth.

But you must know, The Lion having more than a good many Jackals about him (as
all our Lions ever had,) they over-perswaded him to make a Jack-an-Apes
Commander of that Force; who, when the Bear's Cordials and Restoratives came in
sight, sat still upon his Butt-end all the while, cracking of Nutts, and making
of Monkey's-Faces, and so let the strengthening Cordials pass by safe, just
under his Nose, without doing any thing, besides gazing, and smelling at 'em.

After this, you must further know, these foolish headstrong Jackals (being
all great Favorites forsooth, and pretending to ten times more Knowledge and
Discretion, than ever they were, or ever will be Masters of) prevailed likewise
with the Lion, to make an Old grizled Spaniel, Commander in Chief over all his
Mastiffs both English and Dutch.

Wherefore the Lion at the earnest Request and Recommendation of the Jackals,
called out Old Grizle, (a plaguey Dog at a Bitch; and therefore in all
Probability, well acquainted with the best Kennels) and spat in his Mouth, and
clapped him on the Back, and gave him all the Encouragement a Dog could have: And
then bad him go, range about, seek out, and bring home sixteen or eighteen
Couple of stout, well-bred, true English Beagles with him, to hunt out the
Bear, and conduct the Mastiffs to their sport.

But Old Grizle, not observing his Master's Instructions, instead of procuring
strong-built, hearty, experienced Beagles, brought back a damn'd-raw Pack of
mere Whelps and Lap-Dogs: And by his and their fawning, crouching, cringing,
and wheedling (as Spaniels, Whelps, and Lap-Dogs use to do) and by the
Intercession of the Jackals (who will recommend the Devil for a good Artist, if
he has but the Art of feeding them secretly with forbidden Prey;) They
prevailed with the Lion to be commissioned under Old Grizle, in order to lead
and guide the Mastiffs: which made the Mastiffs growl most confoundedly,
through mere Indignation.

However out they went under this wise Conduct; But before they went out, Old
Grizle, his Whelps, and his Lap-Dogs (for I call 'em his, because, as I told
you but now, they were most of his own getting,) thought it convenient, for
their better Security, to muzzle all the Mastiffs, and tie 'em fast in a strong
Line of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance: And as soon as that was
effectually done, then out they went altogether.

And all the way they went, Old Grizle, his Whelps, and his Lap-Dogs did frisk,
and skip, and leap, and bounce, and yelp; being all overjoyed, that they
should see some sport anon: (for most of 'em had never seen a Bear before in
their Lives:) And oh! how they whipped the Bear about, and swing'd him off, all
the way, in their own Fancies!

Says Old, Proud, Impotent, Self-conceited, empty Grizle; Gentlemen Whelps, and
Gentlemen Lap-Dogs, courage! here is Confusion to the Bear; Huzza! show your
selves to be but what you are, viz. true Whelps, and right Lap-Dogs; and I
desire no more: For by your Assistance I have Power enough to beat all the
Bears in France. I have been a Whelp and a Lap-Dog my self in my time, as well
as the best of you all: And to my certain Knowledge an English Whelp or Lap-Dog
is able to grapple with a French Bear at any time: Wherefore we need no Scouts
to go before, to bring us Notice of the Bear's Approach; for as soon as he
comes within hearing of your terrible Yelping, he will be glad to retire fast
enough of his own accord, I warrant you: Therefore Courage, my Beloved Whelps
and Lap-Dogs! here is Confusion once more to the Bear: Huzza --! yelp, yelp,
yelp!

But old Grizle had scarce ended these Words, nor was the Yelping quite ceased,
when lo! all on a sudden, The unexpected roaring of the Bear quite surprised,
dashed, astonished, and stunned the whole Pack of Mongrels: Which made old
Grizle shrink in his Tale between his Legs, and hang down his Head, (and if it
had been hung up, not a halfpenny damage) and made all the Whelps and
Lap-Dogs begin to whine and whimper about him, and fawn upon him, with wagging
Tails clapped in behind, lank Ears before, couchant Heads, and Tears in their
Eyes. But on the other side, it made the brave Mastiffs prick up their Ears,
and drew Rage and Foam from their Mouths, and Fire from their very Eyes, to be
at the Bear. Bless me! what a difference there is between Right-true-bred
Mastiffs, and whisling Currs?

(For you must know, the Great Bear was, by an unexpected Hurricane, driven to
a Bay, Fresh Water Bay; (or else he had seized, and hugged old Grizle, and all
his Whelps and Lap-Dogs, just as the Devil hugg's a Witch, before they had been
aware on it) and was there confined in Lob's Pound, and tied as fast as a Bear
to a Stake: which made him suck his Paws, and fret in his Grease, and roar
after that hideous Manner.)

However old Grizle was forced, by the Rage and Importunity of the Mastiffs, to
go and show 'em the Bear; And (to give the Devil his due) he did show 'em the
Bear, and that was all: For when he plainly perceived, that the French were
really there with their Bears, he immediately took all possible Care to stand
at distance enough out of harms way; and out of the way of doing harm to any,
but the forward Mastiffs.

But had the First, Second, and Third-Rate Mastiffs been then let loose, when
they were fresh and untir'd; and when they had a strong direct Gale to carry
'em to the Bears very Nose, they would certainly have tore him to pieces in a
trice: For he was so hemmed in on every side, that he could not stir one way or
other; neither could any of the Mastiffs have been there lost or sunk, they
being then at the Mouth of the best Kennel (or Port) in Europe: When at the
same time, the Bear was above a hundred Leagues from his Denn: And besides,
there was another strong Party, or Two, of stout third, fourth, and fifth-Rate
Mastiffs, out at the same time, to have intercepted the Bear in his way, if
after the first Mastiffs tearing him, he should have endeavored to make his
escape home. Here were all the Advantages, that Heaven and Earth could grant,
at once; and all the favorable Opportunities, that Man could ask, or that God
need grant: And nothing wanting but Courage, Conduct, Skill, and Honesty, to
accomplish the utter Destruction of the Bear for evermore. Never had Spaniel
such an Opportunity of losing his own Name, and gaining the Reputation of a
Mastiff; and never had Whelps and Lap-Dogs such an Opportunity to ingratiate
themselves with, and gain the applause and esteem of all Mankind, as well as of
Womankind and Children. But I find the Poet is in the Right on it, who says,
Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurrit.
Nature recoils; And tho you hang the Dog,
Yet he will die, just as he lived, a Rogue.


For as soon as old Grizle, his Whelps, and his Lap-Dogs, espied the vast bulk
of the Bear's Body, the wideness of his Jaws, the largeness of his Paws, and
the length of his Claws, (as if they had seen raw-Head and bloody-Bones) they
turned all as white presently, as my Lady's Night-Rail.

But by the thundering noise of the Mastiffs, and by the powerful help of
Brandy, being somewhat roused out of their fainting Fit, they began at last,
(tho it was long first) to recover a little out of their clammy Sweat: And then
they called a Council, (as they called it) And there you might have seen all
the Whelps and Lap-Dogs lying panting round Old Grizle, and looking up to him
in this time of need, and he looking down upon them again, with most pitiful
Countenances on both sides; and all the while making a most intolerable Stink
for fear of the Bear; nay, such a strange Stink, that I am forced to hold my
Nose, even now, whilst I am speaking on it; and to cry, Out, ye stinking Curs!
Faw! Out, and be Hanged! Faw! Out, for shame, and make room for the Mastiffs!

However at long-run Old Grizle made a shift to open his Jaws, and held 'em
open a long while, without speaking ever a word, (for he well knew, they
understood his meaning by his gaping:) Yet at last with much ado, and with as
much hesitation, trembling, and shaking, as if he had been in the House of
Commons, he broke silence, and snarl'd out these following Sentences, to the
great Joy of the Whelps and Lap-Dogs; but to the deep Grief and Regret of the
Mastiffs, and to the everlasting Stain, and eternal Reproach of the English
Nation, viz.

Gentlemen Whelps, and Gentlemen Lap Dogs, I lately saw, when I was so often
and so long on Shore in London, and at Portsmouth, (that the very Watermen
called me Lord Tarry-at-Home, and Lord Tarry-in-Town) then I say, I saw a very
good Book, nay which is more, a Convocation-Book, in Mall Hinton's Closet, (or
rather, Kennel) for I must tell you, she is a very devout Creature, a mighty
Lover of Convocations, and no good Thing can come out, but she, good Girl,
will presently take it in. And there in that Book I remember it is laid down,
by the venerable Authority of a certain kind, of a certain sort of a
Convocation, as an undoubted Principle of our Church, (for I was never of any
Church, that was for true fighting, no more than you,) viz. That whatever
Powers here below are settled and fixed, we ought to pay ample Allegiance,
Non-Resistance, and Passive-Obedience to 'em: And you know well enough, that
our Master, the Lion, is not so very well settled and fixed at this time; for
he is not yet passed the Boyne, and there is a deep Water for him to wade
through up to the Chin, and several French Bears in his way, before he can
reach Dublin. But on the other side you plainly see, That the Great French Bear
here is settled and fixed before your Eyes: And for my part, I have often found
great Civilities from French Bears; and so, I hope, I may again. Wherefore,
Gentlemen Whelps, and Gentlemen Lap-Dogs, tho you are Young, yet I am Old; and
it is high time for me to follow the virtuous Example of Mall Hinton, and to
walk by Convocation-Rules: And therefore I am clearly of the same Opinion with
the venerable Convocation, viz. That we ought in the first place to keep our
distance, to consider where we are, and in whose presence we be, and to see who
and who stand together; and also to keep to the saving Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, till we hear a little better which way things go, and till we
are fully satisfied what is become of the Irish Affairs: And yet
notwithstanding in the mean time, to pay all dutiful Respects to the settled
Power of the Bear, (who was driven into the Bay by a Hurricane, and so has
plainly God's Authority;) And especially to keep close to our
Beloved-Church-Rules, and my Old, Natural, Spaniel-Rules, of Non-Resistance,
and Passive Obedience during our whole Retreat. At which Periodical Snarl, all
the Whelps and Lap-Dogs heaved up their drooping Heads, and cried, Yelp, Yelp,
Yelp; but the enraged Mastiffs swore, Wow, Wow, Wow.

This was the warlike Resolution, the admirable, or Admiral-like Determination,
and positive Injunction of Old Grizle; Whereunto all the Whelps and Lap-Dogs
unanimously agreed, and punctually observed it, like so many Dogs in a String;
and hung down their Heads all the way, like so many Sheep-Biters: finding now
by sad experience the great difference, between Bear-baiting, and Sheep-biting.

But however the Mastiffs, both English and Dutch, could not endure to be held
so long, six or seven days together, by a Pack of shagreen Curs, in such an
unreasonable Line, a Line of five or six Leagues distance at least from the
Bear, the grand Enemy of Mankind, and from their Duty of attacking him.

Therefore to be thus unjustly restrained in spite of their Courage, nay, in
spite of their Teeth, by a Company of Whisters, made the Mastiffs rave, and
grow almost stark-staring-madd, for want of sleep and rest; but especially for
want of fighting; for fighting is their Rest and Quiet; fighting is their Meat
and Drink: A true Tarpollin fight's only to cat, and eat's only to fight again:
And there were enough with them to eat up the Bear; and Sharpers enough in
every thing else, but fighting; and more by a great many, (tho not by a good
many) than those that devoured the Great Spanish Bear in 1588.

Whereupon the Lyoness, hearing the loud-mouthed Voice of her Mastiffs, both
English and Dutch, speaking the same thing, and (which is strange) the same
Language, and both Countries agreeing in the same Verdict, viz. That the
Mastiffs were abused, curbed, and muzzl'd by a parcel of Mongrels; Therefore
she roused up her Royal Wrath and sent positive Orders to the Curs, either to
permit the Mastiffs to fight, or else to come presently themselves to her Denn
in the Tower.

This Royal Echo startled the Spaniel, the Whelps, and the Lap-Dogs worse, (if
possible,) than the roaring of the Bear had done before: For now, being almost
nine days Old in their Iniquity, the Whelps began to see, that there was
another settled Power, besides the Bears.

Thus Old Grizle, his Whelps, and his Lap-Dogs being reduced to a great
straight, for fear of the Lyoness on one side, and of the Bear on the other;
and yet being willing to curry favor with both sides, and to keep to the
Convocation-Rules of Non-Resistance of the settled Power of the Lyoness, and of
Passive Obedience to the fixed Power of the Bear: Therefore they craftily and
cunningly resolved, (as if they had been so many Schoolmen, or Doctors of
Metaphysical Notions and Distinctions,) that they would sacredly (or rather
cursedly) observe a strict Nutrality on both sides.

In pursuance whereof, Old Grizle in the first place making his Honors, his
Bows, and his profound Conge's to the Bear; and then making his Obeisance to
the Lyoness, and with all making a show of praying (but not fighting) for King
William and Queen Mary: He hung out the Bloody Flag, (as they use to do at the
Bear-Garden,) and proclaimed free Liberty for all to fight, that had a mind to
it. Fight Dog, fight Bear, for him, and his.

Whereupon the brave Tyrrell, the undaunted Dorrell, and several other English,
and above twenty Dutch Mastiffs, all as good as ever run at a Bear, (And, oh!
that the courageous and victorious Shovel had been amongst 'em!) tho they were
before almost quite throtled, spent, and strangled by being held back so long
from their Sport, in such an unreasonable Line, yet now took fresh Courage, and
broke the Line, and lest the Mongrels behind to their Due, the Line; and ran
full speed forwards, and made directly at the Bear with open Mouths; and star'd
Fire, and gaped Smoke, and spoke Thunder, and darted Thunderbolts, and hurled
Whirl-winds at the Bear; and so scorched, blighted, blasted, and twisted him;
and gave him such Rents, such Gashes, such Breaches, and such Shocks, that they
made him groan and reel backwards at their very first Onset: And had they been
seconded, as they ought, we should never have been troubled hereafter with any
more French dancing Bears again.

And tho I will hold ten English Crowns to one French Crown at any time, upon
any of these Mastiffs Heads, both Dutch and English, against any French Cubb
whatsoever of equal size: And tho I have great reason always to lament my own
Insolvency, in that I am not able ever to pay sufficient Expressions of
Gratitude and Thankfulness to every one of these glorious Assailants; and
particularly to the Dutch, because I find, they had not so many Whelps and
Lap-Dogs amongst them, as we had; No, nor so many Jackals neither.

Yet after all, I beseech you, Gentlemen, bear with my Weakness, and pardon the
Infirmity of my Judgment (if it be so) and give me leave to say, That my main
Bett is more especially reserved for, and fixed upon, the brave Tyrrell: A
hundred to one on his Head at any time; His Name is Wonder, a right English
Mastiff, and a true-bred Tarpollin; who never gave an Affront, and never
brook'd one: Who is of such strange Humility, Goodness, and Modesty; and yet at
the same time of such unparalled Courage, Knowledge, and Bravery, That I
protest I have often gazed at the Man in Raptures of Admiration; and always
thought him a great Blessing to this Nation, if we understood him; that is to
say, (at which I know the Jackals will grin) if we understood how to employ
true Virtue, true Honesty, true Valor, true Skill, true Conduct, and true
Merit to the best Advantage; And if we understood how to pitch upon a Man, that
can, by his own private Interest and Repute amongst all true Tarpollins, Man
out a whole Fleet at any time without a Press.

But these indeed would be too many Blessings wrapped up all in one; And the
powerful Spirit of the Ever-Blessed-Bishop Usher, still surviving in his
Grandson, would make too good an Admiral for so bad an Age, as this is.

Neither would I have Old envious Grizle, nor any of his malicious Whelps or
Lap-Dogs, think, That Captain Tyrrell is any ways privy to this Commendation:
No, good Man, he would have been the only Obstacle against it, if he had known
it; for he is neither for praising himself, nor dispraising others.

But yet, I hope, my Lord Grizle, Master Whelps, and Master Lap-Dogs, you will
give me leave to speak the truth concerning your Worships; who was a Spectator
and Stander-by all the while, as well as you; especially since you have made
me, and all my Countrymen, pay so dear for our standing at your special
Bear-baiting; nay, methinks, you might out of modesty, (if you had any) give
us leave to speak, who are such great Losers by you: And more especially, since
you have brought things to such a pass, that if we don't speak now, we must for
ever hereafter hold our Peace; for you have bid the last Bans of Matrimony
between Us and Destruction.

Wherefore since I neither do, nor can, speak evil of the Rulers of the People,
viz. King William and Queen Mary; of whom, by whom, and in whom I know nothing
but good: And since our blessed Savior called those Men Dogs, that eat up the
Childrens Bread: And since you, Gentlemen Whelps, and Gentlemen Lap-Dogs, have
given a pretty good stroke already to our daily Bread; and are preparing not
only to devour the Remainder, but also to robb us of the Bread of Life: And to
bring in the Abomination of Desolation upon us; even that Abomination, which
makes desolate now at this very day in Flanders, Savoy, and all the Frontiers
of the Empire, etc. and would willingly do the like here among us, with all his
Heart; and so, I perceive, with all yours too: And since you have only the
Name, the Salary, the Sash, the Cravat-string, the Feather, the Red, and the
Blew of Commanders; without the true Heart, the Spirit, the Experience, the
Honesty, and the Bravery of true English Tarpollins: And since you have
acquitted Old Grizle for his ill Service; and have snarl'd and snapt at my
dearly Beloved Wonder, and his wonderfully courageous Brethrens Heels, for
their good Service: Therefore I will take upon me the boldness, (whether you
give me leave or no) to tell you in plain English, without any mixture of
French in it, That you are a Pack of Curs and Mongrels; and ought to be turned
off, and casheer'd, every one of you; for there is none amongst you all, (tho
you very well deserve it) that is worth hanging.

London, Printed for J. Johnson, 1691.


