THE PARABLE OF THE DOVE: BEING A Review of the late Controversy between the
BLACK-BIRDS, and the MAGPIES; tending to an Amicable Accommodation of all the
Differences which at present disturb the Feathered Nations.
I Will Not rail at Parables, because I Am writing one my self; and how silly
soever it is like to be, it cannot be worse than other things which have
extremely pleased some sorts of People. This I Am sure of, that with Fables, or
without 'em, when the World is weary of quarrelling, 'twill be quiet in its own
defense. Whether this be the lucky time, or no, I cannot tell, but am resolved
rather to venture a Broken Head of both Sides, to make my Countrymen Friends,
than either bett on either Side for the sake of a little nasty Profit, or stand
still, and laugh at both, while they knock out one another's Brains, and save
their Enemies the labor.

It Is no News to those who have consulted the new Virtuoso-Maps, that there lie
several little Worlds, or, if you please, Airy Islands, between this World, and
that in the Moon, where the Birds, you must know, used to call in and bait,
when tired with their Flight thither at the end of our Winter.

'Twas in one of these little Worlds, fixed in a very temperate Region, some
where or other between the two Tropicks, that the Eagles kept their Royal
Court, in an old white Rock, by the side of a curious River, where their Races
had been settled, and ruled the rest of the Birds for several Ages, who never
dared miss calling in there, and doing 'em Homage, in their passage to or from
the Airy Regions.

Once upon a time then (to observe the venerable form of our Great
Grandmothers) it so fell out, that the then regnant Eagle, thinking it below
him to match with any of his Subjects, sent to the Vulture's Court for a Mate;
which Opportunity the Family of the Vultures most readily embraced, hoping
thereby in time to get a Claw in the Eagle's Dominions, or at least preserve
his own, which he had formerly usurped from the Predecessors of the Eagle; and
accordingly sent one of the subt'lest of all his Family, who, in time, wrought
so much on the Affections of her Royal Mate, that nothing was transacted in the
Council of the Birds, without her Privity and Direction Vast Flocks of Vultures
flew daily over, who, being encouraged by so great a Patroness, seduced not a
few of the Subjects of the Eagle; and arrived to such Insolence in a
neighboring World, under his Dominion, which, from the multitude of Hawks
there, was first called Jernia, and since Hibernia, that, at a Signal given,
they massacr'd all the Birds who were loyal to the Eagle, making no difference
between blackbirds and Magpyes, but wrung off their Necks, and tore 'em to
pieces, firing their Nests, and breaking all their Eggs, in the most barbarous
manner that ever was heard of, pretending the Eagle's Authority for their so
doing. And this indeed, whatever else may be alleged, was the main Cause of
those dreadful Wars, which not long after arose in this little World, to the
destruction of many thousands of its feathered Inhabitants; the Magpyes and
Blackbirds, with all the rest, siding with that Party which their Inclinations
or Interest led 'em most to favor, while the Gaulless Dove, who truly loved
his Country, and was Friend to all Sides, sat alone in his Louver, and
deplot'd the common Calamity. Nor did the dreadful Confusion these Dissentions
produced, end in any thing less than the Destruction of the Eagle, banishing
all his Progeny, and setting up a Commonwealth of the Birds, instead of the
ancient Monarchy by which they had been so long governed, and which seemed much
more agreeable to the Genius of the Airy Inhabitants, who generally believed
that Jupiter himself had set the Eagles over 'em, tho, at the bottom, they had
been only chosen Kings by general Consent, and for the Good of the Whole. But
the Birds had not been long in this Condition, before a cunning old Stork, who
had been formerly a General of the Blackbirds, against the Magpyes and the
Eagle, being grown too strong, as well as too cunning for the rest of the silly
Birds, and having none to oppose him, usurped the Throne of the murdered
Eagle, enjoying all the Power which he had before, without the invidious Name;
and with his dreadful Bill, and sharp Claws, frighting the Parliament of the
Birds from their most steady Resolves, and tearing all their Charters to
pieces, huffing all the Worlds about him, as well as his own, and making the
very Vultures tremble. For, to give the Devil his due, 'twas a Bird both of
Policy and Valor; and had the Eagles themselves, after their Restoration, in
some things, followed his Steps, their Government had been, in all probability,
much more firm and happy. Yet, after all, 'twas discovered by the rest of the
Birds, that the Stork's pretenses of Love to his Country were confuted, by his
palpable Endeavors to raise himself and his Family, upon their Ruins; setting
up a more absolute Tyranny than ever was practiced by the Race of the Eagles.
On this the Birds began to consult against him; his Government every Day grew
weak and tottering, which, together with the sudden Death of one of his young
ones, so struck to his Heart, (for the Stork is a very affectionate Bird,)
that, in the highth of all his Glory, he on the sudden dropped off his Perch,
and died; the Blackbirds generally affirming he was poisoned, and the Magpyes
telling the World the Devil fetched him away in a Whirlwind; whereas in truth,
he even fairly died for want of Breath, as well as all other Birds. After his
Departure, the Birds soon fell into a terrible Confusion, which obliged 'em at
last to re-call the banished Eagles, and re-instate him in the Throne of his
Ancestors.

But not to meddle with Affairs during his Reign, any more than he himself did,
who was indeed more earnestly employed to find out the finest Birds in his
Territory, Peacocks, Pheasants, Birds of Paradise, etc. than either the Magpies
or Blackbirds, at his sudden and expected Death, the unnatural Ostrich,
contrary to the sense of two or three Parliaments of Birds, ascended the
Throne: But long he had not enjoyed the Sovereignty, before he publicly sided
with the Vultures, and brought in whole Flights of them, the Kites, the Owls,
and other ravenous Birds, to the utter destruction both of Magpies and
Blackbirds, tho to the latter of these he pretended the greatest kindness;
while the good-natured Dove was concerned for the main, and feared the common
Ruin.

And here it may be worth the while to enquire into the occasion of the
difference between the Magpies and the Blackbirds -- and 'was a wise one if you
knew all -- no better nor worse than on account of their Colors; the
Blackbirds thought the Magpies too fine and gaudy, and would for that reason
have pulled out all their white Feathers, as marks of the Beast, rather than
the true Livery of the Birds: 'The Magpies on 'tother side urged truly enough,
that many other of the Feathered Nation wore the same Color; that 'twas
ancient and innocent; and thus far perhaps they were in the right; but not
staying here, they pushed the business further to be even with the Blackbirds,
chattering most unmercifully against their Black Coats and short Tails, as
undecent and unmannerly; whereas the poor Creatures could not change their
Color, nor spread their Tails any further or larger than Nature had made 'em,
tho 'thad been to save their Necks, while the Doves could hardly keep the Peace
between 'em. And this had by the Artifice of the Vulture, as well as their own
Folly, raised many a Fewd between 'em, tho otherwise in their own Natures both
of 'em very peaceable Birds.

We will not relate what either Party did in their Turns to bertay their Liberties
to the Ostrich, our of Folly, Interest or Revenge; suffie it, that all of 'em
soon found out the Cheat; and finding the Design of the Ostrich was only to
make em a Prey to the Rooks, Owls, Hawks, Vultures, and the other unlucky Birds
which composed his Court, where none besides now appeared; they sent over their
unanimous Petition to a Foreign Eagle who had long roosted in a neighboring
World, to come and assist 'em in their extremity. This Eagle was of the true
Royal Cast; and tho his Father died before he was born, and could not himself
try his Legitimacy, as the use of that Bird is, by flying up with him against
the Sun, yet of his own accord he enured himself to that exercise, and took a
strange pleasure in it. Besides, tho he were yet young, and his Pounces hardly
grown, he had more than once met the Vulture, whose Territories lay in the same
Continent with his own, and held him so stiffly to the Combat in defense of the
Sea-Pies, among whom he lived, that he had very seldom any reason to boast of
his Conquests over him. But he was born for other Worlds as well as his own,
and after the repeated Addresses of the Ostrich's Subjects, came over to
relieve 'em, which he did with such Success, that as you have bin told in the
former Parables, away scamper'd all the Rooks, Hawks, Owls and Vultures, which
made up his Court, and preyed upon the airy Nations; and being gone without so
much as striking a stroke, the Nation of the Birds being in a perfect Anarchy,
and all things in Confusion, the Birds being now again reduced to their state
Nature, chose the young Eagle their Deliverer for their Sovereign, who with his
Royal Mate was advanced to the Throne, with the repeated Carols and
Acclamations of that and all the Neighboring Worlds.

Nor had the Vultures, to whom the Ostrich had fled for Succor, any other way
now lest to destroy the happy Estate of the Birds, and preserve their own ill
gotten Conquests, but by reviving the old Quarrel between the Blackbirds and
the Magpies, to obstruct the Designs of the Eagle, and betray 'em all to the
common Enemy. To this end he not only employed Emissaries in the Eagle's
Country, who conspired to dethrone him, and bring in the Vultures, on pretense
of the Ostrich's Title; but by all means possible endeavored the exasperating
the two powerful Parties of the Magpies and Blackbirds one against another, in
which he made a greater Progress than could have been imagined. The Blackbirds
complained of the sharpness of the Magpies Claws, and that they kept the
Steeples to themselves, refusing to admit them thither for shelter. The Magpies
answered, that 'twas their own Fault, and that they rather chose Hedges and
Field Conventicles, having a mortal Enmity to all the Steeple Houses in the
World, adding besides, and never ceasing to whisper it in the Eagle's Ear, that
the Blackbirds were with all their Hearts for a Commonwealth of Birds, and
would never be at rest till Monarchy was again turned out of Doors, or at least
reduced to what they please.

Things being in this miserable condition, and all the Birds more ready to
engage their Friends, than oppose the common Enemy: The Dove who was all along
for Unity and Moderation, fain would have salv'd all the Accusations writ by
the different Parties, one against another; as a great Emperor once did in the
other World, burnt 'em all before their faces. But since that was
impracticable, he petitioned the Eagle for a general Meeting or Convocation of
the Magpies, in order to accommodate Differences between them and the
Blackbirds their old Enemies. This he obtained, but to little or no purpose;
for tho the Magpies had formerly promised, when in the Clutches of the Ostrich
and panting for Life, if the Blackbirds would stand by 'em, to come to any
Terms with 'em, they could reasonably desire, when once delivered from the
common Calamity, they now forgot they had said one word of the Matter; and
o'tother side, though the Blackbird then seemed very well disposed to Peace and
Unity (as all sorts of Creatures are Friends, when united by mutual Danger)
'twas now absolutely gone out of their minds, that they ever desired any such
thing. And both sides, instead of agreeing in Charity and common Offices of
Love, fell anew on each other with Beaks and Claws as furiously as ever;
Scandals and Lies flying about of all sides; the Blackbirds accused all the
Magpies, for being Friends to the Ostrich's Government (because some of them
were really so) and the Magpyes accusing them, for being for no Government at
all, because, perhaps some of them were of that Humor. In the mean time, none
can express, what Ravage is daily made between the different Factions; how many
Eyes struck out, and Feathers pulled, and Down flying all round the Airy
Regions. The Dove still persists in his fruitless Endeavors to reconcile 'em,
tells 'em in vain the danger of an approaching Enemy, who would take 'em at a
great, disadvantage thus unprepared; assures 'em, they are on both sides
extremely mistaken, and that many are true Friends to the State of the Birds
and the Interest of the Eagle, whom either Party abused as inclined to the
Storks or Ostrich; and tells 'em the truth of the Business is, That Profit is
at the Root of all, and that the feathered People will never be at quiet, till
little particular narrow Interests submit to the common good; while all the
Requital she meets with, is never to expect Preferment; whoever is uppermost, to
be jostled about between the two contending Parties, to whom she may coo her
Heart out, before she bring 'em an Inch nearer one another, than they were
almost an hundred years ago, and to be called a Trimmer or Bat for all her
Labor. In the mean time while she bears her Misfortunes as equally as she can,
and impatiently expects the return of the Ryoal Eagle, whose Affairs have
lately called him into the World of the Scapies, and who, if Heaven prosper his
just Cause against the Vulture, will, she doubts not, when he has more Time and
Leisure, teach both Parties better Manners.

Caelestial Peace! Where shall we meet with thee?
Thou art all Smiles, all Heaven, all Harmony.
Descend, bright Goddess from thy radiant Shrine
All beateous like thy self, and all Divine!
One hand an Olive Branch, the Mark of Love,
And in the other bear thy Darling-Dove.
Charm down each Feud, and teach the World to live;
First, teach it to forget, and then forgive.
Till the last Golden Age receive new Birth,
And Men at last enjoy an Heaven on Earth.
London, Printed for R. Wallup. 1691.


