THE Present Prospect OF THE Famous and Fertile ISLAND OF TOBAGO: WITH A
Description of the Situation, Growth, Fertility and Manufacture of the said
Island.

To which is Added, Proposals for the Encouragement of all those that are
minded to settle there.

By Captain JOHN POYNTZ.

LONDON: Printed by George Larkin for the Author, and are to be Sold by Thomas
Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey. 1683.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader.
THou art here presented with The Present Prospect of the Island of Tobago,
about forty Leagues distant from Barbados; but far excelling that Island, and
indeed any other of the Caribee-Islands, in the Fertility and Richness of the
Soil, and in the Commodiousness of its Bays and Harbors: And it is no Paradox
to affirm, That though it lies more South, the Air is as Cool and Refreshing as
that of Barbados: and yet Exempted from those affrighting and destructive
Hurricanes that have been often Fatal to the rest of the Caribee-Islands.

Nor is it unfurnished with any thing necessary for the Sustenance and
Preservation of Humane Life; as you will see by the Ensuing Prospect of it, in
which there is nothing set down but what will be attested by several that have
been upon the Island, and what thou will find there, if Providence should bring
thee thither: For there is variety enough of the real Products of the Island to
dilate upon, without Interlarding it with fictitious Stories:

And I am persuaded there is no Island in America, that can afford us more
ample Subjects to contemplate the Bounty and Goodness of our Great Creator in,
than this of Tobago; And this I speak not by hearsay, or as one that has lived
always at home; but as one that has had Experience of the World, and been in
the greatest Part of the Caribee-Islands, and most parts of the Continent of
America, and almost all his Majesty's Foreign Plantations; and after having
viewed them all, have chosen this Island of Tobago to take up my Quietus est in.

To which end I have purchased a Grant from the Duke of Courland (to whom by
virtue of an Agreement with His present Majesty of Great Britain, the said
Island does solely belong) of 120000 Acres of the said Island for my self and
Company, upon very Advantageous Conditions, for which I refer thee to the
Proposals at the end of the Book; and to the Grant it self, in my own Custody;
Being very willing to give all reasonable Satisfaction to those whose hearts
shall incline to settle there.

JOHN POYNTZ.

The Present Prospect OF TOBAGO: WITH A Description of the Situation,
Fertility, Growth and Manufacture of that Island.
AS I design only to describe the Flourishing Island of Tobago, so I resolve by
the Methods I have taken, not to build the Porch too big for the House: For
that end let this small Introduction admit you to a Prospect of Tobago, which
is a Subject that needs no Encomium to illustrate so fertile a Soil as
deservedly may speak her own Praise, because consented to by most that have
known her, to vye with the Glory of all the Caribes: So that I approve it
convenient she be heard to speak, and in her own Dialect too; then upon Examine
by those that consult her, she will be found to evince the Incredulous beyond
suspicion.

And since in the Frontispiece I have promised to introduct you to the
Situation of the Island, I do it by telling you that it lies in Eleven Degrees
Thirty Minutes North-Latitude, and in Fifty Three Degrees Six Minutes
Longitude, West from the Lizard; and about Forty Leagues distant from the
flourishing Barbados, as Captain Lloyd asserts in his Breviat; who also affirms
it the most Convenient, Commodious, and Salubrious Island in the Caribes; and
truly so it may, being so sweetly tempered with those moderate and Sovereign
Breezes of Wind that refresh the Planter by Day, and purges the Air by Night:
So that the Day-Breez springs by favor from the Ocean, and rises with the Sun,
as does the Night-Breez refresh by softer Gales, sent from her Rocks and
Mountanous Elevations. Nor is the rage of a Tempest at any time heard to dread
the Inhabitants, nor the terror of a Hurricane ever known to invade them; which
of all things is most dreadful, and consequently most fatal, to the rest of the
Caribes; this being the Southermost Island (and nearest to the Spanish Coast)
which no Hurricane has hitherto invaded, as ever was heard of by any of the
Inhabitants. However it exceeds not Thirty two miles in Length, and I should
err to say more then Eleven in Breadth; which disproportion is sufficiently
recompensed by the Natural Situation of the Bays and the Harbors for
Shipping; as are the Rivers, Rivulets, and larger Openings convenient for
Navigating of Sloops and smaller Vessels, whereby to furnish the Inhabitants,
and commode them for desence.

Inasmuch therefore as by reason of her Fertility she acquires to her self the
Surname of Fortunate, except otherwise the Dutch superscribe her Unfortunate,
when, because to involve them in her Redolent Embracements, or to invite
foreign Princes to emulate their Prosperity: However at present she lives in
peace, and to outlive her troubles, and by the Providence of God sleeps in the
Arms of Security; whose Soil is so rich without Art or Cultivation, that some
have fancied her the Paradise of the Indies; dressed up in a beauteous Complexion
of Soil, that represents in some parts a most pleasant Redness, whilst to
admiration in other places it shines with Blackness; and because mingled for
the most part with a Marley Substance, penetrates the Earth a considerable
depth; which evidently proves by convincing Argument, the prodigious growth of
her massy and ponderous Timber Trees, of which we shall speak in their proper
Classis; as also of the Natural Plenty and Produce of Provision, the Delicacy
of Fruits, and the Sovereign Virtue of Roots, Herbs, Flowers, and Medicinal
Drugs; besides Natures Bounty in Variety of Beasts, and Heavens Benediction in
the multiplication of Fish and Fowl, that abound both in fresh and in salt
Water; which because of another Order, will the rather admit of a distinct
Discourse: So the Staple of the Island, and the Natural Product, will give us
an occasion to offer it somewhere else.

But the Planters and the Inhabitants present a new Prospect; whose Charge will
be much lessned to those that live Northwardly, by reason of a warm yet
temperate Heat, because moderated by a continued Breez of Wind; So that here is
no Summer spent on purpose to accumulate or heap up Provision for Winters
Accommodation; because all the year long both Herbage and Fruits sprout and bud
up by a perpetual Spring; and the Warmth in it self so natural to nourish Age,
as is the Germinating (or budding) Spring to give encouragement to Youth. And
the Island is so replenished with materials for Building, that provided you
bring dextrous Hands and good Artificers, you may in a little Time, and with
sinall Charge, build both Houses and Towns, or Fortifications.

The next thing to consult is, The Growth and Manufacture of the Country,
improvable by Industry, and the Mediums of Art; which will fall in course at
the Opening of Individuals; so that we may proceed to the several particulars,
referring the Reader for satisfaction to the Proposals, if desirous to consult
the Grant, Government, Religion, Liberty of Conscience, the Settlement,
Insurance, Accommodation, Factories, Shipping, and Encouragement for
Transportation; which is fully expressed, without Fraud or Ambiguity.

Of GRAIN.
FIrst therefore let us begin with Indian Corn, which is either such as grows
in Virginia, New York, Carolina, etc. and so proceed to Guiney-Corn, or any
other that has growth in the Island. But I shall delude you if to tell you
that English Grain grows here: However there are English Pease, and of various
sorts; and Beans, and Pulse enough, as you may observe if you please, by the
ensuing Discourse.

The Indian-Corn buds, and grows out with a small stem upon a strong stalk,
(which stalk they burn in Barbados under their Coppers in Crop-time, to boil up
their Sugar) and has a fibrous or stringy Root; some of it brings one Ear, some
two, and some others three: But the green Leaves in most of the Caribe Isles,
they frequently strip off, and give them to their Cattle. Of this sort of Corn,
you may expect at least two, if not three Crops yearly, to a very great
Increase; whereof very good Bread is made; and with indifferent Art, a most
delicate Drink.

The Guiney-Corn is much of the figure and the nature of Rice; save only Rice
has a slender stalk, and a smaller Ear, and grows in Swamps and moist Bottoms;
but this will grow on the Tops of Rocks, and produce its Increase upon any
Soil. The stalk is strong, very large and tall; and the Corn sprouts forth on
the top, or extremest part of the stalk, (it has a fibrous Root) and augments
to a prodigious increase; for one Grain by natural Product, without the Art of
Cultivation, multiplies of it self into many thousands. Of this they make
Bread, Dumplins, and Puddings; and some hull it like Rice, and boil it with
Milk.

The Bonivis represents the shape of a Pea, save only its some what longer;
which if once put into the ground, the Art of Man can hardly destroy it; for it
seldom dies, but continually buds, and blossoms, accommodating the Planter with
green, and ripe Pease all the year about. Nor think I them inferior to the
best of French Beans, if indifferently boiled, and eaten with sweet Butter; but
then it must be while they are green and tender; for when they are ripe, their
Case or Rind turns white; which if dried, and as other Pulse boiled, are eaten
with Pork, and are a Nourishing Food.

Then there is the French Pea, so much admired in Martinego; I confess it a
wholesome and strengthening Food, both for Native and Planter; which also
thrives to a prodigious increase, and bears without interruption all the year
about.

So of the Jamaica (or the five weeks Pea) by slender Art or Industry you can
never want them; and he that wants them not, has always something that is good
and wholesome to seed on. But as Idleness is the Darling of Ease, so through a
vain Remisness some slide into Poverty.

There is also the Kidney-Pea, and the Black-ey'd-Pea, much of one nature and
vertual property; and because of its figure, formation, and likeness to the
Kidney-Bean, have almost to superstition made some fancy it a Specific.

The Pidgeon-Pea grows here also, and is a pleasant Food; but they must be
gathered whilst as yet they are young, and eaten with sweet Butter whilst their
Buds are tender.

Then there is the French-Bean (of a very large size) which, if eaten with sweet
Butter and Bacon, makes a Harmony in the Stomach. Besides several other various
and curious sorts of Pulse this Island produces, to the admiration of all men:
So that if Summer Grain be so happy to fall into that fertile Soil, it never
misseth of a generous increase. Moreover, here are all manner of Pulse, as if
naturally strewed up and down the Country; and which also springs up all the
year about: So that People need not to be tempted into the consideration of
Starving, except through Obstinacy, or a vain Neglect, or degenerating from
Mankind, they offer an Unnatural Violence to Themselves.

I remember the wonderful preservation of Otto Eden, (a Dutchman) that sled in
a small Vessel from Surinam, to preserve himself and Family; which by Gods
Providence were miraculously preserved in this Fortunate Island of Tobago; but
a Stranger on the place, and because having no Bread to eat, and his
half-famish'd Children lamenting about him, it struck him into a deep
Melancholy: So that whiles under a heavy pressure of mind, and considering what
to do, a Protestant- Indian that fled along with him, asked Mr. Eden, Why out
of measure so sorrowful? Mr. Eden replies, I that have fed so many scores of
People, have not at present where withal to eat: To which the Indian answered,
That God that gave you Preservation, has brought you into a Land of Plenty;
Despair not, Mr. Eden; Furnish me with a Negro or two, and a couple of Axes,
and I Will suddenly bring you some Provision to eat: Which was presently
performed by striking down a large Macaw Tree (about the bigness of a man's
middle) and of the whitish pithy substance near to the Top, he beats in a
Mortar, then pressed out the Juice, and boiled it to the consistency of a
Hasty-Pudding: But the residue he dried, and rubbed to a perfect Flower; which
with nothing else but fair Water only, he moulds into Cakes; of which like
Bread I eat at my arrival in Tobago, at the same Eden's House, and did verily
persuade my self (before I heard this Relation) that it was Dutch Wheaten
Biscuit.

Of FRVIT.
I Am now entered upon the Classis of Fruits, and shall first begin with the
Cushen Apple, which is meat and drink; only made distinguishable by the Art of
boiling, whose Nuts if preserved you may eat, and of the Rind whiles green make
an excellent Lamp Oil, which by small Artifice is easily obtainable.

But the Bmano is a fruit of that singular Admiration that the Superstitious
Papist durst not cut it with a Knise; lest desponding with himself he divide
the Cross. This Fruit also may be eaten raw, or bettered by an easy Decoction
of Fire.

Here is also the Fig Tree, such as is that in Spain, and Portugal, and
several parts in America; which Fruit may be eaten while as yet its ripe; or
exposed to better Husbandry, it serves for good Drink.

Then there is the Prickle-Apple, of a sharp brisk taste; (and an Indian
expedient against the Bloody Flux) it makes a brave Marmalade: and helps for
staining and coloring any thing. But the Prickle-Pear, to speak its due
praise, is one of the most Sovereign Fruits in the Indies.

The Pome-granate, is a Fruit of that singular Eminency, as hardly to be
expressed, without a Scriptural Phrase: They are plentiful here, a Restringent
and Cooler; Consulted by the Natives in Fevers, and Fluxes.

The Pineapple, I must confess is a Fruit of that Excellency, that I want
Rhetoric and Oratory to express it. Some bears a Crown, and is the King of
Fruits; but to them with three Crowns, the Idolatrous pay their Superstitions,
The Fruit of it self is of Fruit most delicious, and the Liquor botled up,
makes an admirable Drink.

Here are also Pum-Citrons, that make an excellent l'reserve.

But of Oranges here are three sorts; The sower for sauce, and the Flowers for
Essences, the sweet ones are eaten for Reereation. But the China-Orange that
grows here in America, super-excels those in Europe beyond express.

Of Lemons also, here are two several sorts; the sower one, for Lemanadoes; and
the sweet one for Delectation. So of Limes also, here are sweet and sower: with
the last of which, they make Limeads and Punch.

Guavers are a Fruit that is very stony, there is the white and the Red; but they
differ in Virtue: and if baked or boiled green, are either of them Specificks
against immoderate Purgations. Moreover if you weed, or pick out the stones;
you have then a basis for Marmalade, to equalize Quinces.

Tamerinds, grow here by natural instinct; they are a delicate fruit, and vertual
in Fevers.

But the Planton of all fruits, the Nigros love best; and is a nourishing
Sovereign wholesome food. Some eat them raw when Nature has ripned them; and
some again roast them before they be ripe. Some eat them green, and some take
and boil them, and othersome eat them as often as they get them. Now to roast
them they are bread, and to boil them they are sauce; or Marmelade may be made:
but to barbacue or dry them in the Sun you may rub them to a Flower.

Here are Grapes great store, but are eaten off the Clustre; for the Planter
has another Prospect more profitable than Wine.

The Custard Apple, to my taste I must confess is very delightful.

Then there is the Sower Sop, a mediocrity of nourishment: to some its meat,
when to othersome drink.

And the Papaw-Apple, which to my liking is very grateful, and apetizing when
shaped into sauce, by boiling it with Salt-beef: and if so happy to mingle it
with sweet and fresh Butter: except the Squash, there is nothing beyond it.

The Mamme Apple grows to the Magnitude of a Pound Pear, its of a yellow
color, and eats like Marmalade. Then there is the Mamme Supporter, much of the
same Nature with the former, save only the last has two stones, and the first
as in order is indewed but with one.

The Yellow-plum, grows every where here, and is of Plums a most Luscious Food.
But then there is more cry then wool, for what with the greatness of the Stone
and the thickness of the external rind, the fruit can scarcely get a Habitation
betwixt them.

There are Cherry-trees also, (which bear the year about) whose fruit is
somewhat of a sharpish taste; then there is the Cherry which the Spaniard calls
Purgas, which, when thoroughly ripe, are mellifluous and sweet, of a cooling and
opening Nature, which if preserved would be a Rariety for England.

But the Cocur-Nut-tree, and the fruit that hangs upon it, the Indians idolize
it, and call it Gods-tree: because to produce both meat, drink, and Cloth: its
true beyond dispute, that the Nut of it self is a sweet beyond the sweetest
Almond; and the Liquor that lodges in the bosom of this fruit, is to my liking
beyond Florens at Frontiniack: but the Shell serves for Cups, Spoons, and
Dishes; and the Rind encompassing the Shell, serves the Indians for covering,
and with the Leaves they thatch their Houses, and make Baskets, but some more
ingenious make Ropes, and Lines for Fishing.

Of the Maccaw-Nut Shell, the Indians make the boles of their Tobacco pipes;
the kernel is eatable, Yet not very admirable; but the Nut of it self makes an
excellent Lamp-Oyl.

Then there is the Physick-Nut, of whose tree they make senses: the Nut of it
self is a violent Emetick, as also a Cathartick: but the whole macerated, and
boiled with Water, by a culinary Operation affords you Lamp Oil.

Here are also two sorts of Melons; the one is called Musk, but the other the
Water-Mellon. The first is a food of incomparable taste; but the last affords
you both Drink and Meat; of which you can never eat to a Surfeit.

Penguins are a brisk and sharp fruit, extolled by the Indians for their
excellency in Fevers.

There are Cucumbers of two sorts; the one to eat raw, and the other to pickle.

And prodigious Pumkins, I blush to express their magnitude: with Simnels and
Squashes much of a Nature concordant: these make excellent sauce to eat with
Salt Beef; and if rightly ordered, far Excel Coleworts.

Then there is two sorts of Gourds; the sweet one which the Planter boyls to
make broth Medicinal; and the wild Gourd for Instruments, and vessels to
contain Liquors.

Of Roots.
THis Island of Tobago Accommodates the Planter with three sorts of Potatoes;
the white, the Yellow, and the red Potato: but the White and the Yellow they
boil for food; and are the general Nourishment all the Indies over. Now of the
Yellow sort the more ingenious with a Tincture of the Red make a pleasant
Liquor, which when sweetened with Sugar, they bottle it up; and after twenty
four hours its ready for drinking: this is a Liquor known only by the name of
Mobby, and is the universal drink in the Island of Tobago.

There are Eddies also, a most incomparable Root; and Yames, the whole World
has not better to boast of, for a wholesome, toothsome, and a Nourishing Root,
besides diverse other Roots that I have no name for These and Potatoes are their
natural bread, if not improper to call it so; however it is food, if not bread
of another fashion. Then there is Turnips, Parsnips, Onions, and Carrots: but
these last are nourisht by art, in as much as none of them are America's
natural product.

The Cassado Root ranges it self in another order, whose Liquor intoxicates,
and is as truculent as Death. But the Bread thereof, if by a diligent hand well
ordered, is as pleasant, and wholesome as our English Flower; and the Drink
which afterward is made of the Bread; is a Liquor steady (and heady enough)
known by the name of Pereno.

Of Herbs and Spices.
HEre for the most part you may by your industry cause all sorts of sallating
to grow, since Nature has been bountiful by the preordinate Council of Heaven
to influence, and impregnate this Island with variety; and truly I have wondered
how the soil comes to be so rich, till considering its nourished by a Nitrous
Air. And this is the place wherein Tea grows naturally (and plentifully)
meaning such Tea as is frequently sold in our English Coffee-houses.

There is also a certain Bark that is called by the name of Tobago-Cinnamon,
that grows upon a Shrub or a small Tree. Then there is long Pepper, that
sprouts up in every Angle; and Codd Pepper, Bell Pepper, and Round Pepper; some
red, and some green, that grows naturally withour cultivation. Then there is
that famous American Spice, (or Jamaico Pepper) that gives both the redolency,
Flavor, and tact of Cloves, and Cinnamon; with a complicated mixture of
several and various sweets; but these fall from the Bay Tree. Many other
profitable Rarities, as Fruits, and Roots, besides what is set down in this
short Paragraph, this Island, because adorned with Roots and Herbage, liberally
and freely presents them to the industrious Planter; but not as a gratuity to
compensate his labor; rather out of a bounteous and innate generosity.

Of Flesh.
ANd now we present you with the Clasis of Flesh, give me leave therefore in
the first place to begin with the Wild-Hogg, of which sort of Cattle their
numbers are innumerable; when yearly the people cut off at least twenty
thousand, and yet they increase soprodigiously fast, that neither Gun, nor
Engine, nor any other Artifice can be found to destroy them. It Is truth beyond
suspicion that the Barbadians kill some of them; but the rest of the Caribes
and others are daily visitants; who to save it for transportation, or preserve
it for their own accommodation, commonly Jerk, and dry salt it in the Sun, or
in Bulk or Pickle. But here you are to consider in the description of Flesh, I
only touch upon the natural produce of the Country.

The Pickery is a Beast much resembling a Hogg, save only he draws his Breath
at his ventricle; which for the most part concentrates on the middle of his
Back; which Creature by observation is swifter of foot than the Hog is; But
then his Flesh is leaner, and relishes more of Venison then of Pork; and is
taken with more difficulty then usually Hogs are; because swifter of Foot, and
many times endangers the Dogs that attempt him. So that he is seldom destroyed
without Gun, or Dart, by reason of the excessive largness of his tusks that
branch themselves upwards, as also downwards: yet as formidable as he presents
himself to the apprehension of some men, hitherto none has known him to set
upon a man.

Then here is great quantities of the Armidillas (which the Hollander calls
Tattoos) that are Armed with Armor on their Backs; and the largest amongst
them but of an indifferent size, seldom exceeding one foot in height. They are
a Creature that generally feeds upon Fruits, and Roots: and when roasted have
the natural taste of a Pigg, but then the Flesh is much more Physical; as if
Nature had made it a Specific for a Surfeit.

Moreover, for accomodating Horses, Cows, Ass-Negoes, Sheep, Deer, Hoggs,
Goats, Rawbits, etc. I should lame my Description, and unworthily conceal the
plenty of a Country that represents to every one the bounty of Nature by
Heavens generosity.

In this Island you will meet with two sorts of Guanos; the one of a green, but
the other of a gray color, which is shaped like a Lizard, somewhat resembling
the Allegator. I have seen some of those Creatures four and five foot in
length: they live upon Herbs, Insects and Fruits; and burrow like a Coney in
the hollow Pits in sand. The Indians extol them for Food, but the green Guano
is a more delicate, and nutricious meat; who lives only by eating of Fruits and
Flies; nor is he all out so bigg as the gray one (resembling the Creature we
call the Camelion) he lodges upon Trees, not in Cavities of Rocks, nor will he
soil himself in marley Earth.

The Indian Coney is a delicate Creature, much bigener, much taller, and larger
than ours are. Their meat is pleasant, wholesome, and delicious. And their Skins
aromatically smell of Musk; which occasioned some strangers to call them Musk
Squirrils (or sweet Rats, though somewhat improper) however their Skins are a
good sort of Furr, and the rather because of their natural Perfume.

Then there is the Apossum, another sort of a Creature, who is in resemblance
much of the cast and figure of our English Badger (but his Legs are equal) and
the most of any thing assimulates the Racone, and naturally because so affected
with mankind in general, that he follows him, comes to him, and delights to
gaze on him. So that by industry and an easy artifice, there is but little
difficulty to make him tame: However the Femal has a false, or loose belly,
where she suckles her young ones, and secures them from attempts.

Of Armed Creatures.
SUch is the Land Tortois; which vulgarly goes by the name of Turtle. But they
are of two sorts, and inhabit different Soils. For the lesser (to his liking)
padds the dry ground, whiles the larger contents himself in low and moist
bottoms: some sort of people eat them, and commend their food for good Diet;
some of them are bigger, and some less: but the weightiest to my Observation
exceeded not thirty pound.

Here in the Island are three sorts of Land-Crabbs (viz.) the Red, the black,
and the white Crab; but the Red of himself is naturally so, because Nature
adorns him with more Beauty externally, then internally she inriches him with
Aliment and Nutrition. Yet some have fancyed them very good food, and highly
applaud them; but this sort of Crab loves a rockey, and dry Land; who seldom or
rarely consults the Water.

The next in order we call the black Crab, from which the blew Crab differs but
a little; they are both good food, yet their excess breeds Fluxes; the one
storms the Hills because high minded, but the other more Submissive contents
himself in Dales.

Then there is the White Crab (larger then the rest) that generally lives in
swamps, and miery places: I know not what they feed on, but are of themselves
most delicious food. Of this sort the Carbs because so numerous the Lazy Indian
wont leave his Hamacca to catch them; except in rainy Weather, when they creep
into their houses; it may be then they will take so much pains as to stretch forth
an arm to fling them into the fire; so roast and eat them. These Crabs we call
Delvers, because of their Undermining.

Of the same Classis is the Land Shell Soldier whose Claws resemble the Claws
of a Crab, but is of himself a very little Creature; some say they are eatable,
but I Warrant not that: however their fat is a sovereign Oil, and of that
singular Virtue and excellency, as to blunt the Venom of a Poisoned Dart.

Of Fishes.
ANd now I am got into the Classis of Fish, I shall offer you a present of the
Groper first, because he is a Fish generally much bigger than the Salmon; whose
Head super-excels the head of a Cod for goodness; but an Angler may distinguish
Salt-water-fish from Salmon.

Next to the Grooper, we bring you the gray Porgo; who though in Stature and
figure seems a lesser fish, yet is he nothing inferior for delicate food. Then
there is the Red Porgo, of a faint pinck-colour, and scaled like the Gray, as is
the Gray like the Grooper; this fish of fish is the Fishermans charm, and every
man's purchase, whose hook and line may easily reach him.

But there are two sorts of Cavallas, the Green and the Gray; the last we call
House-eye, of the size of a Salmon, and scaled much alike. But the Green
Cavalla is less than a Grooper, and is infinitely preferred before the Gray for
delicacy of taste; more excellent food, and much more Nutritious.

Of the Mullet here are plenty; some bigger, and some less: from the size of a
Mackerel, to the extent of a Pickerel. This fish I prefer for its delicacy of
food, and by an ingenious artist makes excellent Scaveche.

So the Sea-chub in Tobago is a fish of that excellency, that any ways dressed is
a food extraordinary; but then he must be fresh and bleeding new; otherwise he
neither affords good food, nor will he make but indifferent Physic, this fish
of all fish makes the royal Scaveche, as the Row of the Mullet makes the best
Buttargo.

The Manatee or Sea-cow, is of an Amphibious Nature, that eats grass like an
Ox, and swims like an Otter: that lives sometimes under Water, and grows to a
prodigious greatness; for some of them have weighed ten and twelve hundred
pound weight; they are struck with Harping Irons, or other Engines, and so
taken, whose flesh of fish necessity only extols it; but the skin if well
managed, makes a kind of Bendleather; and the ill Management thereof is when
they Manatee the poor Nigros, with straps made thereof.

Of the fish called Turtle, there are various sorts; the Hawks-bill, the
Vandoras, the Logerhead, and the green Turtle; which the Native Indian out of a
strange admiration, have to a degree of Superstition thought among themselves,
that the last was sacred; for they call it Gods fish, by reason of the
extraordinary virtue that is found therein; as if compendiously sum'd up to
serve all America. And truly I can assert it a Medicinal food, for it cured me
of Poison; from that intoxicated Palm-Wine that the Nigros gave me, when last
in Guiney; which Poison was expelled at the Caiamanos, about ten months after,
by eating of Turtle; but for the Ghonorea, the Yaws and the French Pox, there
is not in Nature a food more effectual. This rariety of a Creature has three
large hearts that hang together in one string; and as the Manattee is, so is
she, an Amphibion that lives in the Water, and without it; that swims like a
fish, yet in the Sand lays Eggs like a Fowl; whose fish is flesh, and admits of
various tastes; as of Veal, of Beef, but the fat is green, and eats like
Marrow; and their Eggs undistinguishable from those of a Hen; which if pickled,
strung up, and barbacued in the Sun, are little or nothing inferior to
Buttargo. And though notwithstanding the Vandoras Turtle assimilates some what
the Nature of the Green, yet is her fat not by half so sweet; and is of a more
yellowish Complexion. But the Hawks-bill is smaller, and not so Sovereign; but
then it excels the former in Substance, for our Tortois Combs are shaped from
that shall: who also lays her Eggs in the Sand as the rest do. But the
Logerhead, because larger in the front then his Fellows, shows more bulkey, and
is a bigger fish. Now we propound you three ways to take them; either by fools,
which are shaped into Netts: or by a strong prong of Iron, fastened to a Pole;
or otherwise by turning of their Calopeia upwards. These are the usual ways we
take them, and their plenty is such in this Island of Tobago, that one nights
work may supply a thousand people with food for more than twice twenty four
hours.

The next that presents in order, is the Barracooto, and they are of two forts,
and some about two foot in length, they have a long beak, or snout, filled full
of Teeth: which when you would surprise them by a hook, and line, be sure you
arm well with wier, for at least two foot in length. The white mouthed
Barracooto is the wholsomest Fish; for the black mouthed Fish his Teeth are
venomous, and the fleshy substance, especially near the Back bone.

Then there is the great Garr, which the Spaniard calls Needle Fish, about some
two foot long; whose bill is shaped like a Snite, good and wholesome Diet. But
the smaller Garr-fish, which also has a long beak, and seldom exceeds twelve
inches in length; if by an Artist dressed and fried with fresh Butter, its
difficult to distinguish his taste from a Smelt.

The Pilchard we have also here (but then its smaller then ours in England)
which rush into the Bays for self-preservation, when chased or pursued by a
Master Fish: So that sometimes part of their Shoals are forced a Shore, and
taken up by casting Nets (and others) in very great quantities. But the
Pilchards in Barbados are feavourish some months in the year.

Here also we have a Fish which we call an Anchovy, much smaller than a
Pilchard, and of an Anchovy shape; which if taken in season, and pickled by
Art, may for ought I know, vye with those from Foreign Part

The Hedg-hogg Fish we have here also, that are armed with prodigious strong
Prickles: which in bigness and largness exceed the Land Vrchin. Some have eaten
them, and say they are very good food; But I rather approve of their Oil for
Aches.

So of the Coney Fish, which is of a smaller size, that has purchased his name
from the shape of his mouth. He Is a Fish as seldom fed on as any Fish, but his
Flesh drawn out and neatly stuffed, they send them to England, and other Parts
for Rarities.

But the Indian Sturgeon (so called by the English) frequents the Bays, and are
some of them five or six foot in length. The Fish wants only the art of well
curing, to preserve it for transportation into Remoter Parts. However if you
eat him fresh, you will find him excellent Food: they are taken with the line,
and sometimes with Nets; but take them at all times they are seldom out of
season. Now were there a Fishery erected in this Island, without dispute it
would turn to a very good account.

The Dolphin is a Fish that gives chase to the flying Fish; which are
numberless here. But the Dolphin in his chase, shines of a golden color, when
at other times (he preys not) his Scales show like Silver. They are taken with
the Hook, as we sail round the Island; some of them two, or three foot long,
and more. They are delicate food, and make a fine Scaveche; which to admiration
when their lives expire, they reflect a tincture of what presents unto them. By
which we may perceive, that the privation of water (which is their natural
Element) causes an immediate Cessation of the actions of life.

The Flying fish is not all out so bigg as a Herring, nor by much so boney, but
is delicate food: which makes several Fishes in the Sea prey upon him: who in a
fresh gale dilates his finns, which Nature has lent him, as wings to fly with;
and which conveys him sometimes half a furlong, or further. So that dipping his
wings again into the salt Ocean, he readily prepares for another flight, and
mindful of the Fish persuing after him, he flies into the chains or midship of
a vessel: and sometimes on the quarter Decks; as it happened to me in my
passage to Barbados, that a flying Fish as I sat at the Table; sprung out of
the Sea, and flew into my Lap.

The Boneto likewise he prays upon flying Fish, and is taken with the Hook,
though sometimes we stick them with Fisgigs, which with sharpened and barbed
Prongs of Iron are fastened to a Pole, having some Lead on the extremest part.
Some of this kind are thirty inches long; which boiled and eaten with fresh
Butter, and the juice of a Lemmon, maks a Food most delicious.

So the Albacore that has the figure and shape of a Boneto; yet is he bigger,
longer, and larger; much of the nature and relish of the Boneto; and preys on
the flying Fish, as the Boneto does. By which you may conclude, that the flying
Fish of all Fish is surrounded with Enemies.

Then there is the Amber Fish, an excellent Food; so is the Angel Fish, and the
green Swallow-Tail; but the last is a Fish not much bigger than a Herring: all
of them take the hook, and if they like their commons dispond not of death,
when to sacrifice their lives to the Angler.

The Parrot Fish whose Scales shine with green and yellow, his head resembles
the head of a Parrot, let the delicacy of the Food praise it self. So of the
Golden Fish, called Dorado (by the Spaniard) his Scales all glister like Gold.
This and the other is about the size of a Mackarel, equivalent in Food with the
former Fish. And of fresh Fish, every River and Rivulet swarms with Plenty.

The next Armado that in order approach us, are the Shellfish; for that end
let us martial the Lobster or Craw-Fish, first; which are of a prodigious
growth in these parts, yet have not their fore Claws, as those in England; but
they are extremely delicious, to the Gusto, because they have a sweet, and if
with liberty I may presume to say it, a pleasant and delightful taste. But then
the Tobago Crab as much excells our English Crab, as the Lobster is approved
above comparison. But they have green Crabs which in shape are like those in
England, save only by nature they have a larger growth; these sort of Crabs
are delicious Food.

The Sea-souldier assimilates the Crab, by reason of the great and smaller
Claws: whose Shell resembles a Snail the most of any thing, and looks like
Pearl of an obscure color.

The Cunck is a Shell Fish, of which we have plenty, nor have I known a sweeter
Food; two boys in two hours may take enough for 500 men. This Fish may be
boiled, stewed with wine, or fried with fresh Butter; eat them any ways, or any
how, there is no Fish I persuade my self, better of his kind; whose Shell has
the tincture of Pearl color, slame color, and white, some part thereof being
taken out, the Indians makeof it their Wampam Pieg; which Shell is a staple
Commodity

The Horn-fish, I have seen some of them ten inches long, and not unlike the
resemblance of a Post-boys-horn: The Shell of this Fish is of a sine figure,
and partly of a Pearl color, but not very Orient; yet the meat very excellent.

The Orney also is a sort of Shellfish, that sticks and adheres to the sides
of Rocks; some of them you may pick up as big as an Egg, which if eaten with
sweet butter, are a delicious food: and the shell of this fish has an Orient
Tincture.

So of the Scollop-fish, whose shell is as big as a saucer, and partly
resembling a Pearl in color. This Fish has but half a Shell, and sticks on the
Rocks as birdlime to a twigg: which if neatly dressed, and well ordered, you will
have little cause to complain of your diet.

Cockles grow here to the bigness of an Egg, but then there is an inferior
growth that never arrive to that Maturity: both lie in Sand, but examined by
the fire, and if you have no aversion to fish, I Will pass my word you will find
good food.

Of the Sea-Snail, here are very great quantities: and some of them you will
meet with as big as your fist: they lie very thick, and close together, on very
Sholes and Rocks, and sometimes on banks that are almost dry: which without
difficulty may be attempted, and taken at low water. Their Shells are of a
curious Figure to form Cups of: and as much as any fish imitates the Oriental.

The Rock Oyster, adheres to the cliffs of the Rocks: the inside of whose Shell
is of a shining color; his Liquor brackish, and his flesh good food. But that
other Oyster that produces the Pearl, they lie in some four or five fathom
Water, which the Indians dive for, to obtain that treasure: but we think to
examine a readier expedient, if when once we come to have Dredges amongst us.

But the Mangrove Oyster, that grows upon Trees on the tops of boughs, and the
smaller branches; for you must know the Red Mangrove grows always in
Salt Water, and the tops of the trees because bending their boughs down wards
(peradventure lick on the Surface of the water) which by natural instinct
incline toward their roots By this means the Oysters Cluster, and clung
together about them: that not a bough is barren. Now some folks eat them out of
Curiosity, but truly I cannot commend them for good food. Their Shells partly
Pearl color, and almost transparent, and because very thin and clear, the
Spaniards substitute them in lieu of Glass.

The Sea-Egg is of two sorts: some black, and some gray. But either sort are
guarded, and armed with Prickles. But the gray eggs are the Oysters, because
resembling them in taste: and are eaten raw, with Vinegar and Pepper; but
better stewed with Wine, and Shellots, and sometimes with a cast of East India
Spices; which so ordered, I confess, there is no richer food. So that you may
read in the Compendions Catalogue, Some Fish are for food, and some others for
Physic.

Of Fowl.
NOw Gentlemen, as we have described the Race and Family of Fish; so if you
please let us consult the Genealogy of Fowl; their virtue, and variety; because
multiplied here, as if Tobago was a Paradise for Englishmen to inhabit in.
First therefore give me leave to begin with the Bill-Bird, whose Bill, or Beak
shows as bigg as his Body; an evidence whereof is in St. James's Park: but the
Indians eat them, and extol them for Food.

Then there is the Blackbird, about the bigness of a Crow, which feeds on the
Berries that fall from the Palmeto; whose flesh is nothing inferior to a
Pidgeon. But the smaller Blackbird resembles ours in England; save only it has
a longer bill, and the Fleshy part of the taste of our English Starlin so that
you must strip him of his skin, otherwise he eats bitter.

The Booby so called, is a bird over credulous; because when to proffer him
your hand, he will perch on your fist. He feeds upon fish, and his flesh eats
fishey; and some of them you shall see as big as a Capon, whose Down is rich,
beyond degrees of Comparison; and less than two ounces from each individual
Bird, you need never doubt of, and their Numbers so numerous that in ten days
time, and by easy Artifice, an ordinary man may procure ten thousand.

The Blew headed Parrot, is a very pretty bird, but in largeness he is somewhat
inferior to the Green: they may be taught to talk any dialect: because
naturally affected with the Vanity of tattle. Roast, or boil them, you will
commend the Diet. So of the Parraketoes, of which there are two sorts; one
about the bigness of our English Thrush, but plumed like a Parrot, and because
inclinable to prattle, the difficulty's the less to learn them to speak. But
the smaller Paraketo exceeds not a Sparrow in bigness; and like the green
Parrot may be taught to talk, whose flesh is equivalent with that of the
Parrot, save only you have not so much at a meal. Then there is the Main Parrot,
whose head is Yellow, and has a yellow breast: which to make him more beautiful
Nature has clothed him though in green. This bird speaks the best, and is more
Docible then the rest; and if I mistake not, is a rich food to feed on.

Then there is the Macaw, that is headed like a Parrot, but his body in
proportion is four times bigger, whose Feathers because shaded with blews,
reds, and green, makes him shine with luster, since beautified with such
eminent colors One of them is to be seen in St James's Park.

But the Flamingo of all fowls is the fairest; and as they generally fly in
Covees together, so they frequently feed in flocks together: whose stature is
tall and upright; equal to the height of a man. Some call them good food, but I
assert they have curious Feathers, and of various colors. Truly to admiration
when I have viewed this Creature, I have been led into speculation to
Contemplate the Creation: whose outside, because most beautiful, interprets a
more glorious inside. But to the Flamingo whose wings are skinned with a
glorious Pin-colour, inclinable to Scarlet: and because, fringed and tipped with
sables: make them show rich, as to the Majesty of birds.

Tobago also has a Duck which is delicate food: but then they are smaller than
ours in England; and degenerate as to setting, for ours will set all night on
the Sand, but these sort aloft, and lodge in Trees.

The Sea-gull is much of a Cast with those in England, somewhat larger then a
Duck, and of a dunnish color.

And so the Sea-mew is plentiful here, and much of the Nature with those in
England: if different in any thing, their food eats better.

The Plover we have here, are of two distinct sorts, and are generally gray,
but the one is distinguishable from the other, by reason of different
proportion, they are both good food, and delicious to feed on,

The Turtle-dove also admits of a double distinction, because here are two
sorts, one bigger then another, but the larger they only coo, and the lesser
sort have a kind of mournful murmuring Note; both of them are eatable, and
delicate food.

The Man of War Bird (so called) makes to the shipping some distance from the
Coast, ere ever the Seamen can discover Land: he preys upon Fish, and has a
fishy taste. His Body seemingly is as bigg as a Turkey; whose Feather is of a
blackish gray, but his Gills look red, like a Turkey Cock when he Bristels.

The Bird of Paradise (or the King-fisher) is much about the bigness of our
English Starlin, whose Feathers represent all colors imaginable: he lives upon
Flies that swim on the surface of the water, and that is his Food which Nature
affords him.

The Pelican is a Bird about the bigness of a Goose, that has a great head, and
a very large swallow, and a Crop or Craw larger than other Birds. Some of our
people has made Caps of their Craws, which they wore to cover their heads. This
Bird feeds upon Fish, and has himself a fishy taste; but his Down is excellent.

The Cockerrico is the Indian name for the Tobago Phesants, which are as large,
and as fair as our English Phesants; and those that have fed upon them, say,
they are better food. They are easily taken in Glades with Nets, or struck with
shot from the Bows of Trees.

There are two sorts of Curlews, the one of them is red, and as bigg as a
Capon; that has a crooked long beak, and gets his living by sucking in
salt-water-plashes. But the gray Curlew, which is shaped like the red one,
differs only in color, and in feeding in the freshes. They are both choice
food, for those that feed on them.

The Wood-Pidgeon so called here, feeds most upon Berries; and is to my
thinking the choicest food in America. This Bird is bigger than an English
Pidgeon, and are sometimes so fat that they burst with their fall, when we have
taken them off from tops of Trees with our Shot. Here are many other Birds, and
Fowls fit for food, but I want names for them; moreover their Feathers are
serviceable and profitable to the Planters, either for present use, or
transportation.

Moreover this Island of Tobago for raising of stock, may make such improvement
by Geese, Ducks, Turkies, Pullin, etc. (I speak within the bounds of modesty)
America cannot produce a richer Soil.

Of Timbers.
I Begin with the Cedar first, because its a Tree of emiminency (and stature)
that naturally grows in the Island of Tobago, and affords excellent Timber from
two foot, to five foot diameter; with this sort of Wood they generally build
their houses, and shipping; except what is transported to Barbados and other
Parts.

The Green Heart is next, which I take to be Hercules; and of this sort of Wood
they make all manner of Instruments, either for inlaying, or the use of Turnery.

Then there is the Locust of two several sorts, the one white, and the other is
red, from two to three foot diameter; either of them are very good Timber for
building Houses, Shores for Milnes, Spindles, and Shafts: they are good to make
Beams, and Knees for shipping, or indeed, to speak generally, any thing else.

The Mastick is a Timber Tree of so fine a grain, that it plains like our
English Box; some of them are three and four foot Diameter, it is sit for all
uses, and of a nature so durable, that the Caribe-Planters call it Wood
everlasting.

Mohogeny is a Tree that resembles the Cedar in color, and is excellent Timber
for building of Ships: the Indian Spaniard uses it much in their building, in
regard it is a Timber the worm will seldom touch under water. Now I fancy this
Timber an excellent sheathing for Shipping.

The Man-grove, by some called Red-wood, the proper use of the Wood is for
Diers: which if further examined, the Bark is useful in Tanning. But white
Mangrove is of little use, save only good to make Ropes with.

The White-wood is a Tree of that singular virtue, the worm will seldom touch
it, therefore have the English Americans consulted with this Timber to build
their shipping, in regard of the singularity and durability of the Wood.

The Yellow Sander Tree, is from two to five foot diameter; a Timber of
excellent use, and may be fitted to any purpose; it is very useful in the place
where it grows, and it is profitable also to those that transport it.

The Bay Tree is a Tree of that admirable virtue, most people admire it: whose
Bark is like Cinnamon, and whose Berries, as are those in Jamaica, of a Clove,
and a Cinnamon scent and taste, qualifies it with a double nature of Spice.

The Box-tree here is a solid, and firm wood; but seldom or rarely grows to
that degree of Timber.

The Fiddle-tree, so called, has a sweet Flower, and grows up to Timber also,
and is useful in building, etc.

The Brazil Tree, Nature has given it the growth of Timber; and a tincture of
that virtue, that it is useful for Diers, in staining of stuffs, or coloring of
Cloth.

Brazilleto, is a Minor or Junior Brazil, seldom or rarely arriving to the
magnitude of Timber; but as useful in dying as the former.

Bully-Tree is a ponderous, durable and compact Wood; that sinks if put into
the Water: they use it in Barbados for Rolers, but principally for Coggs, to
Spindles, and Shafts in their Windmills: besides several other uses.

The Cocus Tree, we thought it unnecessary to range that among the Timber
Trees, having considered it very useful to inlay with; and as profitable as
plentiful to the industrious Turner.

The Cassia Fistula is a Tree, but I cannot warrant it Timber; however the
Fruit is for Physical Use.

The Callabash Tree, is a kind of tough Timber, which we shape into Pumps,
Pump-boxes, Knees, and Timber for small Vessels; and with the shell of the
fruit, some folks make drinking Cups, which are called Calabashes.

The Granadilla is a bastard Cocus; much of its nature, and useful in the like
cases.

Green Fustick is a sort of Timber fitted for Instruments, or the art of
inlaying; but the Yellow Fustick is more proper for Diers, as it may be
directed; or suited at pleasure to other uses.

Lignum vitae is a compact and ponderous Wood, good to make Bowls with, and as
good to make Bowls of; I mean your Punch Bowl, and also Pestles and Mortars;
but the Gum, Flowers, and Bark, are preserved as Druggs, etc. and Ale or any
other Liquor, if provided it have stood ten or twelve hours in a
Lignum-vitae-Cup, and drunk, it helps against Consumptions.

Manchioneel, is a sort of Timber for Plank, and Sheathing, so naturally
seasoned with some bitter taste, that the Worm willby no means touch it.

Yellow Plumb-tree, is a very good Timber, and fitted for several uses.

The Cabbage Tree, grows to a prodigious height, some to one hundred foot in
length, yet has but a fibrous root and the Cabbage you shall observe at the
extremest part; save only a lovely Plume of green leaves over shade it. But
it is no Timber tree, by reason it contains so very much Pith: however it is
useful for Palasades, and to make Pumps, Gutters, Troughs, and Pailing with:
but of the hard, and outmost Rind, the Indians by the use of fire make Piles
for their Arrows; and with the leaves they cover the tops of their Houses, or
Wiggwams; but the Cabbage it self is a most delicious food, and super-excells
our in England.

The Ebony tree grows naturally here, I need not to speak the use of that.

But the Shrubs that grow here, are the Physic Nut and Flowerfence: which are
planted in rows (or lines) as our Hedges are to divide and distinguish
Plantations, And the Sensible Plant, which contracts it self as soon as you
touch it, is but a Shrub neither, that grows plentifully here

The Staples of Tobago.
THe Cocao (that makes Chocolatto) is a Nut so generally known, that it needs
no description: but yet I thought good to incert for encouragement, that in the
Latitude of the Island of Tobago, one Acre of Land by modest computation may
yield to the Planter 400 pieces of Eight per Annum, (which in Barbados is
valued at 100 l. Sterling) after the Trees have been planted six years. Then
there is another thing worthy your consideration, that never any Herricane nor
the Blasts (satal to Jamaica and Hispaniola) has been ever known in the
Latitude of Tobago to strike the tender blossom, and buds, with its perishing
stroke: which experience confirms unto us, that by opening of the Woods in
those parts thereby to plant Canes, or ground provision; they let in the Blast,
that invaded the Cocao (but in this latitude, were we open to the Ocean, it is
never the worse; for it never blasts here) which Cocao was so plentiful in
Jamaica, and Hispaniola formerly, that in the year 1654. I was at the taking of
a Spanish Vessel laden with Cocao, which came from Hispaniola; so great was
the plenty, then, and to admiration; but the reason I have already laid down,
why there is such a searcity now, and think it needless to make repetition,
save only to tell you that the Cocao Tree grows naturally wild in the Woods
here in Tobago, and the Indians here gathered of the Nuts and brought to us;
which Nuts were transported to Barbados, as Mr. Rodderigo the Jew now in
England can evidence.

The Sugar Cane was planted here by the Dutch, and I almost blush to express
their wonderful increase, that the produce of one Acre of Canes should amount
to six thousand pound of Sugar, besides Rum and Mollassos: which in Barbados
and the Leward Islands they esteem it great profit if at any time one Acre
yields them three thousand. And yet the Sugar Cane we approve to be none of the
best Staples in the Island of Tobago.

And the Tobacco that grows in this Island is nothing inferior to Spanish
Trinidado, that lies distant about some seven Leagues, and not above twenty
miles North from the Verines; from whence comes the best Tobacco in the world.
Several small Vessels have I seen laden from Trinidado, and the Tobacco sold
in the Role for 2 s. per pound, which Merchandise they transport to old Spain
and other Parts to advance the price, which turns to considerable profit. So
that in Tobago I persuade my self that a stout laboring man may make 3000 l.
of Tobacco into Roll every year, and do it with a great deal of ease, which if
sold but at seven pence per pound sterling, comes to a considerable sum; as the
Holander when they had the Island engrossed the same, and gave six Stivers for
it there: which was afterward transported to considerable profit.

Indigo is a certain weed that grows in Barbados, and in most of the Leward
Islands: but the best to my observation grevv in Guatimale, which lies in or
near the latitude of Tobago; by which I may rationally conclude that as good
Indigo may be made here, as there; that one hand may dress up, and cure 1500
pound weight in one year, all materials fitted, and the weed brought to the
place.

There are two sorts of Cotton; Ravil and Vine, of either sort of which an
industrious Planter may Plant two thousand weight in a year: and this I look
upon is the meanest staple in Tobago for a man to go upon, and employ his hands.

Ginger, That Is another Staple; and as good grows here as in any part of the
World, which admits of two several ways of curing to better it: so that some
scaled and dry it, othersome scrape it; but the last is best, and more then
doubles the price, let Markets rule as they will. But of the first its ordinary
for one man to make seven Thousand pound weight a year.

Sarsaparilla, is a Spanish drug that grows in the Indies, of which by reason
of the great plenty in Tobago, one man I persuade my self, may gather and dry
as much as by modest Computation comes to eighty, or a hundred pound Sterling a
year.

Semper Vioum, is a certain Juicy Plant, that is guarded with a priekle Leaf; I
need not tell you the use, and virtue of this Plant, of which the Planter here,
as in Barbados, etc. may make as good Aloes, as that which comes from
Succotrina. So that a Thousand weight of Aloes Succotrina, will countervale the
value of two Thousand of Hippatica.

Beeswax, is another Staple; of the Honey we make Metheglen, or expose it to
other uses.

The Vinillios grows like the Cod of a French bean, and is somewhat flat, and
thinner, and full of small seeds. It generally grows upon bushes, or Brambles
that spread themselves upon Rocks. So that when it blossoms, it sends forth
such a fragancy as perfumes the Air; and when the Codds are ripening, they
first turn green, after that brown, and last of all a more Obscure Color. Some
use them as a perfume for Chocalata, or other wise to put amongst Cloths. But
the Spaniards pickle them for Transportation, and their way, and manner is by
scalding them in a pickle made up with Salt and Limewater, which afterward
they dry up, and bind them in Bundels of about one hundred in a bundle; which
bundles have been sold in England for twenty, thirty, or forty Shillings a
Bundle: of these sweet Cods I persuade my self that an active man may gather as
much in a season, as will amount to the value of ten thousand Codds, and not
loose much time.

The Natural Balsam (as we call it) is a certain sappy juice, that issues forth
of the body of the tree, after you have wounded it, by making a hole therein;
so tap it, and the Liquor descends into a clean Gourd, or any other Vessel
that is placed under it. The leaf of this tree differs but a little from that of
the Fig Tree, and the Balsam of most sovereign use for wounds, both in ward and
outward. Yet the true Valuation of this excellent Balsam, is hitherto unknown.
However great quantities, as thirty or forty Gallons, may be gathered in a
year, by a diligent and industrous man.

And then there is the Balm, (like that) of Gilea, (and equal in Virtue for
ought I know) that comes from the Flower of the Balsam-tree, whose Leaf is
Yellow, of a golden color, and as big as a Rose when the flower is full blown,
in which yellow Rose, there appears about some three or four bubbles, or drops
of an Amber color, each of the bigness of a Pea, which springs out of the
Rose, and is that excellent and miraculous Balm, more valuable then Money. But
the virtues I acquired of an Indian, who instructed me in the use on it, which
at that juncture of time proved fortunate to me, when to consider the cut, and
bruise of my finger that made me languish under intolerable pain, yet in one
Minutes time to be released from pain: and within less than twenty four hours
to receive an absolute cure, confirmed it a Medicament of admirable virtues. Of
which precious Balm, I modestly judge near forty pound weight might be gathered
(by an industrous man) in less space of time then eight or ten months, besides
other Labor.

The Silk-Grass, so called, is a Plant that flourishes most in moist bottoms,
and has a large broad long and thick Leaf, guarded with Prickles, not much
unlike the teeth of a Saw, yet spread themselves every way; out of the Center
of these Leaves there grows a stalk, twelve or fourteen foot high, to four or
five inches Diameter, toward the Bottom. When this stalk begins to Wither,
then the leaves are cut away, and laid in Water as you do Hemp; afterward they
dry it in the Sun, then hackle off the rotten pitthy substance which adheres to
the more purer part of the silk-grass, which may be spun to the fineness of
silk, etc. whereof you may make furniture for houses, or habits for your self
and others. But the general use of it is to make Ropes, and fishing Lines, of
which to my certain knowledge there is no stronger, nor better in the World, and
is a good Staple.

Arnotto or Annotto, its all one, (the Hollanders call it Rocoo) it strikes a
deep red, and is profitable for Dyers. The plenty of this Plant is such here
that one man on an Acre of ground may in one years time make a thousand pound
Weight: but the Annotto is cured two several ways: First the Barrel, which is
an inferior sort, and barrel'd up whiles as yet its moist: but the Cakes are
dried in the Sun. I have set down the method, and order for both. This Annotto
grows in prickly Burrs, like Teasels, which Burrs when they be ripe, are full
of Red seeds that are to be gathered in dry Weather, and put on a clean floor
to thrash out the seed, which afterward ought to be put into a Fatt, and
steeped there till the water elicites a deep red Tincture: which the rather and
sooner is done, if provided you sometimes stir it. Then with a sieve, (or
somewhat else of a like nature) they separate the seeds from the tincture by
letting the water run through a Fosset till nothing visibly remains, but a
Recrement or Sedement in the bottom, which substance when like batter, they put
it into Barrels, and so transport it. But others more curious, dry it in the
Sun, which makes it better, and fitter for sale; and to yield almost a double
price.

The Green Tarr issues out of the earth from the Munjack Rocks, and is commonly
gathered after a shower of Rain, by skimming it off from the surface of the
Water; and then put it into a great Gourd, or such like Vessel, that has a hole
at the bottom, they separate the Oil from the Water, by suffering the Water to
slide gently out, but when the Oil appears, they cautiously stop and preserve
it for several servile uses, as to burn in Lamps, etc. and has a most foveraign
virtue to help against pains, and Aches in any part of the Body. In the Island
of Tobago great quantities of this Oil is procurable.

The Munjack is nothing else than a Confirmation or Coagulation of the Tarr (we
spoke of) into a more solid body, which Munjack were it in a frigid, as it is
in the torrid Zone, would be absolute Cole, such as we burn in England. This
Munjack after its beat into powder, they incorporate or mingle it with Earth,
to burn under their Coppers in Barbados; otherwise it runs into an oily
Substance, by reason of the heat; as has been observed by melted Pitch, instead
whereof the Spaniard substitutes Munjack.

The Soap Earth, represents to me a kind of Clay, that Nature has endued with
virtue, and the Qualification of cleansing, and purifying other bodies: which
dissolves in Salt, or in fresh Water; and makes a lather like sope-sudds,
wherewith I washed my hands; and it not only scoured them, but took off the
tanning to Admiration, and so it happens either to Linen or Woolen; by reason
of its Mundificative Virtue and Quality.

There is also a Clay that serves to clay Sugar with, or you may if you please
make Earthen ware thereof. Moreover it will make good Brick or Tile, or to
mingle it with Sand, you may shape it into Glass.

Many curious Shells, stones, Markasites, and Minerals are found up and down
the Island of Tobago, whose virtue and worth is as yet unknown, and as by the
Bounty of Heaven here is plenty enough for the Sustentation of Man, and Beast:
so by a natural instinct, and inclination Nature opens her doors of Treasure,
wherewith to adorn, and enrich the industrous: God is pleased to endue this
Island with plenty, so let her Inhabitants be mindful not to Surfeit with
excess: for if fullness, and ease, be the parents of idleness; idleness must of
Necessity be the darling of a soft and remiss Generation, that slides into the
foolish Embracements of Honor and Ambition, which is the overthrow of civil
Society; and from which two evils, Libera nos Domine.

Directions for Improvement in the Island of TOBAGO.
SUppose a Man that has an hundred pound Sterlin is minded to transport
himself; and Family, consisting of eleven in number, to this Island of Tobago,
and suppose their passages may cost him fifty pound; and Manuals with other
things requisite and necessary for Planting, as also Provision for the first
twelve months, together with the charge of Household stuffs, and all other
Necessaries, may stand him in 47 l. 10 s. more: Suppose also this man takes a
Lease of fifty Acres of Land for a thousand years, at the rate of twelve-pence
an Acre anually, it amounts but to two pound ten shillings a year, (except
otherwise he purchase the Fee simple of the Proprietors) which compleats the
hundred pound; This is the first Money laid out; nor need he be at any more
charge, for in twelve months time he will have ground provision enough, and in
all Probability two Crops of Tobacco.

The next thing to consider of, is the Improvement of the said Land; which is
as follows. After your Arrival in the Island of Tobago the first six Months
may be spent to clear fifteen Acres of Land, and to put Provisions into the
ground; to build Conveniences to accomodate your self, and Family, to adapt
and fit the ground for planting a Nursery of Cacoa-nuts; as also a bed sowed
with Tobacco seeds, and be sure to keep your Nursery clear from Weeds. Then
about a Months time after you have sown your Tobacco seed (provided the Seasons
be good) you may then draw your Tobacco Plants, and plant them about some four
foot distance, one from another, regularly and in rows: which said Tobacco
Tobago produces, is nothing inferior to Spanish Trinidado, that lies about
seven Leagues distance from the said Island of Tobago, where I have seen the
Spaniards (when I was a Prisoner amongst them) sell great quantities of
Trinidado Tobacco at the rate of two Shillings a pound; which said Tobacco the
Spaniards transport from thence, to old Spain; and sell it there to
considerable advantage. Now amongst your Tobacco plants, you may plant your
Cocoa, and transplant them when about six Months old, into new ground, fitted
at ten or twelve foot distance; and be sure to keep clean from Weeds; In which
latter six Months time, you may have on your cleared ground two Crops of
Tobacco. Now admiting you make but eight thousand weight of Neat Tobacco on the
said Ground; yet in all probability (provided your People be healthy) it may
double the number to sixteen thousand. But if it do not, and put the case your
Tobacco fell but for an eighth part of what the Spaniards sell for in Trinidado
(which is but three pence per pound fold here in our Island) yet will this Crop
yield you one hundred pounds Sterlin, which is your Money gained the very first
year, and in six month time, all charges being born.

Now suppose that at the beginning of the second year the said fifteen Acres be
all cleared; and Provision enough put into the ground sufficient for double
your number of hands: you may rationally then expect four Crops in twelve
Months time, when as formerly you made two Crops in the last six Months. So
that with the hundred pounds you gained last year, you may now purchass seven
or eight slaves, or Servants; which may in all probability treble the first
year. But put the case it but only double, yet at the worst it may yield you
(and all charges born) two hundred pounds Sterlin.

Now we cannot otherwise conclude (if things succeed well) but that the third
year will double the second year by improvement, as above is expressed; and if
so, then your Crop will amount to four hundred pounds Sterlin.

And the fourth year doubles the third year, by reason the Cocoa that was
planted the first year on the fifteen Acres of Land, may produce to the value
of thirty pounds Sterlin an Acre; besides the increase of Tobacco, and clearing
of more ground, together with your increase of Servants, and slaves; and
planting of more Cacao Trees, which at least will arise to eight hundred pounds
sterlin, the fourth year.

The fifth year, in all Probability doubles the fourth; by reason the Cocoa
that was first planted, yields now to the value of sixty pound Sterling an
Acre, as the second years planted Cocoa yielded but thirty pounds per Acre. So
that clearing of more ground, and purchasing more slaves, and Servants; your
produce of Cocoa and Tobacco, clears you at least one thousand six hundred
pounds Sterlin, as now the price goes.

The sixth year you may very well clear three thousand pounds sterlin, and all
charges borne; by reason the Cocoa planted the first year, is now come to
perfection, and is at its full height of bearing; Which in this Latitude may
yield one hundred ponnd Sterling an Acre. (viz.) the first fifteen Acres which
were Planted the first year. And the second years Plants Planted the second
year, will yield you sixty pound sterling, and the third years Plants, as by
the same calculation, may yield you thirty pound Sterlin an Acre. So that by
purchasing the more servants, and slaves, you may if you please decline so much
planting of Tobacco as formerly you did.

The seventh year you will have all your Land Planted with Cocoa; and that
increasing, you need not plant above ten, or fifteen Acres of Tobacco this
year, amongst your Cocao; but you may Plant provisions amongst them for support
and maintenance of your self and Family. So that from that increase of your
seventh years Crop, you may hope, and expect by a modest computation, to clear
from the said fifty Acres of Land, at least five thousand pounds Sterling a
year.

And now we come to the Reasons for this great improvement; you must consider,
that the Spaniards in Trinidado, etc. give among themselves one hundred pounds
Sterling, for a Nigro Slave, and yet the said slave will not stand his master
in one single penny, at the years end for his purchase. And all the labor and
service the Spaniard imploys him in the year about, is only in Cocoa, and
Spanish Tobacco, in this our Latitude.

Now pray consider, that we can have Nigro Slaves brought and delivered to us
at fifteen pound sterling a head; by reason we have an open trade, and the
Spaniard allows not of a free trade. Where note the Spaniard pays sixpence, or
more for every thing he wants; when we can have the same for a single penny.
That Is one reason.

The second Reason is, the Spaniard cannot have any Tunage for goods from old
Spain to the West Indies, and home again, for less then forty or fifty pounds
sterling per Tun; besides the Duties run very high. And we can have Freight for
five or six pounds per Tun, and no Duties from us to a free Port. When
therefore to consider and compute the charge on either side, we profit by what
we transport, six to one. Which makes the Spaniard generally so poor in the
Indies; and we generally to flourish so much the more.

The third reason is, that in a Ship of three hundred Tun, the Spaniard has
seldom less then two hundred men belonging to her; and the wages of each man
comes at least to Fifty Shillings Sterling per month: which in the whole
amounts to five hundred pound a month, barely for wages; then you are to
Consider the monthly Provision to accomodate these men cannot come to less then
one hundred and sixty pound Sterlin, and ten months at six hundred and sixty
pound per Month, amounts to six thousand and five hundred pounds Sterlin for
ten Months. Moreover this Ship of three hundred Tun, seldom carries less then
forty Pieces of Ordinance, which with their Provisions, etc. by modest
computation takes up no less room then one hundred and fifty Tun. So that the
Ship in all Probability cannot bring home more then one hundred and fifty tun
of Merchants goods, and the freight of these goods comes to forty pound Sterlin
a tun. So that by this Calculation they must be loosers at least six hundred
pound Sterlin, and at forty five pound- per tun, to pay ware and tare of the
Ship, and men's wages. So that for the ships ware and tare it comes barely but
to one hundred and fifty pound Sterlin clear:

Now admit an English ship of three hundred tun, be bound for Jamaica, and
suppose the freight of this ship be at six pound sterlin per tun, this ship
shall make her voyage better in eight months time then the Spaniard shall in
ten Months; now the freight of the English ship comes to one thousand eight
hundred pound sterlin, and the Wages and Victuals of the said Ship at sixty
pound per Month, comes to four hundred and eighty pound sterlin, so that you
see the Ship clears for her ware and tare the sum of one thousand three hundred
and twenty pound sterlin: See here therefore the great difference.

The fourth and last reason is this; The King of Spain contracts with a body of
Merchants to furnish the West Indies with four thousand Nigros every year; and
the Nigrillos or Merchants there engage to pay the King one hundred pieces of
Eight Custom for each Nigro slave brought unto them. Which comes to four
hundred thousand pieces of Eight by the year, which is paid to the said King,
the King therefore prohibits all Merchants, and others, for bringing Nigros to
the West Indies: And each piece of Eight is valued at five shillings sterlin in
Barbados; but in the Lee-ward Islands it goes for six.

Here follows the Proposals made by my self and Company, To all such People
as are minded to Tiansport or Concern themselves in the Island of TOBAGO, Which
lies about forty Leagues South from Barbados.
WHereas his Majesty the King of Great Britain, that now is, has given and
granted unto James Duke of Courland, his Heirs and Successors, the said Island
of Tobago, on Condition that none shall inhabit the said Island, save only the
Subjects, of the King of England and the Duke of Courland, their Heirs and
Successors: On the said Condition, I have contracted with the said Duke, that
my self and Company settle One hundred and Twenty Thousand Acres of Land in the
said Island, and to have several great and large Privileges; Some of which are
here incerted, viz.

Imprimis, That One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Acres of Land in the said
Island of Tobago, is given and granted to my self and Company, and our Heirs
for ever; and Seven Years to be free from Payment of any Rent; and after the
Expiration of Seven Years each for himself is to pay Two Pence per Acre every
Year to the said Duke, his Lawful Heirs and Successors.

Secondly, That my self and Company, and all the Inhabitants, shall enjoy
Liberty of Conscience, without Interruption; Roman Catholics only Excepted.

Thirdly, That my self and Company, etc. are to be Governed by a Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Assembly, to be yearly chosen by the Majority of
Freeholders Votes, of the People in the Island, to make good and wholesome Laws
for the good Government and Defense of the said Island; and all Controversies
in the Premises to be decided by the Majority of Voices.

Note, These are but Breviates and part of the Heads of the Grant from the Duke
of Courland, Ratified to my self and Company, whereby we hold and enjoy our
Land; for that end I do refer all People to the Grant, as more at large; as
also to them that have been on the Skirt or Body of the said Island, to confirm
the Truth of what is before spoken of the Products of the said Island.

Proposals for further Encouragement.
First, Those which are desirous to concern themselves in the said Island,
shall and may have as much Land as they themselves please, either by Lease or
Purchase; only they are to put upon every Fifteen Acres of Land one White Man,
and so in proportion to the rest; and this to be done in Three Years time.

Secondly, All Persons that are desirous to Transport themselves to the said
Island in the quality of Servants, shall have Better Encouragement from my self
and Company, than has been yet Propounded by any of His Majesty's Subjects in
any Settlement in the American Plantations.

Thirdly, And for a further Encouragement, All those Persons and Planters that
are any ways concerned in the Premises, shall have Credit given unto them from
Crop to Crop, as the Factory is stored, for what they shall stand in need of;
for which the said Company will Erect a Bank or Factory of Credit in the said
Island, the Debtor allowing only two and a half per Cent.

Fourthly, All Merchants and others that shall import any Negroes or other
Merchandise into the said Island, shall have their Goods and Debts Insured, and
disposed of, for Two and a Half per Cent. with Factorage, Storage, Wharfage,
etc. And Exported again for Two and a Half per Cent. more. And all Tradesmen
and Others tha. Contract any Debts amongst themselves, shall have Credit given
them out of the Bank or Factory, from Crop to Crop, for Two and a Half per
Cent. And the Proprietors do engage their Whole Interest for the True
Performance of the aforesaid Premises.

Fifthly, All Merchants and others that have Goods fit to Accommodate the said
Island, and have not ready Money to purchase Land, nor to pay for their own or
Servants Paslage, such may barter with Goods in lien of Money: Always provided,
This implies only such Persons as contract with the Proprietors, or some of
them, before the first Shipping departs out of the River of Thames, to Ship
off, as above, their proportion of Goods or People, as is already sufficiently
above-expressed.

For the Accommodation of all Persons that desire to be Concerned in the
abovenamed Island of Tobago, some of the Proprietors, or their Agents, will
give their Attendance every day in the Week, at Mr. Nathaniel Morin's, at the
Blew Anchor in Finch-Lane, near the Royal Exchange, from Eight a Clock in the
Morning, till two in the Afternoon: And at Jones's Coffee House in Ship yard in
Bartholomew Lane, from two in the Afternoon till four. And at the
Amsterdam-Coffee-House in Bartholomew Lane from four in the Afternoon till six.
Where any Person may receive more Particular Satisfaction: Where also may be
seen a Schedule of the Proprietors, for the settling Twenty Thousand Acres of
Land in the said Island, for a Joint Stock, for Subscriptions of any Persons
that are willing to be Adventurers in the same. And at each of which places
these Books are to be Sold; Price Stitcht, Sixpence.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A new Map of the Island of Tobago (with a Chart of all the Caribee-Islands)
is to be sold by John Seller, at the VVest-side of the Royal Exchange.


