THE PARABLE OF THE MAGPIES.
THIS is an Age of Riddles, the World is becoms a mere Fairy-Land, inhabited by
Chimera's Monsters, Elfes and Changelings; Men act as if were at Cross
purposes, and therefore wonder not if the Press brings for Parables.

The late Prevarication and Flight of a certain Overseer of the Levites in a
small Island, puts me in mind of a Tale, which is not to be found in all
Aeasop's Fables, and yet it runs much after the same manner. Take it as follows:

There was a time when all the Birds in the Air were summoned to swear
Allegiance to the EAGLE, whom by unanimous consent, they had chosen to be their
King. The OSTRIDG who reigned over them before, having deserted his Government,
(as is the manner of that unnatural Bird,) and so the Throne vacant. Now the
EAGLE had gained the Hearts and Affections of all the feathered Kinds: The
Falcons, Herns, Storks, Swallows, Larks, and inumerable other sorts of
High-flying Birds came in and took the Oath, especially the Black-birds, were
very promt and ready to give all the Demonstrations of their Loyalty they were
capable of. To these joined the Nightingales, and Thrushes, a harmless cheerful
sort of Birds, that were always merry in the midst of Afflictions, and would
sing best when pric'k with Briers and Thorns. They all swore Loyalty to the
EAGLE. charpt and carol'd his Praises, so that the Hills and Valleys, Forest
and Plains, echoed his Renown: they also formed themselves into Troops, and had
the over sight of all inferior Magpies, and followed him to the Wars; for the
abdicated OSTRICH having fled to the VVLTVRE for protection, and made a League
with Him, came with huge Armies and invaded the Eagles Dominions; But the Black
birds, Nightingales and Thrushes, as I have said, stood firm to Him, and drove
away his Enemies, being resolved never to forsake Him, till they have subdued
the: OSTRICH and the VVLTVRE, with all that adhere to them.

Now among all the Birds that lived under the Eagles Government; none were so
Treacherous and Disloyal as some MAGPIES, a Bird of two colors,
Double-tongu'd, and much addicted to Quibbles and mental Reservations; yet some
of these took the Oath of Allegiance to the EAGLE: But others stood out, and
chatter'd against it, squinting at all such as took it. There was one Old One
that had his Nest by a Riverside, he was the Ringleader of the Nonswearing
MAGPIE, a surly Old Maggot that would not come near the EAGLES Court, nor so
much as chatter out a How-d'ye to Him, but kept hiving in's Nest under pretense
of Illness. To him there resorted daily the other Non-swearing MAGPIES, with
great numbers of Jack-daws, Rooks, Swallows and Martins, that the MAGPIES had
drawn into their Sedition. From him they received Instructions, and took there
Masures, how to behave themselves in their their several respective Districts,
(for some of them were DIGNIFIED MAGPIES, Jackdaws, Rooks, Swallows, and
Martins, in such and such a Province of the Eagles Dominions,) and when they
had sufficiently learned their Cue, away they flew to their Charges, and made
it their business to preach up Non-swearing, Non obeying, Non. fighting, etc.
as formerly they had done Non-resisting; for all their Doctrines ran upon Nons
and Negatives, the Daughters of Passive Obedinece.

By these Arts they drew to their Party great Numbers of Geese, Owls, Buzzards,
and such like silly birds, who fluttered together at certain times, and kept
their Night Cabals, plotting Treason against the EAGLE, and contriving how to
restore the Abdicated OSTRICH to the Crown. To this end, they held a private
Correspondence with Him, and the VULTURE inviting them to send an Army to
invade the EAGLES Dominions, and promising them all manner of Assistance and
readiness to join with them at their first Appearance:

Amongst the rest of the Dignified MAGPIES concerned in this Plot, there was
one arch Wagg more active than the rest, who having learned the way of training
up Pigeons to carry Letters (as usual at Aleppo and Babylon,) write two
Letters, one to the OSTRICH, and another to his Mate. The Tenor whereof is as
follows:

To the OSTRICH.
SIR,
THE PIDGEON who brings this Dispatch, will be our Credentials, in giving you
such an Assurance of our unfeigned Duty and Fidelity, as will be adequate to
your very Wishes: Yet pardon an Error, which (if it be one) is the effect of my
Ambition, to satisfy you from my own Mouth, and give you this Testimony under
my Claw, That I shall snatch every opportunity, not slighting the least, and
laying wait for the greatest, to acquit our selves your devoted Friends.

SIR! I write in the Plural, because I deliver the sense of the Chief MAGPY as
well as mine own, and the others of our Nest; Who tho diminisht in number, yet,
if our Arithmetic does not fail us, we have no Ciphers amongst us, but are
making a progression in our Interests, that is, in Yors.

The Bearer will, I presume, give you a true Character of us, when he shall
satisfy you, That we are really what we send our selves,

December. 31. Yours entirely. I wish you the merriest New Year.


To the OSTRICH'S Mate.
AS I am not able to chatter out the unparalled Complacency I took this time
Twelvemonth, in receiving that Token of your Condescension and Clemency, under
your own Claw. So I have hopt about ever since in no small uneasiness, for want
of the means to return you my humble Thanks, and renew my solemn Protestations
of unfeigned Loyalty. From which, if I ever flinch, may my Wings be clipped, and
I be never able to mount above a Grasshoppers Leap from the Ground. This I
declare in the Name of the Chief MAGPY, and the rest of our Feather, as well as
on my own score. You may repose an entire confidence in us, nor only for our
unchangeable Fastness in the Practice of so just and well-grounded a
Resolution; But also for our most vigorous endeavors to advance your Cause,
which is our own, beyond the possibility of a Separation.

There is no necessity, that I should particularize, since the Pidgeon who
bears this, can and-will discover to you the bottom of our Hearts. I wish you
could penetrate into them, to behold the Sincerity and Devotion with which we
consecrate our selves to your Service. I wish you a jolly New-Year, and
numerous, a very numerous sequel of them, and all very merry ones. Your Young
Heir we hear is well fledged, he has our most passionate Vows. His Friends
increase daily, and his Adversaries lose ground.

December. 31.

After Margery had writ these Letters, (for you must note by the way, that
these things were done, when Birds and Beasts were as good Scholars as men,) he
began to whit his Bill, plum his Feathers, and hop about, to the Tune of
Packington's Pound. He thought he had conquered the World, and got both the
Indies in his Claws. But alack and well-a-day! the Pidgeon that carried 'em was
seized and all the Roguery discovered, and poor MAG was fain to hop out of
sight fort. For the EAGLE had a Cock belonging to him, who was very wakeful,
and his Name was Chanticleer: This Cock had always a shrewd Eye to the MAGPIES,
and their Gang; he watched all their motions, so that they could hardly mute,
but he was privy to it. 'Twas he that seizjd on the Pidgeon, and brought him to
the EAGLES Palace, laden with Letters to the OSTRICH and the VULTURE; among
the Rest were these two of Margeries own Penning. Upon which Margery very
prudently changed Colors, and turned his White and Black into a deep Red, and
so flew away toward the VULTURE'S Territories, there to Chatter at large the
Contents of his Fawning Letters.

This MAGPY had the Charecter of a flattering, selfish perfidious, insinuating
Bird. He it was that formerly Crowned the OSTRICH, and being afterward
discontented at the OSTRICHE'S Government, with others of his Feather, sent and
invited the EAGLE to come and rescue them from the OSTRICHE'S Tyranny: But as
soon as he had gratified them in that, and the EAGLE had by the general consent
of all the Birds, taken possession of the OSTRICHE'S vacant Throne, this False
hearted MAGPY and his Accomplices turn tail squint at his Proceedings, slight his
Favor, and make such a Chattering, that all the honest Birds were justly
offended at the Noise. Yet some of the OSTRICHE'S Creatures began to listen to
them with delight, and such Artifice was used, that many simple, well-meaning
Birds, were deluded into the MAGPIES Faction.

It ought to be remembered here, That there was an old Grudge between the
MAGPIES and the BLACK-BIRDS, the former being conscious of the harsh, grating
Noise they made, envied and persecuted the latter with their Followers, the
Nightingales and Thrushes, because of the sweet harmonious Notes they sung in
the Woods and Groves, which drew all the Birds, into Admiration of their
Melody! So that multitudes of the MAGPIES Party abandoned them, and went over
to the Black-Birds: Nay, some of the MAGS themselves were so enamored of the
Black-Birds Music and innocent manner of like that they voluntarily underwent
a Metamorphisis and became Black-Birds: But there were but a few of these, and
they were of the inferior MAGPIES. However, the great ones were highly
incensed at this Desertion of some of their own Feather, and whole Coveys of
their Followers. Whereupon they got the OSTRICHES, EAGLES, or whosoever was
King of the Birds at that time, to erect. High Commission Coarts,
Star-Chambers, and other Seats of Judicature, whither the Black Birds were
cited, and there were sencenc'd to Imprisonment, pecuniary Mulcts, and
whatsoever else the MAGPIES pleased to inflict on them. This grew in time to be
a great Grievance in the Commonwealth of Birds; so that in process of time,
these Animosities were improved into a Civil War During which the Chief MAGPY
(even the Predecessor of him whom I before mentioned, the Old surly
Non-swearing MAGPY, whose Nest was by a Riverside,) lost his Head, for
endeavoring to force the Black Birds to wear his Colors, and for other
illegal Impositions against the Laws of Nature, and the general sense of all
the Birds in the Air. After him, the whole Generation of MAGPIES went to Pot,
except such as won'd turn Black Birds.

But in twelve years time the MAGPIE'S Interest faced about again, and they
fell to their old Trade of Domineering, Persecuting, and Tyrannizing over the
Black Birds. Which continued till the OSTRICH came to be Crowned; when he for
his own Ends took the Lash out of the MAGPIES CLAWS, at which they chatter'd
and shapt, with their Bills, huff'd and bounc'd; and tho they themselves had
brought the OSTRICH to the Throne, yet now they grew weary of Him, and never
would be at quiet, till they had chased him away again, and brought the EAGLE
to the Crown; and because he would not countenance their oppression of the
Black Birds, therefore they forsook him also, and his Interest, and endeavored
to calumniate the Loyalty, Service and Zeal of the Blackbirds, who stood
stoutly to him at all turns.

During these Bickerings and ill Offices between the MAGPIES and the Black
Birds, it was thought convenient, that a Public Convocation of the former,
should be called for an Accommodation. But all came to nothing; for the
Prosocuter of the MAGPIES, having scraped the Ground with his Reverend Claws,
and almost kissed it with a submissiive Bow of his learned Noddle; made an
Oration to this Effect, That if the least Feather or Straw were plucked out of
their old weather beaten Nest, all would either fall to the ground, or be blown
away by the Wind, and so their young ones would be forced to take shelter in
the Black Birds Quarters. To this eloquent: Harangue, the rest of the MAGPIES
all said Amen And so the matter lies where it did before, between two Stools.
Sub judice Lis est. Yet it is thought that if the Black Birds could but obtain a
fair and equal hearing of their Cause, they would soon make the MAGPIES ashamed
of their Tyrannous, proud, covetous Actions; and convince the World that those
Pre-bald Birds regarded nothing, but the satisfaction of their Ambitious
Designs, Self-will, Lust and Avarice.

These running PIES will not always appear above board themselves, but are in
Fee with Hawks, Falcons, and such like Birds of Prey, who are their Setters for
any Game. Thus they once employed a hundred and seventeen of these Ravenous
Birds to join in a Petition to the Eagle's Grand Council of State, against the
Phoenix, who was made Governor over the Eagle's Chief Grove, and had kept his
place for two years together, but because he was a faithful Friend, and Loyal
Subject to the Eagle, and was entering upon his third year of Government, the
Magpies chatter'd, and set the Hawks and Falcons to scream against him, who
disgorg'd a world of false and frivolous Accusations in the Council House, but
all came to nothing, for that Loyal Senate would not countenance the Envious
Calumnies of Malcontents. This made the MAGPIES and the rest of their Gang
stark mad, to see the Phoenix shine brighter for their Persecution: So now they
resolved to hazard all at once, and make quick work on it. The Ostrich must be
sent for over in all haste, and the more to encourage him, the invited him to
come as soon as the Eagle was gone to visit some of his Allies and Friends
abroad. Now the MAGPIES hopt about, longing for the day when the Eagle would
take his flight beyond Sea, being then in their own Conceits, cock-sure of
restoring the OSTRICH again to his Crown. But as I have told you before, poor
Pilgarlick the Pigeon that was to carry the News to the Ostrich, was caught in
a Gin, with Two of his Companions, and out came all the Treason. These were all
tried for their Lives, and one of them was condemn'p to be choked with
Hemp Seed. Now when the day of Execution was come, this Pigeon fell sick with
the very smell of the Hempseed, and desired that a certain MAGPY a Friend of
his, would chatter over a Form of Prayer that was used among the MAGPIES in the
Visitation of the Sick. So the Magpy chatter'd, and the Pigeon coo'd, and
having finish^d their Devotions, the Pigeon very orderly took his Hempseed,
which soon spoiled his cooing for ever after, to the great grief of the Magpies
and their Gang. It would even grieve ones Heart to see how the MAGPIES sneakt
about after this fatal Blow? How humble and downish they looked, not jetting it
along as they used to do, and looking over your head, but in a more submissive
posture, like good your Worship on a Wooden Leg, or like an Owl in an Ivy-Bush,
that cares not to be seen. Alas poor Mag! A Cup of Sack for Mag! Mag's a Rogue,
ah poor Mag, Mag, Mag, not a word of the Pudding. Mag's at hide and seek; and
all the Gang are in a Spiritual Maze, as mute as Mum chance, that was hanged
for saying of nothing. What is become of the seven Golden Candlesticks? Why, by
my Sol Man, Is It believe they will aw^turn Prince's Metal in a short time, or the
D -- hale 'em by the Bread Lugs to H --

Good morrow Mr. Mayor of Queenborough. Slap, says the Casement, down falls the
leaden two pence. Confound your Worship, SIR.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
* On Friday Morning next will be published Monsieur in a Mouse-Trap, or the
Parable of the Herring pond. By the Author of the Magpies.

The History of the Royal Congress at the Hague, with the Names, Characters,
and Equipage of the Sovereign Princes that compose this Most August Assembly,
together with an Account of the Glorious Cannopy and Chair of State. The
several curious and admirable Fireworks, the many Triumphal Arches, with the
other vast Preparations made for His Majeshy of Great Britain, with an exact
Draught of the manner of King William's entering into the Hague, and reception
by the States General. Trauslated from the Dutch Copy, Printed at Leiden.

An Account of the late Horrid Conspiracy, to Depose their present Majesty's K.
William and Queen Mary, to bring in the French, and the late King James, and
ruin the City of London. Also some brief Reflections on the Trials of the Lord
Preston and Ashton. By a Gentleman who was present at those Trials.

Remarks upon the Life, Trial, and Acquitment of Arthur Earl of Torrington.

A Penitentiary Sermon preached upon two young Persons doing Penance in a
public Congregation, to which is added an accurate Treatise of Fornication,
written upon an extraordinary occasion, by W. Barlow, M. A.

The Wonders of Free Grace, or, a complete History of all the Remarkable
Penitents that have been Executed at Tyburn for these last 30 years, with a
Sermon preached in the shearing of a Condemned Malefactor.

The third Volume of the Pocket Library (completing the two former) containing
a further account of the Author's Juvenile Rambles, with his first Project of
girdling the World.

The Vanity and Impiety of Judicial Astrology by Francis Own, M. A.

The Triennial Mayor, or, the new Rapparees, a Satyr, Price 6 d.

The Antiweesils, a Poem, price 6 d.

London, Printed for B. Griffiitts, 1691.


