A PREPARATION for DEATH, Recommended in A LETTER to a MALEFACTOR; But Useful
for all sorts of People.
Sept. 7. 1690. Mr. L
I Had really a kindness for you, because I had good hopes of you, that you
might become a good Man, if it pleased God to prolong your Life; and therefore
have done already what I can for you, and shall be ready to do more, if it
please God to give any opportunity. But because I find your Case very dangerous
in that respect, considering what has been sworn against you, and that this is
not the first Fault, and there being great Complaints to the Privy Council of
the frequent Crimes that are committed of that kind; insomuch that the Judge,
who is a very good Man, and as tender of the Life of a Man, as is consistent
with his Duty, cannot show you that Favor that otherwise he would, the
greatest Kindness that I can do you, is, to instruct you how to improve your
present Circumstances, which if you accordingly do, it will be ten thousand
times better than Life it self. You must therefore know that the Great Business
and End of our mortal Life in the Flesh is to work the Creature by various
Exercises to an entire Subjection to the Great, Glorious, and most Excellent
Creator; who is the Father of Spirits, and has not only a just and absolute
Right and Dominion over us by Creation, Sustentation and Redemption, but is in
himself of so transcendent Excellence, and so unconceivably Good and Gracious
to his poor despicable Creatures (whereof the Love of Parents to their Children
is but a little Representation) that even Prudence and Gratitude, if it was
well considered, would effectually prevail with a Man of Sense to seek his
Favor, though by the most Absolute Subjection that can be conceived, were we
not obliged to it by his Absolute Dominion, and subject to his Irresistible
Power. And so that this entire Subjection be but effectually wrought in us, it
matters not whether our Life be long or short: Be it never so short, if the
Work be but perfectly done, it is the same thing as if it was longer; nay, in
some respects better; for then it is secure; whereas till then it is in danger;
only we are in the Hands of a Faithful Creator, and have continual Occasion of
Exercise of our Dependence upon him. Now to come to your particular Case: It
seeems you have ran a Course directly contrary; instead of exercising your self
to this Subjection, you perhaps have never in your Life been sensible of any
such Work you had to do; and not only not done any thing toward it, but done
the quite contrary; instead of subjecting your Sensual Appetites to your Reason
(which is the first part of this Exercise, and what all Mankind must account
for) you have subjected the Man to the Beast in you, and abused your natural
Faculties and Powers to serve and satisfy your Animal Affections; and instead
of subjecting your Will to the Holy and Righteous External Declarations of the
Will of God; you have yielded to the secret Motions of the Apostate Spirits in
your Animal Affections in Disobedience and Rebellion against that Holy Will of
God. And by this means instead of promoting the great Business of your Life,
you have run your self into a worse condition than when you were born and first
began to live; so that thus much of your Life is not only lost, but misspent
to your own Damage. And now to recover all again, and perfect this great Work,
for which you had a longer Life assigned you, in so short a time as is now
allowed you, you may think very hard, if not impossible. But be of good
comfort: Where Sin has abounded, Grace has much more abounded. God is able to
do greater matters than this, if he be graciously so pleased, in less time; but
then you must seek to him, and do what you can to prepare your self for his
Grace, and to be ready to cooperate with it faithfully. To this end you must
endeavor to banish all thoughts of this World, and even of your Temporal Life
it self, and enter into serious Consideration of the Great and Glorious Majesty
of God, who by his Wisdom and Power has Created and Governs the whole
Universe, whereof the whole Earth in respect of the rest is but as a drop of a
Bucket, and in respect of him as nothing; and then consider with your self,
what a despicable thing you are in comparison of the Earth and all its
Inhabitants, which yet altogether is so little as I have said in respect of
Almighty God; so despicable, if you were innocent and righteous; and therefore
that you should be so infatuated as to dare to transgress the least of his
Commands, does justly deserve not only Temporal Death, and to be cut off from
the Children of Men, to whom you have been an Enemy, and Confederated with the
Enemies of their Peace and Quiet, but Eternal Damnation, and to be for ever
separated from his Glorious Presence, against whom you have rebelled, and to
have your part with those Apostate Spirits, whose Motions you have obeyed, in
eternal Misery. And never cease musing and considering these great and plain
Truths, and lifting up your Heart to God with fervent Desires and Prayers, that
he will condescend to give you Grace, to enlighten your Mind, and mollify your
Heart with a deep Sense of your miserable Condition, till you find your self so
affected and concerned for the Favor of God and the Salvation of your Soul,
that all Concern and Thought for your Temporal Life, as an inconsiderable thing
in respect of that, may wholly cease; and that your Soul be mightily humbled
with a deep Sense of your utter unworthiness, that that Great and Glorious and
most Holy Majesty should have any regard to so despicable and so sinful a
Wretch, with great Indignation against your Sin and Madness, and against those
cursed Apostate Spirits, which by their secret Impressions have pressed you on
into all this Wickedness and Mischief. When you have gotten thus far, those
wicked Spirits, when they find they can no longer keep you in Darkness and
Impenitence, will strive to thrust you headlong into Despair, and possess you
with dreadful Apprehensions of the Holiness, Justice, and Severity of God. And
therefore you must further know, that this Great and Glorious Majesty, though
most Holy, Righteous and Terrible to the Impenitent and Incorrigible, yet is of
unconceivable Mercy, Clemency and Goodness to truly humble and penitent
Sinners: And though he be a God of such Holiness and Purity that there is no
immediate Access to him for such despicable and polluted Creatures as the
Children of Men, yet has he in his great Mercy and Wisdom provided a most
admirable Expedient, whereby we may have access to him at all times with
Confidence and Assurance of Acceptance; and not only Pardon of Sin, but Grace
also, and Divine Power to serve him acceptably. And this is by Christ Jesus,
God and Man united in one Person, who having run the same Race and Exercise of
Subjection by Obedience even to Death, and the most shameful Death, the Death
of the Cross, and thereby obtained Favor for us with the Father, him has God
exalted to be Judge both of Quick and Dead, and to be a Prince and a Savior to
all that obey him, and are united to him by his Spirit residing and ruling in
their Hearts. Him has God proposed to be a Propitiation for us by his Passion
and Death, and raised up to be a Mediator and an Advocate for us with him in
Heaven; and by him, and in his Name, all who are Sealed with, and Partakers of
his Spirit, have Access and certain Acceptance with the Father. But that you
may be one of these, here is again, as before, something to be done by you. You
must ruminate much upon the admirable Clemency and Goodness of God to his poor
Creatures, for the recovery of them out of a most miserable Slavery to the
Powers of Darkness; and how admirable a Person this Christ Jesus is, who having
performed a perfect Obedience to the Father in our Nature, and by his Passion
consecrated it, and exalted it to Heaven to be there as a Magnet to attract all
who receive him, and give up themselves to obey him: And how great a new
Obligation this is upon us to do so: How great and admirable the Benefit and
Advantage is to our selves: And therefore how much common Prudence and
Gratitude should prevail with you for that purpose. And never cease musing and
thinking thereupon, and lifting up your. Heart to God in earnest Desires and
Prayers in the Name of Christ Jesus, and for his Sake, that he will be pleased
to enlighten your Mind with a clear understanding of these admirable Truths,
and fill your Heart with such Love and Admiration of his Goodness so
demonstrated in this admirable Person, that all things in this World, your
Temporal Life in the Flesh, and all that you are or have, may appear to you, as
in truth they are, very mean and despicable, and nothing valuable and desirable
but Christ Jesus, and an inseparable Union with him; till you find your Heart
so affected with these things, that you become entirely resigned in all things
to the Will of God, be willing and even desirous to be Partaker of the
Sufferings of that Holy and Innocent Person, which you have justly deserved,
and with full purpose of Heart give up your self to an entire Subjection,
Obedience and Service of the Holy Trinity, to whom you have been dedicated in
your Baptism, to all Eternity. This is a great Work indeed; but God is able to
do this, and more than we can ask or think, in less time than you have to
prepare for it: And if he will be so gracious to you, you will be a happy
Creature, and have reason to admire and bless his Holy Providence, and abundant
Grace, which by so admirable Means has brought you to it; and then you will
have nothing more to do, but to perform some other Works of true Repentance,
which I shall presently show you, and wait upon God and stand ready for
whatever he shall call you to. These remaining Works of Repentance respect
either the particular Persons you have wronged, or the State and your Country
in general. To the particular Persons you must make Restitution as far as you
are able, pray to God to make up what is wanting by his Grace and Blessing to
them, and send to them and desire their Pardon; and heartily forgive all who
have injured you, acknowledging them, whatever they intended, to have been
God's Instruments for your just Punishment and Correction, and pray heartily to
God to pardon them. And to the State and your Country you must do what you can
to make Satisfaction and Restitution by these means: You must do what you can
to break those wicked Combinations, Confederations and Practices, by making all
the Discovery you can both of Robberies and such like Practices, and of the
Persons who either use such Practices, or harbor, or are any way Partners with
them therein. Only thus much I shall advise you, that you do it in Charity, not
only to your Country, but even to the Malefactors themselves, so as that they
may be reclaimed if possible; and therefore do it not to any one, but to such
as you think most like to use your Discoveries wisely and charitably, with due
care and respect even to them. And if you desire my Assistance therein, I will
endeavor to come to you on purpose, rather than you shall want Assistance. I
have no more now but my Prayers for you to Almighty God, that he will bless
these Instructions, make them effectual upon you, and by his powerful Grace
perfect this great and good Work in your Soul.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT is a common Opinion among Malefactors, that it is a dishonorable thing,
and therefore odious and detestable, to discover, (which they call betraying)
their Companions or Partners in their Crimes. But this is plainly a mere vulgar
Error, and a gross Mistake, and no less pernicious to themselves, and to their
Partners, than to their Country, and Mankind in General. The Fallacy lies in
the Misapplication of a true Principle. For the true reason why Breach of Faith
and Betraying of Trust is so odious a thing among all Men, is, because it is
not only injurious to the Person, but tends to the disturbance of Humane
Society: So that if it was generelly practiced, Men would not know how to deal
one with another, and would be deprived of mutual Assistance in many cases, and
of one of the greatest Comforts of Humane Life. But yet, as in many other
Cases, that which in the General is unlawful, dishonorable and odious, (as the
taking away the Life of a Man) may in a particular case, under some certain
Circumstances, become a necessary and commendable Duty, (as the Condemnation
and Execution of a Murderer, which is an Act both of Justice upon the
Malefactor, and of Charity to the rest of Mankind, by preventing and
discouraging other Murders) so it is in this: To discover a Secret committed to
ones Trust, which may lawfully be concealed; but especially, to do it for ones
own advantage, and to the prejudice of his Confident, is commonly reputed, and
very justly, a very base, unmanly, dishonest and dishonorable thing. But when
the Secret or Confidence is in a thing wicked and unjust, injurious to other
Persons, and to the Society whereof a Man is a Member, as, to his Country; this
is no such Secret as can honestly be concealed; because it is a Breach of
Charity to the injured Persons, and a Violation of that Faith, which, by an
antecedent and greater Obligation, is due to the whole Society, whereof he is a
Member. Such mutual Confidences therefore are not properly Human Societies, but
a kind of Confederacies of Enemies and Disturbers of the proper Society, Peace
and Welfare of Men, tending to the Destruction thereof. And the Hypothesis upon
which they are built is for the same reason plainly a Delusion, and probably a
Stratagem of the Apostate Spirits and Enemies of Mankind, to strengthen their
Party and Interest among Men; so that as on the one hand this is no such Trust,
as it is dishonorable to any Person to break it, because it is a wicked thing
to engage in it; so on the other hand it is a Breach of Faith and Duty to the
Society not to break but conceal it, and thereby support a Confederacy of
Enemies and Disturbers of the Peace of his Country; so that the Person, who
conceals what he knows of that nature, becomes accessory, even after his Death,
to all the Evils which are afterward committed, and might have been prevented
by his Discovery. Besides an obstinate and wilful Concealment even to the
Death, is not only a Confirmation of that particular wicked Confederacy wherein
the Person is engaged, or any way concerned or acquainted, but tends mightily
to harden others, and so to support all such wicked Confederacies in general.
Whereas did such Persons, at least when apprehended, in their Affliction become
serious, and not suffer themselves to be longer abused and imposed upon by such
a vulgar Error and Diabolical Delusion, but consider well, judge rightly, and
act accordingly, such wicked Confederacies could not subsist for want of mutual
Confidence. Nor is such Concealment only injurious to diverse other particular
Persons, and a Violation of that Faith and Love, which all Men owe to their
Country; but very pernicious, and of evil consequence to the Partners, and all
other such Criminals; because it encourages them to venture upon and persist
in such Courses as involve them more and more in Sin, whereby they treasure up
Wrath against the Day of Wrath; and expose them to all those temporal Evils,
which usually first or last over-take them. Whereas by such a Discovery, as I
have recommended, the Persons discovered might possibly be reclaimed and
brought to Repentance, at least might be hindered from so much increasing their
Score, which were better for them, though by an unnatural and otherwise
untimely Death, than that they should longer protract a miserable Life here to
the increase of their Misery hereafter. Nor is it less pernicious to the
Malefactor himself. For as without true Repentance no Pardon can be expected
with God: So whoever does not all he can to make Restitution, and repair all
the Evil and Damage he has done, and to prevent all he can for the future, can
be no true Penitent, holding still an implicit Confederacy at least, with
wickedness. And as he can expect no Favor from God, so is he to be looked upon
by Men, not as a Man of Honor in any respect, but as a reprobate, deluded, and
hardened Wretch, an Enemy to Mankind, and a Confederate with Death and Hell,
and the Kingdom of Darkness; an odious and detestable Creature, instead of
being in the least honorable as he vainly fancied. That, which only is
Honorable or Commendable in such Case, and the only true Wisdom, is, 1. To
consider seriously the unreasonableness and wickedness of the Crime, till such
consideration has produced a just Indignation and Abhorrence of it. 2. To
acknowledge ingenuously his own Folly and Impotence to yield to and be overcome
by such a Temptation, whatever it was, which induced him to it; and not rather
more manly to have born any hardships of a transitory human Life, than so
basely to have violated the Order of the Divine Providence, which assigned
those hardships for his Exercise, and the Laws of his Country. 3. To give Glory
to God, acknowledging the Justice of his Punishment, and the special Providence
of God, who has brought him to it not only in Justice, but in Mercy too, to
cut off his Sin, for Correction of his Miscarriages, and that he may not be
condemned with the World, if he truly and effectually repent, as is before
directed. 4. To endeavor, as far as possible he can, to break all such
Confederacies, and prevent all the Mischief which might otherwise be committed
by a plain Discovery of all he knows. This indeed would be an Evidence of
such a Change and Disposition of Mind, as is really valuable in the Judgment of
all Good and Wise Men, and acceptable in the sight of Almighty God, and
therefore truly Honorable with others, and the truest wisdom for himself.

What I have here said to Criminals is fit to be considered by all who have any
knowledge of any such Crimes. That which they may fancy to be Faithfulness, or
Charity, or Pity to Criminals, is a great Mistake and Delusion, and in truth
Unfaithfulness and want of due regard to their Country. That Malefactors be
brought to condign Punishment both Justice and Charity to our Country require;
which is to be preferred before the Consideration of any particular Person: And
therefore to hinder, or refuse ones Assistance to it, is to prefer a
Malefactor, and desert the Duty he ows his Country. But in other respects
Charity and Humanity requires more to be done for them, than usually is with us.

THE END.

