THE Present Interest OF TANGIER.
TAngier is a pleasant City as any in the world, in a most wholesome Air, pure
and free from all Infection, situate in a most rich and fruitful Soil, able to
yield all things needful to the life of man. There is no pleasure or delight,
but this Country, if open, would afford to the Inhabitants, without the
assistance of Foreign Nations. The Air is temperate, and cooled with the annual
Brises in the Summer, called Etesian Winds; and often purged from the
Distempers, which otherwise might reign there, by the Easterly and Westerly
winds. By this means it happens that it is neither very hot in the Summer, nor
excessive cold in the Winter, but temperate, and agreeable with the disposition
of our humane bodies. The Moors thereabouts live commonly to a great age: I
have seen many amongst them about Eighty and Ninety years of age, very lusty.
And since Tangier belonged to England, none can say that ever the Plague has
been in that City, or that there has been any Infection to carry away the
Inhabitants, proceeding from the Air or Country. I confess many have died in
this place, but most through their own Follies, Debaucheries, and Lust; which
have destroyed here many of his Majesty's good Subjects. If we could beg such a
Wind from Almighty God, as to drive from thence these Infections, our English
bodies would be very healthy, and Tangier would not be so odious to the Nation.

It was built by the Phoenicians, if Procopius may be believed: for he tells us
of a Pillar near Tingi, where these words were engraven in the Phoenician
Language: Nos fugimus a facie Josuae filii Nun. They were then the greatest
Traders of the world; they chose this place for that purpose, to enrich
themselves by that Art. Of all the Cities of the world, I know none better
situate for Command and Trade than this: It lies at the mouth and passage of
all the Levant-Trade; no Ship can go in or out of the Streights, but Tangier
must see it in the day; and in the night four or five Men of War cruising to
and fro, some in, others out of the Mediterranean, may take all the Ships that
sail that way: none can escape, without a strong Convoy, which would be too
chargeable for the Dutch, French, and other Northern Merchants. If Argier were
situate where Tangier is now, all its Enemies must forbear Trading: and if
Tangier were in the hands of the Moors, or of the French, or some other Prince
strong at Sea, our Nation were undone, and our Merchants must bid farewell to
the Streights in time of War. It is an easy matter for the Prince of Tangier
therefore to command our Northern world, and to give Laws to Europe and Africa.
The situation of Rome, of Carthage, of Constantinople, of London, Paris, and
other Imperial Cities, is nothing near so advantageous for that purpose as
Tangier, if all things be considered.

The Country and Soil is fruitful in Corn, Honey, Cattle, Beef, Sheep, Goats,
Camels, Horses, and Buffles. The Woods are full of Bees, and wild Beasts that
have excellent Furrs. The Earth would bear good Wines of all sorts: for there
are the sweetest Grapes of the world. Here are all manner of Eastern Fruits,
Pomgranats, Oranges, Melons, Lemons, Figs, etc. So that if our English did
husband the ground about Tangier, there is nothing that we fetch from Spain,
Italy, Greece, or France, but we might have it there. It is the nearest
Plantation that belongs to England, within a fortnight or three weeks sailing
from the Downs.

So that if all things be considered, it seems no little wonder that Tangier
hat not flourished since it is in the hands of such a powerful Nation as the
English. But our unhappiness there, is not to be ascribed to the place, the
Air, or Country, but to several other things which I shall here set down, not
only for the public satisfaction, but that we may understand the true causes
of the Peoples aversion for Tangier, and be better able to remove them for the
future.

First, I shall begin with Religion. It was never there truly encouraged, but
in the short Governments of the Earl of Tiveot and Colonel Norwood. We can
never expect a City will flourish, when all manner of Debaucheries,
Profaneness, Irreligion, and Idolatry, shall have the liberty to appear without
a check; when the Governors themselves have been the Examples to encourage the
contempt of Virtue and Piety; when either openly or privately they have made it
their business to ruin the Protestant Interest, and to call those persons in
question for their Lives, who have been the greatest supporters of it. Let
profane men think what they will, there was never yet a City or a Nation that
ever prosper'd since the beginning of the world, that slighted the Religion of
the Country. The Romans Prosperity is ascribed by St. Austin to their sincere
profession of their Idolatries. In Tangier too many have cast off all respects
due to the God that has made them, and mind nothing but Debauchery and
Lewdness: others have hearkened to the solicitations of some Popish Priests,
and make profession of that Religion, that they might by the means of their
Absolutions, enjoy their Vices and filthiness without remorse of Conscience.
For the benefit of Trade, and the encouragement of Strangers, all sorts of
Religions should be allowed; but it is against all policy, that the English
Subjects and Officers that receive from the King their Livelihood, should be
suffered to change their Religions as often as their Garments, and wantonly to
profess which they please. Not only from hence, but from several other
passages, Religion has received great discouragements, to the open scandal of
the Protestant Profession, and the dishonor of the Church of England in the
eyes of the Nations round about.

The second cause of Tangier's unhappiness is, that most of the persons that
have been sent thither, have never intended to inhabit there, but have been
needy, and greedy, and have only designed to live there a while to fill their
Purses, and then to return for England with their Gains. By this means the
soberer Inhabiters of Tangier, from whose industry and good behavior only we
can reasonably expect Prosperity, impoverish the City, and discourage the
rest. And many other inconveniences proceed from hence, to his Majesty's
prejudice and of the place. To remedy this inconveniencie, such Laws should be
enacted as might encourage sober men to live there, and discourage their
departure upon such unhandsom terms as they commonly leave the Garrison.

The third cause is, the difference and variance between Traders and Soldiers,
encouraged too much by the Rulers covetousness, and the Citizens poverty and
wants; and the unreasonableness of both, unwilling to comply with one another:
For this discourageth all wealthy persons from inhabiting there, because they
are not countenanced, nor have those Liberties which it has pleased his
Majesty to grant them. Some in a late Governors time, for frivolous accounts,
have been called in question for their Lives, condemned contrary to all Law and
Reason, to gratify his displeasure, and others of the female Sex. These, and
such like proceedings, ruin Tangier, and hinder it from that Prosperity and
Wealth which it might easily attain to.

Fourthly, Tangier's ill fate, since it is in the English hands, is due to the
ill Reports spread abroad of the place by the vulgar sort, encouraged by the
many persons dead there through their own miscarriages, and the ill usages of
Popish Officers, who to my knowledge have valued more ten or twenty shillings
at Pay-day, than the lives of their Soldiers; and have not treated them like
men, much less like Christians. I have saved the lives of a great many of my
Neighbors, when they have wanted necessaries: for which good deed I have been
reproved by some Irish Officers, who expected their Pay between their death and
the following muster. The meanest Soldier must be encouraged, and not suffered
to want when fallen into a sickness, though most times through his own
intemperance. I dare affirm, and will offer to prove, that the unmercifulness
of the Officers, and the neglect of Physicians and Apothecaries, who though
paid for that purpose by his Majesty, have killed the three parts of those that
are dead in Tangier. I have sometimes buried three or four in a day, dead for
want of that which his Majesty has provided for them in case of sickness.

Fifthly, Another cause of Tangiers unhappiness, is, the strange Victories of
the Moors, and the sad Massacre of the English, when they have gone out against
them in the open field; with the vast opinion of valor they have gained
amongst us, through our unskilfulness, or rather unadvisedness, and their
successes. The Defeat of Fines's Party on the first third of May, and of my
Lord Tiveot and his Company on the second, have struck a great terror into our
English hearts, and caused us to look upon a Moor as an excellent Soldier: but
truly we are mistaken: I know their valor, and the strength of their Country,
more than any that has yet been in Tangier; for when I have been amongst the
Moors, I have inquired many things concerning their Order, Militia, Numbers,
etc. which I perceive we are ignorant of.

The greatest strength of the Moors Army, is in their Horse and Lance Foot:
they have, Armed partly with Guns, and partly with Lances; but they have no
great Guns, neither do they know how to manage them, nor carry them into the
field. They fight in disorder, without Ranks or Files, the Horse by themselves,
and the Foot by themselves. In set Battles, which have seldom been seen in
this Country, the Horse make up the Van and the Rear, and the Foot the main
Body; so that many times the Foot have nothing for them to do, but to destroy
the Defeated Enemy, when the Horse has routed and terrified them. But they are
for Ambushes and Surprises, because their Country is very proper for that
purpose. Muley Arxid overcame Gayland in this manner; as he had before ruined
Bembouka. In this Country they have but little or no standing Army; all is made
up of their several Divisions, or Companies of Arabs scattered about, who know
their distinct Monkadems or Colonels under whom they are to fight, and to whom
they are to repair in all Alarms. But they cannot subsist long in one place,
because they have no Purveyours, nor other Provisions but what every Man brings
with them, unless it be some small quantity which the place where they lie may
afford them in case of necessity. They fight in the same manner as the Roman
Authors have represented the Ancient Mauri; neither are they better skilled in
martialling an Army, or fighting. Let any man that knows the Art of of War
compare them with us, and judge whether we may not be able to encounter them.
If they have had successes against us, it is through our weakness and
unpreparedness. We have marched against them only with Muskets and Swords, and
they have come against us with Horse and Lance: before our Men had time to
discharge their Muskets, the Horse and the Lance had disordered our Men,
broken their Ranks, and cut them all to pieces on a sudden. Had we a wall of
Pikes to oppose against them, lined with Muskets, all the Horse of Barbary
could do us no mischief, and we might safely march through the Country. An
example we have lately had of a worthy Commander, Sir Palms Fairburne, who
made his Retreat with his Party without any considerable loss, only with the
assistance of a stand of Pikes, which kept off the Moors Horse, whilst his Foot
fired upon them. Their Foot signify nothing, their Horse have no Guns, or very
few, only Pistols. For their Infantry, they are unskilful in the managing of a
Gun, neither have they the courage to stand a shot. The Portugueses seldom
encountered with the Moors, but they had the Victory; therefore we must ascribe
all our losses to the unadvisedness of our Commanders, and the disorder of our
Men, and their want of those defensive Weapons which were able to keep off the
fury of the Moors Horse. I dare engage with five or six thousand English,
against above twenty thousand Moors, if the English may have those Arms and
Provisions that become them. Such is the weakness of this Country, that they
can scare bring together, under one Commander, twenty thousand men; for they
are all divided under several head of Families, since the death of the last
Emperor of Morocco, and will not consent to set up a Monarch again. He
therefore that has the longest Sword gets the Victory, and the chief command.
In this case, it is an easy matter for us to make an interest for our selves,
by encouraging some party, and imitating the Romans policy, who never ventured
against a Nation or People, but with the assistance of some of their own
Soldiers. But it is our unhappiness, that we know not what is done amongst the
Moors; we live in Tangier within the Walls and Lines, and unless we send a Flag
of Truce for some pitiful business, we scarce see the face of a Moor in a
years time, but at a distance, unless some of them come to bring Provisions to
us. But we have never sent any to understand their Country, to search into
their strength and dependancies, to examine their Interest, their inclinations,
and those other things which we might improve to the advantage of Tangier. If
any be sent for that purpose, he must not be a Nobleman; for they care not to
see any greater state amongst them, than they observe. Their greatest Princes
live as King Evander in Virgil. As they have a great respect for Clergymen, I
think such a one, if ingenious, and acquainted with the Language of the
Country, might do much good, either to persuade them to a Trade and Peace with
us, or to understand those particulars, which might cause us to secure the
Interest of Tangier: that may be done either by Peace or War. But let us be
well assured of this, that whilst we keep only the Walls of Tangier, we shall
only spend Money; it will never bring any profit to our King, unless the
Country be opened for us; which may be easily done, with little or no expense:
and now, instead of several thousand pounds which His Majesty spends in the
maintaining of Tangier, it shall not only maintain it self, but yield a
considerable Revenue to the Crown of England. For the future it may be rendered
a dreadful City to the Moors, Spaniards, Turks, and French, and keep in the
incursions of those of Argier. If Tangier were in that condition, Men would
desire to go over and inhabit there, for the convenience of Trade; some
neighbor Factories would settle there, and we should vent all the Commodities
of Wool which lie upon our hands, amongst the Africans; for now the Dutch and
French furnish them. We should secure our Merchants from the Pirates of Argier,
for then they would not dare to break with us upon every slight occasion. When
the Vandals Conquered Africa, it was stronger than it is now, and they had not
the advantage of Guns as we have, yet they found but little difficulty to
subdue the Inhabitants, who were then assisted by the Romans and Grecians.

I could offer many things for the good of Tangier, from my knowledge of the
Country since the beginning of the world; but I know not how acceptable these
things will be. I am certain, if a right course were taken, the Mole, which
has been long building, might be speedily finished; Tangier might be made the
most prosperous and hopeful City that belongs to England; and it should repay
to His Majesty all that has been expended in the keeping of it since it was
ours. If I be required, I shall be willing, not only to give a further
Account, but also to be instrumental in the promoting of the good of Tangier.

FINIS.

