THE Present War NO BURDEN TO England.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by Randal Tailor near Amen-Corner, 1692.

The Present War NO Burden to England.
SOme sort of People having wearied our themselves, in finding fault with the
Government, and reviling sometimes the Dutch, as ready to strike up a private
Peace; sometimes the whole Body of the Allies, as none of them having done
their Duty: The general Cry of that Party now is, That Money being carried
abroad for the Payment of our Forces, it will in time exhaust the Treasure of
the Nation, and impoverish it: Which seems so palpable a thing, and begins to
gain so much ground upon the Belief of many (otherwise well-affected) People,
That a longer delay in showing the falsity of that Notion, might seem of a
dangerous Consequence: Therefore I think it will not be improper, to prove,
That the War increasing our Trade, and occasioning a greater Vent and
Exportation of our Manufactures, and of the Product of our Ground, inriches the
Nation, and augments its Stock.

In the First Place, The Vent of our Woollen Manufactures is greater than
heretofore, which appears not only by that it is generally advanced in Price,
but in that there is a greater Quantity now exported than in Times of Peace, as
may be seen by the Entries in the Custom-houses.

Secondly, The Manufactures of Silk, Linen, Paper and others, have since the
War been considerably forwarded; there is no longer need of importing flowr'd
and mixed Silks, good quantity of plain Silk is made here, as likewise of Linen
and Paper, which saves and keeps so much Money in the Nation, as formerly was
sent out to purchase those Commodities.

Thirdly, Corn, (which by the Blessing of God has been hitherto plentiful
amongst us, although very scarce amongst our Neighbors) Tobacco, Sugar, and
many others the Products of our Ground, bear a better Price than they should in
a peaceable Time, by the greater Exportation abroad; The Netherlands alone
taking more of these Commodities and of our Manufactures, than what is remitted
thither for the maintaining of our Forces, comes to; I say, taking more, over
and above what they did in time of Peace. For how can it be imagined that so
small a Tract of Ground, as the Spaniards have left in the Low Countries, which
does not extend to above Thirty Miles in breadth, and an Hundred Miles in
length, and which by the great and numerous Armies that continually harass it,
yields little or nothing; should suffice to maintain Two Hundred Thousand Men
and Horses of the Allies, besides the Inhabitants of eleven great Towns, and of
an innumerable quantity of Villages, Castles, and Strongholds: Certainly that
prodigious Number of People must be supported and maintained from the
Neighboring Countries. The Dutch, indeed, supply them in a good measure, (for
otherwise being obliged to send Money thither for the payment of their Forces,
their Treasure also would in time be exhausted, and they impoverish't) but they
draw the greatest part of their Maintenance from us; our Wheat, our Malt, our
Oats, our Tobacco, our Sugar, go thither for their Food; our Cloth, our Serges,
our Bays, our Stockings, our Hats, are sent them for their Clothing; our
Coals for their Fuel; our Lead, our Powder, our Arms, for their Warlike
Service; our Tallow, our Pewter, our Leather, and Thousands of other Things,
for their other necessary Uses: Nay, our Wine, our Brandy, our Salt, (that we
take from our Enemies as Prize, and which otherwise would be destroyed) are
sent and vended amongst them, and the Money it produces turned to the Nations
Advantage; So that the fifty or sixty Thousand Pounds a Month we remit thither
for the Payment of our Forces, comes Monthly to us again for the Payment of all
those Necessaries; from whence perhaps this Inference might be drawn, that the
more Forces we send into Flanders, provided the Allies do send an answerable
Number, the Better England will fare, and the Richer grow.

Fourthly, Trade in general is much increased.

1. The Plantations and West-Indias Trade is no less, but rather better; That
of Jamaica especially, which is now Treble of what it was before the War, by
the great Transportation of Linen, and other things from that Island, to the
Coast of Terra Ferma of America. 2. That of Turkey is as considerable, there
going now as much Cloth for Turkey in one Fleet, as formerly did in two or
three Years. 3. That of Spain as good, we now sending thither some of the
Commodities the French used to carry into Spain, and drawing from thence, Wines
and other Commodities in a greater quantity than heretofore. 4. The Trade to
Italy is considerably Increased, not only by our getting from thence more Paper
and Silk; (this last for the carrying on our Manufactures here at Home) but
likewise by our sending thither abundance of Cloth, and other woollen
Manufactures; Lead, Tin, Leather, and other things for the service and
clothing of the Forces in Piedmont, the Milanez, and other parts of Italy. The
Islands of Sicily and Sardinia; The Kingdom of Naples, and the State of Milan,
by the prohibition of French Commodities, drawing now from us several sorts of
Goods which they usually got out of France. 5. That of Portugal has received a
considerable Improvement; We fetching from thence more Wines than we did
formerly, and sending thither in Return, a much greater quantity of Lead, Tin,
Coperas, Serges, Bays, Says, etc. than in time of Peace. 6. The Trade to all
Northern parts, as Russia, Sueden, Denmark, Norway, is more considerable, by
our greater importation of Hemp, Pitch, Tar, and other products of those Cold
olymates. 7. The Germany Trade, as that of Dantsick, Lubeck, Hambourg, Bremen,
is three times what it was heretofore, by the great quantities of Linen we
import from thence, not only for our own Use, but likewise for Transportation
to Jamaica and Spain; as also because we send them more Cloth, and all other
Woollen Manufactures, more Tin, Lead, Coals, Wines, Brandy and Salt, than we
used to do. 8. That of Holland and Flanders, what a vast addition has it not
received? By the prodigious quantities of Corn of all sorts, Sugar, Tabocco,
Tin, Lead, Coals, Cloth, Bays, Says, Serges, Stuffs, Stockings, etc. of our
own Manufacture and Product, we send thither; in such a degree, that where
there was formerly one Vessel Trading between the Netherlands and the Island of
Great Britain, there is now Scores of Ships employed in the mutual Service of
both Countries. 9. The Trade of France indeed is lessened, but is much more
advantageous: Our Money (and in a considerable quantity too) was yearly sent to
that Kingdom for its Products, whereas now whatever we get of French
Commodities costs us nothing, but is sold by our Privateers, and Merchants
concerned with them, in Flanders and Germany, for good Money, which is so much
profit, that accrues to the Nation.
In fine, it appears by the Custom's Books, That we export more, and that the
Customs yearly render more than they did in Time of Peace: There being not one
Foreign Commodity of any kind, wanted here amongst us, nor any of ours, that
our Friends are not supplied with: And (which is Remarkable) Trade is not thus
generally increased; but notwithstanding our many (and so much talk of) Losses,
it is much better than in time of Peace, it being Noted, that since the War, not
above four or five Merchants of any Name, have gone off the Exchange; whereas
there yearly broke some dozens, if not some Scores in Peaceable times.

And although the Ships our Enemies have taken from us, be many (which there is
good ground to hope, by our late Signal Victory at Sea, and the burning of so
many Enemies Capital Ships, will in a good measure be prevented for the future)
it is certain that most of them have been Re-taken by us, or by our friends; for
if it be true, that the French have little Trade, and few Ships of their own;
how does it happen, that our Privateers, and those of Zealand, Ostend,
Brandenbourg and Biscay, have taken so many prizes as amount to no less than
Twenty Five Hundred Ships, unless we have Re-taken our own; And indeed the
French do little brag of their Profits by Sea, there being Letters writ from
France, and writ very feelingly too, that say, those damned Zeelanders have not
left us one Ship to Trade withal: And if I am rightly informed, although their
Trade be small, Shipping however is so very scarce amongst them, that they want
Vessels to carry on that inconsiderable Trade they have, and upon the least
Occasion must hire Danes and Suedes, and sometimes force them too, to Carry
their Goods and provisions from one Port of France, to the other.

If from Trade, we turn our thoughts to other parts of the Nation; is there any
Sort, or Rank of People that can complain they suffer: The Wages and Salaries
of labouring-men are rather higher than in time of Peace: The Handycraft-men
want no Work, and vend it easily, and at good Rates; Nay, several Handycrafts
are set up by the War, which are needless in times of Peace: The Farmer sells
his Corn, his Timber, his Hops, his Cattle, better than at any other time, and
thereby is enabled to pay better his Rent: The Shop keeper h^th as good and as
great a Retail: The Rich-mony'd-man an Opportunity of Lending his Money to a
better Advantage: The Land-man indeed must pay Taxes, and if the Tax were
equally laid, a small Share of his Revenue, (which is the only visible
hardship); but in lieu thereof, how many Gentlemen are there, that have
Employments, and by those Imploys, get more than they give toward the War?
What Family is there, that has not either a Brother, a Son, or some other near
Relation in the Fleet, or in the Army? And thereby is put in a Capacity not
only of maintaining, but of raising it self: Many a Younger Brother, that in
time of Peace had been ready to starve, has now by the War, Hundreds to spend
a year; Nay, many Vagabonds, and other idle people of the Nation, have by the
War an Opportunity of Honestly and Lawfully getting a livelihood in the
service of their Country.

War is said to be a Curse to a Nation, it is true, but it is only so, where the
Seat of War is, where all is Committed to Plunder, Rapine, Fire, Flames and
utter Desolation. But how many Nations have Raised their Name, and Rendered
themselves Famous and Rich by War? The Persians, Macedonians, Romans, Suedes,
are Memorable instances of it, who all grew Great, Potent and Rich by their
Wars.

The Dutch, when they formed themselves into a Commonwealth, were a handful of
people, and had neither Ships, Money, or Strong Towns to boast of; but under
the ever Auspicious Conduct of the Princes of ORANGE, and by a fourscore years
Spanish War; They grew to that vast Wealth and Immense Grandeur, we have seen
them arrived at.

And what have not Advantageous Wars brought into this Nation? Our Conquests in
the West Indies, have for certain advanced our riches: The Fifty years War of
Edward the Third against France, cost England an immense Treasure, and yet all
our Chronicles say, England was never so rich as in his time: Our great Queen
Elizabeth had not always a peaceable, though a happy and a golden Reign: Oliver
was not in Peace, whilst he governed; but no body then complained the Nation
grew poor, every body was sensible it grew Rich: And had not the Richards, the
Henry's, and others our Heroic Princes, Rendered by their Wars abroad the
English Name formidable throughout the world? I don't know, what our last
Thirty-years-peace, would have brought us to, and whether we had been not the
prey of a Neighboring Prince, otherwise greedy and Powerful enough, but who
perhaps was daunted by the remembrance of our Ancient Valor; and the glorious
Achievements of our Ancestors.

FINIS.

