A SERMON Preached at Petworth in Sussex, September 9. 1683. Being a day of
Solemn THANKSGIVING For the Gracious and Wonderful Deliverance OF THE KING, His
Royal Brother, And the GOVERNMENT, From the late Barbarous CONSPIRACY, As
TRAITEROUS.

By JOHN PRICE, D. D.

Concilia callida and inhonesta prima front laeta, tractatu dura, eventu
tristia.

Tacitus. LONDON: Printed for John Fish, near the Fountain-Tavern in the
Strand. 1683.

TO THE Truly Noble and Virtuous Lady ELIZABETH, Duchess of Sommerset.
MADAM,
YOur Grace upon the hearing of this ensuing Discourse, was pleased to do me
that unexpected Honor, as to desire the Publication of it, which by me ought
dutifully to be interpreted as a Command; you judging it might be beneficial to
others beyond the Walls of this Parish Church. Which if it shall prove so, let
God have the Glory, and Your Grace the Thanks: All that I desire from the
Reader, is Candor, and Pardon. Madam, Your natural and acquired
Accomplishments, Your Hereditary Honor and Estate, brought you early upon the
Stage, and soon after into some afflictions, in which I had a share in my
thoughts for You: but they have been such, as have rendered You Prudent beyond
Your years; for You are so in my esteem, without Flattery. Your Grace has
chosen for Your Husband a young Nobleman, who is the second Peer for Dignity
in the Realm, excepting the Royal Line; whose Loyalty is well known among us,
and whose influence, together with Your Graces, may be able in Your Stations to
encourage Loyalty, and to discountenance Faction; which to do, is not only the
duty of the Nobility and Gentry, but their interest too, and indeed of every
man, who can call an Acre of Ground his own.

Madam, as I did always, and ever shall sincerely Honor Your Grace, so I
beseech God to Bless You with all Spiritual Blessings; and that to those for
this Life, he would add the Blessings of Children to inherit them. Madam, I ask
leave to be

Your Graces Most Devoted and Dutiful JOHN PRICE.

1 Corinthians. 10.10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were
destroyed of the Destroyer.


BEcause His Majesty's Declaration represents to us the Methods contrived by
Malevolent men to destroy his Sacred Person, and his Royal Brother, and subvert
his Government, which of all Governments that are nigh or known unto us, is the
most easy to the Subject, not excepting the Democratical, so admired of late,
but falsely as factiously called Commonwealths, as exclusive of Kingdoms,
where the Sovereigns are not the sole Proprietors. And of all Sovereign Princes
known to us, his present Majesty has been most kind and indulgent to his
People, as many of them have owned by their public Addresses, which were
seasonable Remonstrances of their Loyalty. Withal, the Declaration notifies to
us, what must have been the ill consequences of the Conspiracy, had it taken
effect.

I have therefore chosen to discourse to you from this Text, wherein the
Apostle bids the murmuring Corinthians look back upon the murmuring Israelites
in the wilderness against their Leaders, who had soon forgot their long
oppression, and cruel bondage in Egypt, and their miraculous deliverance from
it by the hands of Moses and Aaron, as soon as we have forgot the Calamities of
a long Civil War, and the heavy oppressions that we felt and complained of,
from usurping Governors, and our deliverance from them by the most happy
Restoration of our King, where the hand of God was most eminently seen, as
eminently as any humane record can produce, would I allow my self time to
survey it in all it is circumstances, or were it for me proper now to do it.

But scarce was our Sovereign restored, and with him our Laws and Religion, and
Peace at home, but we were discontented at our own happiness.

Neither the sense of a Natural Allegiance, nor the Sacred Ties of Oaths, nor
Preferments, nor Honors, nor Riches, could keep some men in the dutiful
station of Subjects; who from a false esteem they had gained for their wisdom
and integrity to their Country, as Patriots of it, had inveigled great Parties
to tread in the same footsteps of Disloyalty, and to use the same measures to
disturb the Throne, and so our Peace, as before had been done in the late Kings
days: all the same, with the additional contrivance of the Black Box, etc.
which were so publicly taken notice of, that the late Lord Chancellor spoke
to this purpose to both Houses of Parliament, That he hoped they would not see
Three Kingdoms twice destroyed in one Age, by the same Methods. Examples are
cogent Arguments; if men are in their wits, they will not fall into the same
pit, into which they have seen others fall before them; even beasts will not do
it, be the bait what it will. So St. Paul would have the Corinthians take
warning from the Israelites, whose Murmurings and Discontents are recorded in
Scripture, and recorded there not only to upbraid their ingratitude, but as the
Apostle speaks, v. 11. These things happened to them for ensamples; and they
are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.
Neither murmr ye as some of them, etc.

Solomon gives a Caveat, Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days
were better than these? Eccles. 7.
for thou do not inquire wisely concerning this matter. The murmuring
Questionists of his age had the like before them; and they have been since, and
ever will be: so long as time is, men will complain of the times; and the
little portion of happiness that God gives us in this life, is disturbed by our
own restless and repining nature, by comparing the present with the former; and
because the former is past, it is therefore better. Any little petty accident
at present, does more disturb us, than a load that is past and gone off our
Shoulders. Israel was under the miraculous protection and deliverance of
Heaven, but wants some little convenience; and presently we read of a loud and
clamorous murmuring; Would to God we had died in Egypt.

The hard bondage they had felt in Egypt, was gone off now; and the want but of
a meals meat in the wilderness, put them to murmur against God and their
Governors.

As if it were not enough that man was born to labor as the sparks fly upward,
but we add sparks to the fire.

When we are Children, and under the Discipline of the Rod, we complain, that
we were not born sooner, and past the correction of our Master; and when we are
old, we think, we were never so happy as when we were Children: indeed we are
(...). The phansies that pleased us, we are soon weary of, and seek for new;
something it is that would please us better, but what it is we know not.

Navibus atque Quadrigis petimus been vivere, etc.

This is not only a froward distemper, whereby we create miseries to our
selves; but it is a sin too, though but little taken notice of; yea, a heavy
provocation, by which we draw Gods Judgments upon our heads. This was the sin
of Israel in the Text, and ranked among the great sins of Idolatry,
Fornication, and tempting of God; and derives punishments as great as these do.
The Text has these parts.

1. The sin set down, that is Murmuring. 2. The sin exemplified in Israel; As
some of them murmured. 3. The severe punishment of this sin, in the Paradigm or
Example, Were destroyed of the Destroyer. 4. The like judgment threatened to the
Corinthians, if they did continue in Isreal's example; employed in the
Prohibition, Neither murmur ye.
I. To consider something of the nature of this sin murmuring: The word in
Greek seems to be framed by the voice of Nature, and to be significant of every
thing that creates discontent; a peevish, quarrelsome, nay too, an irrational
distemper. A word, say some, taken from the grunting of a Swine, whose eyes are
bigger than their bellies; that though there be Wash enough in the Trough, yet
hunch each other with their heads, as if enough would not come to their share.

It Is a sin of a secret and specific malignancy; I know not to which of the
Commandments I may refer it, unless it be to the tenth, Thou shall not covet.
Covetousness is the root of all evil: the Apostle instanceth in the love of
Money; but the object of Covetousness is, as it self, infinite, it has no
bounds nor period. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing; and the mind of man is not so soon satisfied as his sense: Take it
regularly in the pursuit of knowledge, which is as the exaltation of his
nature, there is still an ultra progredi; the most knowing may know more, and
desires to do it: but when the mind is debauched, as Israel's once was, given
up to its own lusts, not only the object is infinite as well as the desire, but
its mediums are folly, and its end is ruin. The wicked man is well compared to
the troubled Sea, that casts up mire and sand: and the stronger the tempest,
the thicker are the waters. The wickedness of murmuring has a specific
influence on this Sea, to cast up dirt and filth.

To give then this Discourse a body, and to represent unto you the (...) or
Murmurer.

1. He is a Heretic. St. Jude speaks of false teachers in general, that they
are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts; their mouth speaks
great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because of advantage. A
juggling sort of Heretics murmur and complain, and yet flatter too; cunningly
sift out, who they can make for their Party, so as to disturb the Church.

Such men softly instill the venom of their Principles, and so bring about their
ends, not by strength of their Arguments, (for that cannot be done) but by a
sleighty insinuating themselves into men's affections, complying with their
humors, and admiring their persons; and so take advantage to convey their odd
and false conceits.

Inquietae Haereticorum curiositates, said Tertullian; they are always
restless, and always prying; creep into houses, and then into affections, till
their murmuring discontents at last break out into open Factions. So

2. The Murmurer is certainly the State-sinner: the little grudgings that begin
in Princes Courts, are soon spread into the Country; and they are like the
Poets Fama malum, the farther the same goes, the greater it grows. The
murmuring discontents in the State, at last break out into open Rebellions. The
Israelites said, As for this Moses, we wot not what is become of him; the next
thing we hear of them is, they make a molten calf, that is, set up a Religion
and Government of their own. The Tongue is a little Member, says St. James,
but it is a great evil; and the murmuring tongue, sets the State it is in on
fire; and Hellfire shall be the portion of such tongues.

3. The Murmurer is ever an envious person, and so an ill Member of a Society;
disquiets the Neighborhood he lives in, and, as Theophrastus observes of him,
quarrels at good Offices done him by his Friends, and says they could do no
less, and that they were more kind to others: and if he chance to find Money in
the way, he soon forgets it; and says, when another after chances to find
Money, that he could never have any so good luck. It Is a distemper called
(...), a complaining without a cause; and the envious man always does this.
It Is a nature that makes a near approach to the Devils; the prosperity of Job
is an eyesore.

4. He is the malicious man, delights to do mischief where he lives; is a
trouble to himself, and will be a trouble to his Neighbor; and therefore no
wonder if punishment does attend him: for he is ranked by Solomon among the
seven abominable things that God hates, Prove. 6.19.
him that sows discord among brethren; so that if his hands be too short, his
tongue shall be long enough.

In short, a Murmurer is he that is every thing that is mischievous. Blasphemes
God, the King, the Church, and his Neighbor; and he is a burden to the earth,
and to himself. Neither good nor bad weather pleases him: complains in War, and
yet is discontented in Peace; pines away in scarcity, and yet repines at
plenty: when it is summer, he longs for winter; and when it is winter, wishes
for summer. Neither times nor manners please him; and could he call for them at
his pleasure, yet would murmur still: of which we have a full instance in the
Text.

II. The Example, As some of them murmured. St. Paul being to dissuade the
Corinthians from this sin of Murmuring, as from others there mentioned,
prefaceth the dehortation with a compendious account of Gods mercies to Israel:
I would not have you ignorant, Brethren, that all our fathers were under the
cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized unto Moses in the
cloud, and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink the same spiritual drink; (for they drank of that spiritual rock that
followed them, and that rock was Christ.)

The Holy Ghost intending by the Apostle to upbraid the Church of Corinth, and
that for their ingratitude for so many mercies multiplied upon them, in stating
a parallel between them and Israel: and indeed their mercies were greater than
Isreal's, for as much as the substance is better than the shadow. They tempted
Christ in a Type, but these more plainly wantoned it with the mercies of the
Gospel: The Israelites were profane, when they did eat of that spiritual meat,
and drank of that spiritual drink; but the Corinthians were much more, when
they did not discern the Lords body, and so did desecrate and unhallow that
Sacrament.

But to consider distinctly and briefly this sin of Israel. The people murmured
against Moses, saying, What shall we drink? Exodus 15.24.
The waters of the place were bitter, either naturally, or by Divine
appointment, to try them; and because they were so, a clamor was raised, and
their Governors must hear of it: What shall we drink?

In the next Chapter they murmur for Meat, as before they did for drink; the
whole Congregation murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness: a
National sin, the whole Congregation; and that both against their Prince, and
against their Priest. But because this Murmuring was more loud than the former,
more combined and National; it is called, Gnal Adonai telunnothechem, v. 7.
Your murmurings are against the Lord, and God looked upon it as done against
himself. The glory of the Lord appearing in a cloud whilst they were in this
contest with their Leaders, v. 10.
determined the case; The Lord spoke unto Moses, I have heard the murmurings of
the Children of Israel.

And are they better yet? No: in the next Chapter, they are at the same trade
again; they want Water to their Manna, they had in the last. The People did
chide with Moses: Wherefore is this that thou have brought us out of the Land
of Egypt, to kill us and our Children?

Their murmuring now had broke out into downright and impudent revilings; they
chide, and that to the purpose; and therefore Moses called the name of the
place Massah and Meribah, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and
because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us, or not?

I will leave you to judge whether we have not thus tempted God. We are
querulous and complaining upon every exigencie, and our Governors must hear of
it with both ears. Ill men, who have private designs of their own to carry on,
will always be complaining of public Affairs: and their complaints may
sometimes seem so plausible, that they may gain Proselytes to their Faction,
some of whom may not mean so ill, as they do. For, with what plausible
pretenses did the Serpent of Discord and Rebellion beguile many thousands? What
more plausible, indeed more honorable, than to engage in a War for the defense
of King and Parliament? It Is the constitution of our Government, and a happy
one it is, if we did well understand it: our Laws propounded by our selves in
Parliament, and ratified by our Kings, are our proper freedom as English Men;
and the due execution of them, is our safety: and they are State-Malignants
indeed, that will not contend for this. But the cunning and ambitious men, that
framed the platform of our following Miserys, fixed that odious name of
Malignants upon all those, who adhered to the King, and the known Laws, and
would not run to the same excess of Riot and Madness with themselves. After the
same manner now, they are stigmatized with the more odious name of Tory's, who
have signified their resolution to stand by the established Government, and
will not be seduced by Popish and Fanatic contrivances: for their eyes are
open, by woeful experience, to know and discern the aims of Seducers. But he, or
they, who gave them the name of Torys, did design their ruin by it, as if they
were not fit to have so much as protection from the Government. For Torys are
in Ireland the Outlaws, as the Banditi in Italy. I remember the time when
Parliament-Souldiers, as they would be called such, did Plunder the Houses, and
take away the Horses of honest Countrymen, who lived peaceably at home,
because they were Malignants. The name of Malignant did warrant the Plunder.
But the Tory deserves the Gallow's: so we see what quarter we must expect from
some men, if they could compass their ends to unhinge the Government.
Government is from God, and so sacred, whether it be in Church or State;
therefore Kings and Priests, who are the Ministers of it, are sacred persons,
and were always esteemed so, till the Serpent in Paradise, who presented the
bait of immortality to Eve, ensnared us with the like, viz. freedom and liberty
of Conscience; both which we do measure with our own Rules.

I need not tell you the effects of those murmurings and complaints that
brought the late Civil-Wars among us, about forty years since; the decoy to
engage many thousands was to fight for King and Parliament; but it ended in the
ruin of both. Our Zeal now is against Popery; I beseech Almighty God, with all
the sincere Devotions that I can send up to Heaven, that an indiscreet Zeal
among some, too many, be not the occasion to bring it in: but to keep it out
from re-entring, as a National Church, none can ever be more concerned in
interest than a King of England; this is our great security, so long as we can
enjoy a lawful King, and him in peace at home, for Popery cannot enter but by
struggling of Factions.

III. Part of the Text, The severe punishment of this Sin of murmuring, in the
Paradigme or Example: Were destroyed of the destroyer. The first punishment was
a fire, that brake out from the Lord, and consumed some of them. Numb. 11.
When the people complained, it displeased the Lord, and the Lord heard it, and
his anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and consumed
them that were in the uttermost parts of the Camp: Bemithonnim, in the very
fact, when they complained. The occasion is concealed in the Text: but it was,
say the Jews, from the mysterious reversion of the letter Nun, when they would
conspire to go back to Egypt. The fire fell on the uttermost parts of the Camp;
that is, that which should have led the Van for their retreat to Egypt The fire
of the Lord, (to speak in the Hebrew Idiom) a very great fire, fell not many
years since upon our Metropolis, if I may not say a fire from the Lord; for all
disastrous casualtys depend upon his Providence, without which a Sparrow falls
not to the ground.

The next punishment for Isreal's murmuring is for their desire after flesh:
Numb. 11.4.
The mixed multitude that was among them fell a lusting, and the children of
Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?

This mixed multitude were those Nations gathered up in their march, as we may
probably conjecture with Grotius: God was often jealous over Israel, for the
evils he foresaw would accrue to them from other Nations, and therefore by many
repeated Laws did forbid their commerce with them. This mixed multitude, call
them Arabians, for that the word imports, soon drew in the whole body of Israel
into the same sin: v. 33.
the people weep throughout their Familys, and call for flesh; they had it, but
they had it with a vengeance; v. 10.
for, while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath
of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the people with
a very great Plague.

Truly we have not asked meat for our lusts, as Israel did, but we have had it
without asking, and plenty has often been our complaint.

The next murmuring was occasioned by the Spys bringing up an evil report upon
the Land of Canaan. They dyed of the Plague before the Lord, and the Carcases
of those Murmurers fell, and never entered the Land of promise, Numb. 14. But
Chap. the 16. Corah and his Accomplices enter into an open Conspiracy against
Moses and Aaron; they perish in an Earthquake; and two hundred and fifty by
fire from Heaven, who offered up strange fire: The people cried, and fled, lest
they also should perish.

You would think that their mouths were shut up from murmuring any more, as the
earth had shut up those Rebels in her Womb. No: they had but slept upon the
judgment, and they had forgot it as a Dream: On the morrow all the Congregation
murmur against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the Lords people. Belike
Moses and Aaron were none, the Prince and the Priest, because they were not of
their Faction. God appears, and bids Moses and Aaron withdraw, that he might
consume the Congregation in a moment. It was commanded so before, in the case
of Corah: but there, Moses and Aaron fell upon their faces, and said, O God,
the God of the Spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and will thou be angry
with the whole Congregation? they had then something to plead; they had nothing
now, but fell upon their faces, and by a silent prostration deprecated the
justice of the vengeance: it was a more universal Mutiny of the people against
their Leaders; and there dyed of them, as in the twinkling of an eye, fourteen
thousand and seven hundred of the Plague; and had it not been for the hasty
charity of Aaron's Censer interposing between the living and the dead, they had
all perished.

If they, who did but whet their tongues against their Governors, fell thus;
what do they deserve, who badthed their Swords in the blood of our late King? a
Murder, by the mockery of Justice, never to be forgot, yet never to be
mentioned without horror and detestation: But what do they deserve, who would
have justified that fatal murder by the assassinating of our present Sovereign,
and his Royal Brother? as if the murdering of Kings by these Casuists was
excepted from the sixth Commandment. When froward men do take a liberty to
speak, Write, and Print what they please, and all with designs against the
Government they live under, it is plain that they would be Governors
themselves: and when they have whet their tongues, and sharpened their pens,
they are not far off from drawing their Swords; then the mischief is
completed, the Sin is fulfilled, and it brings forth death, and none knows how
long it will reign.

I shall stop here, either to any farther instances of Isreal's sin or
punishment. But before I proceed to the 4th. part of the Text, let me try to
inform my self and you, why this sin has this punishment. The Murmurer is said
to be destroyed of the Destroyer; that is, by some more remarkable and
immediate hand of vengeance: and why so?

1. Because by what appears, this Sin of murmuring does more immediately strike
at Gods Government of the World; that peevish and froward men, as Israel in the
example, will not allow God to do as he pleases, no not to do them good: for
if all will take upon them to be Governors, they must always be exercised in a
state of War and Confusion. St. Peter speaks of wicked men, 2 Pet. 1.9.
who made pretenses to Godliness, that they were (...), could not see a far
off, forgot they were purged from their old sins by Baptism; which also did
engage them to give all diligence to make their calling and election sure; and
that by addding to their Faith Virtue, etc. an holy Life, to an holy Profession.

Israel was brought out of Bondage from Egypt by mighty signs and miracles;
they had forgot that; and that God had engaged himself by solemn promises to
bring them to a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; but because they were in the
Wilderness, and in a marching condition, which sometimes, as all marches, have
their straights, they presently forgot what God had done for them, and what
more he had promised. Such were those ill Christians in Saint Peter, who were
weary of their profession, because it did enjoin too strict a Life, or was
attended with some pressures and affliction: and such are all ill Subjects, who
forget the benefits they receive from the Government under which they live, and
will be always making attempts to mend it, though they do not foresee the
mischiefs that their own designs would ensnare them into.

Froward men disturb Gods method of mercy, and make it miscarry in the Womb. He
intended quietly and safely to lead Israel out of Egypt into Canaan; and the
march of so many years might have been accomplished in so many days: but they
stood in their own light, and stopped the way against themselves. They tempted
God very often, and so often, that a patient and longsuffering God at last Swear in
his wrath that they should not enter into his rest.

The murmuring discontents of Israel were not recorded by Moses only for their
sakes; St. Paul apply's it in the Text to the froward Corinthians: and it ought
to be a warning to all Malcontents, especially to those, who are always
complaining of their Governors.

2. This Sin of murmuring is (...), an ill habit of the stomach, that corrupts
the best meat; we murmur at mercys, as Israel did at Manna. Certainly to all
wise and unprejudiced men, the Restoration of the King, and so of the Church,
Anno 1660. was a mighty mercy, and I may say, almost, or altogether equal with
any that Israel had: for it secured to us all our Libertys as Subjects, which
before were but precarious; for the Governments we lived under were Arbitrary,
and themselves were uncertain, still upon the wheel of Motion, as Factions
could supplant each other: and the Restoration of the Church, that is, of our
National as established by Law, has best secured to us the Protestant
Religion. I speak to them, who are the lovers of it: for though the Factions,
that have been rampant, were very zealous against Popery, yet they might in
time have been betrayed into it; for the Basis on which those usurped, and
still changeable Governments were founded, was Liberty of Conscience; and so
soon as they could see themselves secure against the claims of the Royal
Family, Popery also might have had it is share in the Toleration: for it was the
interest of the Usurpers to do it; and in doing of it, to strengthen themselves
against the Common enemy, the King and his Party, as they were then called. For
they are much mistaken, who think that the Pope loves Kings, more than
Demagogues, the Directors of popular Governments. For this, let an enquiry be
made, what Monarchys have been abased by the Papal power: And if Popery could
have once come to have as free toleration, as the then Factions had, in some
few years it would have swallowed them up, as Moses's Rod did the Magicians.
For men at last, when their civil Rights were secured, would be weary of so
many new invented forms of Religion; and would be now, but that they are
continually hurried on by underhand contrivances.

3. This Sin of murmuring is a most comprehensive and diffusive malady; few of
us, that are not guilty of it. There are some sins, that great Sinners are not
guilty of; and though this be a sin that is ranked by the Apostle with
Fornication and Idolatry, and possibly a sin too, that we are apt to condemn in
others, yet we will not discern it as such in our selves: we say in their
Language in the Psalmist, Our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us? we are
apt to think that we can speak without offense. Who puts into the Diary of his
Confession, his reviling of Government, his speaking evil of Dignitys, his
repining at every accident or event of Divine Providence? These things pass
incognito, we rarely reflect upon the guilt. Are the entertainments we give our
selves and our friends, but things with us of no peccancy, or sins that seldom
descend so far as to the Conscience, though whole Familys, Villages, and
Corporations are poisoned with it?

Some Casuists tell us, that Habitual sins have a guilt distinct from those
sins of which they are habits; and that they are more dangerous, because the
Sinner is the farther off from Repentance. The guilt that is contracted from
those habits does make a Callus, and fear the Conscience, that the Sinner
little thinks on it, that he is going down to the Chambers of death, and he is
ensnared into Damnation, drowned in Perdition, before he says, Domine miserere,
or asks, What he has done. The habit of murmuring is so universal, hand joined
to hand, tongue to tongue, that the sense of the guilt is lost; and because
it is so, it is a distinct guilt: for the greatest Sinners have repented, as
suppose Murderers, Adulterers, yea and Idolaters too, who are in a peculiar
manner guilty laesae Majestatis divinae, and Traitors to the God of Heaven.

The Repentance of all habitual Sinners is difficult, but the repentance of an
habitual Murmurer is beset with more than ordinary difficultys: for the
arguments that should reach the guilt, are not well reducible to any single
Commandment, and do scarce affect the letter of any: Though murmuring is a sin
of a complicated guilt, affects both Tables, and most of the Commandments of
both.

Besides, the Murmurer is not so soon as other Sinners convinced of his guilt,
because he has framed a rule of rectitude to himself; and his conscience opens
and shuts by that rule, and so he strains at Gnats, and swallows Camels.
Nothing so much troubled the Conscience of a Neapolitan Shepherd, when he came
to Confession at Easter, as that he had tasted a little Cream the Lent before:
But he had often Robbed and Murdered Passengers on the Mountains; and that
troubled not his Conscience, because his Father and Grandfather had done so
before.

I believe we are all of us very ready to pass a true and just censure here:
but reflect. There are, who cannot digest a Set-form of Prayers in our
Assemblies, are offended at a Surplice, startle at the Cross in Baptism, etc.
and yet can whisper against their King, and whisper to be heard too; talk
loudly against Bishops and Priests, censure all men; complain of every thing,
and be satisfied with nothing.

Remember that God passed by some of the discontents of Israel; but when they
grew clamorous, and more combined, his wrath fell in among them. And Remember,
that God has other eyes to see sin with than we have; and has other Scales to
weigh them in. But, we our selves do not take kindly ill Language from our
Neighbor; and can we think that God will from us, when by our discontents we
daily revile his Providence? The method of which is to us, as once to Israel,
to try us, to do us good at the latter end.

IIII. Part of the Text: Neither murmur ye. The like judgment threatened to the
Corinthians, as once executed on Israel. Theod. says thus; that they were the
Murmurers among the Corinthians, (...), such, who were endowed with less gifts
of the Spirit. It Is plain, that the Church of Corinth did contend for them,
even to the breach of Charity; they would be all Apostles, all Prophets, all
Teachers, etc. We have lived in an Age, where we have seen such contentions as
these, and have felt the mischiefs that have been occasioned by them.

All Societies whatsoever, must yield obedience to the Government they are
under; for it is their safety to do it: for we must not think to be all Kings,
and Magistrates; for if all are to be Governors, there must be none to be
governed. The case is the same in all Christian Assemblies, be they greater or
lesser. It Is the Apostles argument, If the whole body were an eye, where were
the hearing? if the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand, I am not of the
body, is it therefore not of the body?

It Is true! Offenses are given and taken in all Governments, Civil or Sacred.
For this, Kings set uneasy in their Thrones, and Bishops and Priests are meanly
esteemed, and the people are Tumultuous, and Religion is disgraced; and all
this, because ambitious men cannot have their aims: They struggle with the
Divine dispensation, which has allotted to all men their proper places. Let the
Governors and Governed look to their duty. So I leave this, and propound next
the sense of Theoph. upon the Text: who says that the Apostle chides them, who
did not (...), generously bear up against the reproachers and persecutors of
their Religion: and this seems to be congruous to the argument of consolation;
There has no temptation taken you, but such as is common to men; but God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it; and therefore falls upon those Murmurers, who say, When shall we have any
good days? and (...); how long shall we lie under these pressures?

The Carnal among them, as there were many no doubt, did often reflect upon their
quiet state when they were Heathens, as the Israelites did, when they were in
Egypt: but the conditions of both became troublesome; of the one, by changing
their Religion; of the other, by changing their Country; though both were for
the better: but both did repine and murmur, because of their present
distresses; they did not or would not see a Divine Intendment of love in them.

Truly God has exercised us with a various face of afflictions in one Age; but
such have been in our, and in other Nations before: but on whomsoever, or
whenever he sends them, they are as so many Summons to Repentance: and if we
make that use of them, he has gained his end in sending of them; for he does
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men: but if we repine, and
are impatient under correction, there is for us a (...) as St. Chrysostom told
his Auditors, God may deal with us more severely, than with Israel; for we live
in a fuller light, and a greater experience, on whom the ends of the World are
fallen. The aim of Israel was an Earthly Canaan; our's is a Heavenly: but we
must pass through a Wilderness to the one, as they did to the other: but if God
hear of our murmurings in it, take care, that he does not Swear in his wrath to
us, as once to them, If they shall, that is, we shall not enter into his rest.

The punishments that God afflicts on us, we must patiently abide; which if we
do, it is to us a Signature of our adoption, that we are Sons and not Bastards,
who will own him to be our Father which is in Heaven; and so pray to him when
he Corrects us with his Rod, as well as when he Comforts us with his Staff.

But we have no reason to complain at any outward Calamities at this time, but
we have much to thank God for the peace and plenty we do enjoy. There are
scarce any parts of Christendom so unmolested as we are; of whom some are now
contending unto blood for their Lives, Liberties and Religion, against the
Mahometans.

My Brethren, I will close with that of the Apostle, Do all things without
murmurings and disputings; Phil. 2.14.
yea, and suffer all things, which God has not put in our power by regular
means to redress: However, make no complaining in our Streets, until there be
actual leading into Captivity; for that is to exceed the example of Israel.

Fears and Jealousies in our Nation, has even anticipated our miseries; and we
brought real mischiefs upon our selves, by hastening to prevent the phansied. In
a word, the murmuring of Israel was against Moses and Aaron, that is, the King
and the Priest; which God took as done against himself.

Be wise before it be too late, lest we fall into the hands of the Destroyer.

For the Declaration says thus: In case it had pleased God to permit these
wicked designs to have taken effect, there could have been nothing in prospect
but confusion. For instead of a Reformation they pretended, their Success would
have produced Divisions and Wars among themselves, until the predominant party
could have enslaved the whole Kingdom. So far the Declaration.

Such intestine broyls might have brought in an Invasion indeed.

There were, some years since, Libellous Pamphlets, under the Allegory of a
Ship and its Officers, in which the King, the Duke, etc. were covertly
traduced. Allow me to speak under the like. Suppose a Ship out at Sea many
Leagues from Land, in which a Conspiracy was made by some Male-contended
Saylors and under - Officers against the Captain and others; but the Captain
had so many true to him, that with them and his Authority, he still so kept
them in awe, that they durst not attempt an open Mutiny: Wherefore these
Malcontents secretly join in a Conspiracy to sink the Ship, and for their
escape, to hoyse out the Longboat under some color, as the Mariners did, Acts
27. Suppose now the Ship with the Captain and his friends were sinking, and the
Conspirators had cleared their Boat of the Ship, and were safe in it, rejoicing
to see that their Plot and Revenge had taken effect. The next thing they
contrive for themselves, is to agree what Land to make: some are for directing
their Course East, some West, etc. In this difference, they could not agree
what Land to make; but the case was such, that the determination must be
speedy: but neither yiedling to each others conceit what Shore was nearest or
best, from words they fall to Blows. So here I leave them, and the Allegory to
be applied by every common capacity.

Wherefore let us bless God for the Deliverance we this day are required to
celebrate, and let us beseech him still to protect our Sovereign Lord the King,
and His; and his Government as now it is in Church and State; to convert those,
who have taken up any prejudices against either, and to disappoint all the
machinations, open or secret, of the Enemies of our peace, which God continue
among us.

FINIS.

