THE PARABLE OF THE Three Jackdaws, etc.
THERE was a Time when the Feathered Commonwealth fell into Great Disorder
about Choosing a Successor to the Eagle, whose Advanced Years Portended the Fall
of his Scepter, and the Disputes which happened amongst the several Pretenders,
did mightily Perplex the Kingdom of Birds, who were in doubt, whether the Eagle
had any Genuine Offspring. The Magpies, who had an Inveterate Malice against
the Blackbirds and Nightingales, because they were better liked than themselves
on the Account of their Harmonious Notes, and Innocent Nature, improved the
opportunity to make Interest with the Jackdaws and Cuccows, to Settle the
Succession on a Noted Bird, which was reckoned Brother to the Eagle, because
Hatched in the same Nest; but a Mortal Enemy to the Nightingales and
Blackbirds, and accused of a Confederacy with the Storks and Kites, to betray
the Winged Nation to the Birds of Prey. The Magpies were frequently told of
this, and Remonstrances were entered against their Proceeding, as destructive to
the whole Volatile Empire; but they turned the Deaf Ear to every thing that was
said to 'em; for being used to feed upon Carrion, they delighted in Slaughter.
In process of time the Eagle died, and his Brother, the Friend to the Magpies,
Succeeded: As soon as he Mounted the Throne, the Magpies Chatter'd for Joy, the
Jackdaws Caw'd, and the Cuccows made Protestations of Loyalty in their Usual
Note; but he was scarcely Seated on the Throne, when the Region of the Air was
filled with Birds of Prey, the Screech-Owls began to quarrel with the Jackdaws,
and the Cormorants pretended a Right to the Nests of the Magpies. In the mean
time, though they could not agree amongst themselves, yet all of them united
against the Nightingales and Blackbirds, who, by this means, were forced to
Retire to the Solitary Groves, where they Chirpt and Warbled out their own
Misfortunes. The Affairs of the Winged Empire being in this posture, a Generous
Falcon, as he was called by some, or the True Offspring of the Eagle, as
reckoned by others, being moved with compassion toward the Injured Birds
attempted their Relief; but the Magpies and Jackdaws, with their Adherents the
Cuccows, were so much Incensed against the Generous Falcon, because of his
favorable Inclinations to the Nightingales and Blackbirds, that they summoned
together their Friends the Rooks, and joining with the Storks and Kites,
Oppressed the poor Falcon, with his small Retinue; and having Barbarously
destroyed them, the Eagles Brother looked upon his Throne as surer than ever;
and the Magpies, Jackdaws, and Cuccows, concluding that they had insur'd his
Favor, by this New Merit, pressed on to destroy the Blackbirds and
Nightingals. But all of a sudden, when they thought themselves secure, the
Night-Owls and Cormorants, with the Storks and Kites their Adherents, having
been a long time dispossessed of their Nests by the Magpies and Jackdaws, and
their followers the Rooks and Cuccows, resolved to come to a Trial of Skill
with them, upon which the Magpies came to have some REMORSE for then Barbarous
Treatment of the Innocent Blackbirds; and, abating something of the usual
harshness of their Note, began to call Mag, Mag, poor Mag, a Cup of Sack for
poor fainting Mag; and the Jackdaws Caw'd to the Blackbirds, in a Milder Note
than before, bewaild their Former Severity, and invited the Nightingales and
Blackbirds to join with them, against the Kites, Cormorants, and Screech-Owls.
The Eagles Brother being afraid of the Consequences of such an Union, came also
to a Parley with the Blackbirds and Nightingales, and offered them fair
Quarter, provided they would concur toward the procuring of an Authentic Act
at the General Diet of the Winged Empire, to secure his Followers in the
Possession of their Nests for all time coming; the Amazed Blackbirds being
surpised with this mighty Change, and having been wretchedly torn by the
Talons of both Parties, knew not whom to trust; but the Eagles Brother being
possessed of the Throne, decency obliged them to make Civil Replies: but some of
the BATTS which frequented the Company of the Blackbirds, engaged too far with
the Cormorant-Interest, and by this time both Parties owned the Possessor of
the Throne for a True Eagle: Having gained his Point so far, he resolved to
push on his Fortune, and being provoked with the Behavior of the Magpies, he
designed to put their Pretensions of Loyalty to the Touchstone, and commanded
them to publish his Imperial Edict, giving Liberty to all the Subjects of the
Airy Regions to Warble out the Praises of their Great Creator, in such Notes as
Nature had furnished 'em with, It being highly unreasonable to say, that the
Canary-bird was no Bird, because she could not Croak like the Raven, or that
the Nightingale was no Subject of the Winged Empire, because she could not
chatter like the Magpy.

The Magpies and Jacks were Thunderstruck at tho hearing of this unlookt-for
Command, and Most of 'em did SVLLENLY refuse it: yet some of the Magpies, and
the Swallows which nestled about the Altars thought fit to comply, but the
Metropolitan-Magpy, and Six of the rest did positively refuse to obey the
Eagle, who did thereupon Commit them to his Imperial Prison. Then nothing was
to be heard but Alas poor Mag, a Cup of Sack for Mag: and on the other hand,
the Cormorants and Kites cried, A Rope for Mag, Mag, Mag, a Halter for Mag: and
the Blackbirds and Nightingales, though they were something concerned at the
Misfortune of the Magpies, yet could not but say, that Mag was served according
to l^er Deserts: but the Jackdaws and Cuccows, with their Allies the Rooks, did
so much disturb the Eagles Quiet; with their Cawing and Croaking, that he
Released the Magpies, but pursued his Design of Establishing a Tyranny in the
Regions of the Air; and, in order to accomplish his Design, did enter into a
Confederacy with the VVLTVRE, Resolved to Disinherit the Generous She-Eagle of
his own Race, and to Impose a Counterfeit He-Eagle upon the Nation of the
Birds; which did so much provoke the Feathered Commonwealth, that they agreed,
with the Assistance of a Genuine Eagle, of the True Imperial Nest, who had the
Generous She-Eagle, abovementioned, to his Mate, to Curb the Tyrannical Eagle,
and prevent his Imposing an Ostrich instead of an Eagle upon the Winged Empire.
Many of the Magpies and Jackdaws, with all the Blackbirds and Nightingales,
Joined in the Invitation to the Young Eagle, who taking his Flight from
Beyond Sea, did happily Alight in the Imperial Grove; and being Joined with a
Promiscuous Flock of Blackbirds, Jackdaws, Nightingales, and some Rooks, put
the Kites, and Cormorants, and Old Eagle to Flight; who, after he had Roosted a
while in his Imperial Nest, abandoned the same, and Fled Beyond Sea with the
Ostrich his Mate, and the Counterfeit-Eagle her Supposed-Son, to the
Vulture's-Grove.

The Eagle having thus taken his flight, the Magpies began to relent, and to
wish that thing had not come to that Extremity; for the Jackda^^ and they
became now apprehensive, that they were in as much danger of losing their
Nests, by the Blackbirds and Nightingals, as they had formerly been by the
Kites and Cormorants, because the Young Eagle who came from beyond Sea, was
Judged to have a mighty kindness for the Blackbirds and Nightingals, and his
Mate, the Generous she-Eagle had no aversion to them, and thus it came to pass
that the Metropolitical Magpy, who had been the Ringleader of those who opposed
the old Eagle, and invited the young one to his Nest, began to grow sullen, and
his Example infecting the rest of the Maggs, the faction was divided amongst
themselves, so that some of the Magpies and Jackdaws, were for acknowledging
the young Eagle as Sovereign of the Birds, and others chattering still upon the
abdicated theme of passive obedience, alleged that the old Eagle had injury
done him, and did all that they could to obstruct the progress of the young
Eagles affairs, and having by the Interest of the Magpies, who owned his Title,
got an influence on his Councils, they advised him to disband the Blackbirds
and Nightingals, who had flockt to him at his first coming over, and to govern
his affairs by the advice of the Magpies and Jackdaws, and by this method they
got his Court and his Camp filled with Rooks, who did still retain a very great
kindness for the old Eagle, and their ancient Cronies, the Cormorants and
Kites, and did them kindly offices as opportunity offered.

In the mean time the Nightingals, and Blackbirds of the Eagles ancient Grove;
had been so terribly infested by the Magpies, Jackdaws, and Rooks, and so
mischievously torn by the Talons of the Kites, and Cormorants their allies,
that they looked upon the Magpies as Harpies, and in a General diet of the Birds
held for that Grove, Voted that the Magpies and their Underlings, the Jackdaws
were the great and insupportable grievance of the Winged Empire, and with one
consent dislog'd them of their Nests, so that the Maggs and Jacks hopt away in
great Numbers, to the Neighboring Grove, chatter'd nothing but passive
obedience and Nonresistance, and the Injury done to the old Eagle, which
strengthened the faction of the Southern Magpies, and made the young Eagle very
uneasy in his Nest; whence it came to pass that the Magpy faction procured a
Rebellion in the Northern Grove, under the Conduct of a Mischievous Rook, who
being joined by a Rabble of the Jackdaws, Kites, Cormorants, and Solan Geese,
gave the young Eagles followers in that Grove a considerable Check, but the
mischievous Rook being peckt to death in the scuffle, the Rebellion was
gradually appeased there; but the Northern Jackdaws and Solan Geese, with the
abdicated Harpies, filled the Southern Grove with their querelous Notes, so
that nothing was to be heard, but alas, poor Magg, Magg, Magg, is put out of
her Nest in the North, and must expect the same treatment in the South, except
the old Eagle be recalled. Whereupon that Tyrrannous bird conceiving good hopes
of his affairs, did by the assistance of the Vulture, who lent him some bands
of Storks, Kites, and Rooks, take his flight to St. Patricks Grove, where being
Joined by some Cormorants, and the Native Woodcocks; he quickly oversoread the
whole Grove excepting some small part of it, where a Colony of their Northern
birds had fixed their Nests, who made such a stout Resistance against the Tyrant
Eagle, and his birds of prey, that the fame thereof echoed through the Regions
of the Air, but the Southern Magpies and Jackdaws being influenced by the
Northern Harpies, and Solan-Geese obstructed the Relief of the Blackbirds of
St. Patricks Grove so long, that they were well nigh undone, and the first
relief they had sent 'em being under the Conduct of a Villainous Rook, he was
little less Noisome to the Blackbirds, than the Kites and Cormorants, so that
the young Eagle was obliged to fly thither in person, and not long after his
Arrival, he gave the Tyrant Eagle and his followers such a terrible overthrow
by a purling brook; that the old one fled from St. Patricks Grove, and betook
himself again to the Vultures quarters, whilst the Colones of the Northern
Blackbirds and Nightingals, did with inimitable Courage subdue the Woodcocks,
and the young Eagles followers dislog'd the Vultures and Cormorants from their
Nests, so that in a little time St. Patricks Grove was entirely recovered.

The Vulture, by whose Counsels the abdicated Eagle had all along governed
himself, perceiving that he was now quite driven from his Nest, resolved to
attack the Flemmish Coppice; which had formerly been the Residence of the young
Eagle, which obliged the Generous Bird to repair Beyond Sea, for the defense of
his ancient friends, but tho he Acted Wonders, yet his Counsels were betrayed
by the friends of the Maggs and the Daws, and his Troops being chiefly
Commanded by Rooks, the Birds of his retinue met with several Disasters, and at
the same time the Kites and Cormorants, and seditious Maggs, did all that they
could to disturb the repose of the Generous she Eagle his Mate, whom they would
fain have destroyed in his absence, but the faithful Magpies and moderate
Jackdaws, with the Blackbirds and Nightingals, did unite so cordially for her
defense, that their designs were disappointed. Thus was the Generous young
Eagle perplexed by Vultures, Storks, and Cormorants abroad, and Treacherous
Magpies Jackdaws and Rooks at home, and chiefly because they were apprehensive
of being outed by the Blackbirds, who whatever privileges they had acquired in
the North, they said must content themselves to build Nests in the Eves of
houses in the South, where the Churches were the proper habitation of the
Magpies and Jackdaws, Nor would they suffer the Nightingals and the Falcons, to
have any command in the winged Army, that being the property of the Kites and
Rooks, because they did annually swear Allegiance to the Magpies and Jackdaws
at the Altars, which the Falcons and Nightingals would never do.

In the mean time the Generous she Eagle died, which did so much grieve her
faithful Mate, that the Kingdom of Birds, had well nigh lost both their
Sovereigns at once: However, he generously plucked up his Courage, and
considering that he was born for Empire, did scorn to be conquered by passion;
and therefore resolved that as he had defeated the Maws and the Gulls,
belonging to the Vulture by Sea, he would have a Trial of Valor with him by
Land, notwithstanding his Alliance with the overgrown Raven of the East, so
that taking another flight into the Continent, he dislodged the Vulture from
one of his chief Nests, who thereupon became so much afraid of the young
Eagles Talons, that he durst not adventure on a fair War with him any more; but
resolved to subborn some Night-Owls, Buzzards, Kites, Cormorants, and Cuccows,
to assassinate the Generous Eagle in the dark, which he had attempted several
times before, but laid the design so craftily now, that he was sure it c^uld
not miscarry. And this taking effect he designed to have destroyed all the
Blackbirds and Nightingals, with the faithful Magpies and moderate Jackdaws,
and all the other loyal Birds in St. George St. Andrews, and St. Patricks
Groves, and to have possessed them for ever; with Vultures, Kites, Storks,
Ravens, Rooks, Cormorants, and Magpies, and Jackdaws of his own stamp. However
this conspiracy being happily discovered by the Parrots, many of the Owls,
Buzzards, and Cormorants, who were employed to assassinate the young Eagle were
taken, and some of 'em suffered Death according to the Laws of the feathered
Kingdom; three Cormorants first, and a little after ^ Cuccows, who being drawn
in by the Treacherous Magpies, and Jackdaws, three of the latter attended them
to the place of their Exit, and Cawing to them in the old Note of passive
obedience, deluded the poor Cuccows, and telling them that by virtue of the
Authority which they had acquired by a long possession of the Steepies; where
no Blackbird had any right to come, they were constituted Lawful Priests of the
winged Empire, and therefore absolved them from the false imputation of guilt,
for endeavoring to cut the young Eagles throat, for he was none of the Birds
of Jupiters Nest, and tho the Beetle had unluckily broke all the old Eagles
Eggs, which were procreated betwixt him and the Italian Ostrich; yet there was
a time coming when they would find a safe repository if not in Joves, yet in
St. Peter's Lapp, and oblige the pretended Eagle, who was no other than a Geneva
Bird, hatched amongst the shells, which one of the Roman Emperors gathered
together as a Mark of Triumph on the Dutch Coast, to retire to the banks of
Lake-Leman, in the faith of which the 2 silly Cuccows, did cheerfully swallow
their hempseed, and crying Cuc-cow, Cuc-cow, the Jackdaws answered Caw, caw,
caw, and then the Cuccows were choackt, at which the Loyal Birds were so much
incensed, that they have shut up 2 of the Jackdaws in a Cage; and are hunting
after the other which is fled; so that in a little time, we may hap to see
these Jackdaws follow the fate of the Cuccows, while all the Winged Empire,
from the Imperial Eagle to the Wren, are associated to defend the Generous
young Eagle, as a true bird of the Imperial Nest against the Vulture of the
West, the ovirgrown Raven of the East, the Traitorous Magpies J^^kdaws, Storks,
Kites, Rooks, Ravens, and Cormorants, and the Larks, Nightingals and
Blackbirds, do daily with their harmonious Notes' Celebrat Jupiters praises,
for preserving his beloved Eagle.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
There is newly published -- A Letter to the Three Absolvers, Mr. Cook, Mr.
Collier and Mr. Snett. Being Reflections on the Papers delivered by Sir John
Friend and Sir Will Parkyns, to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, at
Tyburn, the Place of Execution, April 3. 1696: which said PAPERS are Printed at
length, and answered Paragraph by Paragraph. Price 6 d. Printed for R. Baldwin.

London, Printed for R. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in Warwicklane.


