Presentiments of the Grand Jury for the Town and Borough of Southwark.
To the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR of the City of London, and the rest of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this Town and Borough of Southwark,
sitting in open Sessions at the Bridg-house-Hall in the said Borough, on Friday
the Twelfth day of January, Anno Dom. 1682.
We the Grand Jury, Summoned and Sworn for this present Sessions of the Peace,
holden for this Town and Borough of Southwark, do with all Humble Deference to
our Superiors, Present as follows, viz.

I. THAT what the Wise and Learned King James, his Majesty's Royal Grandfather
of Blessed Memory has, from his Own Observation, and sad Experience (among
other things) so solemnly Asserted in His Excellent Book of Instructions to his
Eldest Son Prince Henry, concerning the Puritans of that Age, may as truly be
affirmed of the generality of the Separatists of our Times; to wit, Basil.
Doron, p. 31.
That they are the very Pests in the Church and Commonweal, whom no Deserts
can Oblige, neither Oaths or Promises Bind; Breathing nothing but Sedition and
Calumnies, Aspiring without Measure, Railing without Reason, and making their
own Imaginations (without any Warrant of the Word) the square of their
Conscience; and that ye shall never find with any High-land, or Border-Thieves
greater Ingratitude, and more Lies and vile Perjuries, than with these
Phanatick Spirits.

II. That Popery and Phanaticism being equally gross Defections from Primitive
Christianity, and equally destructive of the Established Government of these
Kingdoms both in Church and State, equal Zeal and Vigor, as we humbly conceive,
ought to be used toward the Extirpation of them both: And the rather, for that
it is plain from Coleman's Papers, and other unquestionable Evidence, that ever
since his Majesty's happy Restoration, both Papist and Phanatick, for the
compassing their end of Subverting the present Establishment, have been united
in their Endeavors to procure a Toleration, as the only means to accomplish it.

III. That all who do less than their utmost toward the Suppressing all
Conventicles prohibited by Law, and yet style themselves his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects, are mere Usurpers of that Title. And that all who plead for the
Relaxation of the Penal Laws against either Popish, or Protestant Dissenters,
at this time, under what specious Pretext soever, are, in our opinion, Enemies
to the King and the Protestant Religion; and are either such as live in the
open Breach of those Laws, or such others as lie under a just Suspicion of
being Pensioners to the Pope and the French King, and engaged in a Conspiracy
against the Government.

IV. And whereas the often repeated Experiments of Lenity and Indulgence
toward Dissenters have been so far from rendering them more Modest in their
Behavior toward the Government, that on the contrary they are thereby become
more Audacious in their lewd Practices against it; and those who take upon them
to Preach in Conventicles, are generally observed to take Occasion, from the
faint Execution of the Laws against them and their Followers, most
blasphemously to entitle God Almighty to an Especial, nay, even to a Miraculous
Protection of them in their Disobedience to his Vicegerent, and thereby to
make more Proselytes to Faction, than they could do if they were not prosecuted
at all: And whereas also from the Practices of the generality of the Dissenters
in dispensing with Oaths and Sacraments in Matter and Mode repugnant to their
commonly avowed Principles, merely to qualify themselves for Places of Trust
and Profit, it is undeniably apparent that they daily prostitute the most
Sacred Rites of Religion to serve their secular Interests, and thereby have
baffled their own pretenses to Tenderness of Conscience, and are become a
Scandal to the Christian name. Therefore we humbly conceive, that the only way
to maintain the Honor of Christianity, to preserve the Kings Person, the
Monarchy, the Religion Established, the public Peace, the just Rights and
Liberties of his Majesty's Loyal Subjects, to defeat the Designs of that
accursed Mixture of Atheists, Papists, Democraticks and Enthusiasts, of which
the Faction, which has so much annoyed the Government, is compounded, and to
fasten a just brand of Infamy upon the Impostors, and charitably to rescue and
undeceive their deluded Disciples, is a through and impartial Execution of the
Penal Laws against all Dissenters whatsoever.

V. Moreover, we of this Borough laboring more particularly under this
Grievance, that persons notoriously Disaffected to the Royal Interest, are
through Arbitrary Encroachments upon the ancient Rules and Usages of Choice,
become the Majority of Governors of an Hospital of Royal Foundation among us,
and so effectually the disposers of all Offices and Employments relating
thereunto, and the managers of a large Revenue belonging to the same, and
generally abuse the Power and Reputation they gain thereby to the perverting of
those who prefer a sordid Interest before Duty and Allegiance. We offer our
humble Opinion that a speedy Regulation in that matter would be a very
seasonable means of relieving us, that so the numerous Party of Honest Trading
men of this vast Body may be no longer discouraged in their Industry, or
cramped in their Loyalty by the Artifices of those who meditate our Ruin.

Upon this humble Representation of our sense in the Premises, we pray that
this Honorable Court will take some effectual course for the Suppression of all
the Conventicles in this Borough; and exercise its utmost Authority in order to
increase the Number, and strengthen the Interest of his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects among us.

London, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.


