A PARALLEL Between the PROCEEDINGS of this present KING And this present
PARLIAMENT.

Quicquid delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi. LONDON: Printed in the year,
MDCXLVIII.

To the CITY.
GOD was pleased to make you glorious instruments of our liberty in the last
troubles; the Cavaliers account it your shame good men your glory: They for
this cause hate you, and seek to divide you; These care for you, and endeavor
to unite you: They endeavor to draw you to themselves, not that they love you,
but that they may make good their aims by weakening you: These endeavor to set
you upright for no other ends but your own safety, as knowing how dangerous
your Avulsion were from the Commonweal. They can never love you, remembering
how their Cause has suffered by you: These will ever cleave to you be your
selves never so unwilling, as knowing how advantageous to the public you have
been and may be. The way to continue you glorious, is to continue your old
interests, and not seeking new ones, which will ever lead you into new
precipices: If you mean to enjoy the fruits of your hazards and expenses, stick
to your former Cause, and become not rennagadoes to your noble professions and
adventures. If you do, I do not now admonish, but prophecy, your faces will be
covered with shame, and your mouths filled with gravel, and those means which
carnal wisdom may suggest to you, as the fittest for your security, will in
despite of your policy, prove the unhappy and fatal causes of your
devastation: It grieves me to think how forward you are in these forbidden
paths: ye harbor Snakes in your bosoms; an especial antidote that may hinder
the poison to come at your heart is more then necessary: God has hindered many
of your motions; if you go on, there may one be connived at, and then take
heed, least you gather the judgments of other Countries (as you have their
people already,) contracted into your bosoms.

Ye have yet wise Governors among you, follow them, and be advised by them;
remember how like fathers they were to you when you last stirred at Guildhall;
remember their safety is yours, they cannot undo you and preserve themselves:
Hate all those murmurers that distill poison in your ears, and provoke you to
discontent; your selves may hereafter confess that this advice was faithful.
Grudge not at the Army, though they may be a little burdensome: That handful
of men (know it) stands between you and oppression; had that bank been pulled
down, those waters which have lately overflowed some pieces of our Land, had
broke in upon you, and overborne you.

This address proceeds from my well-wishes; if prejudice will suffer you to
peruse it, you, and the whole Kingdom (to whom it will not be unseasonable) may
draw from it some useful conclusions, the God of union prosper it unto you,
and continue you firm to your first love, least you slide into a shameful and
miserable Apostasy, which ever doubles the crime in a Malefactor. Adieu.

A PARALLEL between the Proceedings of this present KING and PARLIAMENT.
. I. AMong the many causes which have cherished and heightened our late and
present distempers, there is none have been more powerful then the audacious
liberty, and careless permission of printed Pamphlets, which seeming
inconsiderable, have better familiarity with the vulgar, and being fraught with
reasons fit for their capacity, do not only confirm those malignant whom they
find so; but by their tart aspersions laid on the best Persons, and their bold
misinterpretations put upon the sincerest actions, corrupt and poison many
times the best and purest integrities; while they of the adverse Party laugh in
their sleeves to see so many good fames sullied, and so little opposition to be
made against them.

. II. Nor has the Parliament been awanting to take notice at several times of
this inconvenience; witness their many Votes and Orders, and appointing of
Committees to this purpose, which as yet have effected nothing: For which, some
have given these reasons: First, That no particular person of sufficient
abilities, armed with sufficient authority, and encouraged by a competent
Salary, has been deputed to this employment; but the business hanging on many
shoulders, has through carelessness of the Superiors, the treachery and
cunning of the Underlings (who are known to receive fees from the Hawkers and
Printers for their connivance) fallen to the ground. Another cause is given,
That the Mercuries and Hawkers (so they call the men and women that carry these
papers up and down) are grown into a kind of a Corporation, and finding the
sweet of it, will not be deterred by these empty threats of Bedlam and
Bridewell, for needy people are in a manner lawless. A third cause is
assigned, which indeed is the nearest from the truth, That a wrong course is
taken to endeavor to suppress Libels in the hands of these people, when they
ought to be originally suppressed at the Presses; which till it be done, they
take but the same course, as if a Physician should endeavor to remove an
internal fixed Disease, by the cutting off of some outward member.

. III. But the troth is this, and which till it be remedied, all attempts in
this kind will be vain: the permission of Bibles printed beyond Sea, and some
others of the most saleable Books to be commonly vended, has so discouraged
the mystery of Printing here, that many Printers are necessitated to
undertakings of this nature, though never so hazardous, so they bring them in
some little profit: and their Brethren knowing not how soon the case may be
their own, out of interest dissemble it. This once remedied, there would not a
Pamphlet peep out, but it would be track'd to its first rise, and discovered:
And I believe, this wholesome policy put in execution, would of it self prove
effectual, without that tyrannical passe-port of an Imprimatur; first spawned
by the Inquisition, fostered by the Bishops and their Trencher-chaplains, and
at last caught by the turbulent Presbyterians.

. IIII. I must add, as a branch of this cause, that although Printing be
decayed, Printers are increased, whereas the Presses were before of a set
number, which must needs infer, there is danger in the multitude of them;
whereas if they were limited as I said before, there might scarce be a Ballad
done, but it would be accounted for, and the State might be satisfied, if it
were injured by a piece, without need, to curb it by a License; which commonly
rather defaces good pieces (according to the humor of the Licenser) then
expunges bad ones. We shall not at this time insist any thing upon these
excellent advantages, and horrible inconveniences, which may proceed from the
good or bad managing of Printing, the wisdom of any State, though never so
weak will find it out. But to the purpose, if this be beside it.

. V. Among the many Pamphlets that have infected our Commonweal, two, in
respect of their continuance and audacious impudence, have not been of the
least note, Pragmaticus and Elencticus; the former for a watery and slight kind
of bitterness, seasoned for the most, with profaned sentences of holy writ,
whose abuse is all the ingenuity it can claim: The other (which occasioned this
present task) by a malicious ribauldry, and desperate reviling of what persons
it pleased, and upon what grounds he cared not, which being also followed with
a frontlesse assertion of whatsoever might advance the cause he undertook, has
made it self the companion of its friends, to see what a stout and daring
champion they had got, and the entertainment of many of his enemies, to see how
unjustly and frowardly he struck at them.

. VI. With these degrees has this sheet of paper, in despite of the obscurity
of its birth and Author, made it self the censor of most of the actions and
passages of the Kingdom; insomuch, that having in late weeks foulely fallen on
my Lord of Warwick, my Lord Wharton, Master Speaker, Master Soliciter, Master
Corbet, Master Bradshaw, Master Hall, Master Lilly, with others of less note
and quality; it struck in it its thirtieth sheet at the Parliament it self, and
with a rascally comparison, endeavored to make all the bitterness that could
be emptied against them, to serve as a foil to set of the King, whom it does
rather injure, by how much he lays to his charge those virtues, which either
are not found, or are awanting in him, and paints him with those colors, which
any body that is not biased, may see are adulterate, and belong not to him; so
that on the one side, his dispraises being scurrilously libellous, and not to
be believed, his encomions on the other side are merely petitionary, and not to
be granted by any one that has the least notice of the actions and carriage of
this King.

. VI. But because a general Answer is not enough to satisfy particular
instances, we will run over the Particulars, and see by what truth, nay
discretion, they can be made good: yet must we profess to retain all reverence
to the King's person, whom we do not in the least level at, further then what
may conduce to clear the understanding of this present comparison.

. VII. We shall only premise, that there is a great difference between the
carriage of a Government a long time settled, and rooted in the opinions of the
people, and one that is but new, and arises from a change: for men's
expectations being in the later case raised, and not meeting perhaps with
equal satisfaction, presently turn into disaffection, whereas in a settled
government, men's thoughts are at a stand; and though they meet with some
inconveniences, they are rather willing to suffer them, then run the hazard of
an insurrection. To add, that a Government of some standing, has commonly
observed and remedied those inconveniences, which a State of a lesser standing
cannot, as either being employed in other affairs, or else for the present not
willing to note them: Withal in the former case, the Revenue is settled and
certain, which is not so in the later, although there be much the more
occasion, which may cause some unusual levies, yet without the imputation of
tyranny.

. IX. So that were it true what the Pamphleteer says, that the people were
weary of the oppression and slavery, which (he says) they now groan under; it
might be rather their own inconsideracies then the mis-government of this
Parliament, whom yet (as being but men, and walking in slippery times) I
suppose no man is bound to justify in every particular: yet for setting up any
arbitrary or tyrannical Government, the best of them would as much loath the
thought of it, as the worst would fear to attempt it.

. X. But how do they oppose a gracious, etc. King? when all their endeavors
have hitherto been to draw him from those Counselors, which by the confession
of his own party, have been too prevalent with him: and had we any leisure to
make long reflections on the late war, it were no difficulty to demonstrate,
that the stubbornness and averseness of Him and his Party, drew it out to that
length, though the Pamphlet charges the People, that they embrace an unnatural
and bloody War.

. XI. The people are also charged to abandon all Order Ecclesiastical, as if
taking away of Bishops, whose gross enormities became the outcry of the whole
Nation, reduced us into an Anarchy, or the taking away of superstitious
Ceremonies (not only burdensome to tender consciences) innovated against Law,
brought profaneness upon us, and shook the frame of all divine Worship: And
whereas he says, that no government can suit with this Nation but Monarchy:
It Is granted, only we desire it may not be Muscovitish or Turkish; and we now
come to the Parallel.

. XII. We know (and the deadliest enemies he has have acknowledged) that his
Majesty conformeth himself unto the laws of Nature, which these Tyrants (at
their pleasure) trample on. This fellow either not understood or explained not
what he meant in that place by the laws of Nature; nor can we, till we be as
wise as he, make an answer to it: only if he understand it as it is in the
Schools, it is but a poor acknowledgment, every King having other Laws whereby
to govern. But why did he not instance wherein the Tyrants (as he calls them)
did trample on them; for by general criminations it is easy to overthrow the
best integrity.

. XIII. The King respects Religion, Justice and Faith, whereas they regard
neither God, Faith nor Law. For the King's Religion, we refer it to that power
who best knows it. For his Justice, whether all the acts of his reign fall
under that note or no, may be soon enquired. For his Faith (which we must
interpret to be keeping of promise) it is well enough known how contrary his
Declarations and Letters have been one to another. For the Parliaments
regarding of God, his mercies to them, so many and so continued, show them not
unsincere. For their regarding of Faith, tax them if thou can with any breach
of Promise. For their regard of Law, to what end have they fought so long? but
to rescue it from oppression; and how can they not regard that whereof they are
the makers? but indeed there is a height of malice in this expression; and
there can be no more said against the Devil himself.

. XIIII. The King refers all his actions to the good of the Commonwealth,
and safety of his Subjects; whereas the other respect nothing more then their
own particular profits, pleasure and revenge. If the King referred all his
actions, etc. he were an Angel and no Man: But this is a mere hyperbolicall
common place of flattery. For the other, etc. That that there may be such ayms
among some particulars, we wish we could deny; but for the general, it is an
imputation that a deadly enemy would hardly charge them withal.

. XV. The King always endeavored to enrich his Subjects; whereas these Tyrants
seek after nothing more, then by impoverishing of them, to increase their own
wealth. If the King had such desires to enrich his Subjects, how came those
unknown Taxes of Ship Money, Knighthood, Loan-money, etc. Not to note a kind of
covetousness in the King, unsuitable to so great a Prince; though to charge
the Parliament with such impoverishment, Prejudice it self can hardly do it,
although in particular persons, it were to be wished there were occasion of more
just vindication.

. XVI. The King accounts his own Goods to be the Goods of his people; they
reckon not only their goods, but even their bodies and their lives also their
own. This is mere presumption, as a particular insistance on both parties would
clear, in reflecting only on the intentions of either Party.

. XVII. The King severely revenged the public injuries done against the
Kingdom, and easily pardon the wrongs done to himself; these men most cruelly
revenge their own, and pardon what is done against others. For the King, the
Isle of Rhee business, with that of Rochel, is not forgotten: and how sensible
he is of particular injuries, they that know his disposition can best tell:
nay, it is affirmed by some of his own Party, that the letting fall of some
sharp speeches has caused not a few to appear against him (as for example, he
told Pembrook he was too long by the head, etc.) whereas all the Kingdom may
know how merciful the Parliament have been to them whom they overcome; and let
any indifferent man judge, whether such quarter would have been had, had the
other side prevailed; nay, whether they have not suffered by their too much
slacknesse.

. XVIII. The King willingly would forgive the offenses of other men, but is of
his own failings a severe Judge; whereas these bloody villains sharply revenge
even the least offenses of others, but unto themselves are most favorable.
This is in effect what was spoken of in the last Paragraph; yet has not the
King been noted as any such severe Judge of himself, but rather of a stiff
nature, why complies he not else with the Parliament, while they by their
several contrary Votes, show they are unwilling to stand to that long, which
they suppose not so convenient. And for their hatred of Pamphlets (as
Elencticus complains) let him speak if ever he knew one State in love with
them: The truth is, they connive at them too much.

. XIX. The King always endeavored to maintain his Subjects in Peace and
unity; whereas they strive still to set them at odds, and by that means to
ruin one another, and with the confiscation of their Land, Goods, enrich
themselves. If it be so, why did the King desert the Parliament, and never yet
return to it; and how much are they to blame when the frequent insurrections of
the other Party, have set the Kingdom in a flame.

. XX. The King advanced to the highest degree of honor the best and most
virtuous men; but these men promote the greatest thieves and villains, whom
they use as spunges to suck the wealth of the people. If the King advanced none
but the best men, how came such a contamination of the Nobility? the King
advanced many who since have adhered to the Commonwealth; either this
assertion is false, or the men are good still: did all at Court enter the
Temple of Honor through that of Virtue? you that remember those times, call
back your thoughts a little, etc. Are they all bad the Parliament employes? or
are they employed to that purpose? it cannot be denied, but that some have been
faithful to their Charges, and must pass to Posterity, with the character of
Honesty.

. XXI. The King frankly bestowed the greatest and most gainful Offices of the
State upon men of best deserts, who free from bribery and corruption, might
defend the people from all injury and oppression; whereas these Rebels set them
to sale to those that will give most for them, and by their robberies and
unreasonable exactions, keep the people under. Was bribery unknown at Court
(far be it from me to charge the person of the King) or were all men that were
advanced seraphicall? was there not several and horrid corruptions? else, why
were so many impeached and discharged of their Offices the very beginning of
the Parliament? But can you charge the people with setting to sale any one
Office, but rather disposed them into those hands who have been most active and
constant in the Cause of the Commonwealth, which now groans as little under
injustice as ever it did, say the adversary what he will.

. XXII. The King was ever ready to expose his Life to any hazard for the good
of his Subjects; they durst never stir their Arses in their defense, but
require it a duty to perish for them in their unjust quarrels. Instance us one
eminent hazard and adventure of the King; the most of them (we know) had
Military Commands and Offices, which they valiantly and faithfully executed
from the beginning of the War, till a particular Ordinance proclaimed them, and
ordered their services to Westminster.

. XXIII. The King (notwithstanding all the malice and venom of scandalous and
detracting tongues and pens) is still beloved and honored of his Subjects;
these envious tyrants hate them all, and are reciprocally of them hated. There
is no body that as a Subject does not honor and love the King, yea hate them
that any way unjustly asperse him; but if a malignant humor prevail in the
Kingdom against the two Houses, that may be the fault of the people themselves,
and not theirs; for if they hated the people, they had never done so much as
they have done, and suffered for them.

. XXIIII. The King in time of War had no other recourse but to his own loyal
Subjects; when they have no other War then against them. How came it then that
he had such assistances came over from Holland, and other places, to fight
against his Subjects? why has there been such solicitations of foreign
Princes? and why was there a peace made in Ireland and Rebels brought over?
while the Parliament held off their hands from any such engagements, and were
desirous (if it had been possible) not to have made use of the assistance of
their Brethren of Scotland, whose coming in notwithstanding brought those undue
aspersions upon them, of calling in foreign Force: but this was without reason
as I have made it good in sundry other places; which whosoever pleases may read.

. XXV. The King had neither Garrison nor Guards but those of his own household;
whereas they dare not show their brazen faces without Garrisons and Guards, and
Armies of the most dissolute and desperate Villains that the whole Kingdom
affords, to protect them in their tyranny, and to keep the poor Subject in a
continual slavery. What Garrisons or Army were needful for the King in time
of peace, when all the Kingdom was under his only beck, and all the Militia of
the Kingdom in hands of his own? when the Parliament were in a manner compelled
to take in what they had by the dint of the sword; which if they should lay
down (there being so many drawn every day about them) were mere folly and
stupidity in them: but that which gals them most, is the keeping up of the
Army, the next means under God of their safety, they being such as had before
got them the best Victories, yes, more then all their other Armies besides,
that so suddenly to disperse them in the midst of so much need they could not
have been excused from a breach of trust, which lies, upon them from the
Kingdom. But how desperate and dissolute villains are the Army? has it not
been confessed of them, that they kept as good order and civility as any have
been known in the last Wars? what outrages can they be taxed with at Whitehall?
or whether does the Country man cry more out of them then the Cavalierish Army?
but if you take desperate in such a sense, as to undergo any hazard or any
danger, when they are directed by their Commanders, it is granted they are
desperate, and that they have adventured as much as could be required from men
and Soldiers; and these sufferings has been requited with as many Victories.

. XXVI. The King lives securely in all quiet and tranquillity of mind, for they
confess weekly in their ordinary Pamphlets, he is merry and pleasant
(notwithstanding his close imprisonment, and most barbarous usage;) whilst
these traitors are possessed and troubled with careful and contrary thoughts,
still languishing in a perpetual horror and fear, and gnawed to pieces by the
worm of their bad consciences. If the King be in that quiet and tranquillity, he
may enjoy it, there is none envies it to him: But if you have no greater
authority for it then printed Pamphlets, we will not so easily believe it;
there is none will scripturize them no more then they will the ungodly
Pamphlets of your Party: yet let us know, what barbarours usage is that he is
under, or wherein he is unchristianly dealt with; Happly he may be a little
restrained, but that is only to prevent the access of bad Counsel to him,
and other inconveniences that might dog such a freedom: But wherein has the
Parliament dealt unmercifully with him, when their care and provision for him
is so well known? And how is the Parliament gnawed with fear and horror of a
bad conscience? Verily for confutation of this, it is enough to say it came from
Elencticus; for what other pen could inhumanely charge such desperation and
horror of conscience on so many select and worthy Patriots:

. XXVII. The King is assured of a most blessed and eternal life in heaven; the
other still expecting when they shall be swallowed up among the damned in hell.
There are not a few of the King's Party that deny any particular assurance can
be had of salvation, whether himself do or no, it is better known to him then
Elencticus, who it seems has been his Confessor, he is so well acquainted
with him. But by what inspiration had he it, that the Parliament expected to be
all damned; for first, many are damned whose consciences are so seared, that
they cannot be sensible of it; next, them that are terrified with damnation,
and do not endeavor to lay hold on God's mercy in Jesus Christ, offend in that
the most of all; so did Cain, when he said, his sin would not be forgiven;
thirdly, are there any such horrible sins to answer for? and fourthly, does
this impudent wretch know, but, if they were as base devils as ever were
incarnate, God might give them a time of mercy before they dye; I am ashamed to
insist on such basenesses of a Christian pen.

. XXVIII. The King has the immortal God Author of all his actions; they have
the Devil for president in all their consultations and councels. If God be so
the author of his actions, he would have showed some more visible mercies upon
him, and will do, if the others be so diabolical, as the Libell says they
are; for none must expect to prosper but the friends and servants of God.

. XXIX And because the misconceit of the Parliaments doings, and the small
satisfaction is to be had among the generality about the true ends and use of
Government, we shall for thy better satisfaction (O Christian Reader) set down
our thoughts concerning Government, and communicate them unto thee; in which
Discourse (setting aside the impertinencies commonly used in Controversies) we
shall observe this method: first, we shall consider the ends of Government:
secondly, the several Governments themselves: thirdly, the right that people
have to their Government: fourthly, how far we can perceive by Scripture light,
that God entrusts every people with the right of Government: lastly, we shall
say somewhat about change of Government, and upon what means and grounds it is
to be admitted. And in this performance we shall neither be negligent nor
slack, if we shall perceive this weak Discourse to be grateful unto thee; and
the eternal Wisdom be pleased to make our Labors as succesfull as they are
honest.

The End

