THE PRESENTMENT OF THE Grand JURY OF BRISTOL At the General SESSIONS of the
PEACE, etc. Holden there, begun March 13. 1682.
To the Right Worshipful, Thomas Eston, Esquire Mayor; The Right Worshipful Sir
John Churchhill, Knight, Recorder: And the Right Worshipful, and Worshipful,
the Court of Aldermen, His Majesty's Justices of the Peace now Assembled in the
General Sessions of the Peace, Court of Oyer and Terminer, and General
Jail-delivery holden for this City, and County of the same City, begun the
13th. day of March, in the Five and Thirtieth Year of His Majesty's Reign,
Annoque Dom. 1682. The Humble Presentment of the Grand Inquest.
WE, Civ. Bristol.
the Grand Jurors for the Body of this City, and County of the same, having
duly Considered the Obligation of our Oath, the Particulars of our Charge, the
Nature of our Duty, and the Circumstances of this City, Have pursuant thereunto
laid before this Court several Bills of Indictment of great and heinous
Offenses, to which, as to so many Grievances, having found your ready
Concurrence for their redress, we can do no less in point of Gratitude than
apply our selves unto your Worships, Humbly to acknowledge the great Happiness
we do enjoy under your Care and constant Attendance on the arduous Affairs of
distributive Justice, whereby we receive those Benefits of the Law which were
intended for us in their first Ordination.

As for this City in relation to Unlawful Assemblies and Seditious
Conventicles, so much lately frequented within the same by Men who thought
their Numbers of Offenders, and Confidence in Offending, should have tired out
all Prosecution, and have carried all before them; We must needs say, it is
owing to the Vigilance and Industry of the Magistrates that they are now
Suppressed; for that by putting the Laws in due Execution, they have been
taught, even by feeling Arguments, that the best way for their Ringleaders
(those Masters of Mis-Rule) is to March off; and the best way for their
Followers is to Retract and Conform. By which they have told the World, That
their great Pretense, wherewith they have so long Cheated others and one
another [That Matter of Religion and Conscience was the Cause of their
Separation] is nothing else but a false Suggestion, and thereby have for ever
baffled their Plea of that Argument, whereby they endeavored to baffle Justice
it self, and dared the Magistrate to give them Opposition; so that now the
business of the Magistrate is rendered much more easy for their future
Suppression, He having only to do with them in the Plea of Obstinacy, the only
surviving Argument for Nonconformity.

We shall only in this particular make bold to repeat a short Sentence out of
the Lord Keepers Speech to Sergeant Saunders, at his being made Lord Chief
Justice: The Temper of this present Age requires your Severity in Cases of
Sedition; it was lately grown to that height of Insolence, and managed with
that Malice, that it was thought very near breaking out into open Force, to the
danger of the Kingdom. But by the Wise Conduct of His Majesty, with the
Blessing of God, it was suffered to baffle it self by its own (...) vagancy.
You may expect it should now be Cr^^^y, the refore you must be the ^^^e Caref^^
to stop the beginning of so dangerous and quick spreading a Poison, and to
Suppress (...) the Materials of Sedition: A great means toward which will be to
cut off all hopes it may have of Countenance in the Courts of Justice.

And for as much as our late Recorder, Sir Robert Atkins, being Prosecuted for
several Miscarriages in the Execution of his Office, has been forced to
surrender the same, We Present our Hearty Thanks to the Right Worshipful, the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council for their Prudent Management of that
Affair, and more especially for their most Happy Choice of so Worthy, so
Learned, and so Loyal a Person to succeed in his room, and be our present
Recorder, whose Acceptance of the said Office and Service of this City we
Thankfully Commemorate, and whose Appearance on the Bench in the Execution of
the same we most Heartily Congratulate.

And whereas it has pleased our Sovereign Lord the King to grant a Writ of
(...) Warranto to be issued out against the Charter of this City, and required
^n short time an Answer thereunto: We do therefore, as our Duty in this
station, Humbly Recommend the same to your Worships, desiring that a timely and
Effectual Care may be taken in that so Considerable an Affair in such manner as
may best consist with the Preservation of the good Esteem and high Respect His
Majesty has been Graciously pleased so frequently to express toward this
City. And a continued Manifestation of that Dutifulness and Loyalty which we
have so often professed, and do ever intend to bear toward His Most Sacred
Majesty, and which may most directly tend to the future Good and Advantage of
this City, and the Ancient Privileges of the same.

We Present, That there having been several Sums of Money Levied by Distresses
on the Goods of several Persons Convicted of being at Unlawful Assemblies and
Seditious Conventicles, which (as we are Informed) remain in several Men's Hands
undisposed of, whereby the Prosecution of Offenders has been delayed, and His
Majesty's Service in that Respect obstructed. We do therefore Humbly desire
that your Worships will be pleased to cause the said Moneys to be brought into
Court, and distributed according as the Law has directed, and that Care may be
taken to the same purpose for the future, that so the Execution of the Laws may
be encouraged, and the Proceedings of this City Vindicated in so doing.

We Present John Dowly, Robert Mansel, John Walden, John Brainton, Michael
Pindar, and others, for that in January and February last past they opened
their Shops, exposed Goods to Sale, and so continued to hold the Fair, called
St. Paul's Fair, in Temple Parish within this City, longer than the time
limited in the Charter for holding the said Fair, to the manifest Detriment of
the Privileges and Liberties of this City, and the Free Burgesses thereof.

And since the welfare of this City does very much consist in the Advantages we
receive by the River, which our Ancestors always studied to secure from all
Obstructions and Damages. We therefore desire your Worships to continue the
Preservation of the said River; And to that End, either to choose a Committee
for inspecting the same, and from time to time to cause the Offenders in this
point to be brought before your Worships, to be proceeded against as the Laws
direct, or to take such other Effectual Course therein, as to your Worships
shall seem most fit and expedient.

We Conclude with our Prayers that God will Bless this City with Prosperity,
and the Happy Effects we have reason to promise our selves under your Worships
good Management of the Government thereof. This Kingdom with Peace, and the
Kings Majesty with Health and length of Days, That he may out live the Malice
of his Enemies. That no Conspiracies formed against him may prosper. That his
Enemies may be clothed with Confusion, and that on his Head the Crown may
Flourish. Amen. God Save the KING.
LONDON: Printed by H. Hills, Jun. for Charles Allin, Bookseller in Bristol:
And Published by Ran. Tailor, near Stationers Hall. 1683.


