Eye Salve for England: OR, The Grand TRAPPAN Detected, In a plain and faithful
NARRATIVE of the horrid and unheard of Designs of some Justices and
Deputy Lieutenants in Lancashire, treacherously to ensnare the Lives and
Estates of many Persons of Quality in that County, as also in the Counties of
York and Chester.

By EVAN PRICE, who suffered long and grievous Imprisonment there, for not
complying with them to carry on their wicked and pernicious Designs.

Psalm. 53.8. Let destruction come upon him unawares, and let his net that he
has hid, catch himself: into that very destruction let him fall.

Verse. 20. For they speak not peace, but they devise deceitful matters against
them that are quiet in the Land. See Psalm. 31.23. and 38.12. and 50.19. and
83.1, 2, 3.

Exodus 8.29. -- But let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more.

Deuteronomy. 27.25. Cursed be he that takes reward to slay an Innocent person: and
all the People shall say, Amen.

Ezekiel. 22.6. Behold the Princes of Israel, every one were in thee to their
power to shed blood.

Ver. 9. In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood.

Mat. 10.26. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed: nor hid,
that shall not come abroad.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1667.

To the READER.
MAny are the Volumns recorded of the craft, cruelty, malice and rage of the
old Serpent the Devil and Satan, besides what is recorded in the Scriptures of
Truth, against the Law of God, and the Gospel and Kingdom of the Lord Jesus,
and his People walking in the profession of the same; but that this Generation
exceeds all in wickedness that ever went before it in this Nation, needs no
proof to such as observe good and evil acted therein, and that Satan's last
shift is to show himself on the stage of the world in the likeness of an Angel
of light, and his ministers as the Ministers of Righteousness, is evident from
the holy Scriptures, and that more especially immediately before his utter
ruin, and downfall of his kingdom. How far he has thus appeared, let them who
are endued with wisdom from above judge, but to me his rage seems to be such,
that doubless himself knows his time is but short, and that he sees the Lord
Jesus in a meek manner mustering up his Host, and ready to go forth in the van
of them, to take to himself his great Power and Reign, not only in the midst
of, but also over his and their Enemies, in his Saints, for the execution of
his Fathers Will.

And now as an additional discovery of the Devil and his instruments, I think
my self obliged every way, in duty to God, my King and Country, to present thee
here with a brief Narrative, acted by some in the name, and under pretense of
Authority, of as monstrous wickedness as ever was brought to public view;
which when thou have read, if thy conscience be not wholly blinded and seared
up, thou thy self wilt say it surpasses the deeds of the Wicked in former
ages, especially when thou see the Wolves, clothed in a Lamb-like dress,
thirsting after the blood of the Innocent. Had it been done by Pagans or
Atheists, void of any knowledge or fear of God, or had not heard of Heaven and
Hell, and of giving account for the deeds done in the flesh, and of God's
dreadful judgments against the shedders of innocent blood, then it had been no
such wonder; though I never read that such went about in the name of Authority
to hire false witnesses to cut off so many men at once (as it were) that feared
the Lord, as it seems was the design of the men that set on foot the actions,
made manifest in the following Relation; which is nothing but what I have
already declared in open Court, as also in my Case given to Judge Ransford,
March 1. 1665. earnestly desiring it might be by him delivered to the King.
Many remarkable passages there are omitted in the Narrative; one thing worthy
noting is, That Mr. Mosely was put into an Office of trust and profit, though
he brought nothing of his Design to perfection: so was Major Greathead, that
was the chiefest man in drawing forth some 30 persons to rise with him in arms
in the Yorkshire pretended plot; whereby many desolate widows and fatherless
were made, and he received a great sum of money for his pains: and Joseph
Crowther, hired to trappan men, came to Manchester, and went in a seeming
desolate condition, and Saint-like shape and language, with sighing and weeping
to some honest men, to seek succor, as a person escap^ng the hands of his
enemies, and guilty in that Yorkshire-fact; and notwithstanding they made
discovery of him, yet he was let go, and two of them bound over to the
Sessions, thence to the Assizes, where they were set free by Judge Turner and
Judge Twisden: this man also has a beneficial Office conferred on him since.

Reader, if thou doubtest the truth of what I say, make but enquiry among any
knowing and impartial persons inhabiting the places herein named, and thou
may easily be confirmed, and further informed than I am willing here to
relate; nor had this come forth by me, but that I was restless night and day
when I saw no course was taken in all this time to stop this spirit of
wickedness, but that it spreads through the Nation and threatens its ruin; at
last I resolved to give it in writing to the King's own hand, but finding how
difficult it was for me to get to him, I got it to the Press, hoping by some
good providence it may be brought to him by some other hands that may make it
more acceptable, that some speedy course might be taken to stop the further
spreading of these pernicious practices by such wicked spirits; at least such
as are in Authority to improve the opportunity, not only to show their dislike
of, but also correct them: otherwise, what shall we look for, but that the
great God of Heaven, who abhors the bloodthirsty person, and has said the
wicked shall be cut off from the Earth, will pour forth the viols of his wrath,
and sweep away the refuge of lies.

I do not (God is my witness) divulge my Enemies wickedness out of any revenge
against their persons, but should be as ready to serve them, as they were to
destroy me, but rather that they would repent, and others be warned to do no
more so wickedly; but chiefly, that such as are peaceable in the Land might
depend only upon the Lord, and beware of the Fowlers snare, and not move by any
pretenses of men, to seek to deliver themselves by an arm of flesh, but cry
mightily to God night and day, until the Spirit from on high be poured down
upon them, and till the Lord arise to go before them. Also I desire Jehovah may
have the praise that is due to him from me among his people, that he should
assist, strengthen and deliver such a silly creature as I am, in the midst, and
from the hands of such potent mighty politic persons, notwithstanding their
flattery and threats, smiles and frowns to overcome me. I likewise desire the
prayers of all Saints (that may hear hereof) to the Lord, that he would
vouchsafe me his grace, still to stand fast and go through whatsoever he shall
call me to do or suffer for his Name sake. Now committing my self to the
protection of Isreal's Preserver, (and this Intelligence, to Englands Watchmen)
waiting for Sions Redemption, at whose breasts I suck consolation, to which
nourishment (if thou have it not) I desire thy conversion, who (in my own
esteem) am the worst of her Off spring.

E. P.

The NARRATIVE.
THat upon the 22d of February 1663, Mr. Nich. Mosely, one of the Justices of
Peace for the County of Lancaster, My fir^^ seisur^ (...) Mr M^^ at Ma^cheste^
came to me, Evan Price, as I was at work with my Master, Roger Mareland,
Clothworker in Manchester; and desired me to go and drink my mornings-draught
at Mr. Johnsons the Kings-head-Tavern: where, after some talk with me alone, he
told me, that he came to me by Authority from the King; and that if I would
take the counsel to do the King a piece of service, it was now in his power to
make me whilst he lived; which was in brief, to be a Witness, and swear against
such men, as were to him discovered to be in a Plot against the King; and for
which I should have as a reward, either a thousand pounds in money Thy m^ney
peri^^ with the Acts 8.
, or the tenth part of such men's Estates as I should evidence against; and that
further Evidence would be procured to join with me herein. Which motion I
utterly rejected, hating (as I told him) to take Bribes to shed Blood.
Whereupon his countenance changed, and being very wrathful, he threatened with
many protestations, that he would hang me if I so withstood his Motion and
Authority; and thereupon laid hands upon me, searching my pockets, and sent for
a Constable, The Constables name is Joh. Br^bands.
charging him to bring me to Justice Lightbound's house, where they examined me
about a pretended Plot; but finding nothing, charged the Constable to secure me
that night in the Dungeon, and bring me the next day to Berry before the
Deputy Lieutenants; sending for my Master with whom I wrought, to find
something against me; but he cleared me upon his Oath, that I had kept
constantly to my work with him for diverse months before.

Being brought the next day to Berry, before the Deputy Lieutenants, and
examined four several times before them, no Accuser appearing against me, all
departing away but Sir Robert Bradshaw, Mr. Holl and Mr. Mosely, they made my
Mittimus, and sent me to Lancaster Goal, without Bail or Mainprize.

Being at Lancaster, Mr. Mosely, at the Assizes following, came to me several
times with his former temptations, enlarging his proffers, and withal told me
that I should find the Judges themselves would confirm the same to me;
thereupon forthwith bringing me to the Judges in their Chamber, viz. Judge
Turner and Twisden, who told me they had received several Letters and Papers,
which Mr. Mosely (as they said) had given them, mentioning a Combination of
five thousand persons (of the Independants, Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and
Fifth-Monarchy-men) in Lancashire and Cheshire, to make Insurrection against
the King and his Government, and the Names of forty or fifty of the principal
Contrivers thereof, against whom my evidence was required, the Judges naming
most of them to me, and amongst the rest the Lord Delamere as chief, assuring
me that what Mr. Mosely had promised should be made good, if I would serve the
King therein as desired; which I still refusing, was returned to Prison again,
and continued there above a twelvemonth after. The Letters and Papers
abovementioned, by the Judges direction, were put into the hands of Justice
Hartly to be transcribed, which he did at the Ship-Tavern in Lancaster that
Assize, and so Copies thereof were spread abroad into many hands in both
Counties, the extract of which Letters, and the whole of the
Trappanning-Declaration, as Providence brought to hand, take as follows.

The first Letter is directed from Wakefield by an unknown hand, no name
thereto, dated Febr. 6. 1663. and therein says, That though Cheshire and
Lancashire (like Pilate) would wash their hands in innocence from the late
Plot, yet it may be found otherwise: for as they were guilty first against his
Father in that Rebellion, so may they be in the last, that now is our Sovereign
Lord and King: for it may not be doubted but the Presbyterians, Independants
and Anabaptists in those two Counties, to the number of five thousand, were
levened with the Fifth-Monarchy Spirit, and about Manchester, Warrington and
Stopford, five hundred. The chiefest Agents and Trustees in both Counties (as
his first Letter mentions) were these, viz. the Lord Delamere, Mr. Eaton his
Chaplain, Colonel Duckenfield, Col. Croxon, Col. Venables, Major Traverse,
Lieut. Smith, Mr. John Crew of Vtkinton, Mr. Henry Bradshaw, and Mr. Jones of
Marpool, the late Mr. Sam. Eaton, Mr. Bruton, James Fitton, and Hugh Gandy;
these fourteen for Cheshire were the chief Engagers and Agents for the rest
with purse and persons to their power. And in Lancashire nineteen, viz. Col.
Birch, Col. West, Col. Sawrey, the late Major Wiggan, Major Ridg, Major Porter,
Major Edge, Mr. Tho. Birch, Mr. Edw. Gathorn, Mr. Angier, Mr. Newcomb, Mr.
Harrison, Mr. Jones, Mr. Robert Birch, Mr. Yates, (all six old pretended
Preachers) Mr. Ditchfield, Mr. Greenwood an Apothecary in Lancashire, Mr.
Jolly, and Sergeant William Booth. These were all that were named in the first
Letter, save one Evan Price that was a Messenger between them, to carry Letters
and Intelligence, against whom the Informer would appear at the Assizes, if the
said Evan, being secured, did refuse to discover the forenamed persons: but if
the said Evan would be drawn by any reward to accuse such men, then give and
grant him the tenth part of each man's estate that he should so accuse; but if
he would not, then threaten and fright him to it.

The second Letter was dated at Lancaster, without name, with some reasons why
yet he would not be known to him, confirming the first, and adding the Names
following, viz. In Cheshire, William Barret, Thomas Partington, Major Bonnell,
Lieut. Bancraft, and William Brown. In Lancashire, Major Robinson, Capt. James
Howorth near Charley, Mr. Sharpless, Sir Rich. Houghton of Houghton Tower, and
Dr. Fife made privy to it, but unwilling to engage in action; but the Lady
Sarah (Mr. Eatons chief Disciple) did engage to supply with Moneys: Mr.
Harrison of the File-Country, Mr. Howbrook Shopkeeper in Manchester. And
moreover, that the Phanaticks in Yorkshire were grown more numerous and
unanimous in their designs and resolutions, to avenge their Brethrens blood, or
be hanged after them: many who formerly dissented, now complied. And that it
required diligence in him, and all his Majesty's faithful Subjects, to stir
themselves to prevent the danger. And that he knew no way better to get a
discovery of them both in Lancashire and Cheshire, than to labor with the said
Evan Price, who being poor, might by a good reward be brought to discover
these, and more, having been so employed amongst them; which if he would, then
get the Judges to assure him of pardon, and any reward he would desire. If by
this means they prevailed not, then get some trusty friend that could act his
part with a Phanaticks, tongue, to go to him as from Capt. Hogsons Wife, Mr.
Marsdens Wife, his Brother Gamaliel, and David Lombies Wife, and Mr. Roots
Wife, and Joshua Bailey and his Wife, with description of the place of their
habitation; and in case they could not get one that knew them and the place of
their abode, with certain tokens from them, then to condole and lament his
condition, and persuade him to endure, and so get what he could from him that
way; then leave this following Declaration with him, and presently seize him
therewith, and so procure him to make a discovery to save his own neck. The
Declaration, word for word, was as follows.

A Door of Hope opened in the Valley of Achor, ^^e Title
for the Mourners of Sion out of the North; sent abroad to revive the Prisoners
of Hope, and awaken the dead Witnesses of the Lamb, to prepare themselves to
meet him in his Remnant on Mount Sion, in judgment against the Mount of Esau
and mystical Babylon, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth.
Whereas several thousands of us, (...) Pre^^^e.
poor low worms, and despised servants of our Lord King JESUS, after earnest
seeking of the face of our God by prayer, supplications and conferences,
together with the Word and Prophecies of the Scripture, as we were able (in an
obscure manner) to understand the Lord's mind, and our own duties, especially
the Work of our Day and Generation; we are by inward compulsion of the Spirit
of God (we trust) carried on to declare and make known our hearts (so far as at
present we are able) to the Lords people, and all others in the three Nations
that love the Name of God, Truth, Peace, their own posterity, and the welfare
of their Country.

That we are deeply affected with, ^ounds
and incensed at the daily Blasphemies which we hear against the Name of God,
his Son, Gospel, Tabernacle, and those who worship therein.

At the most horrible-wickedness (unheard of) openly committed in the Land, and
countenanced by those in Authority (if not tolerated by Law) yea much of it
openly in Stage Plays acted; besides the common sins of Adultery, Drunkenness,
Swearing, Stealing, and what not.

At the common Superstitious and Idolatrous ways of Worship set up in the
Nations, with compulsion of the freeborn Natives to compliance therewith; and
the sad Sufferings of such, as for Conscience Sake toward God cannot, by
Imprisonments, Excommunications, Confiscations of Goods, and Banishment from
Countries and Relations.

At the loud cries, not only of the Saints in most Prisons of the Nation, but
also of the Innocent Blood of our dear Christian Brethren and natural Friends,
Neighbors and Relations, unjustly taken away under pretense of Plots and
Treasons (like Naboth) ensnared by the like trappanning-spirit, as Jezebel
used; so that these* as the Souls under the Altar, do cry for vengeance in our
ears to revenge their blood, that the violence done to their flesh may be upon
Babylon.

At the lamentable cries of the Poor of the Land for want of Employment,
through the decay of Trading, by means of Excise, Customs, Monthly-Taxes,
Poll-money, Chimney-money, Gift-money, and Subsidy-money; all which is laid out
in abundance, but nothing brought in; as if the curse which the Prophet speaks
of were upon it, or 'twere put into bags with holes, Hag. 1.6. Mal. 2.2.

6. The swarming-in of Jesuits, Priests, and outlandish Papists, to infect the
minds of our Neighbors, and in time to cut our throats (if the Lord in mercy
do not timely prevent them) so invading our Country with such Idolatry as cost
the Nation so much Blood and Treasure to extirpate; and stopping the mouths of
(almost all) godly Protestant able Ministers, especially such as cannot in
conscience comply with the Popes Canons in our Episcopal Devotions, thereby
making way for Antichrist, the Pope ( if not at last to bring in the Turks upon
us) yet to bring us back into Romes Jurisdiction, there to meet him, and mock
the Lord Jesus that gave himself for us.

And now though we cannot say that we are sufficiently sensible and humbled for
our own sins, which made way for these abominations, yet in measure we desire
to take shame O that there w^^ such an^ heart in them, and Deuteronomy 5, 29,
to our selves, especially such of us as have defiled our garments in choosing
of us new gods, by being instrumental to bring these things to pass by our
backslidings and revolts from the Lord, to help the wicked and ungodly, as
Jehosaphat did Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and weaken the hands of our godly Brethren,
who in the wisdom of the Spirit foresaw the event, and gave us warning betimes;
but now we desire no longer to abound in sinful compliance, as to stand by and
behold our Brethren carried captives, left we our selves be the first that may
justly follow after, Obad. 10.11. But we beg the Lord to abound in pardoning
grace, and give us hearts to manifest repentance by our returns to, and zeal
for the Lord; and to help the Poor and Needy against the Mighty; and not
delight our selves in our own fullness and their miseries any longer, but quit
our selves like men, seeing there is no remedy but death and destruction
threatened, or at least to live in a worse condition than slavery, for such as
desire to live morally in the Nation, much more godly in Christ Jesus. And we
being taught by Grace and Nature, to use all lawful means to defend our Lives,
Liberties, Relations and Estates; also satisfied from the Word of God that the
use of Temporal Weapons of War is a lawful means of God's own institution in
its time, and that by the use thereof in the hands of Saints; as one means, the
Kingdoms of this world must fall, before they become the Kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ; and having seen the Lord own them so evidently already, We
declare our selves of a ready mind (when the Lord shall form and call us out
thereby) to hazard our lives, and all that is or may be dear or near unto us,
for the reviving of the Good Old Cause. And though we be persuaded we need not
use Arguments to our Brethren (who are called, chosen and faithful) in the
Nation for assistance herein, for we know they love not their lives unto the
death, but will follow the Lamb through the greatest difficulties; Yet to our
civil Neighbors and dear Countrymen, that would rather dye like Men, than live
worse than Slaves in their own native Land, as many do who want food and
raiment (which Slaves have in strange Lands) We say, Break your Plowshares into
Swords, Joel 3.10. and fight for your Lives, your Wives, Children and Houses,
Neh. 4.11, 12. and come forth to help the Lord against the mighty with us; who
for satisfaction to all do declare, ^^ter.
That we thus are resolved, and shall,

labor to remove the aforesaid Grievances.

press after Purity of Life, Doctrine, and Reformation of Church Discipline
according to the Word of God, and the example of best reformed Churches, as
some of us long since have entered, and as the rest of (...) now enter into a
solemn League and Covenant to pursue.

to maintain, uphold and defend both Magistracy and Ministry, for perfecting
the foresaid Work of Reformation, whether Monarchical or Commonwealth.

that we shall secure the Lives and Estates of all that oppose us not herein,
as our own; and that as well those who shall be passive as active herein, to
accomplish the aforesaid good ends.

void of a spirit of revenge for any wrong done to us; nor seek we the blood of
any, but such as in an hostile way stand to oppose us, and such as are guilty
of innocent blood in the Land; nor shall any other damage come by us to those
who have been our greatest persecutors, provided they manifest due and timely
repentance.

That having obtained our ends in these Islands, we desire not to rest or sit
still, but be (till we die) acting for the destruction of Gog and Magog, Pope
and Turk, with all their adherents; preparing for Christ's Kingdom to be set up
at his coming, by magnifying him as King and Law giver of Saints and Nations;
the conversion of the Jews, with the fullness of the Gentiles, which we pray God
for aid and assistanc^ in: and let all that love the Lord Jesus Christ say,
Amen. Even so, com^ quickly, Rev. 22.20. And they heard a great Voice from
Heaven saying* Come up hither, Rev. 11.12. And they heard a great Voice from
Heaven saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. ver. 15.

That about a fortnight after the Assizes Mr. Spencer, the then present
High Sheriff, came to the Goalers house and sent for me from the Prison
assuring me of the reward Mr. Mosely and the Judges had promised me, viz. a
thousand pound in money, or the tenth part of their estates against whom I
should swear. And in further confirmation thereof, showed me two Letters, one
from the Duke of Albemarle, the other from Sir Henry Bennet, whose Names he
showed me, and my own Name also mentioned in the said Letters (telling me
withal that the Lord Delamere and Sir Rich. Horton were in the List.) But when
he saw Rewards and Promises would not work with me, he sorely threatened me with
Death, which (he said) would certainly befall me.

Many forged and indirect ways were used to take away my Life (at least my
Ears) in revenge: For when Mr. Mosely saw all other ways fail, the better to
uphold his own credit, would at last (transcribing those two Letters he gave to
the Judges, like my hand, having got some Letters of mine) persuade the
Deputy Lieutenants and others to whom he showed them, that I was the Writer and
Forger of those Letters, and so would have fathered the villainy upon me; but
being compared with my handwriting, cleared my innocence the more to many that
before suspected me.

Also there was one Enoch Eller of Manchester, a Barber, who by Justice Mosely
was procured to swear with me (had I undertaken it) against any of the persons
designed for destruction, as himself confessed; who had also sworn against me,
but God prevented him by detecting the like villainous contrivance and perjury
against eight innocent persons, who by Mr. Mosely's instigation he swore
against: but was convicted of his Perjury before Judge Turner the Summer
Assizes 1664. being constrained to flee the Country to save his ears.

These my Sufferings and the grounds thereof being made public, and coming to
the ears of some principally designed against; the Lord Delamere sent
particularly to receive information of the truth thereof from me, which I did
give him under my hand and seal, attested before Justice Porter and transcribed
by his Clerk; and particularly of the proceedings aforesaid with Mr. Mosely the
Deputy Lieutenants and the Judges, and of their naming him to me in the chamber
in particular amongst the rest that were designed against. Which Information
(as I was informed) the Lord Delamere transferred, with a Complaint, to London;
And that the return he had from thence thereupon was to this purpose, viz. That
the Judges denied they either mentioned, or so much as heard his Name mentioned
at that time, or that ever they saw his Name in any List in relation to this
business. Thereupon the Lord Delamere, and others concerned in the Report,
demanded my further Evidence, seeing the Judges denied it. But not being
otherwise able to make out what was spoken by them to me in private before
Justice Mosely, I was threatened of all sides, both by the Judges and others, to
be set upon the Pillory: which probably had befaln me, had not God by his
providence brought it to light by Mr. Mosely's own confession to Dr. Fife, at
Mr. Greens a Tavern in Manchester, four o^ five persons being present, who did
there acknowledge to them that the Lord Delamere was named to me by the Judges
in their chamber.

This further confirmation coming to the Lord Delamere, he was pleased, the
better to vindicate himself, and to detect such vile practices, to enter his
Action in some of the Courts of Justice against Mr. Mosely, bu^ (as I was
informed) had his proceedings stopped by Letters from London Mr. Mosely being
enjoined to make his Submission and ask him forgiveness: Thereupon the Lord
Delamere enjoined Justice Mosely to set m^ free, which he did accordingly by
his Agents, Justice Har^ly and Mr. Haward, before Judge Twisden in his chamber
the Lent Assizes 64. following*

But afterward, Aug. 65. Sir Roger Bradshaw, one of my former malicious
adversaries, meeting me near Wiggen, stayed me, and told me he would send me to
Goal; thereupon, without any cause showed, took me to an Alehouse and commanded
six or seven of his men to strip me, under pretense of searching me for
Letters, though before in his presence I opened my clothes, emptied and turned
my pockets; his said men used me very barbarously, and robbed me of about 20 s.
and though they could find nothing they pretended to seek for, yet did Sir
Roger detain me there as (...) Prisoner about 14 days, without any legal
proceeding by Examination Warrant or Mittimus, etc. After Sir Roger, with Mr.
Holt, tendered the Oath of Allegiance to me; and upon the refusing thereof, sent
me to the Common-Goal at Lancaster, where I was kept in most cruel sort for
several months, lying in a cold open Room all Winter long, and four Lock^
turned upon me, neither could I by any means procure a place to lie dry in.
Hereupon on the 16th of March 65. I drew up a Narrative of my former
Sufferings, and the grounds of them, by Mr. Mosely's means; then my latter by
Sir Roger Bradshaws cruel and barbarous usage, with a Petition to Judge
Ransford, the then Judge of the Assizes, beseeching him to tende^ the same to
the King, so eminently concerned therein, which was read to the Judge, and the
principal heads confirmed by some persons of quality (as I was told) which the
Judge gave to Sir Roger, to make his Exception^ against either me or it; which
though I after urged him to in open Cour^ (where in the face of the Country I
laid open their wicked carriages) he could not do, Only (he said) I had refused
to take the Oath, and that Mr. Mosely (whom he set forth to be a very worthy
Gentleman) was for the present absent, whom I had greatly abused in my
Narrative; And therefore desired I might be bound over to the next Assizes to
answer Mr. Mosely for the injury I had done him; which was done accordingly,
and I continued Prisoner til the next Assizes, when with much ado I procured
liberty to appear in the Court by a Petition to Judge Turner, Mr. Mosely being
present, making no reply at all: hereupon the Judge ordered me to be set at
liberty. Thus was the snare broken and I escaped.

THE END

