The Present State OF ALGEIR: BEING A Faithful and True Account Of the most
Considerable OCCURRENCES That happened in that Place, during the lying of the
FRENCH FLEET before it.
In a Letter from a Gentleman in Algier, to his Friend in London.
Worthy Sir,
I Hope mine of the 6th, 11th, and 13th of July are safe Arrived to your hands;
in Answer of your several then Received, to which please to refer your self,
since none of yours appear; Having some extraordinary Advice of News to impart
to you, is the Occasion of this Trouble, which I shall be glad may prove
grateful unto you.

On the 2d. past Arrived the Bristol and Sapphire Friggots, from Leghorn, (at
the same time lying here about 50 Sail of French Frigates, Galleys and
Attendants) one of our Boats being sent ashore, was not Admitted, but a Boat
from hence sent to tell them that they should not come ashore because the
French Fleet lay before the Port, and withal, Orders given that the Consul
should not be Admitted to go out of the Gates; but before the Order Arrived the
Mould-gate, he happened to Run down, and coming to the head of the Mould beckned
to the Boat which was then Rowing off again, but knowing him, Returned, and
when was within call he told them they should be gone and stand upon their
Guard, for he was a Prisoner; the Lieutenant of one of the Ships being in one
of the Boats, asked him whether he had any thing more to say, he Answered, No;
whereupon he went a board, and the Ships stood off to Sea, the next day stood
in again and sent both their boats in, but the Governor prevented their coming
a shore by ordering three Guns to be fired at them, which was accordingly done,
though at a distance, upon which they Returned aboard and the Ships went to
Sea. The boat being the first day Refused coming a shore, the Consul, went to
the Kings House Requesting that if they would not suffer him to go a board
alone, that they would send two or three Renegadoes with him, that could
understand what he said, to avoid the suspicion of his giving any Advice to the
French, but was denied; and after being demanded the Reason of his calling so
to the Boat, he, answered them briskly, and being threatened what damage happened
thereon should fall on his head, told them he would rather die then one poor
English man should be brought in a Slave here, through his holding his Peace.
The Reason of the above Disturbance (we know) was occasioned by our Governor
Rabba Hassan his coming out of the Camp disgusted that the Peace with the
English should have been made in his absence, and that he had not the Honor of
doing it himself; though his pretense to the People was only that if he had
been here he would have done it much more to their Advantage, adding withal,
that the Doors of the Kings house were shut, and that it was done without the
Advice and Consent of the Soldiery, the meanest whereof ought to have had his
Vote in the doing of it, insinuating himself thereby into their Favor (which
is his Safeguard) and at once under the Pretense of propogating and promoting
the Public Interest, and maintaining their Privileges, brings his designs
about, by such indirect means promoting many times his own private Intrest, and
at the same time establishing himself in the Favor, and good Opinion of the
People.

On the 3d. past the French Galleys rowed the Ships in toward the Mould, the
Admiral having two Galleys a head we were in great Expectation of some Action,
but came all in the Evening to an Anchor again.

On the 5th. the Galleys went away; on the 7th the Ships made all Sail, some
within shot of the Mould, were Saluted by these People with a great many Shot.

On the 11th Ditto a Ketch played some Bombs upon the Mould, all of them
falling short. On the 20th about nine a Clock at Night, the Ketches came near
into the Mould, and continued firing Bombs till it was almost day, these People
Returning Guns without ceasing, which I suppose were near 1000. The Bombs the
French fired were above 100. which broke down 44 houses, and killed many
People: Please by the way to Note, that the French have five Ketches with Bombs.

On the 24th Ditto about eight a Clock at night appeared a blazing Star in the
N. W. Ditto, a little after the French began to play with their Bombs upon the
Town, when these People sent out a Gally to take one of the Ketches, but was
Shamefully beaten off and forced to return with the loss of some Christians and
Turks. This night were beaten down about six houses, and killed about 35 or 40
Persons; These People extremely cast down, seem to be inclined to a Mutiny
against their Governor, whereupon he ordered Padre Vacher to go aboard the
Admiral (with a Dutch man of Wars Boat, who now lies here to clear some of
their Captives and is employed as an Ambassador between the Turk and Devil) to
know their demands, though they pretended only to send the Admiral Word that if
he fired one Gun more against the place he would send their chief Cavallero's,
(that are Captives here) a board out of the Muzzles of their Guns. Multitudes
of People daily Flocking out to the Gardens, for fear of the Bombs crying out
with a General Voice, that the World must needs be now at an end, that never
such things as these were seen, that they certainly were not of man's Invention,
but sent by the Devil from Hell, and that Algiers is now Ruined with many such
like Exclamations. Padre Vacher Returning a shore and to the Kings House, gave
them the Admirals Answer, that if they would send a boat off to morrow with a
Flag of Truce he would treat with them, and that he was sent hither about his
Masters Business and would Prosecute it to the Destruction of the place: Padre
Vacher also begs of the Admiral that he would not fire any Bombs that night for
his sake, for fear they should take fantasy against him, impute the ill
Consequence to his Advice, and so take Occasion to cut him off; to which the
Admiral would not consent, saying, he would Willingly do any thing that lay in
his Power for him, but that he could not promise.

These People as formerly, are ready to mutiny, to see their houses broken
down, and Friends and Relations killed before their eyes: impute all to the bad
Government. The Governor to avoid the ill effects of these surmises, and
secure His Person, was willing to do any thing to satisfy them, which I
suppose was the occasion of sending Padre Vacher; alias the French Consul
aboard, which the Captains of the Ships and Chief Turks extremely blame him
for, and are inwardly exceedingly incenst and enraged against him, saying, it
was a thing contrary to all reason, giving the French the greatest
encouragement against them, which had it been done before they had acted any
thing, might have been the more excusable, but now they had fired their Bombs,
showed abundance of weakness and timerousness in them, and animated the Enemy
to prosecute his designs with the greatest Severity, unless complied with on
dishonorable and disadvantagious Terms.

The 25th at Night, the French having fired a great many Bombs, but not with
that success as formerly, aiming chiefly at the Mould, which occasioned most of
them to fall into the water: One took place in a Tuniscan laden with Wool,
and sent her to the bottom; another fell into one of their Ships, broke through
both her Decks, and burst in the Hold, shaking her severely, and two or three
Houses broke down it the Town. It is most certain, these People never met with
such a Chastisement as this, nothing they dread more. But what I thought almost
impossible is* That after their high Looks* and seeming to slight the French so
much, they should with so small a force be brought to send a Boat aboard the
Admiral, which argues their desire to comply almost on any terms, which if the
French prosecute as they have begun, I am apt to believe they will obtain.

I am also credibly informed, that the Admiral sent word by Padre Vacher, That
having received Advice of a Son born to the Dauphine of France, if the
Governor would fire Three Guns in honor thereof, he would esteem it; and that
the Governor next day ordered the said Guns to be fired, but the Order was
immediately recalled by his Father-in-law, who is really the Governor, but
that his Son takes it upon him by reason of his Fathers Age, and Incapacity of
Ruling so Rebellious and Headstrong a People, who are no longer satisfied with
their Governors, than things go before the Wind, and succeed well, or that he
serve for their turn; but upon the least adversity of Affairs, cut him off, as
they have done others, not past one of fourteen having only died his natural
Death.

The first instant the Ketches which used to divertise us with their
Fireworks, sailed with two Rere-Admirals, and several other Ships, so that I
believe the French are breaking up their Rendezvous in this Place, and that
they do think the Winter too near at hand to continue longer here; of which
more by the next, God willing. I am in all things,

SIR, Your Faithful Humble Servant.

London, Printed by George Larkin. 1682.


