THE PRESENT STATE OF Ireland: TOGETHER With some Remarques Upon the Ancient
State thereof.

Likewise a Description of the Chief Towns: With a MAP of the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed by M. D. for Chr. Wilkinson at the Black-Boy in Fleet Street,
and T. Burrell at the Golden-Ball under St. Dunstans Church. 1673.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
MVch cannot be expected (upon a Subject of this Nature) from a private Person,
and one who was seconded with few other helps to accomplish his desires herein,
than to consult his own thoughts, and a mall number of Books that lay by him.
However, the Reader may be well assured, there is nothing offered here to his
consideration in relation to the Present, or Ancient State of Ireland (as far
as the Subject would possibly admit of the same) but what is backed with good
Authority, and faithfully related by the Author, according to the best
information he could obtain. As for other matters here Essayed by way of
conjecture, the Author well hopes this mean attempt will shortly administer a
fit occasion for a more knowing Person, and abler Pen, to render the World more
ample satisfction touching the Public Affairs, and State of that Kingdom;
wherein it may seem strange, how that this our Age affords many Treatises
entitled The present State of Enngland, France, Italy, Holland, Venice,
Muscovy, etc. yet not any thing of that Nature (since his Majesty's happy
Restoration) has been hitherto presented to public view in relation to the
State of Ireland, though it be one of the chiefest Members of the British
Empire; as if either there were no such thing in Nature; Or at least, that the
Affairs thereof afforded not any thing worthy of Note: whereas indeed the
continued infelicity of that unhappy Kingdom (till of late) might alone
(besides many other remarkes made mention of in this ensuing Treatise) justly
breed some curiosity in any knowing person to take into his consideration, what
were the true causes why that Realm, whereof our Kings of England have born the
Title of Sovereign Lords for the space of four hundred and odd years (a period
of time wherein diverse great Monarchies have risen from Barbarism to Civility,
and fallen again to Ruin) was not in all that space of time thoroughly subdued,
and reduced to the obedience of the Crown of England, although there has been
almost a continual War between the English and the Irish; and why the manners
of the mere Irish, were so little altered (till King James his Reign) since the
days of King Henry the Second (as appears by the description made by Giraldus
Cambrensis who lived and wrote in that time) although there has been since
that time so many English Colonies planted in Ireland, as that if the people
had been numbered by the Poll, such as were descended of English race, would
have been found more in number, than the ancient Natives. To give therefore a
brief account of the true causes of those disorders, as also of the exquisite
remedies applied (by the late Settlement of Ireland) in order to a perfect
Reformation of the same, is one of the chief ends and design of this discourse,
wherein if it gives the Reader any competent satisfaction, the Author will deem
himself thereby well rewarded for his pains.

THE CONTENTS OF THE First Part.
THat Ireland is supposed to be first Inhabited by the Britains. page 1. That
it was first Invaded by the Saxon Monarchs. p. 3. Next by the Northern Nations
(about the year 830.) of Danes, Swedes and Normans, all passing under the Names
of Norwegians. p. ib. And last of all by the English, in K. Henry the Seconds
time. p. 4. That the Conquest of Ireland by the English, ever since Henry the
Seconds time, till now of late, was imperfect, by reason of two great Defects;
the first whereof consisted in faint prosecution of the War; and the next, in
in the looseness of the Civil Government. p. 6. Of the faint prosecution of the
War, and the causes of it. p. ib. That notwithstanding many obstructions, yet
the first English Adventurers (during the first forty years) gained many large
proportions of Land in the Provinces of Leinster, Munster, Connaght and Ulster.
p. 8. That the English being (for a long time) necessitated to maintain a
bordering War with the Irish, wholly at the charge of the English Planters, the
English Plantations in Ireland began thereupon to decay. p. 9, 10, 11. That
Morris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond was the first began that wicked Extortion
of Coin, Livery and Pay (in K. Edward the Seconds time) which soon after
proved the utter ruin of all the English Colonies in Ireland, except those few
within the Pale; which Interest of the English could never be put in a way of
recovery again, till about the beginning of Queen E^izabeths Reign. p. 12, 13.
That by reason of the said Earl of Desmond, and diverse other Grandees of the
first English Conquerors, getting vast Estates from the English Colonies in
Ireland, by those horrible oppressioins of Coin and Livery, etc. many of the
English fled into England; and the rest, in a small tract of time, so much
degenerated into Irish manners, as that they hated the very name of the
English, and took upon them Irish Nicknames. p. 14, 15. That those great
English Lords, the better to maintain their said unlawful Acquisitions, became
thereupon Arch Enemies both to the Government, and the Laws of England:
refusing to appear at Parliaments, and no way observing the Dictates and
Command of the Chief Governors of that Realm. p. 16, 17. That by these means;
and by reason of the English Nobility and Gentry passing (afterward) out of
Ireland into England to be engaged in the Civil-Wars between York and
Lancaster, wherein most of them perished, the Irish became victorious over all
the English, except those within the Pale, without blood or sweat. p. 17, 18.
That it was a great hindrance to the full Conquest of Ireland, that the first
English Conquerors, did not equally communicate the English Laws to the Irish,
as well as to English Planters. ib. That by means thereof, the English
Conquerors, maintained perpetual Enmity, and War, with the Irish, for their own
private ends and advantages, to the destruction of the Country. p. 19. That
this was contrary to the practice of the Roman State, who never refused to
communicate their Laws to the rude and barbarous people they conquered. p. 20.
And to the practice of William the Conqueror, who Governed both Normands and
the English under one Law. p. 21. And against the prudent course Edward the
First observed in the reducing of Wales. p. ib. That the next Error in the
Civil policy, was the over great proportions of Land, with great Royalties and
Liberties granted to the first English Adventurers in Ireland, which occasioned
many notorious inconveniences p. 22. The reason why such vast proportions of
Land were given to the first Adventurers in Ireland. p. 30. The manner how
Ireland was divided among the English Conquerors, in Henry the Seconds time,
and soon after. p. 23. That when the Roman Generals had with the public charge
Conquered many Kingdoms and Commonwealths, they were rewarded with honorable
Offices and Triumphs, and not made Lords and Proprietors of whole Kingdoms and
Provinces. p. 31. That William Duke of Normandy in the Conquest of England
(which he made his own work) distributed sundry Lordships and Monnors unto his
followers, but gave not away whole Shires and Counties, as was done in Ireland,
in Demesne to any of his Servitors whom he desired to advance. p. ib. The like
did Edward the First in the Conquest of Wales, p. 32. That as the best policy
was not observed in the distribution of the Conquered Lands in Ireland by the
first English Adventurers; so were they deceived in the choice of the fitttest
places to settle their Plantations in. p. 34. That the Nature of the Irish
Customs are such, that of necessity they make those people Rebels, who make use
of the same, to all good Government, and to the destruction of the
Commonwealth wherein they live. p. 37. That the frequent Rebellions in Ireland
in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, especially that notorious one of the Earl of Tyrone
and his Adherents, chiefly fomented by the Pope and the King of Spain, did so
far provoke the Queen, as that she made an absolute Conquest of the Irishry p.
44 That upon the finishing of the said Conquest, to the end the long for wished
perpetual Peace and Settlememt of that Kingdom might be established on firm
foundations, 'twas propounded, as the fittest expedient, that all the forfeited
Lands in Ireland, might be disposed of to such English as should be brought out
of England to plant the same, paying thereout yearly, by way of Quit-Rent, a
reasonable consideration, to the Crown of England toward the maintenance of a
Standing Army in Ireland. p. 46. The same method being observed by the Romans
to continue their Conquered Countries in due Obedience to them; And which
should also have been also put in practice by the first English Conquerors of
the Realm of Ireland p. 48. That all such Irish who had forfeited the said
Lands, were to be transplanted from one Province into another, and to become
only Tenants to the English. p. 50. That King James (being swayed by wilder
Councels) wholly waving the Transplantation, and of laying hold on the said
forfeited Lands; did (by an Act of Olivion) remit all manner of offenses
committed against the Crown by the said Earl of Tyrone and the rest of the
Irish; which mild resolution of his, was like to be (soon after) ill requited
by the said Earl and his Adherents: who practicing a new Rebellion in the North
of Ireland, and failing therein, fled (upon the guilty conscience thereof) to
the Spanish Netherlands, giving thereby an excellent opportunity to settle a
brave British Plantation within the fix forfeited Counties in the Province of
Ulster p. 50, 51. How far King James proceeded in the Reformation and
Settlement of Ireland, by dividing the same into Counties, and thereby
consequently making way for the Laws of England to be put in execution in all
parts of the Kingdom; and by ascertaining also all men's Estates according to
English tenure, etc. with many other public Acts, tending to the future good
Government and welfare of that Realm. p. ib. That notwithstanding all those
excellent Constitutions, yet the foundation of that settlement of Ireland (not
long after) received a shake, by the Irish denying to contribute toward the
maintenance of a standing Army in Ireland An. 1627. (except they might first
obtain a Tolleration of the Romish Religion) though the Lord Primate Usher in a
set Speech (in the presence of the Lord Deputy Falkland) made use of many
strong Arguments and reasons to press them thereunto. p. 53. That the loss of
this rare opportunity by the Irish, to express the height of their Loyalty to
his Majesty of England, can never be sufficiently repented of by them. p. 54.
That the Lord Primate Usher wisely foresaw a storm impending, which was (not
long after) unhappily verified by the bloody Rebellion in Ireland, Anno 1641.
without the least provocation given by the English to the Irish to perpetrate
so wicked an Act, wherein were barbarously destroyed (in a very short space of
time) by the Sword and Famine above a hundred and fifty thousand Protestants. p.
54 to 64. That the English could not obtain an opportunity to be thoroughly
revenged on the Irish, for their inhumane slaughtering of their Countrymen,
till the year 1649. from what time (within the compass of about three years) it
is conceived there was not left undestroyed (by the Sword, Plague and Famine)
above the eighth part of all the Irish Nation; Being a just judgment of God
fallen upon them for their impious carriage toward the poor Protestant British
Planters p. 66. That the Irish Nation being thus broken, all the Romish-Irish
Proprietors were commanded upon pain of death by a certain day to transplant
themselves from the Provinces of Lynster, Munster and Ulster, into the Province
of Connaght and County of Clare; which was performed accordingly. p. 67. A
brief description of the admirable Strength of the Province of Connaght, as
well by Art as Nature; As also of the lamentable waste condition all Ireland
was reduced unto, in the close of the War An. 1652, 1653. p, 67 to 70. That
immediately after the said Transplantation of the Irish, (being in the year
1653.) certain Regiments of the English Army were disbanded, and settled upon
the Lands fallen by Lot to them for their Arrears within the Provinces of
Lynster, Munster and Ulster. p. 68. etc. That both English and Irish (within
three years after) were settled upon their respective proportions of Land
assigned to them, or fallen by Lot, in all parts of Ireland. p. 68, 69. That
within three years ensuing the said Settlement, there appeared a strange
alteration in the general state of Ireland, from a most ruinous, to a reviving
Commonwealth. p. 70, 71. That as his Majesty's Restoration crowned the joy of
oll the English in Ireland; so it did as much deject the Irish, who immediately
expected thereupon to be generally restored to their former Estates. p. 72.
What alteration hapened to the Settlement of Ireland, since his Majesty's
Restoration. p. 73, and 216, etc. How that that perpetual Peace and Settlement
of Ireland which was so solidly discoursed of, and stoutly fought for in Queen
Elizabeth's Reign; and very far proceeded in King James his time; Is now fully
perfected, and confirmed by our Gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second, to
the glory of God, and the great honor and profit of his Majesty, and security
of his three Kingdoms. p. 74 to 79.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Part.
OF the Name of Ireland and its Climate. p. 80. Of its Dimension. p. 81. Of the
Division, Form, Air and Commodities of the Province of Lynster. p. 82. Of
Munster. p. 84. Of Ulster. p. 87. And of Connaght. p. 90. A Character of all
Ireland, and how far it differs from England in Air and Commodities, etc. p.
93, 94. Of the Money of Ireland. p. 96. Of its Buildings. p. 101. Of its
Inhabitants and Laws. p. 105. And of its Religion. p. 111. Of the Manners of
the Irish, Ancient and Modern. p. 120. How lovingly the Irish lived of late
times in Neighborhood with the English till October 23. An. 1641. And how
strangly they altered upon the sudden from more than ordinary good Offices of
Kindness, to extreme Barbarism and cruelty, toward their said English
Neighbuors, and the rest of the Protestant British Planters in Ireland; with
the manner, motives and causes of the same. p. 123, etc. Of the number of the
Inhabitants of Ireland. p. 145. Of the Irish Language. p. 147. Of their
Stature. p. 150. Of their Diet. p. 151. Of their Attire. p. 152 Of their
Recreations. p. 153. Of the Irish Names p. ibid. Of their Sir names. p. 154. Of
the Government of Ireland p. 156 A Catalogue of the Lord Lieutenants, Deputies
and Lord Justices. p. 158 The Title of the Kings of England altered from Lords
of Ireland to King. p. 17^. The Titles of the Crown of England to every part of
Ireland, and to the whole diverse ways; As to Lynster. p. 171. To Mead. p. 172.
To Munster. p. ibi^ To Ulster and Connaght. p. 173 Of the several Claims of the
Crow^ of England to the Land of Ireland p. 174 Of the Revenue of Ireland. p.
183 A Table for Reducing Plantation-Acres. p. 186. Of the Strength of Ireland,
and how it principally consists by its dependency on the Crown of England. p.
196. By what ways and means the English (since the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, and a little before) did again extend their Power and
Interest in Ireland beyond the narrow Limits of the English Pale. p. ibid. Of
the great advantages that will accrue, in the future, to the English by their
late vast Acquisitions in Ireland, the better to enable them thereby to breed
up their Children for the service of that Kingdom, both in Church and State. p.
205. How that the Popish Irish Lawyers and Divines, did of late times abuse the
advantage they had by their good Education, to the ruin of their own Country.
p. 206. Of how many Troops of Horse, and Companies of Foot the present Standing
Army in Ireland consists. p. 217. Of the Militia in Ireland. p. 218. How that
henceforth there will be no-more need of Trayning up the Irish, together with
the English, in the Feats of Arms, which of late times proved very destructive
to the English, Interest in Ireland. p. ibid. Of Electing Parliament men. p.
221. A List of what places Return Parliament Men. p. 223. Nobility Subsidy. p.
227. Subsidies of the several Bishoprics. p. 231. Provincial Subsidies p. 233.
Salaries belonging to several Courts of Judicature, etc. p. 236. Military
Payments. p. 239. Provincial Officers, etc. p. 240. Creation-Money. p. 243.
Perpetuities and Temporary Payments. p. 245, and 247. Pensions and Annuities.
p. 246.
THE CONTENT OF THE Third Part.
TO the Reader. p. 24^ That it much imports the futur^ security of the
Protestant British Planters, to be for the most part, if not who^ possessed, by
way of habitation, of the chief Cities and strong Towns of Ireland, which was
sufficiently evidence by the examples of the Cities of Dublin Limrick and
Gallaway, upon the fir^^ breaking out of the last Rebellion in Ireland, begun
the 23d of October Ann^ 1641. p. 249 The Characters of some of the chie^ Towns
and Cities of Ireland; whereb^ is discovered, how conveniently they ar^
situated (as they lie in the respectiv^ Provinces) in reference to Trade and
Strength, both foreign and domestic; How they increased and flourished during
the last forty years Peace; And what probability there is, of their future
flourishing state and condition, with many other things remarkable in relation
thereunto. p. 255.
In the Province of Munster.
Of Waterford. p. ibid. Of Kingsale. p. 257. Of Cork. p. 258. Of Youghall. p.
ibid. Of Limrick. p. 259. Of Clonmell. p. 260.
In the Province of Connaght.
Of Gallaway. p. 261. Of Sleygoe. p. 263. Of James-Town. p. 265. Of Athlone. p.
266.
In the Province of Vlster.
Of Carlingford and Dundalk p. 267. Of Cnockfergus. p. ibid. Of Londonderry.
p. 268.
In the Province of Lynster.
Of Wexford. p. 269 Of Kilkenny. p. 270 Of Ross. p. ibid Of Carlough. p. 271.
Of Tredagh. p. 272. Of Dublin. p. ibid.
IRLANDIA
map of the northern portion of Ireland, possibly incomplete scan

THE Present State OF IRELAND.
TO pass by the story how Caesaria, Ireland supposed to be first Inhabited by
the Britains.
Noah's Niece, inhabited IRELAND before the Flood; and how three hundred years
after the Flood, it was subdued by one Bartholanus a Scythian, who overcame
here, I know not what Giants, with other such stuff, wholly resting on the
Testimony of the Irish Chronicles, which are thought to relish too much of the
Fable; and not altogether to rely upon that opinion grounded on very probable
Circumstances, that this Island was first Inhabited by the mixed Nations of
Spaniards, Gauls, Africans or Goths, coming out of Spain; and by the Britains
out of Britain (the Irish being observed to partake of tho Customs and Manners
of each of these People;) but it seems most likely, that the first Inhabitants
thereof came wholly out of Britain; Britain being the nighest unto it, and
thereby affording the convenience of a more speedy Waftage thither; and the
ancient Customs, Laws, Language and Dispositions of these People being not
much unlike the Britains, though they were accounted far more Barbarous and
Savage by most ancient Writers, than those of Britain are said to be at the
first discovery, having never been made so happy as to come under the power of
the Romans, the Great Masters of Civility and good Letters in the West of
Europe, by means whereof, their Actions and Affairs were buried in Oblivion.

The Ancient Inhabitants of this Island being thus conceived to be Originally
Britains, Ireland first Invaded by the Saxon Monarch.
and the Scots found to inhabit here, about the fall of the Roman Empire; the
first Onset it received, by way of Invasion, was by the Saxon Monarchs: who,
casting their Eyes upon it, made themselves Masters of Dublin and some other
places; but could not long possess the same, as being hardly able to defend
their own, against that People.

The next that undertook the Conquest thereof (being about Anno 830. Next, by
the Northern Nations, all passing under the Names of Danes, Swedes and Normans.
) were the Northern Nations of Danes, Swedes and Normans; all passing, in the
Chronicles of those times, under the Name of Norwegians; who first scouring
along the Seacoasts, by way of Pyracy, and afterward finding the weakness of
the Island, being divided amongst many petit and inconsiderable Princes, made
an absolute Conquest of it, under the Conduct of one Turgesius, whom they
Elected for their King, but were soon rooted out by the policy of the King of
Meth, the only Irish Prince then in favor with the Tyrant. These Northern
Nations were the first that brought the Irish acquainted with Traffic and
Commerce, and with building of Castles and Fortresses, only upon the
Seacoasts; having hitherto known no other defense, but Woods, Boggs or Stoakes.

And last of all, by the English, in K. Henry 2ds reign, An. 1172.
After this, the Roytelets, or petty Princes, enjoying their former Dominions
till the year 1172. in which, Dermot Mac Morogh King of Lynster, having forced
the Wife of Maurice O Rorke King of Meth, was driven, by him, out of his
Kingdom; who, applying himself to Henry the Second, of England, for succor;
received Aid, under the leading of Richard de Clare, Sir-named Strongbow, Earl
of Pembroke, to be restored to his Kingdom: by whose good success, and the rest
of the Adventurers, upon the Arrival of Henry the Second in Ireland; his very
Presence, without drawing his Sword prevailed so far, as that all the petty
Kings or great Lords, within Lynster, Connaght and Munster, submitted
themselves unto him; promising to pay him Tribute, and acknowledging him their
chief and Sovereign Lord: But as the Conquest was but slight and superficial,
so the Irish Submissions, were but weak and fickle assurances to hold in
Obedience so considerable a Kingdom; for no sooner were the Kings of Englands
backs turned, but the Irish returned to their former Rebellions; and the Kings
of England had here, no more power or profit, than the great ones of the
Country were pleased to give them: for they governed their People by the Brehon
Law, they made their own Magistrates and Officers, pardoned and punished all
Malefactors within their several Countries, made War and Peace one with the
other, without controulment; and this they did, not only during the Reign of
King Henry the Second, but also in the times succeeding, even until the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, which Conquest became thus imperfect, by reason of two
great Defects; first, in the faint prosecution of the War, and next, in the
looseness of the Civil Government.

The Conquest of Ireland by the English imperfect (till of late) by reason of
two defects, viz. first, faint Prosecution of the War, and the Causes of it.
As touching the carriage of Martial Affairs, from the seventeenth year of King
Henry the Second, at what time the first overture was made for the Conquest of
Ireland, until the nine and thirtieth year of Queen Elizabeth, when that Royal
Army was sent over to suppress the the Rebellion of Tyrone; which in the end,
made an universal and absolute Conquest of all the Irishry. It is very evident,
that the English, either raised here, or sent hither from time to time out of
England, were always too weak to Subdue and Master so many Warlike Nations (or
Septs) of the Irish as did possess this Island; and besides their weakness,
they were ill paid and worse Governed. And if at any time, there arrived out of
England an Army of competent strength and power, it did rather terrify, than
break or subdue this People; being ever broken and dissolved by some one
accident and impediment or other, before the perfection of the Conquest of it;
as namely, Henry the Second, by the Rebellion of his Sons: King John, Henry the
Third and Edward the Second, by the Barrons Wars: Edward the First, by his Wars
in Wales and Scotland: Edward the Third and Henry the Fifth, by the Wars of
France: Richard the Second, Henry the Fourth, Henry the Sixth and Edward the
Fourth, by Domestic contention for the Crown of England it self: Richard the
Third, not worth mentioning, as having never got the quiet possession of
England, but was cast out by Henry the Seventh, within two years and an half
after his Usurpation: And Henry the Seventh himself, though he made the happy
Union of the two Houses of York and Lancaster; yet for more than half the space
of his Reign there were walking Spirits of the House of York, which he could
not conjure down, without the expense of some Blood and Treasure. Henry the
Eighth was diverted by his two Expeditions into France, at the first and latter
part of his Reign, and in the middle thereof, wholly taken up with the troubles
created to him by the great alteration of Ecclesiastical Affairs: And lastly,
the Infancy of King Edward and the Coverture of Queen Mary (which were both
not-abilities in Law) did likewise in fact disable them to accomplish the
Conquest of Ireland; so that all the Kings of England coming thus far short as
to the perfecting of the true Conquest of Ireland; let us examine what other
impediments were given thereunto in point of Martial Affairs by the Adventurers
themselves that first undertook the Conquest of this Kingdom upon their own
account.

That the first English Adventurers had good success in Ireland during the
first forty years.
It does appear, that for the space of about forty years after the first landing
of the English in Ireland till the seventeenth year of King John, (during all
which time there was no Army transmitted out of England to finish the Conquest
of Ireland) that the Adventurers and Colonies already planted there, proceeded
with so much good success, as they gained very large portions of ground in
every Province: As namely, the Earl of Strongbow, by his Marriage with the
Daughter of Mac Morrogh in Lynster; the La^ies in Meth; the Giraldines, and
other Adventurers in Munster; the Andeleyes, Gernons, Clintons, Russels, and
other Voluntaries of Sir John de Courcies retinue in Vlster; and the Bourkes
(planted by William Fitz-Adelme) in Connaght.

The English Colonies being thus dispersed through all the Provinces of
Ireland; were necessitated, But being necessitated for a long time to maintain
a bordering War against the Irish at the charge of the English Planters.
from the twelfth year of King John, till the six and thirtieth year of King
Edward the Third, (being about an hundred and fifty years) to maintain a
continual bordering War between them and the Irish, without receiving (during
all that time) any supply, either of Men or Money, out of England to manage the
same: So that all the chief Governors of the Realm, and the English Lords who
had gotten such great Possessions and Royalties (as that they presumed to make
War and Peace at their pleasure, without the least advice or direction from the
State) being forced to levy all their Forces within the Land, who being ill
Paid and worse Governed, it so came to pass, (the public Revenues of Ireland
being then inconsiderable to sustain such a charge) that as well the Ordinary
Forces which stood continually, as the extraordinary, which were levied by the
chief Governor, upon Journeys and general Hostings, were for the most part
laid upon the poor Subjects descended of English race; which burden was in some
measure tolerable during the Reign of King Henry the Third, and Edward the
First; but afterward became insupportable in the time of King Edward the
Second; For Morris Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond being chief Commander of the
Army against the Scots, began that wicked extortion of Coin and Livery, and
pay; that is, he and his Army took Horse-meat, Mans-meat, and Money at their
pleasure, without giving any Ticket, or other satisfaction for the same.

This wicked imposition (made High Treason by the Statute of 11. The English
Plantations in Ireland began to decay.
H. 4.) became afterward so habitual and general a fault of all the Governors
and Commanders of the Army in this Land, that in a short time it enforced
(because the great English Lords and Captains had power to impose this charge,
when and where they pleased) many of the poor English Freeholders to give unto
those Lords a great part of their Lands, that they might hold the rest free
from that extortion: And many others not being able to endure so intolerable a
burden, did utterly quit their Free-holds, and returned into England; by means
whereof the English Colonies did soon grow poor and feeble, and the English
Lords became rich and mighty: for having placed Irish Tenants upon the Lands,
relinquished by the English, upon whom they levied all Irish exactions, and
with whom they married, fostered, and made Gossips; so as within one age both
English Lords and Freeholders became degenerate and mere Irish in their
Language, Apparel, Arms and manner of fight, and all other Customs of life
whatsoever.

That Morris Fitz-Thomas, Earl of Desmond, was the first began that wicked
Custom of Coin and Livery.
But that I may not quit my self so soon of this subject, before I give a more
particular satisfaction to the Reader, touching the evil consequences that
ensued upon the general practice of this wicked Extortion of Coin and Livery,
(which indeed was one of the chiefest causes of the sudden decay and ruin of
the first English Colonies in Ireland) he may be pleased to understand, that
the forementioned Thomas Fitz-Morrice, Earl of Desmond, did soon (by these
oppressive courses) grow from a mean to a mighty Estate, in so much that his
ancient inheritance being not one thousand Marks yearly, he became able to
dispend every way ten thousand pound per Annum.

These possessions being thus unlawfully gained, could not be maintained by the
just and honorable Laws of England, which would have restored the true owners
to their Land again; And therefore this Great Man found no better means to
continue and uphold his ill purchased greatness, then by rejecting the English
Laws and Government, and assuming in lieu thereof the barbarous Customs of the
Irish, whereupon followed the defection of those four Counties, Which proved
the utter ruin of the first, English Colonies in Ireland, (except those within
the Pale.)
containing the greatest parts of Munster, viz. Kerry, Limrick, Cork, and
Waterford, from the obedience of the Law; and so successively by the same
means, and much about the same time, the rest of the English Lords, and
Freeholders in Ireland (except those of the English Pale) fell away from the
English Law and Government in the end of King Edward the Second's Reign, and in
the beginning of King Edward the third.

And truly it is here a fit subject of wonder, All the English Colonies in
Ireland, (except those within the Pale,) degenerate into mere Irish manners.
to consider to what height of baseness the English arrived unto by this
defection, in so much as within less time then the Age of a Man, they had no
marks or differences left amongst them of that Noble Nation, from which they
were descended; for they did not only forget the English Language, and scorn
the use thereof, but grew to be ashamed of their very English Names, though
they were Noble and of great Antiquity, and took Irish Sir-names, and
Nicknames. Namely the two most potent families of the Bourkes in Connaght
(after the house of the Red Earl failed of Heirs Males) called their Chiefs Mac
William Eighter, and Mac William Oughter. In the same Province, Bremingham
Baron of Athenry, called himself Mac Yeoris. D'Execester, or d' Exon, was
called, Mac Jordan. Mangle, or d' Angulo, took the name of Mac Costello. Of the
inferior Families of the Bourks, one was called Mac Hubbard, another Mac
David. In Munster of the great Families of the Geraldines planted there; one
was called Mac Morris, chief of the house of Lixnaw; and another Mac Gibbon,
who was also called the White Knight. The chief of the Baron of Dunboyns house,
who is a branch of the House of Ormond, took Sir-names of Mac Pheris. Condon of
the County of Waterford, was called Mac Majoke: and the Archdeacon of the
County of Kilkenny, Mac Odo. And this they did in contempt and hatred of the
English Name and Nation; of whom these degenerated Families became more mortal
enemies, then the mere Irish.

The Native Subjects of Ireland, The Civil War of York and Lancaster, furthered
the ruin of the English Colonies in Ireland.
of English Race, in Henry the 6th's time, seeing the Kingdom thus utterly
ruined, passed in such numbers into England, as one Law was made there, to
transmit them back again; and another Law made in Ireland to stop their passage
in every Port and Creek: And as one ill fortune happens in the neck of another,
the greatest part of the Nobility and Gentry of Meth, past over afterward into
England, and were slain with Richard Duke of York (who had been long Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland) at the Battle of Wakefield in Yorkshire, after whose
death, while the Wars between the two Houses of York and Lancaster were in
their heat, almost all the good English blood which was left in Ireland, was
spent in these civil dissentions; so as the Irish became Victorious over all,
without blood or sweat, except only that little Canton of Land (as aforesaid)
called the English Pale, containing the Counties of Dublin, Louth, Kildare, and
Meth, (which last has since the time of King Henry the Eight been subdivided
into three Counties; that is to say, East-Meath, West-Meath, and Longford)
which only maintained a bordering War, and retained the form of an English
Government; so that by the fourteenth of King Edward the Fourth, the State of
Ireland was grown to so low an ebb upon an English account, that at their
erecting a Fraternity of men of Arms, called the Brotherhood of S. George, for
the defense of the said Pale, they exceeded not in number above 200. being all
the standing Forces that were then in Ireland, and as they were Natives of the
Kingdom, so the Kingdom it self did pay their wages, without expecting any
Treasure out of England; However (the great Lords of the natural Irish, and
degenerate English being divided into many factions, and never conjoined in any
one principle of common interest, and thereby consequently becoming very
inconsiderable) this small spot of ground was valiantly maintained for a long
time by the weak (but united Forces) of the Kings of England.

Having proceeded thus far in examining the chief causes that obstructed the
Conquest of Ireland (till about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's reign) as to
Martial Affairs; And secondly, looseness in the Civil Government of Ireland, for
not communicating the Laws of England to the Irish.
I shall now endeavor in the next place to give some satisfaction touching
those defects that were observed to be in the Civil Policy and Government of
this Kingdom, which gave no less impediment to the full Conquest thereof;
which does first consist in this; That the Crown of England did not from the
beginning give Laws to the Irishry, though the Irish did often desire to be
admitted to the benefit of it, and protection of the English Laws, but could
not obtain it. For although King Henry the Second before his return out of
Ireland, held a Counfel or Parliament at Lismore, where the Laws of England
were willingly accepted off by all the Irishry, and that confirmed by their
Oaths; And though King John in the twelfth year of his Reign, did establish the
English Laws and Customs here, and the Courts of Judicature at Dublin, and
placed Sheriffs and other Ministers to rule and govern the people according to
the Laws of England; yet it is evident by all the Records of this Kingdom,
that only the English Colonies, and some few Septs of the Irishry (as O Neal
of Vlster, O Malaghlin of Mead, O Connagher of Connaght, O Brien of Thomond,
and Mac Muorrogh of Lynster, who were enfranchised by special Charters) were
admitted to the benefit and protection of the Laws of England; for in them
only the English Laws were published, and put in execution; and in them only
did the Itinerant Judges make their Circuits and Visitations of Justice, as
namely in the Counties of Dublin, Kildare, Meth, Vriel, Catherlogh, Kilkenny,
Wexford, Waterford, Cork, Limrick, Kerry, and Typperary, and not in the
Countries possessed by the Irishry, which contained at least two third parts of
the Kingdom, and even in these Counties the said Laws stretched no farther then
the Lands of the English Colonies did extend; so that the Irish were not only
disabled to bring any actions, but they were so far out of the protection of
the Law, as it was often adjudged no Felony, to kill a mere Irish man in time
of Peace; from whence it came to pass, that in all the Parliament Rolls which
are extant, from the 40th year of Edward the Third, when the Statutes of
Kilkenny were enacted, till the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, we find the
degenerate and disobedient English called Rebels; but the Irish which were not
in the Kings Peace, are called Enemies: Whereby it it is manifest, that such as
had the Government of Ireland, under the Crown of England, did intend to
maintain a perpetual Separation and Enmity between the English and the Irish,
pretending that the English should in the end be able to root out the Irish,
which the English not being able to effect, caused a perpetual War between both
Nations, which continued four hundred and odd years, and might have continued
to the worlds end, if in the end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Irishry had not
been broken and Conquered by the Sword; and since the beginning of King James
his Reign had not been protected and governed by the Law. Contrary to the
practice of the Romans, and others, etc. who communicated their Laws to the
Conquered.


This was contrary to the practice of the Roman State, which Conquered so many
barbarous and civil Nations, and therefore knowing by experience the best and
readiest way of making a perfect and absolute Conquest, refused not to
communicate their Laws to the rude and barbarous people, whom they had
conquered; neither did they ever put them out of their Protection, after they
had once submitted themselves; but rather (the better to assure their conquest)
by all the means imaginable they could, allured them to Civility, and Learning,
whereof the ancient Britains were a famous instance. This was also against the
practice William the Conqueror used, who governed both the Normans and the
English under one Law; And against the prudent course that has been observed
in the reducing of Wales, partly performed by King Edward the First, and
altogether finished by King Henry the Eighth, by dividing the whole Country
into Shires and Circuits, and establishing a Commonwealth amongst them,
according to the English Government; by means whereof, that entire Country was
in a short time so securely settled in Peace and Obedience, and has attained to
that civility of manners, and plenty of all things, as now we find it not
inferior to the best parts of England.

That the over great proportions of Land granted to the first Conquerors of
Ireland occasioned great inconveniences.
The next Error in the Civil Policy which hindered the perfection of the
Conquest of Ireland, did consist in the distribution of the Lands and
Possessions which were won and conquered from the Irish. For the Scopes of Land
which were granted to the first Adventurers, were too large, and the Liberties
and Royalties, which they obtained therein, were too great for Subjects; though
it stood with reason, that they should be liberally rewarded out of the fruits
of their own labors, since they managed the War upon their own account, and
received no pay from the Crown of England, whereupon ensued diverse
inconveniences, that gave great impediment to the Conquest: for first, Earl
Strongbow was entitled to the whole Kingdom of Lynster, partly by Invasion,
and partly by Marriage; albeit he surrendered the same entirely to King Henry
the Second his Sovereign; The manner how Ireland was divided amongst the first
Eng^ish Conquerors.
for that with his License he came over, and with the aid of his Subjects, he
had gained that great Inheritance; yet did the King regrant back again to him
and his Hei^s all that Province, reserving only the City of Dublin, and the
Cantreds next adjoining, with the Maritine Towns, and principal Forts and
Castles. Next, the same King granted to Robert Fitz-Stephen, and Miles Cogan,
the whole Kingdom of Cork from Lismore to the Sea. To Philip le Bruce, he gave
the whole Kingdom of Lymrick, with the Donation of Bishoprics and Abbeys
(except the City and one Cantred of Land adjoining.) To Sir Hugh de Lacy all
Mead. To Sir John de Courcy, all Vlster. To William Bourke Fitz-Adelin, the
greatest part of Connaght. In like manner, Sir Thomas de Clare obtained a grant
of all Thomond; and Otho de Grandison of all Tipperary; and Robert le Poor, of
the Territory of Waterford (the City it self, and the Cantred of the Oastmen
only excepted.) And thus was al^ Ireland Cantonized among ten Persons of the
English Nation. And though they had not gained the Possession of one third part
of the whole Kingdom; yet in Title they were owners and Lords of all: so as
nothing was left to be granted to the Natives, whose petty Kings and Great
ones, our great English Lords could not endure they should Reign in Ireland;
nay, they were come that height, by these great Possessions, that they could
not brook that the Crown of England it self should have any Jurisdiction or
Power over them. For many of these Lords, to whom our Kings had granted these
petty Kingdoms; did by Virtue and Color of these Grants, claim and exercise
Jura Regalia within their Territories; in so much, as there were no less than
eight Counties Palatines in Ireland at one time. The first English Conquerors
exercise Regal Power.


These absolute Palatines made Barons and Knights, did exercise high Justice in
all points within their Territories, erected Courts for Criminal and Civil
Causes, and for their own Revenues; in the same form as the Kings Courts were
established at Dublin; made their own Judges, Seneschalls, Sheriffs, Coroners,
and Escheators; so as the Kings Writ did not run in those Counties (which took
up more then two parts of the English Colonies) but only in Church Lands lying
within the same, which were called the Cross, wherein the King made a Sheriff:
And so in each of these Counties Palatines, there were two Sheriffs; one of the
Liberty, and another of the Cross: whereby it is manifest, how much the Kings
Jurisdictions was restrained, and the power of these Lords enlarged by these
high Privileges. Again, these great undertakers were not tied to any form of
Plantation, but all was left to their discretion and pleasure. And although
they builded Castles, and made Freeholders, yet were there no tenures or
services reserved to the Crown, but the Lords drew all the respect and
dependancy of the common people unto themselves. Now let us see what
inconveniences did arise by these large and ample Grants of Lands and
Liberties, to the first Adventurers in the Conquest.

The great inconveniences that ensued the Grant of whole Provinces and petit
Kingdoms to the first English Conquerors of Ireland.
Without doubt by these Grants of whole Provinces and petty Kingdoms, these few
English Lords pretended to be Proprietors of all the Land, so as their was no
possibility left of settling the Natives in their Possessions, and by
consequence the Conquest became impossible, without the utter extirpation of
all the Irish; which these English Lords were not able to perform, nor perhaps
willing if they had ability. Notwithstanding, because they did still hope to
become Lords of those Lands which were possessed by the Irish, whereunto they
pretended Title, by their large Grants; And because they did fear, that if the
Irish were received into the Kings protection, and made Liege-men, and Free
Subjects; the State of England would establish them in their possessions by
Grants from the Crown; reduce their Countries into Counties, ennoble some of
them, and enfranchise all; and make them amensurable to the Law, which would
have abridged, and cut off a great part of that greatness which they had
promised unto themselves: They therefore persuaded the King of England, that it
was unfit to communicate the Laws of England unto them; and that it was the
best policy to hold them as Aliens and Enemies, and to prosecute them with a
continual War; whereby they obtained another Royal Prerogative and Power: Which
was, to make War and Peace at their Pleasure, in every part of the Kingdom,
which gave them an absolute command over the Bodies, Lands and Goods of the
English Subjects there. And besides the Irish inhabiting the Lands fully
Conquered, and reduced, being in the condition of Slaves and Villains, did
render a greater Profit and Revenue, than if they had been the Kings Free
Subjects, and therefore for these two causes last expressed, they were not
willing to root out all the Irishry.

Again, Those large Scopes of Land, and great Liberties, with absolute Power to
make War and Peace, did raise the English Lords to that height of Pride and
Ambition, as they could not endure one another, but grew to a mortal War and
Dissension amongst themselves; insomuch, that whole Towns and Countries have
often times been destroyed by their Contentions, which brought forth diverse
mischiefs that did not only disable the English to finish the Conquest of all
Ireland, but did endanger the loss of what was already gained; And of
Conquerors, made themselves Slaves to that Nation, which they did intend to
Conquer. For, whenever one English Lord had vanquished another, the Irish
waited, and took the opportunity, and fell upon that Country which had received
the blow; and so daily recovered some part of the Lands, which were possessed
by the English Colonies.

Besides, The English Lords to strengthen their Parties, did Ally themselves
with the Irish, and drew them in to dwell amongst them, and gave their Children
to be fostered by them; and having no other means to pay or reward them,
suffered them to take Coin and Livery, upon the English Freeholder; which
oppression was so intolerable, as that the better sort were enforced to quit
their Free-holds, and fly into England; and never returned, though many Laws
were made in both Realms, to remand them back again: and the rest which
remained, became degenerate and mere Irish, as is before declared. And the
English Lords finding the Irish Exactions to be more profitable then the
English Rents and Services, and loving the Irish tyranny which was tied to no
Rules of Law or Honor, better than a just and lawful Seigniory, did reject and
cast off the English Law and Government, received the Irish Laws and Customs,
took (as aforesaid) Irish Sir-names, refused to come to the Parliaments which
were summoned by the King of Englands Authority, and scorned to obey the
English Knights which were sent to command and govern this Kingdom.

Why the Kings of England Granted such large Proportions of Land to the first
Conquerors of Ireland.
But this ought withal to be taken into consideration, that as these Grants of
little Kingdoms, and great Royalties, to a few private persons, did produce
the mischiefs spoken of before: So the true cause of making those Grants, did
proceed from this; That the Kings of England being otherwise employed, and
diverted, did not make the Conquest of Ireland their own work, and undertook it
not royally at their own charge; but as it was first begun by particular
Adventurers, so they left the prosecution thereof to them, and other
Adventurers, who came to seek their Fortunes in Ireland; wherein if they could
prevail, they thought it in Reason and Honor, they could do no less than make
them Proprietors of such Scopes of Land as they could Conquer, People and Plant
at their own charge, reserving only the Sovereign Lordship to the Crown of
England: But if the Lion had gone to hunt himself, the shares of the inferior
Beasts had not been so great. If the Invasion had been made by an Army,
transmitted, furnished, and supplied only at the Kings charges, and wholly
paid with the Kings Treasure, as the Armies of Queen Elizabeth and King James
were, as the Conquest had been sooner achieved, so the Servitors had been
contented with lesser proportions.

For when Scipio, Pompey and Caesar, and other Generals of the Roman Armies, as
Subjects and Servants of that State, and with the Public Charge, had Conquered
many Kingdoms and Common-Weals, we find them rewarded with Honorable Offices
and Triumphs at their return; and not made Lords and Proprietors of whole
Provinces and Kingdoms, which they had subdued to the Empire of Rome.
Likewise, when the Duke of Normandy had Conquered England, which he made his
own work, and performed it in his own person, he distributed sundry Lordships
and Manners unto his Followers, but gave not away whole Shires and Countries in
Demesne to any of his Servitors, whom he most desired to advance.

Again, From the time of the Norman Conquest, till the Reign of King Edward the
First, many of our English Lords made War upon the Welch-men, at their own
charge; the Lands which they gained, they held to their own use, were called
Lords Marchers, and had Royal Liberties within their Lordships. Howbeit these
particular Adventurers could never make a Conquest of Wales.

But when King Edward the First came in person with his Army thither, kept his
Residence and Court there; made the reducing of Wales an enterprise of his own;
he finished that work in a Year or two, whereof the Lords Marchers had not
performed a third part, with their continual Bordering War, for two hundred
Years. And withal we may observe, that though this King had now the Dominion
of Wales, in jure proprietatis, (as the Statute of Rutland affirms) which
before was subject unto him, but in jure feodali: And though he had lost diverse
principal Knights and Noble men in that War, yet did he not reward his
Servitors with whole Countries or Counties, but with particular Manors and
Lordships: As to Henry Lacie, Earl of Lincoln, he gave the Lordship of Denbigh;
and to Reighnold Gray, the Lordship of Ruthen, and so to others.

If the like course had been used in the winning and distribuiting of the Lands
of Ireland, that Island had been fully conquered before the Continent of Wales
had been reduced. But the truth is, when private men attempt the Conquest of
Countries at their own charge, commonly their enterprises do perish without
success: as when in the time of Queen Elizabeth Sir Thomas Smith undertook to
recover the Ardes: and Chatterton, to reconquer the Fues, and Orier. The one
lost his Son; and the other himself; and both their Adventures came to nothing.
And as for the Crown of England, it has had the like Fortune in the Conquest
of this Land, as some Purchasers have; who desire to buy Land at too easy a
Rate: they find those cheap Purchasers so full of trouble, as they spend twice
as much as the Land is worth, before they get the quiet possession thereof.

And as the best policy was not observed in the distribution of the Conquered
Lands; That the first English Adventurers in Ireland, were deceived in the
choice of the fittest places to settle their Plantations in
so as I conceive, that the first Adventurers intending to make a full Conquest
of the Irish, were deceived in the choice of the fittest places for their
Plantation. For they sat down, and erected their Castles and Habitations in
the Plains, and open Countries; where they found most fruitful and profitable
Lands, and turned the Irish into the Woods and Mountains: Which as they were
proper places for Outlaws and Thieves, so were they their Natural Castles and
Fortifications; thither they drove their preys and stealths; there they lurkt,
and lay in wait to do mischief. These ^^st places they kept unknown, by making
the ways and entries thereunto impassable; there they kept their Creaghts or
Herds of Cattle, living by the Milk of the Cow, without Husbandry or Tillage;
there they increased and multiplied unto infinite numbers by promiscuous
generation among themselves; there they made their Assemblies, and Conspiracies
without discovery: But they discovered the weakness of the English dwelling in
the open plains, and thereupon made their Sallies and Retreats with great
advantage; Whereas on the other side, if the English had builded their Castles
and Towns in those places of fastness, and had driven the Irish into the plains
and open Countries, where they might have had an eye and observation upon them,
the Irish had been easily kept in order, and in short time reclaimed from their
wildness; There they would have used Tillage, dwelt together in Town ships,
learned Mechanical Arts and Sciences. The Woods had been wasted with the
English Habitations, as they were afterward about the Forts of Mariborough,
and Philipston, which were built in the fast places in Leinster, and the ways
and passages throughout Ireland, would have been as clear and open, as they are
in England, (or Ireland) at this day.

Having thus far recounted the manifold defects, mischiefs and impediments that
both in the Civil and Martial Affairs so long obstructed the full Conquest of
Ireland, I should have here also briefly recited the many good Laws and
Ordinances made and enacted from time to time, by the Kings of England and the
Parliaments in Ireland, for redressing the said mischiefs and inconveniences;
but all fair endeavors and purposes of this kind proving abortive and
ineffectual, for want of the Sovereign Sword, as well as the Royal Scepter to
put the same in execution; I shall now only set forth the Nature of the Irish
Customs, with the evil Consequences thereof; and then proceed to a conclusion
of this discourse, containing those Affairs that shall appear most remarkable
in the reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James and King Charles the First, and
especially in the Reign of our present Gracious Sovereign King Charles the
Second, in order to the Reformation and good Government of this Realm.

If we consider the Nature of the Irish Customs, The Nature of the Irish
Customs destructive to all good Government.
we shall find that the people which does use them, must of necessity be Rebels
to all good Government, destroy the Commonwealth wherein they live, and bring
Barbarism and Desolation upon the richest and most fruitful Land of the World.
For whereas by the just and honorable Law of England, and by the Laws of all
other well governed Kingdoms and Commonwealths, Murder, Manslaughter, Rape,
Robbery and Theft, are punished with Death; By the Irish Custom, or Brehen Law,
the highest of these offenses was punished only with Fine, which they called
an Erick. Therefore, when Sir William Fitz-Williams (being Lord Deputy) told
Maguire that he was to send a Sheriff into Farmannagh, being lately before made
a County; your Sheriff (said Maguire) shall be welcome to me, but let me know
his Erick, or the price of his head before hand, that if my people cut it off,
I may cut the Erick upon the Country. As for Oppression, Extortion, and other
trespasses, the weaker had never any remedy against the stronger: whereby it
came to pass, that no man could enjoy his Life, his Wife, his Lands or Goods in
safety; if a mightier man then himself had an appetite to take the same from
him. Wherein they were little better then Cannibals, who do hunt one another,
and he that has most strength and swiftness, does eat and devour all his
followers.

Again, In England and all well ordered Commonwealths, men have certain
Estates in their Lands and possessions, and their inheritances descend from
Father to Son, which does give them an encouragement to Build, and Plant, and
to improve their Lands, and to make them better for their Posterities. But by
the Irish Custom of Tanistry, the Chieftains of every Country, and the Chief
of every Sept, had no longer Estate then for life in their Chieferies, the
inheritance whereof did rest in no man. And these Chieferies, though they had
some portions of Land allotted to them, did consist chiefly in Cuttings and
Cosheries, and other Irish Exactions, whereby they did spoil and impoverish the
People at their pleasure. And when their Chieftains were dead, their Sons or
next Heirs did not succeed them, but their Tanists, who were Elective, and
purchased their Elections by strong hand; And by the Irish Custom of Gavelkind,
the inferior Tennanties were partible amongst all the Males of the Sept, both
Bastards and Legitimate: and after partition made, if any one of the Sept had
died his portion was not divided among his Sons, but the Chief of the Sept made
a new partition of all the Lands belonging to that Sept, and gave every one his
part according to his antiquity.

That the Irish Custom of Tanistry made all their possessions uncertain.
These two Irish Customs made all their Possessions uncertain, being shuffled,
changed, and removed so often from one to another, by new Elections, and
partitions; which uncertainty of Estates has been the true cause of such
Desolations and Barbarismes in this Land, as the like was never seen in any
Country, that professes the name of Christ. For, though the Irish be a Nation
of great Antiquity, and wanted neither Wit nor Valor; and though they had
received the Christian Faith, above twelve hundred years since, and were Lovers
of Music and Poetry, and all kind of Learning, and possessed a Land abounding
with all things necessary for the Civil life of man; yet (which is strange to
be related) they did never build any houses of Brick or Stone (some few poor
Religious Houses excepted) before the Reign of King Henry the Second, though
they were Lords of this Island for many hundred years before, and since the
Conquest attempted by the English: Albeit, when they saw as Build Castles upon
their Borders, they did only in imitation of us, erect some few piles for the
Captains of the Country: yet may it be confidently affirmed that never any
particular person, either before or since, did build any Stone or Brick House
for his private Habitation; but such as have lately obtained Estates, according
to the course of the Law of England. Neither did any of them in all this time,
plant any Gardens or Orchards, Enclose or improve their Lands, live together in
settled Villages, or Towns, nor made any provision for Posterity; which being
against all common sense and reason, must needs be imputed to those
unreasonable Customs, which made their Estates so uncertain and transitory in
their possessions.

For, who would plant, improve, And therefore unwilling to improve.
or build upon that Land, which a stranger whom he knew not should possess
after his death? For that (as Solomon notes) is one of the strangest vanities
under the sun. And this was the true reason, why Vlster, and all the Irish
Countries were found so wast and desolate about the beginning of King James's
Reign; and so would have continued to the worlds end, if these Customs were not
abolished by the Law of England.

The ill conconsequences of Gavelkind Custom in Ireland.
Again, That Irish Custom of Gavelkind, did breed another mischief; for
thereby, every man being born to Land, as well Bastard as Legitimate, they all
held themselves to be Gentlemen. And though their Portions were never so small,
and themselves never so poor, (for Gavelkind must needs in the end make a poor
Gentility) yet did they scorn to descend to Husbandry or Merchandise, or to
learn any Mechanical Art or Science. And this is the true cause, why there were
never any Corporate Towns erected in the Irish Countries.

The Maritine Towns in Ireland first built by the Ostmen or Easterlings
As for the Maritine Cities and Towns, most certain it is, that they were Built
and Peopled by the Ostmen, or Easterlings: for the Natives of Ireland never
performed so good a work, as to build a City. Besides, these poor Gentlemen
were so affected unto their small portions of Land, as they rather chose to
live at home by Theft, Extortion, and Coshering, then to seek any better
fortunes abroad: which increased their Septs or Sir-names into such numbers, as
there are not to be found in any Kingdom of Europe so many Gentlemen of one
Blood, Family, and Surname, as there were of late of the O Neals in Vlster; of
the Bourkes in Cannaght; of the Geraldines and Butlers in Munster and Leinster.
And the like may be said of inferior Bloods and Families; whereby it came to
pass in times of trouble and dissension, that they made great parties and
factions adhering to one another with much constancy; because they were tied
together, Vinculo Sanguinis; whereas Rebels and Malefactors which are tied to
their Leaders by no bond, either of Duty or Blood, do more easily break and
fall off one from another. And besides, their Co-habitation in one Territory or
Country, gave them opportunity suddenly to assemble, and conspire, and rise in
Multitudes against the Crown. And even till of late in the time of Peace, there
was found this inconvenience, that there could hardly be an indifferent trial
had between the King, and the Subject, or between party and party, by reason of
this general Kindred and Consanguinity.

The Irish by their frequent Rebellions became fully Conquered by Queen
Elizabeth.
And now are we arrived at that remarkable time (being about the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign) wherein was laid the foundation of that eternal peace
of Ireland, so solidly discoursed of, and stoutly fought for in her time; and
soon after very far proceeded in, by King James of blessed memory; But fully
perfected (according to all humane appearance) by our Gracious Sovereign King
Charles the Second: for though Queen Elizabeth through the whole course of her
Reign studied by all the ways and means possible she could, to retain the Irish
Nation in their dutiful obedience to her; Howbeit, by their frequent Rebellions
(being often excited thereunto by the Pope, and the King of Spain) and
especially by that last and general one, so diligently managed by that
notorious and ungrateful Rebel Tyrone and his Adherents; they so far provoked
her, as that by employing (as it were) her whole care and strength for the
suppression thereof, she most happily brought it to an end (by the utter
overthrow of the said Tyrone, and the Spanish Forces at the Siege of Kingsale)
under the prudent conduct of the Lord Montjoy, then Lord Deputy of Ireland, in
the eighth year after it brake forth; which Rebellion had been begun upon
private grudges, intermixed with ambition, cherished by contempt and parsimony
in England, spread over all Ireland, by pretext of restoring the Romish
Religion, and hope of unbridled licentiousness and impunity; Strengthened by
the light credulity of some, and secret favor of others which were of great
authority, as also by one or two prosperous successes, Spanish Pentions,
Spanish Forces, and Papal Indulgences; and protected by the wicked emulations
of the English, by a by-partite Government, the covetousness of the old
Soldiers, the cunning practices of Tyrone, by his dissembled truces and
submissions, by the protections of Malefactors bought for money, the most
cumbersom difficulty of places, and by the desperate kind of men, safer in the
nimbleness of their heels, than stableness in Battle.

The ways propounded in Q. Elizabeth's Reign, to establish a perpetual peace in
Ireland.
This War proving thus difficult and very tedious, and like to have been also
very dangerous, in case Tyrone and the Spaniards had prevailed at Kingsale,
caused many wise and worthy persons of the English party, to advise of the best
ways that could be thought on, how the Irish, (after the suppression of this
Rebellion) might be assuredly contained in their future Obedience to the Crown
of England, and not be subject to those frequent relapses, whereof the English
and the honester sort of Irish, had too often had a sad experience; in the
conclusion of which debate, it was generally agreed upon, that the fittest
remedy and expedient to prevent all those future mischiefs and inconveniences,
would be (upon the subduing of Tyrone, and his Confederates) to transplant the
Rebels of Vlster into Leinster, and those of Leinster into Vlster, and to give
all their Lands to such English as should be invited to come out of England to
Plant the same, with such Estates as should be thought meet, and for such
rents, as in the whole would maintain four thousand five hundred Soldiers, and
those disposed of (as now they are) in very advantageous, and well fortified
Garrisons, which might prove an exceeding good thing both to her Highness, to
have so many old Soldiers always ready at a call, to what purpose soever she
please to employ them, and also to have that Land thereby so strengthened, that
it should neither fear any foreign Invasion nor practice, which the Irish
should ever attempt, but should keep them under in continual awe, and firm
obedience. This was therefore a notorious Error, and proved (as you have heard)
of sad consequence to the first English Adventurers, and Conquerers of this
Kingdom, not to have ascertained (by way of Chiefry to be raised yearly out of
the Conquered Lands) a ^ompetent maintenance for the perpetual continuing of
five or six thousand Soldiers in pay, which should have been disposed of in
several strong Garrisons through all Ireland as aforesaid; then would have
followed, that the Laws of England might have been as freely communi^ated to
the Irish, as well as to the English Colonies, without any need of turning the
Irish into Deserts and Mountains, still to continue them in their Barbarism,
but rather to have made use of them (as the present English Planters do) for
their Tenants and Laborers, to the great benefit and security of the Public,
as well as the Private advantage of the English in Ireland. And this was the
course which the Romans observed in the Conquest of England, for they planted
some of their Legions in all places convenient, the which they caused the
Counntry to maintain, by cutting upon every portion of Land a reasonable rent,
which they called Romescot, the which might not surcharge the Tenant or
Freeholder, and might defray the pay of the Garrisons. And this has been
always observed by all Princes in all Countries to them newly subdued, to set
Garrisons amongst them, to keep them in duty, whose burden they made them to
bear, and the want of this Ordinance in the first Conquest of Ireland, by Henry
the Second, was the cause of the so short decay of that Government, and the
quick recovery again of the Irish, therefore by all means this was to be
provided for; And this was thought to be worthy of blame, that in the Planting
of Munster (after the suppression of the Earl of Desmond's Rebellion Anno
1580.) that no care was had of this Ordinance, nor any strength of Garrison
provided for, by a certain allowance out of all the forfeited Lands, but only
the present profit looked into, and the safe continuance thereof for ever
thereafter neglected.

Under every of those English men, were to be placed some of those Irish, to be
Tenants for a certain Rent, according to the quantity of such Land as every man
should have alloted to him, and should be able to Weild, wherein this special
regard was to be had, that in no place under any Landlord, there should be many
of them placed together, but dispersed wide from their acquaintance, and
scattered far abroad through all the Country: for that was the evil which was
then found in Ireland, that the Irish dwelt together by their Septs, and
several Nations, so as they might practice, or conspire what they pleased;
whereas, if there had been English well placed amongst them, they should not
have been able once to stir or murmur, but that it should be known, and they
shortened according to their demerits.

But King James being swayed by milder Councils, How far K. James proceeded in
the Reformation and settlement of Ireland.
(though Tyrone and all his Adherents had absolutely submitted themselves, both
as to life and estate to be at his Majesty's pleasure) did by a General Act of
State, cal^ed The Act of Oblivion, published by Proclamation under the great
Seal, remit, and utterly extinguish all offenses against the Crown, and all
particular Trespasses between Subject and Subject, done at any time before his
Majesty's Reign, to all such as would come into the Justice of the Assize by a
certain day, and claim the benefit of this Act. And by the same Proclamation,
all the Irishry (who for the most part, in former times, were left under the
tyranny of their Lords and Chieftains, and had no defense or Justice from the
Crown) were received into his Majesty's immediate protection. The Public Peace
being thus established, the State proceeded next to establish the Public
Justice in every part of the Realm, by dividing all Ireland into Shires, and
erecting Circuits in every Province, and Governing all things therein,
according to the Laws of England; But being it was impossible to make a
Commonwealth in Ireland, without performing another service, which was the
settling of all the Estates and Possessions, as well of Irish as English,
throughout the Kingdom. Therefore, whereas there was (as you heard) but one
Freeholder in a whole Country, which was the Lord himself, the rest holding in
Villenage, and being subject to the Lords immeasurable Taxations; whereby they
had no encouragement to Build or Plant: Now the Lords Estate was divided into
two parts, that which he held in Domain to himself, which was still left unto
him, and that which was in the hands of the Tenants, who had Estates made in
their possessions, according to the Common Law of England, paying instead of
uncertain Irish Impositions, certain English Rents: whereby the people have
since set their minds upon repairing their Houses, and Manuring their Lands, to
the great increase of the Private and Public Revenues; These proceedings bred
such comfort and security in the hearts of all men, as thereupon ensued for the
space of about forty years, the calmest and most universal Peace that ever was
seen in Ireland.

But the foundation of this so long for wished, The Foundation of that
settlement shaken Anno 1627. by the Irish refusing to contribute toward the
pay of a standing Army in Ireland.
and most delectable Peace, was not so deeply laid, but but that it received a
shake by the first storm that threatened England; for being engaged in a War
with France and Spain, about the beginning of his Majesty's Reign King Charles
the First, and having therefore occasion to send some additional Forces into
Ireland, for the better assuring the Peace thereof in such a doubtful time of
trouble; A proposition was made by the then Lord Deputy Falkland, to the chief
of the Irish Nation, for the contributing of a competent sum of Money, toward
the maintenance of those Forces to be established by way of a stan^ing Army in
Ireland; To which they would not condescend without a Toleration of Religion
first obtained, and then they would willingly maintain five hundred horse, and
five thousand foot, wherein the Protestants must have born a share also; But
the Protestants not approving thereof; The Lord Archbishop Usher, then Lord
Primate of Ireland, was desired by the said Lord Deputy (at a great Assembly,
both of Irish and English, met at his Majesty's Castle at Dublin the last of
April, Anno 1627) to press the Irish (by very strong Arguments) to a
condescension of the said proposition; where amongst many other most excellent
ones then made use of by his Lordship to induce them thereunto; He declared
that the resolution of those Gentlemen in denying to contribute unto the
supplying of the Army, sent thither for their defense, did put him in mind of
the Philosophers Observation; That such as have respect to a few things, are
easily misled; the present pressure which they sustained by the imposition of
Soldiers, and the desire they had to be cased of that burden, did so wholly
possess their minds, that they had only an eye to the freeing of themselves
from that encumbrance, without looking at all to the Desolations that were like
to come upon them by a long and heavy War, which the having of an Army in a
readiness, might be a means to have prevented; The lamentable effects (said he)
of our last Wars in this Kingdom does yet freeshly stick in our memories:
Neither can we so soon forget the depopulation of our Land, when besides the
cumbustions of War, the extremity of famine grew so great that the very Women
in some places by the way side, have surprised the men that rod by, to feed
themselves with the flesh of the Horse of the Rider: and that now again (said
he) here is a storm toward wheresoever it will light, every wise man will
easily foresee, which if we be not careful to meet with in time, our State may
prove irrecoverable, when it will be too late to think of had I wist.

Proceeding farther, he recounted to them, how that in the days of King Henry
the Eighth, the Earl of Desmond had made an offer of the Kingdom of Ireland to
the French King, Ireland offered to Sale to the French King, in days of K.
Henry the Eighth.
(the Instrument whereof remains yet upon Record in the Court of Paris) and
that the Bishop of Rome afterward transferred the Title of all our Kingdoms
unto Charles the Fifth; which new Grants were confirmed unto his Son Philip, in
the time of Queen Elizabeth, with a resolution to settle the Crown of Ireland
upon the Spanish Infanta: Which Donations of the Popes, howsoever they were in
themselves of no value, yet would they serve for a fair color to a Potent
Pretender, who is able to supply, by the power of the Sword, whatsoever therein
may be thought defective. Whereunto, might be added; that, of late in Spain, at
the very same time, when the Treaty of the Match was in hand; there was a Book
published with great approbation there, by one of Irish Birth, Philip O
Sullevan: wherein the Spaniard is taught; that the ready way to establish his
Monarchy (for that is the only thing he mainly aims at, and is plainly there
confessed) is first to set upon Ireland, which being quickly obtained; the
Conquest of Scotland, of England next, then of the Low Countries, is foretold,
with great facility will follow after.

Neither have we more cause (says my Lord) in this regard, A distinction of
the Irish.
to be afraid of a foreign Invasion, than to be jealous of a Domestic
Rebellion. Where, least I be mistaken, as your Lordships have been lately, I
must of necessity put a difference betwixt the Inhabitants of this Nation: some
of them are descended of the Race of the ancient English; or otherwise hold
their Estates from the Crown, and have Possessions of their own to stick to,
who easily may be trusted against a foreign Invader, although they differ from
the State in matter of Religion: for proof of which fidelity in this kind (he
says) he need go no farther, than the late Wars in the time of the Earl of
Tyrone; wherein they were assaulted with as powerful Temptations, to move them
from their Loyalty, as possibly could be afterward presented unto them; for at
that time, not only the King of Spain did confederate himself with the Rebels,
and landed his Forces at Kingsale for their assistance: but the Bishop of Rome
also, with his Breves and Bulls solicited the Nobility, and Gentry of Ireland
to Revolt from their Obedience to the Queen, declaring that the English did
fight against the Catholic Religion, and ought to be oppugned as much as the
Turks; importing the same favors, to such as should set upon them, as he does
unto such as fight against the Turks; and finally, promising unto them, that
the God of Peace would tread down their Enemies under their feet speedily. And
yet for all the Popes promises and threatenings, which were also seconded by a
Declatation of the Divines of Salamanca and Valledolid, not only the Lords and
Gentlemen, did constantly continue their Allegiance to the Queen, but were also
encouraged so to do by the Priests of the Pale, that were of Popish Profession:
who were therefore vehemently taxed by the Traitor Suellevan, for exhorting
them to follow the Queens side; which he is pleased to term Insanam and
venenosam Doctrinam, and tartareum Dogma, a mad and venomous Doctrine, and a
hellish Opinion.

But besides these, there were a great number of Irish, who either bore a
secret grudge against the English, planted among them; or having nothing at all
to lose, upon the first occasion, are apt to join with any foreign Invader;
for we have not used that policy in our Plantations that wise States have
used in former times. They, when the settled new Colonies in any place, did
commonly translate the ancient Inhabitants to other dwellings. We have brought
new Planters into the Land, (meaning those got by Desmonds Rebellion, and six
Counties in Vlster by Tyrone and his Adherents departing into Spain) and have
left the old Inhabitants to shift for themselves; who being strong in body, and
daily increasing in number, and seeing themselves deprived of their means and
maintenance; which they and their Ancestors had formerly enjoyed, would
undoubtedly be ready, when any occasion offered it self, to disturb our quiet;
whether then (says he) we cast our eyes abroad, or look at home, we see our
danger is very great.

The Romish Irish as well as the Protestant British Planters are in equal
danger of a Common Enemy.
Neither may you, my Lords, and Gentlemen, that differ from us in point of
Religion, imagine that the Community of profession will exempt you more than us
from the danger of a Common Enemy. Whatsoever you may expect from a forreigner,
you may conjecture by the Answer which the Duke of Medina Sidonia gave in this
case in 88. That his Sword knew no difference between a Catholic and an
Heretic, but that he came to make way for his Master: and what kindness thy
looked for from the Countrymen that were to join with them, they might judge,
as well by the carriage which they ordinarily used toward them, both in the
Court and Colleges abroad; as by the advice, not long since, presented by them
unto the Council of Spain; wherein they would not have so much as the Irish
Priests and Jesuits that are descended of English blood to be trusted, but
would have you, and all yours to be accounted Enemies to the designs of Spain.
In the Declaration published about the beginning of the Insurrection of James
Fitz-Morrice in the South, the Rebels professed it was no part of their meaning
to subvert Honorabile Anglorum solium; their quarrel was only against the
Person of Queen Elizabeth and her Government. But now the case is otherwise;
the Translating of the Throne of the English to the Power of a Forreigner, is
the thing that mainly is intended, and the re-establishing of the Irish in
their Ancient Possessions, which by the the Valor of our Ancestors were
gained from them. This (says my Lord) you may assure your self, Manet alta
mente repostum, and makes you more to be hated of them, than any other of the
English Nation whatsoever. The danger therefore being thus common to us all, it
stands us upon, to join our best helps for the avoiding of it.

The Irish refuse to contribute toward a standing Army in Ireland, except they
might first obtain a toleration of the Romish Religion.
But all these strong arguments, with many more, could not prevail in the least
with the Irish to contribute one penny, in answer to his Majesty's desires on
this so important an occasion, without they might first obtain a Toleration of
their Religion; To which the Lord Primate told them, that the only way was, to
grant to his Majesty freely, what they would give, without all manner of
conditions that might seem unequal unto any side; and to refer unto his own
sacred breast, how far he would be pleased to extend or abridge his favors; of
whose Lenity in forbearing the execution of the Statute (he said) the Recusants
of Ireland had found such experience, that they could not expect a greater
liberty, by giving any thing that was demanded, then now already they did
freely enjoy. The loss of which rare opportunity so seasonably offering it self
to the Irish Nation, That the Irish have cause to repent their not contributing
toward a standing Army in Ireland.
to express the height of their Loyalty and dutifulness to his Majesty, by a
free and generous contribution upon so important occasion, they have now
leisure enough to repent; for their forwardness manifested afterward in
levying of Forces, and contributing toward the maintenance of that Army
designed for an Expedition against the Scots, may seem to proceed (as much if
not more) from the prejudice the Irish had against that Nation, both upon the
account of their Religion, and their daily accession in great Numbers out of
Scotland to inhabit the North parts of Ireland, then any thing of a generous
Loyalty that might move them then, more then formerly, thereunto; And as for
what overtures, and offers of kindnesses were tendered by them to his Majesty,
during the late unhappy Wars in England, was but to fish in troubled waters,
with an expectation (after the Example of other disobedient Subjects) to extort
from his Majesty (by reason of the disadvantages of the times) such unequal
Conditions, as they were out of all hopes to obtain from him in a Calmer
season. Besides, they had the honor upon this occasion to have many of their
Country men trained up to Military Discipline amongst the English Soldiery,
which at last sorted not to the best, for that many of the Irish Soldiers and
Commanders proved afterward unhappily to be the very Ring leaders of that
bloody Rebellion begun in Ireland, the 23d of October, Anno. 1641.

I have more largely insisted upon this of my Lord Primates Speech, then did
well consist with my designed brevity; First, because it does excellently set
forth the General State of Ireland, both as touching points of Interest, and
also transactions, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, down almost
as far as the last Irish Rebellion, Anno 1641. Secondly, for that it justifies
the necessity of maintaining a standing Army in Ireland, and the convenience of
the late settlement thereof, as very suitable to the whole scope, and subject
of this discourse. Thirdly and lastly, because I find my Lord Primate a true
Prophet by this his Speech, wherein he foresaw the storm that afterward fell
upon Ireland, in the year 1641. In which were most inhumanly massacred (by the
outrageous carriage of the Irish) about a hundred and fifty thousand of the
British Planters, without the least provocation given by them to the Irish, to
perpetrate so wicked and unparalleled Act of Barbarism. But the unhappy troubles
that soon after followed in England, hindered the English from having an
opportunity to be thoroughly revenged on the Irish, for their perfidiously
massacred Countrymen, (all Ireland as well as England, being in the mean time
divided into several factions, the Popish Irish party of the supreme Counsel
against the Popes Nuntio and his party, afterward some English and Irish for,
and others against my Lord of Ormonds Peace, and at last some of the Protestant
party, and of the Irish for the King, and some others of both parties for the
Rump-Parliament, but all in a confusion) till the year 1649. The English find
an opportunity to be thoroughly revenged en the Irish Anno, 1649. etc.
At what time a considerable Army of English being transported into Ireland,
where after two Disputes, the one at Dublin, and the other at Tredagh, the
Royal party there (finding no probability of effecting any thing advantageous
to his Majesty's Service) joining their forces with those newly landed out of
England, so bore down the Irish, that in less space than three years, there was
scarce an Irish man through all Ireland, that durst hold up his hand against
them, and by a necessary severity put in practice for the soon finishing of the
War, the whole Kingdom became upon a sudden so depopulated, that considering
what vast numbers of people were destroyed by the Sword, Famine, and Plague, it
is thought that in the conclusion of the said War, there was not left living
the eighth part of all the Irish Nation; a just judgment of God inflicted on
them for their notorious Barbarism committed in their massacring the English.

The Irishry being thus broken, the Irish Proprietors of Lands within the
Provinces of Munster, Leinster, The Irish being broken, are Transplanted into
the Provinces of Connaght and County of Clare
and Vlster, were commanded by Proclamation, by a certain day upon pain of
Death, to Transplant themselves into the Province of Connaght, and County of
Clare, there to receive their proportions of Land according to their
Qualifications, the which very speedily and submissively they performed
accordingly. This Province of Connaght, and County of Clare, for their Natural
and Artificial strength, are worth the noting, being altogether environed on
the West and South-west part thereof by the vast Ocean, and almost encompassed
on the East and North-East part thereof, in the whole length from North to
South, for the space of one hundred and forty miles, or thereabouts, with the
great, and for the most part impassable River Shannon, except by Boat or
Bridge; And on all sides and parts of the said Province of Connaght and County
of Clare, so beset with mighty strong Garrisons, as namely, Limrick, Galloway,
Athlone, James-Town, the Forts of Slego, and Belick in the County of Mayo, with
many other Garrisons of lesser moment, and yet of no small strength, that
should the Irish at any time appear to stir in the least to oppose the Ruling
power, it were no less then wilfully to expose themselves to immediate
slaughter, and the mercy of the Sword.

This service being thus performed (together with the turning out about the
same time by degrees all the Popish Irish Proprietors out of all the strong
Towns and Cities in Ireland, Some part of the English Army disbanded after the
Irish Transplantation.
and bringing in Protestant Planters as fast as they could to succed them in
their habitations) soon after followed the disbanding of certain Regiments of
the Army, who received their respective proportions of Land for their Arrears,
in the Provinces of Lynster, Munster, and Vlster, according to their Lots, upon
every Acre whereof was imposed a certain Chiefry or Quit-Rent, to be yearly
paid (after the expiration of five years) toward the defraying of the Public
charge of the Kingdom. The same method was soon after observed in satisfying
the Arrears of the rest of the Army; And about the same time the Commissioners
sat at Athlone, for determining the Qualifications of the Irish, who having
there received their doom, immediately posted to Lougreah, to get their
respective proportions of Land to be assigned to them, either in Connaght or
the County of Clare; according to the tenor of their said determined
Qualifications, from Commissioners siting at Lougreah for that purpose; upon
every Acre whereof a Quit-Rent was also imposed, to be paid yearly (after the
expiration of five years as aforesaid) toward the Public charge.

All these things being effected, The English and Irish settled upon their
respective proportions of Lands within the compass of three years. Whereupon
followed a strange alteration in the general Face and State of Ireland.
and brought to this pass, within the compass of three years or thereabouts
(this settlement having been first begun, Anno 1653.) there appeared within
three or four years following such a strange alteration in the general Face and
State of Ireland as might justly work much admiration in any sober man; who
having traveled over a considerable part of this Realm in the years 1652 and
1653. should on one side but consider what a dreadful wast Country he had
beheld; where, for ten, sometimes twenty or thirty Miles together, nay indeed
almost all the Kingdom over (except about the English Garrisons) one should not
behold, The lamentable condition all Ireland was reduced unto in the close of
the War, An. 1652, 1653.
Man, Bird, or Beast appear; the very wild Fowls of the Air, and the wild
Beasts of the Field, being either dead, or having departed out of those
Desolations, and thousands of Irish daily starving for want of Food, did in
this extremity ordinarily feed on the Soldiers Horses, for which, no
satisfaction was in any times received but with the loss of their lives: Nay,
the Famine grew generally at last to that height, that the Irish did not only
feed upon Horses, but upon dead Corpse taken out of the Graves, (the English
Army and all those that followed them, being in the mean time necessitated to
be upon the matter wholly supplied out of England with all manner of Provisions,
as well as Pay) I say, these things being seriously considered, could not
choose but pierce a heart of Stone with grief and sorrow. Ireland reviving
again from its ruinous condition.
But on the other side, what true hearted English man (or indeed any Christian)
but would have rejoiced to see a considerable number of all sorts of people
repairing securely from all parts of the Country, four times in the year, to
receive Justice in the four Courts of Judicature at Dublin, according to the
nature of their Complaints; To see the Judges twice a year ride through all the
Circuits in Ireland, bravely attended, and entertained by the Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, and many other persons of good quality, being all
English, accompanied also with many Irish, both Gentry and Commons. To see,
moreover, both English and Irish (together with the additional number of many
thousands of English, Welsh and Scots, with some Dutch that yearly Transported
themselves hither to Plant) diligently applying themselves all over Ireland to
Tillage, and breeding of of all sorts of Cattle (with a competent proportion
whereof, the whole Country became in a few years indifferently well Planted
though not with a sufficient numbe^ of people to inhabit the same* which are
still wanting, and will be so yet for many years to come) repairing (as fast as
they could) ruined Houses and Towns, and building of new ones, forwarding
Merchandise and Commerce, and carefully promoting all other ways and means that
tended to the repair of a ruined Commonwealth; The Irish rejoicing though they
had got but small Estates in lieu of great ones, after so terrible a storm; But
most of the English rejoicing much more, as having got far better Estates then
ever they expected to inherit from their Ancestors. The joy of the English in
Ireland crowned by the happy restoration of his Majesty, and the Irish
dejected thereby.


But that which crowned the joy of all the English hearts in Ireland, and as
much dejected the Transplanted Irish, (who now expected no less then to be
generally restored to their former Estates) was the happy Restoration of his
Majesty into England, wherein Ireland received no other change or alteration,
but the Soldiers parting withal, or purchasing one third of all the Lands
assigned them for their Arrears (which was cast into a common stock to satisfy
Reprisals) that so they might get the rest confirmed to them by his Majesty;
And the deposing of all the Cities and Corporate Towns of Ireland (with the
four Counties formerly reserved for the Public) to the 49 men, many whereof
notwithstanding they had performed excellent service in the late Wars of
Ireland, yet received no satisfaction (till of late) for their Arrears, being
formerly neglected therein, by reason of their noted loyalty to his Majesty;
And the restoring of some Noble men and others of the Irish Nation to their
former Estates, either by passing their Trials at the Court of Claims at
Dublin, or by meriting the same by their good services to his Majesty.

Now that I may draw to an end of this Discourse, and endeavor to prove what I
formerly proposed; That that Eternal Peace of Ireland, That perpetual Peace is
now established in Ireland by the late settlement thereof, being the conclusion
of this discourse.
which was so solidly discoursed of, and stoutly fought for in Queen Elizabeth's
time; And very far proceeded in by King James; But is absolutely perfected (as
I said according to all humane appearance) by the last settlement of Ireland
confirmed by his gracious Majesty King Charles the Second, I desire the Reader
to take these things into his consideration; As first, to observe, The good
consequences by the late settlement of Ireland, By dividing the great Irish
Lords and Gentry, from their numerous Train of Adherents and Tenants.
that by the Transplantation of the Irish Proprietors into the Province of
Connaght and County of Clare, those Irish so Transplanted were not only
provided of a livelihood to support them; settled in such a place of security,
as that they are wholly dis-enabled thereby to work any prejudice to the
English Government; And separated (for the most part) from their numerous train
of Tenants and Adherents, (who willingly staid behind them, becoming Tenants to
the no small Advantage of the English, but to the great disadvantage of the
Irish Lords, and Great ones of that Nation, who at all times chiefly relied
upon these kind of people to promote their many Rebellions in Ireland) all
which matters (though of very great importance) were notwithstanding wholly
neglected or omitted by the English in all their former Settlements of this
Realm; But also by this Transplantation of the said Irish Proprietors, the
English being invested by way of Propriety and Tenancy in above three parts of
four, of all the Lands in Ireland, there will hereafter be no need to fear as
formerly (the English being now the greater Number in all their Public
Assemblies and Parliaments) that there shall be any farther obstruction given
by the Popish Irish party, By increasing the Number of Protestant Justices of
Peace and Parliament men, etc in Ireland.
either to the making of good Laws, or putting the same in execution; or to the
imposing of Money toward the payment of the Army, or any other public
charges; Or that the English shall henceforth fear to be any way degenerated by
reason of their marrying and fostering with the Irish, having there people
enough of their own Nation and Religion upon the place, as well to supply their
continual wants therein, as also by those their dispersed, and growing Numerous
habitations in most parts of the Kingdom, will prove a singular good means to
civilize the Irish from their wonted Barbarism.

Secondly, That by having now (which was otherwise formerly) all the strong
Towns and Cities of Ireland, By the English having the possession (by way of
habitation) of all the strong Towns and Cities of Ireland.
for the most part inhabited by Protestants, and being withal better
fortified, as not only environed with strong Walls about them, but also
mightily strengthened by well fortified Cittadels within them, to present
surprisals, and bravely manned with Men, Arms and Ammunition to defend them, the
whole Kingdom is thereby become better secured from future Rebellions, and
consequently the British Planters from having any more their throats cut by
the Irish; It being observed formerly, that there was nothing did more stay and
strengthen this realm, then the well fortified Corporate Towns, as by proof
has manifestly appeared in many Rebellions (till the last) in which when all
the Countries have swerved, the Towns have stood fast, and yielded good relief
to the English Soldiers in all occasions of service; The want of which supply,
by the Revolt of most of the Corporate Towns of this Kingdom, Anno 1641, First
occasioned the inhumane slaughter of the greatest part of the British Planters
there, who in their extremity sought the protection of those Towns but could
not obtain it; Secondly, the continuance of the War so long; And last of all,
the universal desolation of the Country, and almost a total extirpation of the
whole Irish Nation out of Ireland.

Thirdly, and lastly, And by increasing of his Majesty's Revenue in Ireland
beyond all former examples.
that by the late increase of his Majesty's standing Revenue in Ireland, beyond
all former Examples; As namely by the Imposition of Quit-Rents upon all the
Lands of the Adventurers, Soldiers, and Transplanted Irish, Hearth Money,
Excise, etc. which will be much more increased beyond what it now is, by the
Industry of so great and universal a British Plantation, as will inhabit this
Country, when fully Planted; It may therefore be very well hoped that Ireland
will in a short time become so well improved thereby, as to be sufficiently
able not only to maintain a good standing Army upon the account of its own
proper Revenues, to make the Irish desist from doing themselves and the English
harm, (the want whereof proved the ruin of all former Settlements there, since
the first Conquest of it by the Engglish) and discharge all other Public
Expenses; But will also (ere long) afford yearly some competent supply of money
toward the filling of the English Exchequer, by way of retaliation, in lieu of
those many and great Sums sent at several times out of England for the support
of this so long unhappy Kingdom; The premises being therefore seriously and
duly considered, I think I may safely conclude, that that Eternal Peace of
Ireland so solidly discoursed of, and stoutly fought for in Q. Elizabeth's time:
And very far proceeded in by K. James; Is now absolutely established (as I said
according to all humane appearance) by his gracious Majesty, our dread
Sovereign K. Charles the Second, who long may he live in all earthly happiness;
so that (I suppose) it may be now more truly said then ever, that Ireland which
formerly served but as a Grave to bury our best men, and a Gulf to swallow our
greatest Treasures, is brought by the prudence and policy of her late Kings and
Lord Deputies, to be an Orderly Commonwealth, civil in it self, and in time
like to prove profitable to the Prince, and at all times a good additional
strength to the British Empire.

PART II.
CHAP. I. Of Its Name, Climate, Dimensions, Division, Air, Soil, Commodities,
Money and Buildings.
Name and Climate.
IReland was once called Scotia, from the Scots who inhabited there; and Scotia
major, to distinguish it from Scotland, in the Isle of Britain; But the general
Name hereof is Ireland; by the Latins, called Hibernia; by the Greeeks, Iernia.
And though some frame a wrested Etymology from Iberus, a Spanish Captain; and
some from Irnaulph, once a supposed Duke hereof; as others, ab Hyberno aare,
the winter-like and inclement air: Yet probably, the Name proceeded from Erin,
which signifies, in their own language, a Western Land. And yet we must not
pretermit the Etymon given us by Bochartus, (more near the name, than most of
his other Fancies) who will have it called Hibernia, from Ibernae, a Phaenician
word, signifying the farthest Habitation: there being no Country known amongst
the Ancients, which lay West of Ireland; and is seated under the eighth and
tenth Climates; the longest day being 16 hours and a half in the Southern, and
17 hours 3 quarters in the Northern parts.

It is in length, 300. and in breadth, Dimension.
120. Miles; in shape, some have formed it like an Egg; and others compared it
to the Fore-leg of a Boar, if the simile breed no offense, contains by
computation, about fifteen millions of Acres; it is about half as big as
England and Wales, and much about the same bigness as Scotland, including the
Islands thereunto belonging.

Division.
It was divided anciently into five Provinces, each one a Kingdom in it self;
that is to say, 1. Leinster, 2. Mead, 3. Vlster, 4. Connaght, and 5. Mounster:
but of late time, the Province of Mead is reckoned for a member or part of
Leinster; within these four Provinces (according to the latest Division) are
contained 2328. Parishes.

Leinster.
This Province, the Natives call Leighingh, the Britains, Lein; in Latin,
Lagenia; in the ancient lives of the Saints, Lagen; and in English, Leinster.
It lies Eastward along the Hibernicum Sea: on Connaght side Westward, it is
bounded with the River Shanon; the North with the Territory of Louth, and the
South, with part of the Province of M^^nster. The Country butteth upon England,
as Mounster and Connaght do on Spain.

The Form Form.
thereof is Triangle, and sides not much unequal, from her South-East unto the
West point about 80 miles; from thence, to her North-west about 70 miles, and
her East coast along the Irish Seashore, eighty miles: the Circumference upon
two hundred and seventy miles.

The Air Air.
is clear and gentle, mixed with a temperate disposition, yiedling neither
extremity of Heat or Cold, according to the seasonable times of the Year, and
the natural condition of the Continent. The Soil is generally Fruitful,
Plentiful both in Fish and Flesh, and in other Victuals, as Butter, Cheese and
Milk. It is Fertile in Corn, Cattle, and Pasture ground, and now in a much
better way of improving than formerly, in regard the English do generally
affect to inhabit in this Province, more than in any other part of Ireland, by
reason of its nearer Neighborhood to the Metropolitan City of Dublin, and
bordering so near upon England, does thereby consequently afford them, both
more pleasure and profit. It is well watered with Rivers, and indifferently
well Wooded, except the County of Develin, which complains much of that want,
being so destitute of Wood, that they are compelled to use a clammy kind of fat
Turff for their Fuel, or Sea-coal brought out of England.

The Commodities Commodities.
of this Country do chiefly consist in Cattle, Sea-Fowl and Fish. It breeds
many excellent good Horses, called Irish Hobbies, which have not the same pace
that other Horses have in their course, but a soft and round amble, setting
very easily.

Division.
This Province contains the Counties of Kilkenny, Caterlogh, Queens County,
Kings County, Kildare, East-Meath, West-Meath, Weshford, Wicklo and Dublin: In
which, are comprehended 926. Parishes, whereof, 47. Towns of Note, and 102.
Castles, well fortified, and able to make good resistance against an Enemy; The
English being forced to fortify themselves in their Plantations with strong
holds and fortresses, against the incursious of the Natives.

Mounster.
This Province is called in Irish, Mawn; in a more ordinary construction of
Speech, Wown; in Latin, Momonia; and in English, Mounster; lies open Southward
to the Virginean Sea: Northward it fronteth part of Connaght: The East is
Neighboured by Leinster: And the West is altogether washed with the Ocean
Westward.

The Form Form.
thereof is quadrant or apiece, and in length extended from Ballattimore
Bay in her South, unto the Bay of Galoway in her North, is about 90. miles. Her
broadest part from East to West, is from Waterford Haven, to Feriter Haven, and
contains an hundred miles. The whole Circumference, by following the
Promontories and Inlets, are above four hundred and forty miles.

The Air Air.
mild and temperate, neither too chilling Cold, not t^o schorching Hot. The
Soil in some parts Hilly, looking a loft with Woody, Wild and Solitary
Mountains: Yet the Valleys below, are garnished with Cornfieldsd. And
generally, all, both pleasant for Sight, and fertile for Soil.

The general Commodities Commodities.
of this Province, are Corn, Cattle, Wood, Wool and Fish. The last whereof, it
affords in every place plenty and abundance of all sorts. But none so well
known for the Store of Herrings that are taken there, as is the Promontory
called Eraugh, that lies between Bautre and Ballatimore Bay. Whereunto every
year a great Fleet of Spaniards and Portugals resort (even in the midst of
Winter) to Fish also for Cods.

Division.
It was in times past divided into many parts, as Towoun, that is North
Mounster, whereof Twomond (al-Thomond) or County of Clare was accounted part of
it; Deswoun, that is South Mounster; Hierwoun, that is, West Mounster;
Mean-Woun, that is, Middle Mounster; and Vrwoun, that is, the Front of
Mounster. But at this day it is distinguished into these Counties; Limrick,
Kery, Cork, Waterford and Tipperary: And in these Shires are comprehended
(besides many safe Stations and Roads for Shipping) twenty four Towns of Note
and Trading, sixty six Castles of Old Erection, and including in the whole,
eight hundred and two Parishes.

This Province being counted the largest of all Ireland, Ulster.
called by our Welsh Britains, Vlt^^; in Irish, Cui Guilly; in Latin, Vltonia
and Vlidia; in English, Vlster; On the North it is divided by a narrow Sea of
three or four hours Sail from Scotland; Southward it extends it self to
Connaught and Leinster; The East part lies upon the Irish Sea; And the West
part is continually beaten with the boisterous rage of the main West Ocean.
This Province and farthest part of Ireland, fronteth the Scottish Islands,
which are called the Hebrides, and are scattered in the Seas between both
Kingdoms; whose Inhabitants at this day are the Irish-Scot, and their Language
is the same as the Irish.

The Form Form.
thereof is round, reaching in length from Coldagh Haven in her North, to
Kilmore in her South, near an hundred miles; and in breadth from Black-Abby in
her East, to Calebeg point in her West, one hundred thirty and odd miles: The
whole in Circumference, about four hundred and twenty Miles.

Air.
This Country seldom feels any unseasonable extremities, the quick and
flexible Winds cooling the heat of Summer, and soft and gentle Showers
mollifying the hardness of the Winter. Briefly, the frozen nor torrid Zone have
not here any usurpation; the clouds in the Air being very sweet and pleasant;
yea, and when they are most impure, are not unwholsom, nor of long continuance,
the rough winds holding them in continual agitation.

Commodities.
This equal temperature causes the ground to bring forth great store of several
Trees, both fit for Building and bearing of Fruit; plentiful of grass for
feeding of Cattle, and is abundantly furnished with Horses, Sheep and Oxen; The
Rivers likewise pay double Tribute, deep enough to carry Vessels either for
pleasure or profit, and Fish great store, both for their own uses, and
commodity of others. Salmons in some Rivers of this Country abound more in
number than in any River of Europe. To speak (in general) though in some places
it be somewhat barren, troubled with Loughs, Lakes and thick Woods, yet it is
every where fresh and full of Cattle and Forage, ready at all times to answer
the Husbandmans pains; And now Nature being much beholden to the Art and
Industry of the British Planters in this Province, who cause all things to
flourish there, has wholly taken away the former complaints, how that the
various show upon Banks, the shady Groves, the green Meadows, hanging Hills,
and the spacious Fields fit for Corn (being left unmanured) did seem to be
angry with their Inhabitants for suffering all to grow wild and barbarous,
through their own negligence.

It is divided into the Counties of 1. Louth, 2. Cavon, 3. Fermanagh, Division.
4. Down, 5. Monaghan, 6. Armagh, 7. Colrane, 8. Tirconnel. 9. Tir-Oen, and 10.
Antrim. In which are comprehended two hundred and fourteen Parishes, whereof
fourteen are Towns of Note for Commerce and Traffic, and thirty Castles for
the defense of the Country, and keeping under the wild Irish; wilder and more
untractable formerly in these Northern parts than the rest of Ireland; But now
by reason of the last general Rebellion (the Irish being upon the matter wholly
rooted out from hence) there is as hopeful a British Plantation going on in
this Province, as in any other in all Ireland.

Connaught.
This Province named by Giraldus Cambrensis, Conaghtia, and Conacia; by the
Irish, Conaughty, and the English men, Connaught: is bounded Eastward, with
part of the Province of Leinster; Northward, with part of Vlster; Westward,
with the West main Ocean; and on the South, it is confined with a part of the
Province of Mounster, closed in with the River Shanon, and butting against the
Kingdom of Spain.

The Form Form.
thereof is long, and toward the North and South ends, thin and narrow; but as
it grows toward the middle, from either part it waxes still bigger and
bigger; extending in length from the Shannon in her South, to Eins Kelling in
her North, one hundred twenty six Miles, and the broadest part is from Tromer
in her East, to Barragh-Bay in her West, containing about fourscore Miles. The
whole in Circuit and compass is above four hundred Miles.

The Air Air.
is not altogether so pure and clear, as in the other Provinces of Ireland, by
reason of certain moist places (covered over with grass) which of their
softness are usually termed Boghs, both dangerous, and full of vaporous and
foggy mists.

This Country as it is divided into several portions, Commodities.
so is every portion severally commended for the Soil, according to the
seasonable times of the year. Thomond or the County of Clare, is said to be a
County so conveniently situated, that either from the Sea or Soil there can be
nothing wished for more, than what it does naturally afford of it self, were
but the industry of the Inhabitants answerable to the rest. Galaway is a Land
very thankful to the painful Husbandman, and no less Commodious and profitable
to the Shepherd. Maio, is replenished both with pleasure and fertility,
abundantly rich in Cattle, Deer, Hawks, and plenty of Honey. Slego (coasting
upon the Sea) is a plentiful Country for feeding and raising of Cattle. Letrim
(place rising up throughout with Hills) is so full of rank grass and Forage,
that (as Solinus reports) if Cattle were not kept sometims from grasing,
their fullness would endanger them. And Roscomon is a Territory, for the most
part plain and fruitful, feeding many Herds of Cattle, and with mean Husbandry
and Tillage, yiedling plenty of Corn. As every particular is thus severally
profitable by inbred Commodities; so is it no less commended (in the
generality) for the many accommodate and fit Bays, Creeks, and Navigable
Rivers, lying upon her Sea coasts, that after a sort invite and provoke the
Inhabitants to Navigation.

Division.
It is divided at present, into these five Shires; that is to say, 1. Letrim, 2.
Roscommon, 3. Maio, 4. Slego, 5. Galloway, and 6. Thomond, or the County of
Clare. In which are comprehended but eight Towns of any consequence, for
commerce and traffic, (an Argument of the imperfect plantation of it by the
English Conquerors) and about twenty four Castles, for the defense of the
Country, of Old Erection, besides such Fortresses as have been raised
occasionally in our latter troubles. But in the whole it contains three hundred
and fix Parishes.

These four Provinces makes up a Kingdom (which for the bigness) is of a most
beautiful and sweet Country as any under Heaven, A Character of all Ireland.
being stored throughout with many goodly Rivers, replenished in abundance with
all sorts of Fish; sprinkled with many very sweet Islands and goodly Lakes,
like little Inland-Seas, which will carry even Ships upon their waters; adorned
with goodly Woods even fit for building of Houses and Ships so commodiously, as
that if some Prince in the World had them, they would soon hope to be Lords of
all the Seas, and ere long, of all the World; Also full of very good Forts and
Havens opening upon England, as inviting us to come unto them to see what
excellent Commodities that Country can afford; besides the Soil it self most
fertile, fit to yield all kind of Fruit that shall be committed thereunto, And
lastly, the Heavens most mild and temperate, though somewhat more moist in the
parts toward the West.

How far Ireland differs from England in Air and Commodities.
Ireland differs not much from England for all manner of Commodities, either
for Feeding or Clothing, or for Pleasure or Profit, but only in this; that the
Air thereof, (though very wholesome and delectable) is neither so clear nor
subtle as ours of England, by reason of the Sun being frequently overshadowed
with clouds, even almost as well in Summer as in Winter, which is therefore
nothing favorable for the ripening of Corn and Fruits; but so grateful to the
ground, that it causes grass to grow abundantly, not only fresh and long, but
withal very sweet for all kind of Cattle; and in Winter is more subject to Wind
than Snow or Frost: the Wool of this Country is said to be not of so fine a
grain as that of England, but the Sheep of as large a body (and so all other
kind of Cattle) if bred there after the way of England. Coal they have none but
what is near Kilkenny, and that in no great quantity, however, plentifully
supplied with Fuel by reason of their neighboring Boggs, though otherwise
over-plentifully dispersed through all parts of the Kingdom. Iron Ore they have
none (as I take it) but what is brought out of England, which occasions (as I
suppose) so few Iron Mills in Ireland, there being of late years but two that I
have heard off, viz. one at Mountrath in the Kings County, and another at
Corfew in the County of Wexford, near the Town of Wexford, the fewness whereof,
I presume, is no great loss to that Country, the Woods there, (the over-plenty
whereof was formerly complained of) being now of late too much destroyed even
to admiration. Some Mines of Lead have been found there of late (by the
industry of the English) the chief whereof, was that called the Silver Mines,
in the County of Typperary, not far from Limrick; out of which was extracted
some proportion of Silver which gave it the Denomination. England and Ireland
may be esteemed (without doubt) to be two of the most plentiful Kingdoms for
Provisions (for the extent of them) of any in the whole World; but that which
causes the vast difference between the value of the Stock and Lands of the one
and the other (though both conveniently situated for Trade) is that of Traffic
and Commerce, and (till of late) the sloathfulness of the people of Ireland, in
not disposing themselves to Manufactury, a great rectification whereof may be
well hoped will fall out even in this our Age, whereunto there is already given
a very fair beginning by the British Planters.

Money.
The Irish (till of late times) did for the most part manage their Trade and
Commerce amongst themselves by exchange of Wares, Trade driven formerly in
Ireland hy Commutation of Commodities.
and commutation of Commodities, having little or no coin stirring even amongst
their greatest Lords and Noblemen; And no great marvel it should be so in
Ireland, since that of old, the most usual material of money amongst the Roman
Provinces was seldom Gold or Silver, but Brass, sometimes Leather, Corium
forma publica percussum, as Seneca has it. This last kind of Money was by
Frederick the Second made current, when he besieged Millaine; The like is said
to have been used here in England in the time of the Barons Wars: and why not?
since no longer ago, than in the year 1574 the Hollanders then being in their
Extremities, made money of Past-board; But this happened only in case of
necessity: The Metals of Gold and Silver having for many hundred years (though
not in such abundance) been the principal instrument of Exchange and Barter,
and so questionless will continue to the end of the World.

English Moneys prohibited to be transported out of England into Ireland.
In the three and fortieth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, being Anno 1601. It
was commanded by Proclamation (as also King Henry the Seventh had provided by
Act of Parliament) that no man should carry over English money into Ireland,
for as much as the Rebels drew unto themselves a great part thereof, to buy
Ammunition and Provision for the Wars, and from thence the Merchants carried it
into foreign Countries, to the great detriment of England. There was therefore
a serious deliberation then had about changing the Irish Coy^ by mingling some
Brass with it, for that the Irish War drew yearly o^^ of England 160000 l.
Sterling. Here upon some were of opinion, that the Charges of the War might be
ab^ted; that all the good Money mig^^ by Exchange be drawn out of Ireland into
England; that so the R^bels, when the good Money faile^ would be excluded from
all Co^merce with Foreigners, and of necessity weakened. Others argued (...)
the contrary, that this change would redound to the dishonor of the Queen, and
the damage of the Subject; that the good Money of Ireland could not be drawn
thence without a great charge to the Queen; that the gain gotten thereby, if
new Money were Coined in England, would not, when the Accounts were cast up,
countervail the Charges of carrying over; A Mint not profitable to be set up in
Ireland.
and much less if it were Coined in Ireland, where a Mint must needs be set up
at great Charges, and Minters must be hired for great wages: Neither could the
Commerce of the Rebels with Foreigners be impeached, whilst there was Silver
in the new Coin, which the Merchant knew well enough how to separate; unto whom
it is all one whether he receive one piece of Money, or three of the same
value; and that it was to be feared least the Soldiers would mutiny, for
thereby their pay would be diminished. But Buckhurst, Lord Treasusurer, a man
very skilful in Money matters, with much ado extorted from the Queen, out of
necessity (for that is the Law of Time) which he urged, that the Money should
be changed for a time, to be called back again afterward to the highest value;
for she many times said, that this would depress her Fame, and be grievous to
the Army. Yet did the Army continue without tumult, and commotion, through the
Queens rare happiness, which retained her Authority with her People, joined
with love. To the Army certainly it proved a great loss, whether it turned to
the benefit of the Queen or no, is not known; But to the Treasurers and
Paymasters, without doubt it brought in good gain, whose avarice (which is a
diligent searcher of hidden gains) may seem to have devised it.

The Money now generally used in Ireland (there being little of English,
because prohibited to be transported thither beyond the sum of five pounds,
as I take it; for the better encouragement of Trade between both Kingdoms) is
most of all Spanish Coin; to wit, pieces of Eight, at 4 s. 6 d. the piece,
consisting of Plate pieces, Mexico and old Peru, with half and quarter pieces:
The new Perues (whereof there was a good quantity) being not long since called
in, and (by reason they were thought to be abused and falsified) converted into
Plate, to the great benefit of some in Dublin, and the no small loss (at that
time) of a great many people in Ireland.

A piece of old English Gold is hardly to be seen in Ireland, (except what is
closely kept in private hands) though there was a great proportion thereof
before the late Wars, which commonly passed from hand to hand in ordinary
Payments. There is a small quantity of Brass Coin that is used there for the
convenience of change.

I have already hinted, Buildings.
how that the Irish (by reason of their Barbarous Laws and Customs) did never
build any Houses of Brick or Stone, (some few poor Religious Houses excepted)
before the Reign of King Henry the Second, which seems as manifest (as strange)
by the entertainment of the said King received at their chief City of Dublin,
Anno 1172. who was unavoidably necessitated for mere accommodation (finding
there no fit place for his reception) to set up a long house made of smoothed
Wattles, after the manner of the Country, wherein he pompously entertained the
great Irish Lords and Princes at Christmas. All their Forts, Castles, Stately
Buildings, and other Edifices, were afterward Erected by the English, except
(as I said) some of the Maritine Towns, which were built by the Ostmanni, or
Easterlings, who anciently came and Inhabited Ireland.

The Buildings of Ireland much improved by the last forty years Peace.
During the last forty years peace in Ireland, there were many lovely Houses
built through most part of that Kingdom, by the English Nobility and Gentry,
with delicate improvements in Orchards, Gardens, and Enclosures correspondent
thereunto. There was also at the same time (by way of imitation) the like good
endeavors of making handsome Improvements and Buildings, by the better sort of
Irish both in Towns and Country; But the fair Dwellings of the English were so
badly handled by the Irish in the heat of the War, that scarce any part of them
(except the main Walls) escaped from fireing; upon which, being generally made
of Massy Stone, the English have rebuilt and are building, besides a great
number upon new foundations, many fair Structures.

But that which has been hitherto, The Nasty Irish Cabbins a great blemish to
Ireland.
and, I doubt, will ever hereafter be a blemish to the flourishing state of
Ireland in point of Building, is the great number of Nasty-Smoaky-Cabbins every
where, made up of Wattles without any Chimnies, wherein the poorer sort of
Irish do well, which cannot be altogether ascribed to their mere poverty, and
ancient custom, but rather much more to the uncertainty of the tenure whereby
they hold the same, being Tenants only but from May to May, that so they may
more easily quit their Station, and try their fortunes else where for an other
year, though many times to as little effect, in case they find themselves
overmuch oppressed by their Landlords.

Their Parish Churches were generally as meanly built in Ireland, as their
practice was in Religion; but now that the Country comes to be inhabited by a
more civil and better Principled people, it may be justly hoped, and likewise
expected, that there will be, by degrees, a Reformation in this particular, as
well as in other matters of less moment, since the handsome building and
adorning of Churches do conduce much to draw the rude people to the the
reverencing and frequenting thereof.

CHAP. II. Of the Inhabitants, their Laws, Religion and Manners; Of their
Number, Language, Stature, Diet, Attire, Recreations, Names and Sir-names.
I have already declared how it is most probable that the first Inhabitants of
this Island came hither out of Britain, Inhabitants and Laws.
now called England and Wales; And therefore shall proceed to give some farther
Account, touching the Laws of this Realm, both Ancient and Modern. The Brehon
Law, by which the Irish governed themselves, was a Rule of Right unwritten, but
delivered by Tradition from one to another, in which often times there appeared
great show of Equity, in determining the Right between party and party; but in
many things repugning quite both to Gods Law and Man's: The partiality and
impiety of the Brehon Irish Law.
As for example in the case of Murder, the Brehon, that is their Judge, would
compound between the Murderer, and the Friends of the party Murdered which
Prosecuted the Action, that the Malefactor should give unto them, or to the
Child or Wife of him that is slain, a recompense, which they called an Eriach:
By which vile Law of theirs, many Murders amongst them were made up and
smothered. And this Judge being as he was called the Lords Brehon, adjudged for
the most part, a better share unto this Lord, that is the Lord of the Soil, or
the head of that Sept, and also unto himself for his judgment a greater
portion, then unto the Plaintiffs or parties grieved.

Sir Edward Poynings the best Reformer of the Laws of Ireland.
He that gave the fairest beginning to the Reformation of the Laws of Ireland,
of any till his time, was Sir Edward Poynings, Lord Deputy of Ireland in the
Reign of King Henry the Seventh, who finding in that Realm nothing but a common
misery, took the best course he possibly could to establish there a well
governed Commonwealth: and to that end he held a Parliament no less famous,
than that of Kilkenny; and more available for the Reformation of the whole
Kingdom. For whereas all wise men did ever concur in opinion, that the readiest
way to Reform Ireland, was to settle a form of Civil Government there,
conformable to that of England: To bring this to pass, Sir Edward Poynings did
pass an Act, whereby all the Statutes made in England before that time, were
enacted, established, and made of force in Ireland. Neither did he only respect
the time past, but provided also for the time to come. For he caused an other
Law to be made, that no Act should be propounded in any Parliament of Ireland,
but such as should be first Transmitted into England, and approved by the King
and Council there, as good and expedient for that Land, and so returned back
again, under the Great Seal of England. This Act, though it seem Prima facie to
restrain the Liberty of the Subjects of Ireland; yet was it made at the Prayer
of the Commons, upon just and important cause.

For the Governors of that Realm, especially such as were of that Country
Birth, Poynings Act made at the request of the Commons of Ireland
had laid many opprssions upon the Commons: And amongst the rest they had
imposed Laws upon them, not tending to the general good, but to serve private
turns, and to strengthen their particular factions. This moved them to refer
all Laws, that were to be past in Ireland, to be considered, corrected, and
allowed, first by the State of England which had always been tender and
careful of the good of this people, and had long since made them a Civil, Rich,
and Happy Nation, if their own Lords and Governors there, had not sent bad
intelligence into England. Besides this, he took special Order, that the
Summons of Parliament should go into all the Shires of Ireland, and not to the
four Shires only within the English Pale; (for out of that little Precinct
there were no Lords, Knights or Burgesses, Summoned to the Parliament; neither
did the Kings Writ run in any other part of the Kingdom) and for that cause
specially, he caused all the Acts of Parliament, lately before holden by the
Viscount of Gormanston to be repealed and made void. On these foundations they
have raised many superstructures both of Law and Government, enacted in their
own Parliaments, summoned by the Lord Deputy at the Kings appointment. Amongst
many inconveniences which have been observed in the Laws of England in relation
to the Government of Ireland (whereof a reformation was wished) this was a main
one; That when any of the Irish intended to go into Rebellion, Entailing of
Lands supported the Rebellions in Ireland.
they would convey away all their Lands, and Lordships to Feoffees in trust,
whereby they reserved to themselves, but a State for term of life; which being
determined by the sword, or by the halter, their Lands straight came to their
heirs, and the Crown of England defrauded of the intent of the Law, which laid
that grievous punishment upon Traitors, to forfeit all their Lands to the
Prince, to the end that men might the rather be terrified from committing
treasons, for many which would little esteem of their own lives, yet for
remorse of their Wives and Children would be withheld from that heinous crime.
This appeared plainly in the late Earl of Desmond. For before his breaking
forth into open Rebellion, he had conveyed secretly all his Lands to Feoffees
of trust, in hope to have cut off her Majesty from the Escheat of his Lands;
which inconvenience, though well enough avoided at that time by an Act of
Parliament (obtained with much difficulty) which (by cutting off, and
frustrating all such conveyances as had at any time by the space of twelve
years before his Rebellion, been made, within the compass whereof, the
fraudulent Feoffment, and many the like of others his accomplices and fellow
traitors were contained) gave all his Lands to the Queen; yet were it not an
endless trouble (supposing such Acts were easily brought to pass) that no
Traitor or Fellon should be attainted, but a Parliament must be called for
bringing of his Lands to the Crown which the Law gives it.

Although since the time of St. Patrick (Anno 430) Christianity was never
extinct in Ireland, Religion.
yet the Government being hailed into contrary factions, the Nobility lawless,
the multitude wilful, it came to pass that Religion waxed with the temporal
common sort cold and feeble, until the Conquest by King Henry the Second did
settle it. The Honorable state of Marriage they much abused, either in
contracts, unlawful meetings, the Levitical and Canonical degrees of
prohibition, or in divorcements at pleasure, or in omitting Sacramental
solemnities, or in retaining either Concubines or Harlots for Wives: yea, where
the Clergy were faint, they could be content to Marry for a year and a day of
probation, and at the years end, to return her home upon any light quarrels, if
the Gentlewomans friends were weak and unable to avenge the injury. Never was
there heard of so many dispensations for Marriage, as those men show, I pray
God grant they were all authentic, and builded upon sufficient warrant.

The Disorders of the Church of Ireland, about the latter end of Q. Elizabeth's
Reign, and the causes of it.
About the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Church of Ireland was
infested, not only with gross Symony, greedy covetousness, fleshly
incontinency, careless sloth, and generally a disordered life in the common
Clergymen: But besides all these had their particular enormities; for all the
Irish Priests, which then enjoyed the Church Livings, were in a manner mere
Laymen, saving that they had taken holy Orders, but otherwise they did go, and
live like Laymen, follow all kind of Husbandry, and other worldly affairs, as
other Irish men did. They neither read Scriptures, nor preach to the People,
nor administer Communion, but Baptism they did: for they Christened then after
the Popish fashion, only they took the Tithes and Offerings, and gathered what
fruit else they might of their Livings, the which they converted as badly, and
some of them (they said) paid as due Tributes and Shares of their Livings to
their Bishops (I mean those which were Irish) as they received them duly.

Which shameful abuses the English Governors could not redress, because they
knew not the parties so offending; for the Irish Bishops had their Clergy in
such aw and subjection under them, that they durst not complain of them, so as
they might do to them what they pleased, for they knowing their own
unworthiness, and incapacity, and that they were still removeable at their
Bishops will, yielded to what pleased him, and he took what he listed: yea, and
some of them whose Diocesses were in remote parts, somewhat out of the Worlds
eye, did not at all bestow the Benefices, which were in their own donation,
upon any, but kept them in their own hands, and did set their own Servants and
horseboys to take up the Tithes and Fruits of them; with the which, some of
them purchased great Lands, and built fair Castles upon the same. Of which
abuse, if any question were moved, they had a very seemly color and excuse,
that they had no worthy Ministers to bestow them upon, but kept them so
unbestowed for any such sufficient person, as should be offered unto them.

To meet with this mischief, there was a Statute enacted in Ireland which seems
to have been grounded upon a good meaning; That whatsoever Englishman of good
conversation and sufficiency, should be brought to any of the Bishops, and
nominated unto any Living, within their Diocese that were presently void, that
he should (without any contradiction) be admitted thereunto, before any Irish:
which good Law, though it had been well observed, and that none of the Bishops
had transgressed the same, yet it wrought no Reformation thereof for many
defects.

First, there were no such sufficient English Ministers sent over as might be
presented to any Bishop for any Living; but the most part of such English as
came over thither of themselves, were either unlearned, or men of some bad
note, for which they had forsaken England. So as the Bishop to whom they should
have been presented, might justly reject them as incapable and insufficient.
Secondly, the Bishop himself being perhaps an Irish man who being made Judge by
that Law, of the sufficiency of the Ministers, might at his own Will, dislike
of the English man, as unworthy in his Opinion, and admit of any Irish, whom he
should think more for his turn. And if he should at the Instance of any English
man of countenance there, whom he would not displease, accept of any such
English Minister as should be tendered unto him, yet he would underhand, carry
such a hard hand over him, or by his Officers wring him so sore, that he would
soon make him weary of his poor Living. Lastly, the Benefices themselves were
so mean, and of so small profit in those Irish Countries, through the ill
husbandry of the Irish people which did inhabit them, that they would not yield
any competent maintenance for any honest Minister to live upon, scarcely to buy
him a Gown. And had all this been redressed, yet what good should any English
Minister have done amongst them, by teaching or preaching unto them, which
either could not understand him, or would not hear him? Or what comfort of life
could he have, where his Parishoners were so insatiable, so intractable, so ill
affected to him, as they usually are to all the English? Or finally, how durst
almost any honest Ministers, that were peaceable civil men, commit their safety
to the hands of such Neighbors, as the boldest Captains durst scarce dwell by?

The Church of Ireland much Reformed of late.
But these Obstructions (by the special Providence of God appearing in the late
Revolutions of Ireland) seems upon the matter to be wholly taken away; for
first, there are now in Ireland (together with other Divines that commonly
repair thither out of England and Scotland) a sufficient number of able
Ministers bred up in Trinity College at Dublin to supply the above mentioned
first Defect. Secondly, all the Bishops of Ireland are now worthy learned
Protestants, who with all the endeavors they can, do encourage Protestant
Ministers to settle themselves in such convenient places, as they may do God
and that Country good service, and themselves have thereby a comfortable
subsistence. Besides, the English Magistracy and Gentry being now so generally
dispersed through all parts of Ireland, do give great countenance to the
Protestant Ministry to proceed cheerfully and industriously in their Vocations.
Lastly, the Benefices themselves are now (by the industry and good husbandry of
the British Planters, together with the uniting of two or three Parishes into
one to supply the imperfect Plantation thereof) become so considerable (and
will much more hereafter when fully Planted) as to be able to yield a competent
maintenance for honest learned Ministers to live upon; and which is a farther
encouragement to them, have already very considerable Congregations of
Protestant-Plantres through most parts of the Kingdom to attend upon Divine
Service every Sabbath Day.

The Revenues of the Church o^ Ireland have much increased of late in this
manner.

The Revenues of the Church of Ireland much increased of late, and the manner
how.
First, it was observed, that the Clergy of this Country were formerly little
beholding to their Lay-Patrons; some of their Bishops being so poor, that they
had no other Revenues than the Pasture of two Milch Beasts. And so far had the
Monasteries, and Religious Houses invade^ by Appropriations, the Churche^
Rites; that of late times, in the whol^ Province of Connaght, the whole stipend
of the Incumbent, was not above forty shillings, in some place^ not above
sixteen. So that the poc^ Irish must needs be better fed tha^ taught: For ad
tenuitatem Benefici orum, necessario sequitur ignorantia Sacerdotum: Poor
Benefices will be fitted with ignorant Priests said Panormitan rightly. But
this was remedied in part by his Sacred Majesty King Charles, the Second
Monarch of Great Britain, who liberally (a^ the Suit of the late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury) restored unto this Chuch all the Impropriations, and
portions of Tithes, which had been vested in the Crown: An Action of most
singular Piety, and Princely Bounty.

Secondly, King James, out of the forfeited Lands of the six Counties in
Vlster, allowed fair proportions of Land, as Gleabable to those Parishes within
the said forfeited Counties, which has caused them (for so much) to be counted
better Livings for Ministers, than in any other part of that Kingdom.

Thirdly, That by the care the Earl of Strafford had, while he was Lord Deputy
of Ireland, to increase the Revenues of that Church, he recovered by Law Suits
great quantities of Land in many parts of Ireland, which the Church enjoys to
this very day.

Fourthly and lastly, That the whole Kingdom of Ireland may be justly thought
to be so far improved during the last forty years peace (by the industry of the
British Planters, and by the Irish also in imitation of the same) as that all
the Lands thereof (and consequently the Tithes in proportion) came to be worth
in yearly value, four or five times more than it ever amounted unto in any
former Age: And therefore we need not much marvel how that this last Rebellion,
Anno 1641. became more bloody and universal than any of the former, the Popish
Irish Clergy and Lawers well understanding that the Sovereign Command of
Ireland was now worth the contending for. Bishoprics of Ireland.
Reckoned in Ireland at, and since the Reformation, four Archbishops, nineteen
Bishops, and one University, viz. Dublin.

Manners.
The Irish have long since had the Character of being Religious, Frank, Amorous,
Ireful, Sufferable, of pains infinite, very glorious, many Sorcerers, excellent
Horsemen, delighted with Wars, great Alms-givers, passing in Hospitality: The
lewder sort both Clerks and Laymen, sensual and loose to Leachery above
measure. The same being virtuously bred up or Reformed, are such mirrours of
Holiness and Austerity, that other Nations retain but a show or shadow of
Devotion in comparison of them. As for Abstinence and Fasting, which these days
make so dangerous, this is to them a familiar kind of Chastisement: In which
virtue, and diverse other, how far the best excel, so far, in Gluttony and other
hateful Crimes, the Vicious, they are worse than too bad. They follow the dead
Corpse to the grave with hollowings and barbarous outcries, pitiful in
appearance; whereof grew (as I suppose) the Proverb, To weep Irish.

These people, of late times, The good agreement bewixt the Irish and the
English in Ireland during the last forty years peace.
were so much civilized by their Cohabitation with the English, as that the
ancient Animosities and Hatred which the Irish had been ever observed to bear
unto the English Nation, seemed now to be quite deposited and buried in a firm
conglutination of their affection and National Obligations passed between them.
The two Nations had now lived together forty years in peace, with great
security and comfort, which had in a manner consolidated them into one Body,
knit and compacted together with all those Bonds and Ligatures of Friendship,
Alliance and Consanguinity as might make up a constant and perpetual Union
betwixt them. Their inter Marriages were frequent, Gossipred, Fostering
(relations of much dearness among the Irish) together with all others of
tenancy, neighborhood, and service interchangably passed amongst them. Nay,
they had made as it were a kind of mutual transmigration into each others
manners, many English being strangely degenerated into Irish affections and
customs, and many Irish, especially of the better sort, having taken up the
English Language, Apparel, and decent manner of living in their private houses.
And so great an advantage did they find by the English Commerce and
Cohabitation in the profits and high improvements of their Lands and native
commodities, so incomparably beyond what they ever formerly enjoyed, or could
expect to raise by their own proper industry, as Sir Philemon O Neal, and many
others of the prime Leaders in the last Rebellion, had not long before turned
their Irish tenants off their Lands, while they took on English, who were able
to give them much greater rents, and more certainly pay the same. A matter that
was much taken notice of, and esteemed by many; as most highly conducing to the
security of the English interests, and Plantation amongst them.

But behold a fatal day approaching (when least expected) wherein this great
League of friendship was broken; This great League of friendship betwixt the
English and the Irish dissolved, by the breaking out of the Rebellion October.
23. 1641. when least suspected.
A fatal day (I must confess) to the English; but much more fatal to the Irish,
in that they destroyed thereby not only themselves, but the greatest part of
their posterity. I say when least expected; because that the Irish Army raised
for the invasion of the Kingdom of Scotland, being peaceably disbanded, their
Arms and Munition, by the singular care of the Lords Justices and Council
brought into his Majestes stores within the City of Dublin; there was no manner
of warlike preparations, no relics of any kind of disorders proceeding from
the late Levies, nor indeed any noise of War remaining within those coasts. Now
while in this great calm the British continued in a most deep security, under
the assurance of the blessed peace of that Land; while all things were carried
on with great temper and moderation in the present Government, and all men sat
pleasantly enjoying the comfortable fruits of their own labors, without the
least thoughts or apprehension of either tumults or other troubles, the
differences between his Majesty K. Charles the First, and his Subjects of
Scotland being about that time fairly composed and settled: There brake out upon
the 23d. of October 1641. a most desperate and formidable Rebellion, an
universal defection and general Revolt, wherei^ not only all the mere Irish,
but almost all the old English that adhered to the Church of Rome, were totally
involved.

Whereupon all bonds and ties of faith and friendship being broken, Whereupon
unexpressable cruelties were practiced by the Irish against the English in
Ireland.
the Irish Landlords (by the instigation of their Popish Priests) made a prey
of their English tenants; Irish tenants and servants a sacrifice of their
English Landlords and Masters; one Neighbor cruelly murdered by another; Nay
the Irish children in the very beginning fell to strip and kill English
children: all other relations were quite cancelled and laid aside, and it was
now esteemed a most meritorious work in any of them that could by any means or
ways whatsoever, bring an English man to the Slaughter. A work not difficult to
be compassed as things then stood. The intermixing of the English among the
Irish, a main cause of their sudden destruction.
For they living promiscuously amongst the British, in all parts having from
their Priests received the Watchword both for time and place, rose up, as it
were actuated by one and the same spirit, in all places in those Countries
where it first began in the Province of Vlster, at one and the same point of
time; and so in a moment fell upon them, murdering some, stripping or expelling
others out of their habitations. This bred such a general terror and
astonishment amongst the English, as they knew not what to think, much less
what to do, or which way to turn themselves. Their servants were killed as they
were plowing in the fields, Husbands cut in pieces in the presence of their
Wives, their Childrens brains dashed out before their faces, others had all
their Goods and Cattle seized and carried away, their Houses burnt, their
habitations laid waste, and all as it were at an instant, before they could
suspect the Irish for their enemies, or any ways imagine that they had it in
their hearts, or in their power, to offer so great violence, or do such
mischief unto them.

The rage of the Irish grew to that height of malice, as to hate the very
English Language and their Cattle.
Nay, they grew at last to that height of Malice, that some of the Irish would
not endure the very sound of the English Language, but would have penalties
inflicted upon them that spoke English, and all the English names of places
changed into the old Irish denominations; Others professed that they would not
leave an English man or woman alive in the Kingdom, but that all should be
gone, no not so much as an English Beast, or any of the breed of them: in many
places killing English Cows and Sheep, merely because they were English; and in
some places cutting off their legs, or taking out a piece out of their
buttocks, and so let them remain still alive in torture.

We shall find in the Roman story, All bands of friendship and humanity
violated in this great contest betwixt the Irish and the English
during the several cruel contestations betwixt Marius and Scilla, when their
factious followers filled the whole City of Rome with streams of blood, strange
and most incomparable passages of friendships; one exposing himself to all
manner of dangers for the preservation of his friend of a contrary faction;
servants willingly sacrificing themselves to save the lives of their beloved
Masters. But here on the contrary, what open violation of all bands of humanity
and friendship; no contracts, no promises observed; quarter given in the most
solemn manner with the greatest Oaths and severest execrations under hand and
Seal, suddenly broken. The Irish Landlords making a prey of their English
Tenants; the Irish Servants betraying their English Masters, and every one
esteeming any Act wherein they could declare their hatred and malice most
against any of the Brittsh Nation, as gallant and truly meritorious. The Irish
unanimously agreed to root the English out of Ireland.
It is not to be denied, but that the first and most bloody executions were
made in the Prevince of Vlster, and there they continued longest to execute
their rage and cruelty; yet must it be acknowledged, that all the other three
Provinces, did concur with them, as it were, with one common consent, to
destroy and pluck up by the roots, all the British planted throughout the
Kingdom. And for this purpose they went on, not only murdering, stripping and
driving out all of them, Men, Women and Children: but they laid wast their
Habitations, burnt their evidences, defaced in many places all the Monuments of
Civility, and Devotion; the Courts and places of the English Government; Nay,
as some of themselves expressed it, they resolved not to leave them either Name
or Posterity in Ireland.

Having thus far briefly rendered an account touching matter of fact, That the
Irish can pretend no grievances, as motives to the last Rebellion An. 164^.
transacted in this most bloody Rebellion; I shall in the next place take an
occasion to enquire, whether this desperate resolution of the Irish proceeded
from the sense of some grievous oppressions imposed upon by their English
Governors, or rather merely from an impetuous desire they had to draw the
whole Government of the Kingdom of Ireland into their own hands: Upon due
consideration whereof, I cannot find they had the least cause to complain of
oppression; for his late Majesty's Indulgence was so great toward his Subjects
of Ireland, as that in the year 1640. upon their complaints, and a general
Remonstrance sent over unto him from both Houses of Parliament then sitting at
Dublin, by a Committee of four Temporal Lords of the Upper House, and twelve
Members of the House of Commons, with instructions to represent the heavy
pressures they had for some time suffered under the Government of the Earl of
Strafford; He took these Grievances into his Royal Consideration, descended so
far to their satisfaction, as that he heard them himself, and made present
Provisions for their redress. And upon the decease of Mr. Wandsford, Master of
the Rolls in Ireland, and then Lord Deputy there, under the said Earl of
Strafford, who still continued Lord Lieutenant of that Kingdom (though then
accused of High Treason, and imprisoned in the Tower of London, by the
Parliament of England) His Majesty sent a Commission of Government to the Lord
Dillon of Kilkenny West, and Sir William Parsons, Knight and Baronet, Master of
the Wards in Ireland; yet soon after, finding the choice of the Lord Dillon to
be much disgusted by the Committee, he did at their Motion, cause the said
Commission to be Cancelled, and with their consent and approbation, placed the
Government upon Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Borlace Knight, Master of the
Ordinance, both esteemed persons of great Integrity; and the Master of Wards,
by reason of his very long continued employment in the State, his particular
knowledge of the Kingdom, much valued and well beloved amongst the People. They
took the Sword upon the ninth of February 1640. And in the first place they
aplyed themselves with all gentle lenitives to mollify the sharp humors
raised by the rigid passages in the former Government. They declared themselves
against all such proceedings lately used, as they found any ways varying from
the Common Law: They gave all due encouragement to the Parliament then sitting,
to endeavor the reasonable ease and contentment of the people, freely
ascenting to all such Acts as really tended to a Legal Reformation: They betook
themselves wholly to the advice of the Council, and caused all matters, as well
of the Crown as Popular Interest, to be handled in his Majesty's Courts of
Justice: no way admitting the late exorbitancies (so bitterly decryed in
Parliament) of Paper-Petitions or Bills, in Civil Causes, to be brought before
them at the Councel-board, or before any other by their Authority: They, by his
Majesty's gracious directions, gave way to the Parliament to abate the
Subsidies (there given, in the Earl of Straffords time, and then in Collection)
from forty thousand pounds each Subsidy, to twelve thousand pounds a piece, so
low did they think fit to reduce them: And they were farther content (because
they saw his Majesty most absolutely resolved to give the Irish Agents full
satisfaction) to draw up two Acts to be passed in the Parliament, most
impetuously desired by the Natives; The one was the Act of Limitations, which
unquestionably settled all Estates of Land in the Kingdom, quietly enjoyed
without claim or interruption for the space of sixty years immediately
preceding; The other was for the relinquishment of the right and title which
his Majesty had to the four Counties in Connaght, legally found for him by
several Inquisitions taken in them, and ready to be disposed upon a due Survey,
to British undertakers; as also to some Territories of good extant in Mounster,
and the County of Clare upon the same title.

Thus was the present Government most sweetly tempered, and carried on with
great lenity and moderation; the Lords Justices and Council wholly departing
from the rigor of former courses, did gently unbend themselves into a happy
and just compliance with the seasonable desires of the people. And his Majesty,
that he might farther testify his own settled resolution for the continuation
thereof, with the same tender hand over them, having first given full
satisfaction in all things to the said Committee of Parliament still attending
their dispatch, did about the latter end of May 1641. declare Kobert Earl of
Leicester, Lord Lieutenant General of the Kingdom of Ireland. He was Heir to
Sir Philip Sidney, his Uncle, as well as to Sir Henry Sidney, his Grandfather,
who with great Honor and much Integrity long continued Chief Governor of
Ireland during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; and being a person of excellent
Abilities by Nature, great Acquisitions from his own private Industry, and
public Employment abroad, of exceeding great Temper and Moderation, was never
engaged in any public pressures of the Commonwealth, and therefore most likely
to prove a just and gentle Governor, most pleasing and acceptable to the
people.

The Romish Catholics privately enjoyed the exercise of their Religion through
all Ireland.
Moreover, the Romish Catholics privately enjoyed the free exercise of their
Religion throughout the whole Kingdom, according to the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome. They had, by the over great indulgence of the late Governors, their
Titular Archbishops, Bishops, Vicars general, Provincial Consistories, Deans,
Abbots, Priors, Nuns, who all lived freely, though somewhat covertly among
them, and without control exercised a voluntary jurisdiction over them, they
had their Priests, Jesuits and Friars, who were of late years exceedingly
multiplied, and in great numbers returned out of Spain, Italy and other
foreign parts, where the Children of the Natives of Ireland that way devoted,
were sent usually to receive their Education. And these without any manner of
Restraint, had quietly settled themselves in all the chief Towns, Villages,
Noblemen and private Gentlemen's houses throughout the Kingdom. So as the
private exercise of all their Religious Rites, and Ceremonies were freely
enjoyed by them without any manner of disturbance, and not any of the Laws put
in execution, whereby heavy penalties were to be inflicted upon transgressors
in that kind.

Now seeing we have manifestly found by woeful experience that all those
Princely favors and tender proceedings of his late Majesty toward the Irish,
That no Princely favors can oblige the Popish-Irish part to be Loyal to the
Crown of England.
proved altogether ineffectual to contain them within the due bounds of Loyalty
and Obedience; The world may easily believe, that their designs (by their last
Rebellion) tended to no other end than the utter subversion of the English
Government in Ireland, The utter subversion of the Enlish Government designed
by the last Rebellion in Ireland An. 1641.
and the establishing of the same in the hands of their own Natives; for
confirmation whereof, we have the Testimony of a Franciscan Friar, who was one
of their Council, who tells us that the last Session of Parliament held at
Dublin being proroged in August 1641. and the time drawing nigh for putting
their design in execution of surprising Dublin Castle, and all other places of
Strength in the possession of the English in Ireland, there was a great meeting
appointed of the heads of the Romish Clergy and other Laymen of their faction
to be at the Abbey of Mullifarvan, A Council held at Mullifarvan Abbey in Mead,
whether to Kill, or Banish all the English out of Ireland An. 1641.
in the County of West-Meath, where amongst other matters there debated; the
question was what course should be taken with the English, and all others that
were found in the whole Kingdom to be Protestants. The Council was therein
divided.

1. The Council divided; some for Banishing.
Some were for their Banishment, without attempting on their Lives; for this
was given the Instance, of the King of Spains expelling out of Granado, and
other parts of his Dominions, the Moors to the number of many hundred of
thousands: all of them being dismissed with their Lives, Wives and Children,
with some part of their Goods (if not the most part) that this his way of
proceeding redounded much to the honor of Spain, whereas the Slaughter of many
Innocents would have laid an everlasting blemish of cruelty on that State, that
the like usage of the English their Neighbors, and to whom many there present
owed, (if no more) yet their Education; would gain much to the Cause, both in
England and other parts: That their Goods and Estates seized upon, would be
sufficient without meddling with their Persons; that if the contrary course were
taken, and their blood spilt, besides the Curse it might draw from Heaven upon
their Cause, it might withal increase and provoke the Neighbor Kingdom of
England, and that justly taking a more severe revenge on the^ and theirs, even
to extirpation if (...) had the upper hand.

Others for cutting off all the English.
2. On the other side, was urge^ a contrary preceding to the utte^ cutting off
all the English Protestants where, to the instance of the dismissed Moors, it
was answered, th^^ that was the sole Act of the King an^ Queen of Spain,
contrary to the a^vise of their Council, which howsoever it might gain that
Prince a nam^ of mercy, yet therein the event showed him to be most unmerciful,
no^ only to his own, but to all Christendom beside. That this was eviden^ in
the great and excessive charge tha^ Spain has been since that time pu^ unto by
those Moors, and their posterity to this day. All Christendom also has and
does still groan under the miseries it does suffer by the Pyracies of Algiers,
Sally, and the like Dens of Thieves. That all this might have been prevented in
one hour by a general Massacre, applying tha^ it was no less dangerous to expel
the English: That these Robbers an^ banished men might again return with swords
in their hands, who by their hard usage in spoiling, might be exasperated, and
by the hope of recovering their former Estates, would be incensed far more than
strangers that were sent against them. Being neither in their persons injured,
nor grieved in their estate, that therefore a general Massacre were the safest
and readiest way for freeing the Kingdom of any such fears.

3. In which diversity of opinions, howsoever the first prevailed with some,
for which the Franciscans (says this Friar) did stand, yet others inclined to
the second: some again leading to a middle way, neither to dismiss nor kill.

And according to this do we find the event and course of their proceedings.
But both was practiced, with that of imprisonment
In some places they were generally put to the sword, or to other miserable
ends: some restrain their persons in durance, knowing it to be in their hands
to dispatch them at their pleasures; in the mean time they being reserved
either for profit by their ransom, or for exchange of Prisoners, or gaining
their own pa^dons by the lives of their Prisoners, if time would serve, or by
their death, (if the worst did happen) to satisfy their fury. The third sort
at the first altogether dismissed the^^ prisoners, but first having spoile^
them of their goods, and after of their raiment, exposing the miserable
wretches to cold and famine, whereby many have perished by deaths, worse then
sword or halter.

Hitherto of their Counsels, and the effect of them. Now for their intentions,
all being reduced, (which God forbid) into their power; an^ thereof did they as
by some Law, give such peremptory conclusions, that it may well be wondered the
thoughts of men professing themselves wise, should be so vain: and herein I do
still follow mine Informer.

What the Irish would have done if they had prevailed.
First, Their Loyalty to his Majesty should be still reserved. The said they of
the modest sort: Bu^ both his Revenues and Governme^^ must be reduced to
certain bounds His Rents none other then the a^cient reservations before the
Plantation, and Customs so ordered, as to them should be thought fitting.

Secondly, for the Government, such as would be esteemed loyal, would have it
committed to the hands of two Lords Justices, one of the ancient Irish Race,
the other of the ancient British Inhabitants in the Kingdom; Provided that
they be of the Romish Profession.

Thirdly, That a Parliament should be forthwith called, consisting of whom they
should think fit to be admitted, wherein their own religious men should be
assistants.

Fourthly, Poynings Act should be repealed, and Ireland declared to be a
Kingdom independent on England, and without any reference unto it in any case
whatsoever.

Fifthly, All Acts prejudicial to the Romish Religion, should be abolished; and
it to be enacted, That there should be none ohter profession in the Kingdom but
the Romish.

Sixthly, That only the ancient Nobility of the Kingdom should stand, and of
them, such as should refuse to conform to the Romish Religion, to be removed,
and others put in their room; howsoever the then present Earl of Kildare was to
be excluded, and another established in his place.

Seventhly, All Plantation Lands to be recalled, and the ancient proprietors to
be reinvested in their former estates, with the limitations in their Covenant
expressed; That they had not formerly sold their interests on valuable
considerations.

Eighthly, That the respective Countries of the Kingdom, should be sub-divided,
and certain Bounds or Barronies assigned to the chief Septs, and others of the
Nobility, who were to be answerable for the Government thereof: And that a
standing Army might be still in being, the respective Governors being to keep a
certain number of men to be ready at all risings out (as they termed it:) They
also being to build and maintain certain Fortresses, in places most convenient
within their Precincts: And that these Governors should be of absolute power,
only responsible to the Parliament.

Lastly, for maintaining a correspondency with other Nations, and for securing
the Coasts, that also they might be rendered considerable unto others, a Navy
of a certain number of Ships was to be maintained. That to this end five Houses
were to be appointed, one in each Province, accounting Mead for one of them;
That to those houses should be allotted an annual pension of certain thousands
of pounds to be made up of part of the Lands appropriate to Abbeys: And a
farther Contribution to be raised in the respective Provinces to that end: That
these Houses were to be assigned to a certain Order of Knights, answerable to
that of Malta, who were to be Seamen: And to Maintain this Fleet: that all
Prizes were to be apportioned; some part for a Common Bank, the rest to be
divided; to which purpose the felling of Woods serviceable for this use was to
be forbidden: The house for this purpose to be assigned to the Province of
Leinster, was Kilmainham, or rather Houth, the Lord of Howith being otherwise
to be accommodated, provided he join with them; that place being esteemed most
convenient, in respect of situation, which they had small grounds to hope for.

The Transplantation justified, by reason of the late barbarous carriage of the
Irish toward the English.
The serious consideration of this strange behavior of the Irish, toward the
English, has given them just cause to place a wall of separation between them
and such dangerous Neighbors, by whose barbarous carriage and inhumanity,
there were (since the Rebellion first brake out unto the time of the cessation
made Sept. 15. 1643. which was not full two years after) three hundred thousand
British and Protestants cruelly murdered in cold blood, destroyed some other
way, or expelled out of their habitations, according to the strictest
conjecture, and computation of those who seemed best to understand the numbers
of English planted in Ireland, besides those few which perished in the heat of
fight, during the War: The losses sustained by the British Planters in the
space of 2. years from Oct. 23. 1641. amounted to 635375 l.
And upon an enquiry made in Ireland An. 1641. of their losses sustained in
their Estates, Fortunes and Livelyhoods, by Spoil and Robbery, from the 23. of
October 1641. till the 8. of March following, by estimation they amounted to
six hundred thirty five thousand, three hundred seventy five pounds. And if a
right information could have been taken, as I supposed, would have amounted to
near five hundred times as much.

It has been said (of late) by some, Number of Inhabitants.
that the people of England are quadrubled, within four hundred years, as
doubling every two hundred years: How true this may be in relation to England I
know not; but I am persuaded that this observation may be more properly applied
to Ireland, which has been (within these four hundred years) mightily improved
by clearing of grounds from a Wilderness, and thereby consequently giving way
for the enlargment of peoples Habitations, Ireland being reported to be
generally overgrown with Woods in Giraldus Cambrensis his time. Though Ireland
was very populous before the last War, and is computed to be half as big as
England, yet I dare not say that it contained half as many people as England
did, because above one fourth part of Ireland is taken up with unprofitable
Boggs, Lakes and barren Mountains; and for that the Towns Cities of England are
far greater and more numerous in proportion, than those of Ireland; in so much,
as that the City of London it self may be thought to contain more people, than
one half of the Kingdom of Ireland in the best of times; But whether Ireland
did (in its prime) contain two millions of people, or what more, I will not
take upon me to determine, but do submit the decision of so doubtful a matter to
more knowing persons, together with the enquiry, whither in time to come (when
Ireland shall be fully inhabited) it may be thought (though mixedly) the
English may inhabit the proportion of about one Province and an half of it,
though most numerous in the Provinces of Mounster and Leinster: The Irish the
like proportion of one Province and an half more, though most numerous in the
Province of Connnaght; And the Scots inhabiting the proportion of a fourth part
of Ireland, but more numerous in the Province of Vlster, than in any other.

The Irish tongue is sharp and sententious, Their Language.
offers great occasion to quick Apothegms and proper allusions, wherefore
their common Jesters, Bards, and Rymers, are said to delight passingly those
that conceive the grace and propriety of the tongue. But the true Irish indeed
differs so much from that they they commonly speak, that scarce one amongst
five score, can either write, read, or understand it. Therefore it is
prescribed among certain their Poets, and other Students of Antiquity.

The Italian, Spanish, and French Tongues are compounded of the Latin. The
German (high and low Country) Saxon, Scotland, and English have great affinity.
North Wales, South Wales, Cornwall, and Little Britain in France, as Cambrensis
and Sir John Price have learnedly discoursed; but the Irish (except the
Redshanks, and the Scottish of the High-lands) have affinity with no Tongue (as
I can learn) more then with the British Language.

Many reasons there are to induce one to be of this opinion; first of all
according to the first command, the Celtick Tongue was of force in all these
Northern parts. Bodinus writes, that the British and Celtick Language was all
one. Pausanius the Greecian makes mention how the Celts in their Language
called a Horse Marc, and three Horses, Trimarc; the which, the Welchman uses
to this day with a guttural alteration, Margh, and Treemargh. Also Camden, the
learned Antiquary of this our Age, is of this opinion (remembering the Story of
Gurguntius, and the infinite number of British Words in use among the Irish,
the which he terms infinitam vim Britannicarum dictionum) that the Britains
first peopled this Land. And although of a long time (by reason of troubles,
and alterations) the speech grew wholly out of use; yet afterward in success
of time it was revived. Secondly, the British and Irish often Matched together,
so that there grew among them great alliance and affinity, to the fartherance
of the Language. Thirdly, the first Conquerors in Henry the Seconds time, that
brake the Ice into this Land, were Welch-men, whose Names and Seats to this day
are fresh in memory. As for instance, in the Dioces of Leighlin, there is a
Town called Villa Wallicorum, the Town of Welsh men. Careg and Craig in the
British or Welsh Tongue is a Stone or Rock, and of the Britains,
Carreggferggus, Carreggmont-Griffiin, Carregg in Shurie, Carrigguaspin, and
Craigwading, have their Names. Likewise, Llis in British is a Court or Palace,
of that in Ireland you have Lismore, Lisfenyn, Lislofty, Lismakery. Glan and
Glyn are British words, of them have you Glangibbon, Glandoboy, Glanreynold,
Glynburry, Glyndelory, Glynmoloura, etc. Inis an Island, is British and Irish,
of which kind are Inissirocan, Inishoven, Inisdiok, Inisuag, Iniscorthie, and
the like. Rath, a Moat or round Trench (whereof there are many in Ireland made
by the Danes) if Beda had not said that it was a Saxon word, I would have said
it had been British, and how many names of places are compounded with it in
Ireland, were too long to rehearse. I will here give Stainhurst leave to
conclude, Omnes Insulae locos and lucos Wallici nominis gloria implevit; the
renown of the Welsh name (says he) has filled all the ways and woods of the
Island. The Irish are now generally bred both to read and speak the English
Tongue.

The Irish are commonly of a large and handsome proportion of body, clear of
Skin and Hue. Their Women are well Favored, clear Colored, fair handed, big
and large, suffered from their infancy to grow at Will, nothing curious of
their feature and proportion of body.

The Common sort of People in Ireland do feed generally upon Milk, Diet.
Butter, Curds and Whey, New bread made of Oat meal, Beans, Barley and Pease,
and sometimes of Wheat upon Festivals, their bread being baked every day
against the fire. Most of their Drink is Butter-milk and Whey; They feed much
also upon Parsnips, Potatoes, and Watercresses, and in those Countries
bordering on the Sea, upon Sea weeds, as Dullusck, Slugane, but seldom eat
Flesh. The middle sott of the Irish Gentry differ not much from the same kind
of Diet, save only that they oftener feed upon Flesh, eat better Bread, and
drink Beer more frequently. They are all of them (when opportunity offers it
self) too much inclined to drink Beer and Vsquebagh to an excess; And both Men
and Women of all sorts, extremely addicted to take Tobacco in a most abundant
manner. The best sort of Irish do imitate the English both in Diet and Apparel,
but not without a palpable difference (most commonly) in the mode of their
Entertainment.

At^^^e.
Trouses and Mantles were (till King James and King Charles his Reign) the
general habit of the Irish; their Mantles serving many times as a fit house for
an Outlaw, a meet bed for a Rebel, and an apt cloak for a Thief; But now the
Men wear their clothes altogether after the English fashion, having converted
their Mantles into Cloaks, with which kind of wear they are much affected.
Formerly they used no Hats, but Caps made of Irish Frize, called Cappeenes, and
even now the middle sort of Gentry seldom wear Bands, unless they go abroad
amongst Strangers. The Common sort of People both Men and Women wear no English
Shoos, but things called Irish Brogues, thin soled, somewhat like our Poumps,
and sowed altogether with Leather. The ordinary sort of Irish Women wear a kind
of loose Gowns without stiffening, with Petticoats, and Wascoats without any
Bodies; having linen Kerchers about their heads, instead of head-cloaths, and
never using hats, but covering their heads with their Mantles to save
themselves from rain, or the heat of the Sun.

The Irish Gentry are musically disposed, Recreations.
and therefore many of them play singular well upon the Irish-Harp; they affect
also to play at Tables; The Common sort meet oftentimes in great numbers (in
plain Meadows or Ground) to recreate themselves at a play called Bandy, with
Balls and crooked Sticks, much after the manner of our play at Stoe-ball; they
are much given to Dancing after their Country way, and the men to play upon
the Jews-Harp, and at Cards, but for no great value.

The Irish Names Irish Names.
of Baptism are generally, Teig, Patrick, Turlough, Murrogh, Mortoch, Donoch,
Loughlin, Dermot, etc. with many other Names made use of there as well as here
in England; as namely, John, Edmund, Edward, Thomas, William, James, etc.

Sirnames
For the better breaking of the Heads, and Septs of the Irish, which was one of
their greatest strength, and motive to lead them to Rebellion, there was a law
made in Ireland, in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, by which it was
commanded, that whereas all men then used to be called by the name of their
Septs, according to the several Nations, and had no Sirnames at all, that from
thenceforth each one should take upon himself a several Surname, either of his
trade and faculty, or of some quality of his body or mind, or the place where
he dwelt, so as every one should be distinguished from the other, or from the
most part, whereby they should not only; not depend upon the head of their
Sept, as then they did, but also in time, learn quite to forget the Irish
Nation. And herewithall would I also wish all the O's and Mac's, which the
Heads of Septs have taken to their names, to be utterly forbidden and
extinguished. For that the same being an Ordinance (as some say) first made by
O Brien for for the strengthening of the Irish, the abrogating thereof will as
much infeeble them. The custom of prefixing the vowel O, to many of the chief
Irish Sirnames began in the Reign of Brien Boria the son of Kennethy King of
Ireland. As for Mac in Sirnames, it bears no other signification, then Fitz
does amongst the French, and (from them) the English, and Ap with the Welsh.
And although it were more anciently used then the other, yet it varied
according to the Fathers Name, and became not so soon fully settled in families.

CHAP. III. Of the Government.
THe Government Government
of Ireland by Viceroys or Deputies, were from the first entrance of the
English under Henry the Second, till King Edward the Third's days, called
Justicers of Ireland, and Justicers and Keepers of the Land of Ireland; then
Lieutenants, and their Vicegerent Deputies. The Viceroys or Deputies of
Ireland diversely named at sundry times.
Afterward, they were at the Prince his pleasure termed, sometimes Deputies,
sometimes Justicers, and sometimes Lieutenants, (which is a little more honor)
but for the most part with one and the same authority. And without doubt those
first Justicers of Ireland (as the Justicer of England, who in that age was
also for brevity called Justice,) were ordained for keeping of the Peace, and
Ministering of Justice to all and every person; as were the Proprietors, and
Proconsuls in old time among the Romans, which were sent into a Province with
highest command.

Before we pass further, Let us take a view of the Catalogue here before us,
comprehending this following Table.

A Table showing the Names and Titles of all the Lord Lieutenants, Deputies,
and Lord Justices of Ireland, with the time they began their Government; since
the 16th Year of the Reign of Henry the Seventh unto this present Year, 1672.
Order Their Names. Titles they had before. Titles in Ireland. Month. Day. Year
1 Henry Duke of York L. Lieuten 1501 2 Gerrald Earl of Kildare Deputy 1501 3
Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey Lieuten. 1520 4 Piers Butler Earl of Ossory Deputy
5 Gerrald Earl of Kildare Deputy 6 Baron of Delvin Deputy 7 Piers Butler Earl
of Ossory Deputy 1529 8 Will. Skevington Knight Deputy 1530 9 Gerrald Earl of
Kildare Deputy 1532 10 Will. Skevington Knight Deputy October 4 1534 11 Leonard
Lord Gray Deputy January 1 1534 12 William Brereton Knight Deputy 1540 13
Anthon. S. Leager Knight Deputy July 25 1541 14 William Brabazon Knight Justice
April 1 1546 15 Anthon. S. Leager Knight Deputy August 4 1546 16 Edw.
Bellingham Knight Deputy May 1548 17 Francis Bryen Knight Justice December. 27
1549 18 William Brabazon Knight Justice Februar. 1549 19 Anthon. S. Leager
Knight Deputy August 4 1550 20 James Crofts Knight Deputy April 29 1551 21
Thomas Cusack Gerrald Ailmer
Knights Justices December. 1552 22 Anth. S. Leager Knight Deputy September. 1 1554
23 Thomas Lord Fitz-Water Deputy May 26 1555 24 Hugh Cruwen Henry Sidney
Arch. Bish. Dub. L. Chan. Knight and Treasurer
Justices 1557 25 Henry Sidney Knight Justice February 6 1557 26 Thomas Earl of
Sussex Deputy April 27 1558 27 H. Sidney absent Sussex in Scotia
Knight Justice September. 24 1558 28 Thomas Earl of Sussex Deputy 29 Henry
Sidney Knight Justice December. 13 1558 30 Thomas Earl of Sussex Deputy August 27
1559 31 W. Fitz-Williams Knight Justice February 15 1559 32 Thomas Earl of
Sussex Lieutenant June 24 1560 33 W. Fitz-Williams Knight Justice February 2
1560 34 Thomas Earl of Sussex Lieutenant June 1 1561 35 W. Fitz Williams Knight
Justice January 22 1561 36 Thomas Earl of Sussex Lieutenant July 24 1562 37
Nicholas Arnold Knight Justice May 25 1564 38 Henry Sidney Knight Deputy June
20 1565 39 Do Weston W. Fitz-Williams
Lord Chancellor Knight
Justices October. 14 1567 40 Henry Sidney Knight Deputy October. 20 1568 41 W.
Fitz-Williams Knight Justice March 26 1570 42 W. Fitz-Williams Knight Deputy
June 13 1570 43 Henry Sidney Knight Deputy September. 18 1575 44 William Drurie
Knight Justice September. 14 1578 45 William Petham Knight Justice October 11
1579 46 Arthur Lord Gray Deputy August 12 1580 47 Adam Loftus Henry Wallop
Arch. Bish. Dub. L. Chan. Knight and Treasurer
Justices 1582 48 John Perrott Knight Deputy June 21 1584 49 W. Fitz-Williams
Knight Deputy June 30 1588 50 William Russel Knight Deputy August 11 1594 51
Thomas Lord Burrogh Deputy May 22 1597 52 Thomas Norris Knight Justice October
30 1597 53 Adam Loftus Arch-Bish. Dub. L. Chan. Justice November. 27 1597 53
Robert Gardener Knight Justice Novem. 27 1597 54 Rob. D'Evercux Earl of Essex
Lieutenant April 15 1598 Adam Loftus Arch-Bish. Dub. L. Chan. Justices 1599 55
George Carry Knight and Treasurer 56 Charles Blunt Lord Mount-joy Lieutenant
1599 57 George Carry Knight and Treasurer Deputy April 29 1603 58 Arthur
Chichester Knight Deputy February 3 1604 Thomas Jones Arch Bish. Dub. L. Chan.
Justices March 14 1613 59 Rich. Wingfeild Knight and Marshal 60 Arthur
Chichester Lord Belfast Deputy July 1614 61 Thomas Jones John Denham
Arch-Bish. Dub. L. Chan. Knight
Justices February 11 1615 62 Oliver St. John Knight Deputy August 30 1616 63
Adam Loftus K. Visc. Ely, L. Chan. Justices May 4 1622 Rich. Wingfeild Visc.
Poyerscourt 64 Henry Carry Visc. Faulkland Deputy September. 8 1622 65 Adam
L^ftus Visc. Ely, L. Chan. Justice October 25 16^^ 65 Richard Boil Earl of
Cork L. Treas. Justice October 25 1629 66 Tho. Wentworth Visc. Wentworth Deputy
1633 67 Adam Loftus Char. Wandesford
Visc. Ely, L. Chan. Esquire; Mr. of the Rolls
Justices June 2 1636 68 Tho. Wentworth Visc. Wentworth Liutenant 1636 69
Robert Dillon Char. Wandesford
Lord Kilkenny West Esquire; Mr. of the Rolls
Justices 1639 70 Tho. Wentworth Earl of Strafford Lieutenant 1640 71 Char.
Wandesford Master of the Rolls Deputy April 1 1640 72 William Parsons John
Burlace
K. Mr. of the Wards. K. Mr. of the Ordnance
Justices December. 1641 73 John Burlace Henry Fichburne
K. Mr. of the Ordnance K. Gover. of Drogheda
Justices December. 1642 74 James Butler Earl Marq. of Ormond Lieutenant 1643
Maur. Eustace Lord Chancellor December 31 75 Roger Earl of Orrery Justices
January 17 1660 Charles Earl of Montrath December. 31 76 James D. Mar. and E. of
Ormond Lieutenant July 28 1662 77 Thomas Earl of Ossory Deputy May 31 1663 78
James D. Mar. and E. of Ormond Lieutenant September. 1665 79 Thomas Earl of
Ossory Deputy April 25 1668 80 John Lord Roberts Lieutenant September. 18 1669 81
John Lord Berkley Lieutenant April 21 1670 82 Michael Boil Arthur Forbs
Arch. Bish. Dub. L. Chan. Knight
Justices 1671 83 John Lord Berkley Lieutenant September. 1671 84 Henry Capell
Earl of Essex Lieutenant May 21 1672

Notwithstanding what before is said, The great Power and Train of the
Viceroys or Deputies of Ireland.
no Viceroy in all Europe has greater Power, or comes nearer the Majesty of a
King in his Train and State, yet it was thought (that in the times of trouble)
this should have been one principal in the appointing of the Lord Deputies
Authority, that it should be more ample and absolute than it is, and that he
should have uncontrouled Power, to do any thing, that he with the advisement of
the Council should think meet to be done: for that it was impossible for the
Council here to direct a Governor there, who should be forced oftentimes to
follow the necessity of present occasions, and to take the sudden advantage of
time, which being once lost could not be recovered, whilst, The want of more
absolute power in the Deputies of of Ireland, was formerly prejudicial to the
Affairs of that Kingdom.
expecting direction from hence, the delays whereof were oftentimes through
other greater affairs most irksome, the oportunities there in the mean time
past away, and greater danger did often grow, which by such timely prevention
might easily have been stopped: And this is worthily observed by Machiavel in
his discourses upon Livie, where he commends the manner of the Romans
Government, in giving absolute Power to all their Counselors and Governors,
which if they abused they afterward should dearly answer And the contrary
thereof he reprehendeth in the States of Venice, of Florence, and many other
Principalities of Italy: who use to limit their chief Officers so strictly, as
that thereby they have oftentimes lost such happy occasions, as they could
never come unto again: The like whereof, who so has been conversant in the
Government of Ireland (especially during Queen Elizabeth's Reign) has too often
seen to their great hindrance and hurt.

That besides the want of Power, there were eminent defects observed in the
managemet of the public Affairs of Ireland.
Besides this want of Power which did hinder the good Reformation of Ireland,
there were eminent defects noted in the mangement of the public Affairs of
that Kingdom, by some of the chief Governors thereof, who seeing the end of
their Government to draw nigh, and some mischiefs and practices growing up,
which afterward might work trouble to the next succeeding Governor, would not
attempt the redress, or cutting off thereof, either for fear they should leave
the Realm unquiet at the end of their Government, or that the next that came,
should receive the same too quiet, and so happily win more praise thereof, than
they before. And therefore they would not seek at all to repress that evil, but
would either by granting protection for a time, or holding some emparlance with
the Rebel, or by treaty of Comissioners, or by other like devices, only smother
and keep down the flame of the mischief, so it might not break out in their
time of Government, what came afterward they cared not, or rather wished the
worst

To this may be added, The savoring of the Irish, and depressing of the
English, an ill practice by some of the Lord Deputies of Ireland.
that when the Irish have been broken by the Sword of one Governor, and
thereby consequently made fit and capable for subjection, another succeeding
(as it were) into his harvest, and finding an open way made for what course he
pleased, bent not to that point which the former intended, but rather quite
contrary, and as it were in scorn of the former, and in vain vaunt of his own
Councels, would tread down and disgrace all the English, and set up and
countenance the Irish all that he he could, thereby to make them more tractable
and buxome to his Government, (wherein he thought much amiss) for surely his
Government could not be sound and wholesome for that Realm, it being so contrary
to the former. For it was even as two Physicians should take one sick body in
hand, at two sundry times: of which, the former would minister al things meet
to purge and keep under the body; the other, to pamper and strengthen it
suddenly again; whereof, what is to be looked for, but a most dangerous
relapse? Therefore, by all means it ought to be foreseen, and assured, that
after once entering into this course of Reformation, there be afterward no
remorse nor drawing back for the sight of any such rueful objects, as must
thereupon follow, nor for compassion of their Calamities, seeing that by no
other means it is possible to cure them, and that these are not of will, but of
very urgent necess^ty.

The Lord Lieutenant, The Lord Deputies of Ireland ass^sted by a Privy Council.
or Lord Deputy of Ireland, has for his assistance a Privy Council attending
on him, though resident for the most part at Dublin: and in emergencies, or
cases of more difficult nature proceeds many times in an arbitrary way,
without formalities of Law.

Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland in Queen Elizabeth's time, The Lords
Presidents of Connaght and Mounster instituted in Queen Elizabeth's time.
to enure and acquaint the People of Mounster and Connaght, with the English
Government again (which had not been in use among them for the space of two
hundred years before) he instituted two Presidency Courts in those two
Provinces, placing Sir Edward Fitton in Connaght, and John Perrot in Mounster.
The Lord President of Mounster, has one Assistant, twelve learned Lawyers, and
a Secretary.

CHAP. IV. Of the Title changed from Lord to King of Ireland in the time of
Henry the Eighth. Of the Titles of the Crown to every part of Ireland, and to
the whole diverse ways; And several claims to the Land of Ireland. Of the
Revenue and Strength.
Title altered from Lord to King.
SIR Anthony Saint-Leger Lord Deputy of Ireland, in a Parliament which he held
the 33. of Henry 8. caused an Act to pass, which gave unto King Henry the
Eighth, his Heirs and Successors, the Name, Style and Title of King of Ireland;
Whereas, before that time, the Kings of England were styled but Lords of
Ireland: Although indeed, they were absolute Monarchs thereof, and had in right
all Royal and Imperial Jurisdiction and Power there, as they had in the Realm
of England. And yet because in the vulgar conceit the name of King is higher
than the name of Lord; assuredly the assuming of this Title, has not a little
raised the Sovereignity of the Kings of England in the minds of this people.
And because it has been doubted by some whether we might Lawfully fight
against the Irish, I shall (for farther satisfaction) here insert the Right and
Title the Crown of England has to the Kingdom of Ireland, as to every part of
it, and to the whole diverse ways.

I will begin with the Pedigree of William Earl Marshal, Title to Leinster.
for thereupon depend many Records in Ireland, and the King of Englands Right
to Leinster. Walter Fitz Richard, who came from Normandy with William the
Conqueror, died Lord Strongbow of Strigule, alias Chepstow without Issue, to
whom succeeded his Sisters Son, who was created the first Earl of Pembroke, and
had Issue, Richard the inheritor of Leinster, by a Covenant and Marriage of
Eva, the Sole Daughter of Mac Murrough King of Leinster. This Richard conveyed
to Henry the Second all his Title, and held of him the Lordship of Leinster in
four Counties, Wexford, Catherlagh, Ossory and Kildare. Richard left Issue, a
Daughter Issabel, married to William Earl Marshal of England, now Earl of
Pembroke, Lord Strongbow, and Lord of Leinster. William had Issue, five Sons,
who died without Issue, when every of them, except the youngest, had
successively possessed their Fathers Lands; and five Daughters, Maud, Jone,
Issabel, Sibil and Eve, among whom the Patrimony was parted Anno 31. H. 3. Of
these Daughters bestowed in Marriage, are descended many Noble Houses, as the
Mortimers, Bruises, Clares, etc. born Subjects to the Crown of England, paying
ever to the King his Duties reserved.

Title to Meth.
Hugh de Lacy Conqueror of Meth, had Issue, Walter de Lacy, who held the same
of King John, paying a Fine of four thousand Marks Sterling, and hence began
all the several Claims there, with Alegiance sworn and done by their Ancestors.

Title to Mounster.
At the very first arrival of Henry the Second, the Princes of Mounster came
universally, and did homage voluntarily, and acknowledged to him and his Heirs,
Duties and pays for ever.

John de Courcy Conqueror and Earl of Vlster, dyed without Issue, Title to
Ulster and Connaght
King John, Lord of Ireland, gave the Earldome to Hugh de Lacy, who who had
Issue, Walter and Hugh, who died without Issue, and one Daughter married to
Reymond Burke, Conqueror and Lord of Connaght.

Connaght descended to diverse Heirs, owing service to the Prince, but Vlster
returned by devolution to the special Inheritance and the Revenues of the Crown
of England, in this manner; The said de Burgo, had Issue, Richard, who had
Issue, John, who had Issue William, who was slain without Issue, and a Daughter
Elizabeth, entitled to thirty thousand Marks yearly, by the Earldome of Vlster,
whom Edward the Third gave in marriage to Lionel his second Son, Duke of
Clarence, who had Issue a Daughter Philippe, married to Edward Mortimer, who
had Issue Edmund, Anne, Elianor; Edmund and Elianor died without Issue, Anne
was married to Richard, Earl of Cambridge, Son to Edmund of Langley Duke of
York, fifth Son to Edward the Third; which said Richard had Issue, Richard
Plantaginet, Father to Edward the Fourth, Father to Elizabeth, Wife to Henry
the Seventh, and Mother to Henry the Eighth, Father to Mary, Edward the Sixth,
and Elizabeth.

Several Claims to the Land of Ireland.
Several claims to the Land of Ireland.
1. Mac Gil-murrow King of Ireland, with all his Petty Princes, Lords and
Captains, summoned to King Arthurs Court held in Carlion Anno 519. did
accordingly their homage, and attended all the while his great Feast and
Assembly lasted.

2. The Monarch of all Ireland, and all other, both Reges and Reguli for them
and for theirs for ever, betook themselves to Henry the Second An. Dom. 1172.
namely those of the South, whiles he lay at Waterford, Dermot K. of Cork,
which is the Nation of the Mac Cartyes, at Cashel, Donald K. of Limrick, which
is the Nation of the Obrenes, Donald K. of Ossory, Mac Shaghlon King of Ophaly,
at Divelin did the like, Okernel King of Vriel, Ororick King of Meth, Roderick
King of all Ireland, and of Connaght. This did they with consents and shouts of
their People; and King Henry returned without any Battle given. Only Vlster
remained, which John de Courcy soon after conquered, and Oneale Captain of all
the Irish there, came to Dublin to Richard the Second, An. 1399. and freely
bound himself by Oath and great Sums of Money, to be true to the Crown of
England.

3. The same time O Brien of Thomond, Oconar of Connaght, Arthur Mac Murrow of
Leinster, and all the Irish Lords which had been somewhat disordered, renewed
their Obedience.

4. When Ireland first received the Christian Faith, they gave themselves into
the Jurisdiction both Spiritual and Temporal, of the Sea of Rome. The Temporal
Lordship, Pope Adrian conferred upon Henry the Second, and he gave the same to
John his younger Son, afterward King of England, and so it returned home to
the Crown.

5. Alexander the Third confirmed the Gift of Adrian as in both their Charters
is expressed at large.

6. Vivian the Legate on the Popes behalf did Accurse and Excommunicate all
those that fell from the Obeisance of the Kings of England.

7. The Clergy twice Assembled, once at Cashell, secondly at Armagh, plainly
determined the Conquest to be Lawful, and threatnad all people, under pain of
Gods, and holy Churches indignation, to accept of the English Kings for their
Lords, from time to time.

8. It would ask a Volume to recite the Name of such Irish Princes, who since
the Conquest have continually, upon Occasions, Revolts, or Petitions, sworn
Truth and Faith to the Kings of England; and from time to time received Honors,
Wages, Fees, Pardons, and made Petitions. And thus I think no reasonable man
will doubt of a Right so old, so continued, so ratified, and so many ways
confessed.

The Kings Revenue in Ireland was spent and wholly exhausted in the public
service; and therefore, The Kings Revenue in Ireland wholly spent on that
Kingdom.
in all the ancient Pipe-Rolls in the times of King Henry the Third, Edward the
First, Edward the Second, and Edward the Third, between the Receipts and
Allowances, there is this entry; In Thesauro nihil. For the Officers of the
State and the Army, spent all; so, as there was no surplusage of Treasure; And
here I may well take occasion, to show the vanity of that which is reported in
the Story of Walsingham, touching the Revenue of the Crown in Ireland, which he
says did amount to thirty thousand Pounds a year, in the time of King Edward
the Third. The vain story of 30000 l. yearly Revenue in E, 3ds time refuted.


If this Writer had known, that the Kings Courts had been established in
Ireland more than a hundred years before King Edward the Third was born, or had
seen either the Parliament Rolls in England, or the Records of the Receipts and
Issues in Ireland, he had not left this vain report to Posterity, for both the
Benches and Exchequer were erected in the twelfth year of King John. And it is
Recorded in the Parliament Rolls of 21. of Edward the Third, remaining in the
Tower, that the Commons of England made Petition that it might be enquired why
the King received no benefit of his Land in Ireland, considering he possessed
more there, than any of his Ancestors had before him. Now, if the King at that
time, when there were no standing Forces maintained there, had received thirty
thousand pounds yearly at his Exchequer in Ireland, he must needs have made
profit by that Land, considering that the whole charge of the Kingdom in the
47th year of Edward the Third (when the King did pay an Army there) did amount
to no more than eleven thousand and two hundred pounds per Annum, as appears
by the Contract of William Winsore.

Besides it is manifest by the Pipe-Rolls of that time, whereof many are yet
preserved in Breminghams Tower; and are of better credit than any Monks story,
that during the Reign of King Edward the Third, the Revenue of the Crown of
Ireland, both certain and casual, did not rise unto ten thousand pound per
Annum, though the medium be taken of the best seven years that are be found in
that Kings time. The like Fable has Hollingshead, touching the Revenue of the
Earldome of Vlster; which (says he) in the time of King Richard the Second,
was thirty thousand Marks by the year; Whereas in truth, though the Lordships
of Connaght and Mead (which were then parcel of the Inheritance of the Earl of
Vlster) be added to the Account, the Revenue of that Earldome came not to the
third part of that he writes. For the Account of the Profits of Vlster yet
remaining in Breminghams Tower, made by William Fitz-Warren, Seneschall and
Farmer of the Lands in Vlster, seized into the Kings hands after the death of
Walter de Burgo, Earl of Vlster, from the fifth year of Edward the Third, until
the eighth year, do amount but to nine hundred and odd pounds, at what time the
Irishry had not made so great an invasion upon Earldome of Vlster, as they had
done in the time of King Richard the Second.

As vain a thing it is, that has been seen written in an ancient Manuscript
touching the Customs of Ireland in the time of King Edward the Third, that
those duties in those days should yearly amount to ten thousand Marks, which to
search and view of the Records there, can justly be controlled. For upon the
late reducing (about the beginning of King James his Reign) of this ancient
Inheritance of the Crown which had been detained in most of the Port Towns of
that Realm, The Customs of Ireland of little value till King James his Reign
being but 1000 l. per An.
for the space of one hundred years and upwards, some pains being taken to
visit all the Pipe Rolls, wherein the Accounts of Customs are contained, those
duties were found to be answered in every Port, for two hundred and fifty years
together, but could not find that at any time they did exceed a thousand Pounds
per Annum; and no marvel, for the Subsidy Poundage was not then known, and the
greatest profit did arise by the Cocquet of Hides; for Wool and Wooll-fells
were ever of little value in that Kingdom till of late.

The Profit of the Custom House in Ireland in the last year of King James his
Reign did amount to thirty thousand Pounds per Annum; The Customs of Ireland
advanced to 30000 l. per An. in the last year of K. James his Reign.
And what great improvements were made thereof by the Earl of Strafford in the
time of his Government, I cannot find, because they fell together with him; But
what that branch of the Revenue now comes to, together with the rest paid
yearly to his Majesty's Exchequer in Ireland, I shall here render a particular
account of, (which at first view (considering that Country is not yet half
Planted with People) may be much wondered at. But when I call to mind Sir Audley
Mervyns expressions (Speaker of the House of Commons in Ireland) delivered in a
Speech of his to his Grace the Duke of Ormond, then Lord Lieutenant of that
Kingdom, Feb. 13. 1662. being these, viz. That they did understand the usual
proceedings of Parliaments, to begin at Grievances, and to conclude with
Supplies: But that they had inverted that Order, by applying themselves in the
first place to the settling a constant Revenue for his Majesty, and granting
other Temporary Aides far above their Abilities, though far less than what his
Majesty's goodness might challenge from them; then the wonder ceases; for as I
have already observed, while the Popish Irish party bore sway in the Public
Assemblies of that Realm, they appeared averse, not only to contribute toward
the Public Charge (unless upon their own Terms) though the occasions were
never so urgent, and they in a condition more able to discharge the same than
now of late; But repented themselves of those good Acts they had once consented
to in this kind: in order to his Majesty's Service, which they evidently
expressed by their forward accepting the abatement of the forementioned
Subsidies in the Earl of Straffords time, from forty thousand Pounds each
Subsidy, to twelve thousand pounds a piece; An Act far different from the
behavior of those Loyal English hearts in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, who
contributed so freely to supply her Majesty's necessities in the Public
Concern, as that sometimes she refused their kindnesses, accounting the Money
in the purses of her good Subjects, to be as ready for her Service (when
occasion required) as if they had been locked up in her own Coffers.

The particulars of his Majesty's present Revenue in Ireland, The particulars
of his Majesty's present Revenue in Ireland amounting to 219500 l.
according the Demise made by King Charles the Second to John Forth and his
Partners by Indenture, bearing date July 12. 1669. are as follows, viz. His
Revenue arising by Hearth-Money, Licenses to Retail Wine, and Strong Water,
the New Quit-Rents given to his Majesty by the Acts of Setlement, and
Explanation; the Chief Rents, Fee Farm Rents, Rent-Service, Rentcharge, Rents
See, Rents reserved upon Leases exceeding one and twenty years, Copy hold, and
all other ancient Crown Rents set for seven years, commencing at Christmas
1668. rendering yearly for the same, ninety one thousand and five hundred
Pounds. And his Majesty's Revenue arising by Customs and imported Excise; set
for six years commencing at Christmas An. 1669. rendering yearly seventy five
thousand Pounds. And his Majesty's Revenue arising by Inland Excise, and by
Licenses to retaile Ale and Beer; set for four years and three quarters from
March 25. 1671. rendering yearly fifty three thousand Pounds for the first four
years, and thirty nine thousand seven hundred and fifty three thousand Pounds
during the last three quarters; amounting in the whole yearly, to two hundred
nineteen thousand five hundred Pounds. The Grant made to the Lord Ranelagh of
all the Revenue of Ireland, continues to December. 26. 1675. So that by this we
may see in part, what hopeful advantages are like in time to accrue to the
Crown of England, by having Ireland for the most part) inhabited by Protestant
British Planters, whose Loyalty and Industry, will (I make no doubt) cause that
Kingdom to become in a short time, a most flourishing Country.

A Table for Reducing Plantation Acres into English; and Ascertaining the Kings
Rent in the several Provinces of IRELAND, according to the Explanatory Act:
viz. For every English Statute Acre in the Province of Leinster 3 d. Munster 2
d. ob. Connaght 1 d. q. Vlster 2 d
Irish. English Acres. Leinster. Munster. Vlster. Connaght. Ir. A. En. A. R. P.
Pts. l. s. d. q. l. s. d. q. l. s. d. q. l. s. d. q. 1 1 2 9 21 0 4 3 0 3 3 0 3
1 0 2 2 2 3 0 38 42 0 9 3 0 7 1 0 6 2 0 4 3 3 4 3 17 63 1 2 2 0 11 0 0 0 3 0 7
1 4 0 1 36 84 1 7 2 1 2 2 1 1 0 0 9 3 5 8 0 15 105 0 2 1 1 6 1 1 4 1 1 0 0 6 9
2 35 5 2 5 1 1 9 3 1 7 2 1 2 2 7 11 1 14 26 2 10 0 2 1 2 1 10 3 1 5 0 8 12 3 33
44 3 2 3 2 5 1 2 2 0 1 7 2 9 14 2 12 68 3 7 3 2 8 3 2 6 1 1 9 3 10 16 0 31 89 4
0 2 4 0 2 2 8 2 2 0 1 11 17 3 10 110 4 5 2 3 4 0 2 11 3 2 2 3 12 19 1 30 10 4
10 1 3 7 3 3 3 0 2 5 1 13 21 0 9 31 5 3 1 3 11 2 3 6 0 2 7 2 14 22 2 28 52 5 8
0 4 3 0 3 9 1 2 10 0 15 24 1 7 73 6 0 3 4 6 3 4 0 2 3 0 2 16 25 3 26 94 6 5 3 4
10 1 4 3 3 3 3 0 17 27 2 5 15 6 10 2 5 2 0 4 7 0 3 5 1 18 39 0 25 15 7 3 2 5 5
1 4 10 1 3 7 3 19 30 3 4 36 7 8 1 5 9 2 5 1 2 3 10 1 20 32 1 23 57 8 1 1 6 1 3
5 4 3 4 0 2 21 34 0 2 78 8 6 0 6 4 2 5 8 0 4 3 0 22 33 2 21 ^9 8 10 3 6 8 1 5
11 1 4 5 2 23 37 1 0 120 9 3 3 6 11 0 6 2 2 4 8 0 24 38 3 20 20 9 8 2 7 3 2 6 5
3 4 10 1 25 40 1 39 41 10 1 2 7 7 0 6 9 0 5 0 3 26 42 0 18 62 10 6 1 7 10 3 7 0
1 5 3 1 27 43 2 37 83 10 11 1 8 2 2 7 3 2 5 5 2 28 45 1 16 104 11 4 0 8 6 0 7 6
3 5 8 0 29 46 3 36 4 11 9 0 8 9 3 7 10 0 5 10 2 30 48 2 15 25 12 1 3 9 1 1 8 1
1 6 1 0 31 50 0 34 46 12 2 3 9 5 0 8 4 1 6 3 1 32 51 3 13 67 12 11 0 9 8 3 8 7
3 6 5 3 33 53 1 32 88 13 4 1 10 0 1 8 11 0 6 8 1 34 55 0 11 109 13 9 1 10 4 0 9
2 1 6 10 2 35 56 2 31 9 14 2 0 10 7 2 9 5 2 7 1 0 36 58 1 10 30 14 7 0 10 11 1
9 8 3 7 3 2 37 59 3 29 51 14 11 3 11 2 3 9 11 3 7 6 0 38 61 2 8 78 15 4 3 11 0
2 10 3 0 7 8 1 39 63 0 27 93 15 9 2 12 10 1 10 6 1 7 10 3 40 64 3 6 114 16 2 2
12 1 3 10 9 2 8 1 1 41 66 1 26 14 16 7 1 12 5 2 11 0 3 8 3 2 42 68 0 5 35 17 0
0 12 9 0 11 4 0 8 6 0 43 69 2 24 56 17 5 0 13 0 3 11 7 1 8 8 2 44 71 1 3 77 17
9 3 13 4 1 11 10 2 8 11 0 45 72 3 22 98 18 2 3 13 8 0 12 1 3 9 1 1 46 74 2 1
119 18 7 2 13 11 3 12 5 0 9 3 3 47 76 0 21 19 19 0 2 14 3 1 12 8 1 9 6 1 48 77
3 0 40 19 5 1 14 7 0 12 11 2 9 8 2 49 79 1 19 61 19 10 0 14 10 2 13 2 3 9 11 0
50 80 3 38 82 1 0 3 0 15 2 1 13 6 0 10 1 2 51 82 1 17 103 1 0 0 3 15 6 0 13 9 1
10 4 0 52 84 0 7 03 1 1 1 3 15 9 2 14 0 2 10 6 1 53 85 3 16 24 1 1 1 2 16 1 1
14 3 3 10 8 3 54 87 1 35 45 1 1 1 2 16 4 3 14 7 0 10 11 1 55 89 0 14 66 1 2 3 1
16 8 2 14 10 1 11 2 3 56 90 2 13 87 1 2 8 1 17 0 0 15 1 2 11 4 0 57 92 1 12 108
1 3 1 0 17 3 3 15 4 3 11 6 2 58 93 3 32 8 1 3 5 3 17 7 2 15 8 0 11 9 0 59 95 2
11 29 1 3 10 3 17 11 0 15 11 1 11 11 1 60 97 0 30 50 1 4 3 2 18 2 3 16 2 2 12 1
3 61 98 3 9 71 1 4 8 2 18 6 1 16 5 2 12 4 1 62 100 1 2^ 92 1 5 1 1 18 10 0 16 9
3 12 6 3 63 102 0 7 113 1 5 6 1 19 1 2 17 0 0 12 9 0 64 103 2 27 13 1 5 11 0 19
5 1 17 3 0 12 11 2 65 105 1 6 34 1 6 3 3 19 9 0 17 6 1 13 2 0 66 106 3 25 55 1
6 8 3 1 0 0 2 17 9 2 13 4 1 67 108 2 4 76 1 7 1 2 1 0 4 1 18 1 3 13 6 3 68 110
0 23 97 1 7 6 2 1 0 7 3 18 4 0 13 9 1 69 111 3 2 118 1 7 11 1 1 0 11 2 18 7 1
13 11 3 70 113 1 22 18 1 8 4 1 1 1 3 1 18 10 2 24 2 0 71 115 0 1 39 1 8 9 0 1 1
6 3 19 2 3 14 4 2 72 116 2 20 60 1 9 2 0 1 1 10 0 19 5 1 14 7 0 73 118 0 39 81
1 9 6 3 1 2 2 0 19 8 2 14 9 1 74 119 3 18 102 1 9 11 2 1 2 5 3 19 11 3 14 11 3
75 121 1 38 2 1 10 4 2 1 2 9 1 1 0 3 0 15 3 1 76 123 0 17 23 1 10 9 1 1 3 1 0 1
0 6 1 15 4 3 77 124 2 36 44 1 11 2 1 1 3 4 3 1 0 9 2 15 7 0 78 126 1 15 65 1 11
7 0 1 3 8 1 1 1 0 3 15 9 2 79 127 3 34 86 1 11 11 3 1 3 11 3 1 1 4 0 16 0 0 80
129 2 13 107 1 12 4 3 1 4 3 2 1 1 7 1 16 2 1 81 131 0 33 7 1 12 9 2 1 4 7 1 1 1
10 2 16 4 3 82 132 3 12 28 1 13 2 2 1 4 10 3 1 2 1 3 16 7 1 83 134 1 31 49 1 13
7 1 1 5 2 2 1 2 5 0 16 9 3 84 136 0 10 70 1 14 0 1 1 5 6 1 1 2 ^ ^ 17 0 0 85
137 2 29 91 1 14 5 0 1 5 9 3 1 2 1 ^ 17 2 2 86 139 1 8 112 1 14 9 3 1 6 1 2 1 3
2 2 17 5 0 87 140 3 28 12 1 15 2 3 1 6 5 0 1 3 5 3 17 7 1 88 142 2 7 33 1 15 7
3 1 6 8 3 1 3 9 0 17 9 3 89 144 0 26 54 1 16 0 2 1 7 0 1 1 4 0 1 18 0 1 90 145
3 5 75 1 16 5 1 1 7 4 0 1 4 3 2 18 2 3 91 147 1 24 96 1 16 10 1 1 7 7 3 1 4 6 3
18 5 0 92 149 0 3 117 1 17 3 0 1 7 11 1 1 4 11 0 18 7 2 93 150 2 23 17 1 17 8 0
1 8 3 0 1 5 1 1 18 10 0 94 152 1 2 38 1 18 0 3 1 8 6 2 1 5 4 2 19 0 2 95 153 3
21 ^9 1 18 5 3 1 8 10 1 1 5 7 3 19 2 3 96 155 2 0 80 1 18 10 2 1 9 2 0 1 5 1 0
19 5 1 97 157 0 19 ^01 1 19 3 2 1 9 5 2 1 6 2 1 19 7 3 98 158 2 39 1 1 19 8 1 1
9 9 1 1 6 5 2 19 10 0 99 159 1 18 22 2 0 1 0 1 10 0 3 1 6 8 3 1 00 0 2 100 161
3 37 43 2 0 6 0 1 10 4 2 1 7 0 0 1 00 3 0 110 178 0 29 11 2 4 6 2 1 13 5 2 1 9
8 1 1 2 3 1 120 194 1 0 100 2 8 7 3 1 16 5 0 1 12 4 3 1 4 3 2 130 210 2 2 68 2
12 7 1 1 19 5 3 1 15 1 1 1 6 3 3 140 226 3 4 36 2 16 8 0 2 2 6 1 1 17 9 2 1 8 4
1 150 247 3 36 4 3 0 9 0 2 5 6 0 2 0 6 0 1 10 4 2 160 259 0 27 93 3 4 9 2 2 8 7
1 2 3 2 2 1 12 4 3 170 275 1 19 61 3 8 10 0 2 11 7 2 2 5 10 3 1 14 5 0 180 291
2 11 29 3 12 10 3 2 14 8 0 2 8 7 1 1 16 5 1 190 307 3 2 118 3 16 11 1 2 17 8 2
2 11 3 2 1 18 5 3 200 323 3 34 86 4 1 0 0 3 0 9 0 2 14 0 0 2 0 5 3 250 404 3 33
47 5 1 2 3 3 15 11 1 3 7 6 0 2 10 7 2 300 485 3 32 8 6 1 5 3 4 11 1 2 4 1 0 0 3
0 9 0 350 566 3 30 90 7 1 8 3 5 6 3 2 4 14 6 0 3 10 10 2 400 647 3 29 51 8 1 11
3 6 1 5 3 5 8 0 0 4 1 0 0 450 728 3 28 12 9 2 2 3 6 6 8 0 6 1 5 3 4 11 1 1 500
809 3 26 94 10 2 5 3 7 11 10 1 6 14 11 3 5 1 2 3 550 890 3 25 55 11 2 8 3 8 7 0
2 7 8 5 3 5 11 4 1 600 971 3 24 16 12 2 11 3 9 2 2 3 8 1 11 3 6 1 5 3 650 1052
3 22 98 13 3 2 3 9 17 5 0 8 15 5 3 6 11 7 1 700 1133 3 21 59 14 3 5 3 10 12 7 1
9 8 11 3 7 1 8 3 750 1214 3 20 20 15 3 8 3 11 7 9 2 10 2 5 3 7 11 10 1 800 1295
3 18 102 16 3 11 2 12 2 11 3 10 15 11 3 8 1 11 3 850 1376 3 17 63 17 04 2 7 12
18 2 0 11 9 5 3 8 12 1 1 900 1457 3 16 24 18 04 5 2 13 13 4 1 12 2 11 3 9 2 2 3
950 1538 3 14 100 19 04 ^ 2 14 8 6 2 12 16 5 3 9 12 4 1 1000 1619 3 13 67 20 04
11 2 15 3 6 2 13 9 11 3 10 2 5 3 1500 2429 3 0 40 30 07 5 1 22 15 7 0 20 4 11 2
15 3 8 2 2000 3239 2 27 13 40 09 1 10 30 7 5 1 26 19 11 2 20 4 1 12 2500 4049 2
13 107 50 12 4 3 37 19 3 2 33 14 11 1 25 6 2 1 3000 485^ 2 0 8 60 14 10 2 45 11
1 3 40 9 11 0 30 7 5 0 3500 5669 1 27 53 70 17 3 1 53 8 0 0 ^7 4 11 0 35 8 8 0
4000 6479 1 14 26 80 19 10 0 60 14 10 2 53 19 10 3 40 9 10 3 4500 7139 1 0 120
91 02 3 3 68 6 8 3 60 14 10 3 45 11 1 3 5000 8099 0 27 39 101 04 9 2 75 18 7 0
67 9 10 2 50 12 4 2 5500 8909 0 14 66 111 07 3 1 83 10 5 2 ^4 4 10 1 55 13 7 1
6000 7919 0 01 39 121 09 9 0 91 2 3 3 80 19 10 1 60 14 10 1 6500 10528 3 28 12
131 122 3 98 14 2 0 87 14 100 65 16 1 0 7000 11338 3 14 106 141 148 2 106 6 0 1
94 9 100 70 17 3 3 8000 12958 2 28 52 161 19 8 0 121 9 9 0 107 199 2 80 199 2
9000 14578 0 01 119 182 0^ 7 ^ 136 13 5 2 121 9 9 1 91 02 3 1 10000 16198 1 15
65 202 00 7 0 151 17 2 1 134 19 9 0 101 04 9 0 11000 17818 0 29 11 222 14 6 2
167 00 10 3 148 9 8 3 111 07 2 3 12000 19438 0 02 78 242 19 6 0 182 04 7 2 161
19 8 2 121 09 8 2 13000 21057 3 16 24 263 04 5 2 197 08 4 0 175 9 8 0 131 12 2
0 14000 22677 2 29 91 283 09 5 0 212 12 0 3 188 19 7 3 141 14 7 3 15000 24297 2
03 37 303 14 4 2 227 15 9 1 202 9 7 2 151 17 2 2 20000 32396 2 31 09 404 19 2 0
303 14 4 1 269 19 6 0 202 09 6 0 30000 48595 0 06 74 607 08 9 0 455 11 6 2 404
19 3 0 303 14 3 0 40000 64793 1 22 18 809 18 4 0 607 08 8 3 339 19 0 0 404 19 0
0 50000 80991 2 37 83 1012 07 11 1 759 05 10 3 674 18 9 0 506 03 9 0

Strength.
Seeing the Irish Nation (by reason of their barbarous Laws and Customs) could
never upon their own soore put themselves in any hopeful way of erecting a
Commonwealth in Ireland, The Irish Nation inconsiderable, but by their
dependency on the Crown of England.
either before, or since the Conquest of it by K. Henry the Second; And that it
is most evident (unless they were bred under, The manner how the English did
again extend their bounds beyond the narrow Limits of the English Pale since
the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's reign and a little before.
and protected by the English Laws and Government) they had never been
otherwise looked upon in the World but as a mean and despicable people. I shall
therefore (since a true measure of the strength of Ireland must be taken upon
an English accout) here briefly relate by what ways and means, the English
(since the beginning of Quen Elizabeth's Reign, and a little before) did again
extend their power and interest in Ireland beyond the n^rrow Limtis of the
English Pale.

1. Viz. By the Rebellion of the Moors and Connors in the Reign of Ed. 6. and
Q. Mary.
1. In the first place, I find, that Sir Edward Bellingham being Lord Deputy of
Ireland in King Edward the Sixths time, was the first Deputy since the Reign of
King Edward the Third, that by a Martial course extended the border beyond the
Limits of the English Pale, by beating and breaking the Moors and Connors, and
building the Forts of Leix and Offaly, To which work, Thomas Earl of Sussex,
Lord Deputy of Ireland in Queen Marys Reign, did put the last hand to; who
having rooted out these two Rebellious Septs, planted English Colonies in their
rooms, which in all the tumultuous times ever since kept their Habitations,
their Loyalty, and Religion, unless destroyed by the last Rebellion An. 1641.

2. 2. By the Rebellion of too Earl of Desmond An. 1583.
In the five and twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Anno 1583 that
infamous Rebel and Traitor to his Country Girald fitz Girald, or Giraldides,
the eleventh Earl of Desmond of his Family, when his men were consumed with
Famine and Sword, (which had barbarously vowed to forswear God before they would
forsake him) and when he had escaped the hands of the Victorious English almost
two years, by lurking in uncertain corners, was now by a common Soldier found
in a little Cottage, and unknown, till having his Arm almost cut off, he
discovered himself, and was slain, being run through the body in many places,
his head being sent over into England, was fixed upon a pole on London Bridge;
such end had this most powerful man in Ireland, who derived his Pedigree from
Maurice fitz Giralde of Winsor, an Englishman, most renowned amongst the first
Conquerors of Ireland in the year 1170. He had goodly Lands and Possessions,
yea whole Provinces, with Kerry, a County-Palatine, and very many Castles, and
a number of Tenements, and Adherents, and of his own Stock and Surname he had
about five hundred Gentlemen at his Devotion. Of all which, and of his life
also, he was dispoyled within three years, very few of the Family being left,
after he had broken his Allegiance to his Prince through the persuasion of
certain Priests, amongst whom the chiefest of all was Nicholas Sanders an
Englishman, who almost at the same instant was most miserably famished to
death, who being forsaken of all company, and troubled in mind for the adverse
success of the Rebellion, he wandered up and down through Woods, Forests and
Hills, and found no comfort. In his Pouch were found certain Orations and
Epistles written to confirm the Rebels, stuffed with large promises from the
Bishop of Rome, and the Spaniard. By the downfall of this great Earl, and his
Adherents, there fell such a great proportion of Land to the Crown, in the
Counties of Cork, Kerrey, and and Limrick, as gave occasion to a brave English
Plantation to be settled in those Southern parts of Ireland in the Reigns of
King James, and King Charles the first.

3. 3. By the Rebellion of Edm. Burgh of Castle-Barry An. 1585.
In the twenty seventh year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign Anno 1585. Edmund Burgh
of Castle Barry with his Sons and Adherents, namely the Clan-Gibbons,
Clandonells, and Joys, all of the Province of Connaght, after they had drawn
the Scots to their assistance, and done the Country a great deal of mischief
by their Rebellion, were taken and condemned for Treason; by means whereof
there was a good portion of Land got to renew an English Colony in the Province
of Connaght.

4. By the Rebellion of Hugh Roe-Mac Mahone a great Lord in Ulster An. 1590.
4. In the one and thirtieth year of her Reign Anno 1590. by the Rebellion of
Hugh Roe-Mac Mahon, a great Lord in the Territory of Monaghan in Vlster, for
that he had with Banners displayed and exacted of his people Contributions due
according to the barbarous manner of the Country, being condemned and hanged,
his most large Lands, and Livings were divided betwixt the English, and certain
of the Mac Mahons, to hold the same (paying certain yearly Rent to the Queen)
according to the Laws of England: and this to the end, that they might weaken
that Family, strong and powerful of Tenants and Adherents, and blot out the
Tyranny of Mac Mahone together with Title. For by this Title, those of that
Family waxed insolent, which by right or wrong took upon them the denomination.
Hereupon Brion O-Rerke a great Lord in the neighbor Country of Brenn (and one
who marvellously favored and affected the Spaniards) fearing lest the same
might befall him, took Arms against the Queen, but being hunted into Scotland,
was very willingly delivered by King James to Queen Elizabeth, who was
Arraigned Anno 1591. in Westminster Hall; for that he had excited and harbored
Alexander Mac Conell and others against the Queen; had commanded the Queens
Picture painted in a Table, to be hung at a horses tail, and hurried about in
scorn, and disgracefully cut in pieces; had entertained into his house certain
Spaniards, which were Shipwracked, contrary to the Lord Deputies Proclamation;
had burnt down to Ashes the Houses of the Queens faithful Subjects by his
Incendiaries; had slain many of them, and had offered Ireland into the
possession of the King of Scots. Sentence of death being pronounced upon him,
after a few days, he suffered a Traitors death at Tiburn with a most obstinate
mind. This Traitors Land did also farther contribute toward the resetling of
an English Plantation in the North of Ireland.

5. By the d^signed Rebellion and flight of the Earl of Tyrone and his
Adherents An. 1609.
5. In the sixth year of King James his Reign, being Anno 1609. The Earl of
Tyrone, and Tirconnel; Sir John O Daugherty and other great men of the North,
possessed of large Territories and great Jurisdictions, containing in the whole
six Counties; who being both incapable of Loyalty, and impatient of seeing the
Kings Judges, Justices, and other Ministers of State, to hold their Sessions,
and execute their Commissions of Oyre and Terminer within the parts where they
commanded; out of a guilty conscience (having laid the foundation of a
Rebellion, but not being able to bring the same to effect) forsook the
Country, and went into Spain, leaving their whole Estates to the Kings
disposal; By whose directions their Lands were seized upon, and sold to
several Purchasers, the City of London enfeoffed in a great part of them; a
great Plantation made in Vlster of English, Welsh and Scots, by the united name
of British Plantation; By means whereof, the foundations of some good Towns
(whereof London was one) soon after encompassed with Stone walls, were
presently laid, several Castles and Houses of strength built in several parts
of the Country, and great numbers of British Inhabitants settled there to the
great comfort and security of the Kingdom. And the same course was taken
likewise for the better assurance of the peace of the Country, in the
Plantation of several parts of Leinster, where the Irish had made incursions
and violently expelled the Old English out of their Possessions. And though the
King was by due course of Law justly entitled to all their whole Estates there;
yet he was graciously pleased, to take but one fourth part of their Lands,
which was delivered over likewise into the hands of the British undertakers,
who with great cost and much industry planted themselves so firmly, as they
became of great security to the Country, and were a most special means to
introduce civility in those parts; so as now the whole Kingdom began
exceedingly to flourish in costly Buildings, and all manner of improvements,
the people to multiply and increase, and the very Irish seemed to be much
satisfied with the benefits of that peaceable Government and general
tranquillity which they so happily enjoyed.

6. By the purchase of great quantities of Land by the Eng. in Ireland. during
the last forty years peace.
6. During the continuance of this happy peace (which lasted about forty years)
diverse English purchased great quantities of Land in Ireland, to plant upon.

7. And last of all, by that universal, and most bloody Rebellion in the year
1441. the Irish propriety (except a few) of all the Lands and Towns in the
Provinces of Munster, 7. Last of all by that universal and most a body
Rebellion An. 1641.
Leinster and Vlster, became forfeited, and was (as I said) disposed of between
the Soldiers, Adventurers, and forty nine men. Large proportions of Land were
also purchased (about the same time) by the English in the Province of
Connaght, from the transplanted Irish at Loughreagh and Athlone: so that upon
the whole matter (according to this account) the Irish have, by their desperate
and bloody endeavors of rooting the English wholly out of Ireland, dispossessed
themselves and their posterity, out of above three parts of four of the whole
propriety thereof; and therefore afforded the English opportunity and advantage
to establish (for the future) such a firm settlement therein, That the English
by their late vast acquisitions in Ireland. will be the better enabled thereby
to breed up able Protestant Lawyers and Divines for the service of the Church
and State of Ireland to the great strengthening of the Civil Government.
as they could never expect or hope for, unless by such an inhumane and
uuparalleld provocation.

Besides those particular advantages the English have obtained by these their
late vast acquisitions in Ireland (whereof a hint before) As namely by having
already upon the matter a sufficient number of able Protestants to serve as
Parliament men, High Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Grand and Petty Juries in
most Counties in Ireland; This one benefit more will be of no small moment to
them; which is, that by their enjoying such plentiful Estates in that Realm,
they will thereby the better enabled to breed up a sufficient number of Learned
Protestant Lawyers and Divines to serve the Public; which will very much tend
to the strengthening of the Civil Government of that Kingdom; A considerable
part of the Profits whereof (while in the possession of the Irish) being
disposed of for the carrying on of the foreign Education, they most
pernitiously employed to the ruin of their own Country.

That the Romish Clergy and the Popish Lawyers were great instruments in the
first plotting and carrying on the Rebellion An. 1641.
For it was observed, that there were two sorts of persons who did most
eminently appear in laying those main Fundamentals whereupon the bloody
Superstructures of the last Rebellion, were afterward easily reared up: And
these were such of the Popish Lawyers as were Natives of the Kingdom, and
those of the Romish Clergy of several degrees and orders. For the first, they
had in regard of their Knowledge in the Laws of the Land, very great reputation
and trust, they now began to stand up like great Patriots for the vindication
of the liberties of the Subject, and redress of their pretended grievances: The
Irish Lawyers drew a great party in the house of Commons to adhere to them.
and having by their bold appearing therein, made a great party in the House of
Commons then sitting at Dublin, some of them did there Magisterially obtrude,
as undoubted maxims of Law, the pernicious speculations of their own brain;
which though plainly discerned to the full virulency and tending to Sedition,
yet so strangely were many of the Protestants and well meaning men in the House
blinded with an apprehension of ease and redress, and so stupefied with their
bold accusations of the Government, as most thought not fit, others durst not
stand up to contradict their fond Assertions; so as what they spoke was
received with great acclamation, and much applause by most of the Protestant
Members of the Hou e; many of which, under specious pretenses of public Zeal
to that that Country, they had inveigled into their party: And then it was,
that having impeached Sir Richard Bolton, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, of High
Treason, together with the prime Officers and Ministers of State that were of
English birth: some of those great Masters took upon them with much confidence
to declare the Law, to make new Expositions of their own upon the Text, to
frame their Queries, challenges fitter to be taken to a long, wilfully,
overgrown misgovernment, than to be made against an an Authority, that had for
many years strugled against the beloved irregularities of a stubborn people,
and which had prevailed far beyond former times, toward the allaying of the
long continued distempers of the Kingdom: They disdained the moderate
quallifications of the Judges, who gave them modest answers, such as the Law
and duty to their Sovereign would admit. But those would not serve their turn,
they resolved upon an alteration in the Government, and drawing of it wholly
into the hands of the Natives, which they knew they could not compass in a
Parliamentary way, and therefore only made preparatives there, and delivered
such desparate Maxims, which being diffused abroad, would fit and dispose the
people to a change: As they declared it to be Law, that being killed in
Rebellion, though found by matter of Record, would give the King no forfeiture
of Estate; that though many thousands stood up in Arms in a Kingdom, The Irish
Lawyers offered to maintain absurd positions in point of Law, to promote the
Rebellion An. 1641.
working all manner of destruction, yet if they professed not to rise against
the King, that it was no Rebellion: That if a man were Outlawed for Treason,
and his land thereby vested in the Crown, or given away by the King, his Heir
might come afterward and be admitted to reverse the Outlawry, and recover his
Ancestors Estate. And many other positions of perilous consequence, tending to
sedition and disturbance, did they continue to publish during that Session, and
by the power and strength of their party, so far did they prevail at last, as
they, presumed to attempt a suspension of Poynings Act, an^ indeed intended the
utter abrogation of that Statute, which remains as one of the greatest ties and
best monuments the English have of their entire dominion over the Irish Nation,
and the annexion of that Kingdom to the Imperial Crown of England They farther
assumed power of Judicature to the Parliament in Criminal and Capital Offenses:
a Right which no former age has left any president for, neither would this
admit the Example.

And thus carrying all things before them, they continued the Session of
Parliament begun in May, till about two months before the first breaking out of
the last Rebellion; it being very ill taken, that then they were adjourned. And
this they have since aggravated as a high Crime against the Lords Justices, and
as one of the chief moving causes to the taking up of Arms generally,
throughout the Kingdom.

But to let these things pass, how finely soever these proceedings were carried
on, and being covered over with pretenses of Zeal and public affection, passed
then current without any manner of suspicion; yet now the eyes of all men are
open, and they are fully resolved that all these passages, The fair, but
pernicious pretenses of the Irish fully discovered by their Rebellion An. 1641.
together with the other high contestations in Parliament, not to have the
newly raised Irish Army disbanded, the importunate solicitation of their Agents
in England, to have the old Army in Ireland cashiered, and the Kingdom left to
be defended by the Trained Bands of their own Nation. As likewise the
Commissions procured by several of the most eminent Commanders afterward in
Rebellion, for the raising men to carry into Spain, were all parts of the Plot,
Prologues to the ensuing Tragedy; Preparatives, such as had been long laid to
bring on the sudden execution of that most bloody design, all at one and the
same time throughout the Kingdom.

Now for the Jesuits, Priests, The means used by the Priests and Jesuits to
stir up the people to Rebel.
Friars all the rest of their Viperous Fraternity belonging to their Holy
Orders; who, as I said, had a main part to Act, and did not fail with great
assiduity and diligence to discharge the same. They lost no time but most
dexterously applied themselves in all parts of the Country to lay other such
dangerous impressions in the minds, as well of the meaner sort, as of the chief
Gentlemen, as might make them ready to take fire upon the first occasion. And
when this Plot was so surely, as they thought, laid, as it could not well
fail, and the day once perfixed for Execution; they did in their public
Devotions long before, recommend by their Prayers, the good success of a great
Design, much tending to the prosperity of the Kingdom, and the advancement of
the Catholic Cause. And for the facilitating of the work, and stirring up of
the people with greater animosity and cruelty to put it on at the time
perfixed; they loudly in all places declaimed against the Protestants; telling
the people that they were Heretics, and not to be suffered any longer to live
among them; that it was no more sin to kill an Englishman, than to kill a dog;
and that it was a most mortal and unpardonable sin to relieve or protect any of
them. Then also they represented with much acrimony, the several courses taken
by the Parliament in England, for suppressing of the Romish Religion in all
parts of of the Kingdom, and utter extirpation of all Professors of it. They
told the people that in England they had caused the Queens Priest to be hanged
before her own face, and that they held her Majesty in her own person under a
most severe discipline: That the same cruel Laws against Popery were ordered to
be put suddenly in execution in Ireland; and a design secretly laid for
bringing and seizing upon all the principal Noblemen and Gentlemen in Ireland
upon November 23. next ensuing; and so to make a general Massacre of all that
would not desert their Religion and presently become Protestants.

And now also did they take occasion to revive their inveterate hatred and
ancient animosities against the English Nation, The Irish revive their ancient
animosities against the English.
whom they represented to themselves as hard Masters, under whose Government,
how pleasant; comfortable and advantageous so ever it was, they would have the
world believe they had endured a most miserable Captivity and Envassalage. They
looked with much envy upon their prosperity, considering all the Land they
possessed (though a great part bought at high rates of the Natives) as their
own proper Inheritance. They grudged at the great multitudes of their fair
English Cattle; at their goodly Houses, though built by their own industry at
their own charges; at the large improvements they made of their Estates, by
their own travels and careful endeavors. They spoke with much scorn and
contempt of such as brought little with them into Ireland, and having there
planted themselves, in a little time contracted great Fortunes. They were much
troubled, especially in the Irish Countries, to see the English live handsomely,
and to have every thing with much decency about them, while they lay nastily
buried, as it were, in mire and filthiness, the ordinary sort of people
commonly bringing their Cattle into their own stinking Creates or Cabins, and
there naturally delighting to lie amongst them. These malignant considerations
made them with an envious eye impatiently to look upon all the British lately
gone over in that Kingdom. Nothing less than a general extirpation would now
serve their turn; they must have restitution of all the Lands to the proper
Natives, whom they took to be the ancient Proprietors, and only true owners,
most unjustly despoiled by the English, whom they held to have made undue
acquisitions of all the Land they possessed by gift from the Crown, upon
attainder of any of their Ancestors.

And so impetuous were the desires of the Natives to draw the whole Government
of the Kingdom into their own hands, The Ends proposed by the first plotters of
the Rebellion.
to enjoy the public profession of their Religion, as well as disburthen the
Country of all the British Inhabitants seated therein, as they made the whole
body of the State to be universally disliked; represented the several Members
as persons altogether corrupt and ill affected; pretended the ill humors and
distempers in the Kingdom to be grown into that height as required Cauteries,
deep incisions; and indeed nothing able to work so great a cure, but an
universal Rebellion. This was certainly the Disease, as appears by all the
Symptoms, and the joint concurrence in opinion of all the great Physicians that
held themselves wise enough to propose remedies, and prescribe fit applications
to so desparate a Malady. And thus we see those persons, who by the advantage
of their Education, and duty of Profession, should have been the great lights
to direct the footsteps of the unwary and giddy-headed multitude, to walk
steddily in the right path of Obedience and Loyalty to their Prince, and of
Love and Charity toward their Neighbors, by a notorious abuse of the same,
did wilfully mislead them to ruin and destruction.

The Establishment of the Army in Ireland An. 1669.
Come we now to take a view of the standing Army in Ireland, according to the
Establishment made in the year 1669. which did then consist of thirty Troops of
Horse (including the Lifeguard) and sixty Foot Companies besides the Regiments
of Guards, in which were twelve Companies.

The Lifeguard did consist of a hundred Men besides Officers, and each of the
other twenty nine Troops consisted of forty five men besides Officers, only the
Troops belonging to the general Officers, had each of them fifty Men besides
Officers, viz. the Lord Lieutenants, the Lieutenant Generals, the Major
Generals, the Commissary Generals, and the Scout-Master Generals; Each Company
in the Regiment of Guards did consist of an hundred Men, besides Officers, and
each of the afforesaid sixty Companies consted of sixty Men, besides Officers:
the whole Standing Army in Ireland amounting then to 1598 Horse, and 4250 Foot;
The yearly pay of the whole Army with Horse and Foot Guards, amounted to 140664
l. 8 s. 6 d.

In the Militia of Ireland, there are 103 Troops of Horse, The Militia of
Ireland.
127 Companies of Foot; by the instructions from the Lord Lieutenant and
Council to the Commissioners of Array in each County, each Troop was to consist
of 50 Men besides Officers, and every Company of 100 private Soldiers, the
whole Militia of Ireland amounting to 5150 Horse, besides Officers, and 12700
Foot, besides Officers.

Since the aforesaid Establishment made in 1669. there have been several
Reducements and alterations in the Army of Ireland, and as it admits of more,
so it will be more than difficult to be exact in particulars. This being
premised, I shall proceed to tell the Reader, A caution against training the
Irish to the Feats of Arms, as being of ill consequence to the English Inte est
in Ireland.
that hence forwards there will be no more need of training up the Irish
(together with the English) in the Feats of Arms, which (as I hinted already)
sorted very ill with the English Interest in Ireland, especially since the nine
and twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, being An. 1587. In which year,
Sir John Perot then Lord Deputy of Ireland being called home, and having
delivered up his Charge to Sir Will. Fitz-Williams the appointed Lord Deputy of
Ireland, it was observed, that till that time, the English men had very easy
Wars in Ireland; eight hundred Foot and three hundred Horse was holden an
Invincible Army. Randolph, with six hundred English easily discomfited O-Neale
with four thousand Irish. Colier, in the year 1571. with his one only Company
defeated a thousand Hebridanes in Connaght. Three hundred Horse overthrew the
Butlers with a great rabble of Rebels: and (to omit other such like) two
Companies of Foot won in one day above twenty Castles of the Irish. But after
they were by Perots commandment trained daily at home, taught to use their
weapons, and discharge their Pieces at a Mark, that they might be the more
ready Servitors against the Hebridanes, and afterward being bred up ^n the
Netherland Wars, they had lea^ned the manner of fortifications; they ^hen (and
ever after) certainly exercised the English with (...) difficult War. This puts
me in mind of another like passage I have read in a description of Novum
Belgium, or New Netherland in America (now called New-Yorke) where relating the
story how upon complaint made by King Charles the first to the States of
Holland (a little before the last unhappy Civil Wars in England) of some of the
Hollanders incroaching upon some parts of his Territories in Virginia, then
called New-Nederland (but now New-Yorke) the States having by public
Instrument utterly disclaimed any pretensions thereunto, the Hollanders then
inhabiting there, did seem willing to be gone, and leave all they had there for
the sum of two thousand five hundred pounds, yet taking advantage of the
trouble which not long after followed in England; they not only raised their
demands to a greater height; but furnished the Native Indians with Arms, and
taught them how to use their Weapons. A most mischievous and wicked act, not
only tending to the damage, and discouragement of the then present
Adventurers, but even to the Extirpation of all the Christians out of those
Countries. But the best was, they were the first that smarted by it, the
Savages thus Armed and Trained, fell foul upon them, destroying their
Farm-houses, and forcing them to betake themselves to their Forts, and
Fortresses. How far the application of this Story may fit the Subject in hand
as the matter stands in controversy, between the Protestant party, and Papists
in Ireland, I refer to the consideration of the judicious Reader.

The manner of Electing Parliament Men in this Kingdom, Election.
is the same with that in England, but the Acts are drawn up and passed
differently, as also those in Scotland where the Lords of the Articles, after
the Parliament is met, prepare the Bills, but here the Lord Lieutenant and
Council usually draw up such Bills as they think fit, and transmit them to his
Majesty, and Council in England, where they come under a new Debate, and if
approved, returned back under the Great Seal to the Lord Lieutenant, who offers
them to the Parliament. Each House may reject them, or else must consent to
them in terminis without any alteration. When any Bills are thus by both Houses
agreed to, then they are presented to the Lord Lieutenant who gives the Royal
Assent. The Law whereby the Houses are not trusted with the framing of their
own Bills, is called Poynings Law, of which look back to page 106.

A List of what Places Returns Parliament Men in IRELAND.
COm. Ardmagh 2 Bor. of Ardmagh 2 Bor. of Charlemont 2 6 Com. Antrym 2 Bor. of
Belfast 2 Bor. of Carickfergus 2 Bor. of Lisbon 2 Bor. of Antrym 2 10 Com.
Catherlaugh 2 Bor. Catherlaugh 2 Bor. Old Leighlin 2 6 Com. Cork 2 City of
Cork 2 Bor. of Mallow 2 Bor. of Baltimore 2 Bor. Cloghnekilty 2 Bor. Bandon
Bridge 2 Bor. Kinsayle 2 Bor. Youghall 2 16 Com. Cavan 2 Borough of Cavan 2
Bor. of Belturbet 2 6 Com. Clare 2 Bor. of Inish 2 4 Com. Dublin 2 City of
Dublin 2 Univer. of Dublin 3 Bor. of Newcastle 2 Bor. of Swords 2 11 Com. Down
2 Bor. Down 2 Bor. Newtown 2 Bor. New^y 2 Balkillaleagh 2 Bor. Bangor 2 Bor.
Hilsborough 2 14 Com. Donegal 2 Bor Lifford 2 Bor. Ballyshannon 2 Bor.
Killbeggs 2 Bor. Donegall 2 B^r. St. John's town 2 12 Villa de Drogheda 2 2 Com.
Gallway 2 Bor. Gallway 2 Bor. Athenry 2 Bor. Tuam 2 8 Com. Fermanagh 2 Bor.
Eniskilling 2 4 Com. Kerry 2 Bor. Traley 2 Bor. Dingleicough 2 Bor. Ardfart 2 8
Com. Kilkenny 2 Bor. Callen 2 Bor. Thomas town 2 Bor. Gowran 2 Bor. Emisteoge 2
Bor. Knoctopher 2 Bor. St. Kennis 2 Civit. Kilkenny 2 16 Com. Kildare 2 Bor.
Kildare 2 Bor. Naas 2 Bor. Athy 2 8 Com. Regis 2 Bor. Philips town 2 Bor.
Banagher 2 6 Com. Letrim 2 Bor. James-town 2 Bor. Carricdrumrusck 2 6 Com.
Lymrick 2 Civit. Lymrick 2 Bor. Kilmallock 2 Bor. Askeaton 2 8 Com. Longford 2
Town of Longford 2 Bor. St. John's town 2 Bor. Lainsborough 2 8 Com. Louth 2
Bor. Carlingford 2 Bor. Dundalke 2 Bor. Atherdee 2 8 Com. London-dery 2 Civit
London-dery 2 Bor. Colraine 2 Bor. Limavaddy 2 8 Com. Mayo 2 Bor. Castlebarr 2
4 Com. Mead 2 Bor. of Trym 2 Bor. Kells 2 Bor. Navan 2 Bor. Athbay 2 Bor.
Duleeke 2 Bor. Ratooth 2 14 Com. Monaghan 2 Bor. Monaghan 2 4 Com. Reginae 2
Bor. Bollakill 2 Bor. Maryborough 2 6 Com. Roscommon 2 Bor. Roscommon 2 Bor.
Tulske 2 6 Com. Sligoe 2 Bor. Sligoe 2 4 Com. Tipperary 2 Bor. Clonmell 2 Bor.
Fetherd 2 Town of Cashell 2 8 Com. Tyrone 2 Bor. Donegall 2 Town of Clogher 2
Bor. of Agher 2 Bor. Strabane 2 10 Com. Waterford 2 Civit. Waterford 2 Bor.
Dungharvan 2 Bor. Lismore 2 Bor. Pallow 2 10 Com. West Mead 2 Bor. Athlone 2
Bor. Four 2 Bor. Kilbegan 2 Bor. Molinger 2 10 Com. Wicklow 2 Bor. Wicklow 2
Bor. Caresford 2 Bor. Baltinglass 2 8 Com. Wexford 2 Town of Wexford 2 Town of
Ross 2 Bor. Eniscourthy 2 Bor. Feathard 2 Bor. Bannow 2 Bor. Cloghmaine 2 Bor.
Taghman 2 Bor. Newborough 2 18 Total of Parliament Men Returned in the whole
Kingdom of Ireland 215.
Subsidiary Payments of the Nobiliy, with those of the Bishoprics, as likewise
the four Provincial Subsidies, follow here all in their order.
Nobility Subsidy.
l. s. d. DUke of Ormond 100 00 00 Earl of Cork 110 00 00 Marquess of Antrim
060 00 00 Earl of Kildare 056 13 00 Earl of Thomond 040 00 00 Earl of
Clanrickard 035 00 00 Earl of Castlehaven 002 10 00 Earl of Roscomen 015 00 00
Earl of Londonderry 010 00 00 Earl of Desmond 010 00 00 Earl of Mead 015 00 00
Earl of Barrymore 030 00 00 Earl of Carbery 015 00 00 Earl of Arglass 020 00 00
Earl of Dunnigall 050 00 00 Earl of Cavan 002 10 00 Earl of Clanbrazill 030 00
00 Earl of Inchiquin 010 00 00 Earl of Clanoarthy 040 00 00 Earl of Orrery 020
00 00 Earl of Montrath 015 00 00 Earl of Drogheda 040 00 00 Earl of Waterford
023 00 00 Earl of Mountallexander 005 00 00 Earl of Castlemaine 020 00 00 Earl
of Arran 015 00 00 Earl of Carlingford 015 00 00

Viscounts.
l. s. d. Viscount GRandison 10 00 00 Viscount Willmot 10 00 00 Viscount
Valentia 30 00 00 Viscount Dillon 20 00 00 Viscount Loftus of Ely 12 10 00
Viscount Swords 12 10 00 Viscount Kilmurry 12 10 00 Viscount Conway 30 00 00
Viscount Mayo 10 00 00 Viscount Castleston 20 00 00 Viscount Chaworth 20 00 00
Viscount Savi^l 20 00 00 Viscount Scudamore of Sligce 12 10 00 Viscount Lumley
12 10 00 Viscount Strangford 12 10 00 Viscount Wenman of Triam 10 00 00
Viscount Ranelagh 25 00 00 Viscount Molleux 17 10 00 Viscount Fairfax 12 10 00
Viscount Fitz Williams 07 00 00 Viscount Rathcoole 12 10 00 Viscount Bareford
12 10 00 Viscount Bulkley 15 00 00 Viscount Ogle 12 10 00 Viscount Bronckart 12
10 00 Viscount Cullen 20 00 00 Viscount Gallmoy 03 00 00 Viscount Kingsland 20
00 00 Viscount Shannon 12 10 00 Viscount Dromore 12 10 00 Viscount Clain 10 00
00 Viscount Mazareene 10 00 00 Viscount Cholmondlegh 12 10 00 Viscount Fanshaw
of Donnomore 05 00 00 Viscount Duncannon 12 10 00 Viscount Fitz-Harding 20 00
00 Viscount Clare 20 00 00 Viscount Charlemount 10 00 00 Viscount Powerscourt
10 00 00

Lord Barons.
l. s. d. Lord BRemingham 01 00 00 Lord Coursey 02 00 00 Lord Kerry 10 00 00
Lord Hoath 05 00 00 Lord Power and Bar. Mountnorress 05 00 00 Lord Cahir 05 00
00 Lord Montjoy 12 10 00 Lord Folliot 15 00 00 Lord Maynord 15 00 00 Lord
Gorges 05 00 00 Lord Digby 10 00 00 Lord Fitz-Williams 10 00 00 Lord Aungier 10
00 00 Lord Herbert 20 00 00 Lord Baltimore 10 00 00 Lord Brereton of Laghlin 05
00 00 Lord Colraine 10 00 00 Lord Sherard of Letrim 10 00 00 Lord Strabane 05
00 00 Lord Hawley of Duncannon 05 00 00 Lord Allington of Killard 20 00 00 Lord
Kingston 10 00 00 Lord Collooney 10 00 00 Lord Santry 10 00 00 Lord Clanawly 10
00 00 Total 1595 03 00

Women's Subsidies.
l. s. d. Lady CLanrickard 20 00 00 Lady Thomond 10 00 00 Lady Antrim 11 13 00
Lady Roscommon 05 00 00 Lady Clanbrazil 10 00 00 Lady Clancarty 15 00 00 Lady
Mountallexander 06 00 00 Lady Glamoy 03 00 00 Lady Firconnell 04 13 00 Lady
Massareene 05 00 00 Lady Lady 10 00 00 Lady Strabane 02 00 00 Lady Strabane 02
00 00 Total 102 08 00

Subsidies of the several Bishoprics of the Diocese of Ardmagh.
l. s. d. Archbishopric of Ardmagh 180 17 08 Bishopric of Mead 206 13 00
Bishopric of Londonderry 142 08 00 Bishopric of Clogher 105 08 00 Bishopric
of Connor 044 00 00 Bishopric of Rapho 086 12 00 Bishopric of Dromore 020 12
00 Bishopric of Down 016 16 00 Bishopric of Kilmore 059 08 00 Bishopric of
Ardagh 012 12 00 Total 875 06 08

Subsidies of the several Bishoprics of the Diocese of Dublin.
l. s. d. Archbishopric of Dublin 247 14 00 Bishopr. of Kildare 101 12 00
Bishopr. of Ossory 088 00 00 Bishopr. of Fernes 111 08 00 Bishopr. of Leighlin
044 08 00 Total 593 02 00

Subsidies of the several Bishoprics of the Diocese of Cashell.
l. s. d. Archbishopric of Cashell 051 12 00 Bishopric of Waterford and
Lismore 102 09 06 Bishopric of Co^ke 032 16 00 Bishopric of Cloyne 041 04 00
Bishopric of Lymrick 031 12 00 Bishopric of Killalow 020 08 00 Bishopric of
Ardfart 004 05 00 Total 284 06 00

Subsidies of the several Bishoprics of the Diocese of Tuam.
l. s. d. ARch Bishopric of Tuam. 022 16 00 Bishopric of Elphin 034 04 00
Bishopric of Atheonry and Killala 012 00 00 Bishopric of Clonfart 030 08 00
Bishopric of Kilmacough 007 00 00 Total 106 08 00

Provincial Subsidies.
LEINSTER.
l. s. d. CIty of Dublin 601 18 01 ob. County of Dublin 551 18 01 ob. County of
Catherlough 147 10 07 ob. County of Kildare 477 12 10 ob. County of Kilkenny
479 02 00 City of Kilkenny 044 02 04 ob. County of Waxford 323 10 09 County of
Wicklow 154 16 06 Queens County 242 13 09 Kings County 2^4 ^9 03 County of
Longford 145 07 00 County of West Mead 356 17 04 ob. Coun^y of Mead 659 13 04
ob. County ^f Louth 217 13 09 Villa de Drogheda 053 11 06 Total 4580 08 04 ob.

MUNSTER.
l. s. d. COunty and City of Cork 1364 18 00 City of Waterford 097 01 00
County of Waterford 265 15 00 County of Tipperary 1039 17 00 City of Lymrick
097 01 00 County of Lymrick 492 08 00 County of Kerry 209 19 03 Total 3566 19
03

CONNAGHT.
l. s. d. COunty of Galway 153 15 01 ob. Town of Galway 082 10 06 County of
Roscommon 350 17 04 ob. County of Mayo 385 18 04 ob. County of Letrym 160 05 06
County of Sleigo 295 10 03 County of Clare 386 14 06 Total 2515 11 07 ob.

VLSTER.
l. s. d. COunty of Antrim and Town of Carrickfergus 402 13 06 County of Down
387 16 02 County of Dunnagall 461 19 06 Coun. and City of Londonderry 3^4 01 10
ob. County of Ard^agh 258 15 03 County of Monighon 267 05 03 County of Cavan
272 09 09 County of Fermanagh 237 07 06 County of Tyrone 367 18 10 ob. Total
3030 07 08 Total of the four Provinces 13693 06 11

Before I come to the Character of the Chief Towns, it will not be amiss to
insert here the Fees and Salaries belonging to several Courts and Offices,
Creation money, with Military and Temporary Payments, etc. according to the
Establishment made in 1669.

The Court of Exchequer.
l. s. d. VIce Treasurer 050 00 00 Chancellor 200 00 00 Chief Baron 400 00 00
Second Baron 300 00 00 Third Baron 200 00 00 Prime Sergeant 020 10 00 Attorney
General 075 00 00 Soliciter General 075 00 00 Chief Remembrancer 030 00 00
Auditor General 234 06 03 Surveyor General 060 00 00 Escheator of Leinster 006
13 04 Escheator of Munster 001 05 00 Escheator of Connaght 001 05 00 Escheator
of Vlster 001 05 00 Second Remembrancer 007 15 06 Clerk of the Pipe 015 00 00
Chief Chamberlain 010 00 00 Second Chamberlain 005 00 00 Comptroller of the
Pipe 007 00 00 Usher of the Exchequer 012 10 00 Transcriptor and Foreign
Opposer 015 00 00 Summonister 007 10 00 Marshall of the four Courts 004 00 00
Clerk of the Pells 030 00 00 Clerk of the first Fruits 027 10 00 Crier of the
Exchequer 001 13 04 Total 1798 03 05

Kings Bench.
l. s. d. CHief Justice 500 00 00 Second Justice 300 00 00 Third Justice 300 00
00 Clerk of the Crown 007 10 00 Total 1107 10 00

Court of Chancery.
l. s. d. CHancellor of Ireland 1200 00 00 Master of the Rolls 0144 03 03 Two
Masters of Chancery 0040 00 00 Clerk of the Crown 0025 00 00 Clerk of the
Hanaper 3035 10 00 Total 1444 13 03

Common Pleas.
l. s. d. CHief Justice 400 00 00 Second Justice 300 00 00 Third Justice 300 00
00 Prothonotory 007 10 00 Total 1007 10 00

Starr Chamber.
l. s. d. CLerk of the Starr Chamb. 010 00 00 Marshal of the same 010 00 00
Total 020 00 00

Officers attending the State.
l. s. d. SEcretary of State 200 00 00 For his Intelligence 100 00 00 Clerk of
the Council 047 10 00 Vlster King at Arms 026 13 04 Athlone Pursivant 013 13 09
Sergeant at Arms 025 00 00 Wakefield Pursivant 013 13 9 Roe Pursivant 010 00 00
Keeper of the Council Chamb. 018 05 00 Total 454 15 10

l. s. d. Judges of the Circuits 1000 00 00 A Share to be paid only to those
that go, the rest saved to the King.

Incidents.
l. s. d. JUdges, Master of the Rolls and Kings Councels Robes 173 06 08
Liberates for the Officers of the Exchequer 082 02 04 For the Receipt House 025
00 00 Keeper of the same 005 00 00 Singers of Christ-Church, Term 002 00 00
Paper and Parchm. to the Court 150 00 00 Pursivants of the Exchequer 071 05 00
Total 508 14 00

Military Payments.
l. s. d. THe Lord Lieutenant for all his Entertainments in time of Peace 6593
16 08 In Case of War as General 3192 04 02 Lieutenants Genesis of the Army 0365 00
00 Major General 0365 00 00 Commissary Genesis of the Army 0365 00 00

These only to be paid in time of War, and the Grants to cease with present
possessors.

l. s. d. LOrd Lieutenant as before 6593 16 08 Knight Mrshal of Ireland 0489 06
07 Muster Master 0365 00 00 Comptrollor of the Cheques 365 00 00 Four
Commissaries 400 00 00 A Corporal of the Field at 5 s. per diem 091 05 00
Advocate Genesis 6 s. 8 d. per. diem 121 13 04 Physician Genesis at 10 s. per diem
182 10 00 Chyrurgeon of the Army 121 13 04 Total 8730 04 11

Provincial Officers.
l. s. d. PResident of Munster 908 19 09 ob. President of Connaght 908 19 09
ob. The Provost Marshal of the four Provinces at 77 l. 3 s. 7 d. ob. q. each
per an. to cease with the present possessors. 308 14 07 Total 2126 14 02

Constables.
l. s. d. COnstable of Dublin Castle 20 00 00 The Porter 13 13 09 Constable and
Porter of Limrick 20 05 03 Constable of Roscommon Castle 60 00 00 Constable and
Porter of Athlone 18 07 09 Constable of Carrickfergus 45 12 00 Total 177 18 09

Officers of the Ordnance and Train of Artillery.
l. s. d. MAster of the Ordnance 491 04 07 Lieutenant of the Ordnance at 7 s.
p. diem 127 25 00 Comptroller of the Ordnance at 6 s. per diem 109 10 00 The
Ingeneer Overseer, etc. of the Fortifications at 5 s. per diem 091 05 00
Several other Officers of the Ordnance in Leinster 774 02 00 Officers of the
Ordnance in Munster 270 14 00 Officers of the Ordnance in Connaght 176 08 04
Officers of the Ordnance in Vlster 136 17 06 Total 2177 06 05

Provincial Officers.
l. s. d. CHief Justice of Munster 100 00 00 Second Justice of Munster 066 13
04 Attorney of Munster 013 06 08 C^erk of the Council 007 10 00 Sergeant at
Arms 020 00 00 Total 207 10 00

Connnaght.
l. s. d. CHief Justice 100 00 00 Second Justice 066 13 04 Attorney 020 00 00
Clerk of the Council 007 10 00 Sergeant at Arms 020 00 00 Total 214 03 04

Officers of the Customs, etc. Dublin.
l. s. d. CUstomer 007 10 00 Comptroller 007 10 00 Searcher 005 00 00 The
Officers of all the other Ports in Ireland 218 06 08 Total 238 06 08

l. s. d. FOur Commissioners of Appeals 400 00 00 Accomptants General of the
Customs and Excise (not to be paid in time of Farm) 200 00 00

Creation Money.
l. s. d. DUke of Ormond 40 00 00 Marquess of Antrim 40 00 00 Earl of
Castlehaven 20 00 00 Earl of Desmond 15 00 00 Earl of Westmeath 15 00 00 Earl
of Arglass 15 00 00 Earl of Carbury 15 00 00 Earl of Cavan 15 00 00 Earl of
Dunagall 15 00 00 Earl of Clanbrazile 20 00 00 Earl of Inchiquin 20 00 00 Earl
of Orrery 20 00 00 Earl of Montrath 20 00 00 Earl of Tirconnel 20 00 00 Earl of
Clancarty 2^ 00 00 Earl of Mountallexander 2^ 00 00 Earl of Carlingford 20 00
00 Lord Viscount Grandison 1^ 00 00 Lord Viscount Willmot 1^ 00 00 Lord
Viscount Valentia 1^ 00 00 Lord Viscount Dillon 1^ 00 00 Lord Viscount
Nettervile 10 00 00 Lord Viscount Killultagh 1^ 00 00 Lord Viscount Maguennis
10 00 00 Lord Viscount Sarsfield 10 00 00 Lord Viscount Ranelagh 1^ 00 00 Lord
Viscount Wenman of Trian 10 00 00 Lord Viscount Shannon 13 6 8 Lord Viscount
Clare 1^ 00 00 Lord Baron of Cahir 11 ^5 08 Total 484 11 08

Whereas Creation money is granted to one and the same person for two Honors,
that Sum which is granted with the highest Title, is only to be paid.

Perpetuities.
l. s. d. College of Dublin 388 15 00 Dean of Christ-Church Dub. 045 00 08
Archbishop of Dub. for Proxies. 018 05 06 Bishop of Mead out of the Manner of
Trim 003 15 00 Citizens of Dublin 500 00 00 Chanter of Christ-Church for Rent
for a Plot of Ground 027 00 00 Total 983 02 02

Temporary Payments.
l. s. d. LOrd Treasurer 30 00 00 Ke^ (...) Castle Ro^m^ 18 05 00 Keeper of the
Re^o^ds in Breminghams Tower 10 00 00 Total 36 05 00

Pensions and Annuities
l. s. d. COuntess of Tirconnell 300 00 00 Patrick Archer 205 l. per annum till
he be paid 5883 l. 19 s. 6 d. and 410 l. 5 s. 6 d. being granted to him by
Letters Patent, dated March 13. 1662. and his Majesty's Letters May 2. 1662.
205 00 00 Lord Coursey and his Son John Coursey 150 00 00 Sarah King Widow p.
an. 040 00 00 Mary Warrin p. annum 060 00 00 Sir James Dillon Knight p. an. 500
00 00 Luke Gernon Esquire; p. an. 100 00 00 John Dogherty Esquire; p. an. 027 07 07
Joseph Maguire per annum 040 00 00 Anne Connock per annum 050 00 00 William
Aubry per annum 052 00 00 Total 1524 07 07

l. s. d. FIve Commissioners of Accounts and the Clerks allowances 150 00 00
Payments for Extraordinaries by concordatums 6000 00 00 The total Sum of all
the Payments aforesaid amounts to 16601 11 11 Total of the Militery Payments
155341 13 07 Total of both Lists 171943 05 08

Temporary Payments.
l. s. d. KNight Marsh. of Ireland 198 01 09 Scout Master General of Ireland
221 13 04 Secretary of War 456 05 00 Governor of Carrickfergus 199 04 07 The
Mayor of the City of Dublin 146 00 00 Governor of the County of Clare 182 10 00
Constable of Hilsborough Fort 060 16 08 Total 1464 11 04

Part III.
TO THE READER.
That it much imports the future security of the British Planters in Ireland,
to be for the most part (if not wholly possessed (by way of habitation) of the
chief Cities and strong Towns of Ireland; as witness the Example of the City of
Dublin.
HOw much it concerns the future welfare and security of the Protestant
British Planters, to be for the most part, if not wholly possessed (by way of
Habitation) of the chief Cities and strong Towns of Ireland, does very
evidently appear by these two Examples, which may serve as sufficient Instances
for all the rest; viz. That of the City of Dublin; And the other, those of
Limrick, and Gallaway. As for Dublin, though it owed its whole being (upon the
matter) and especially the sole cause of its late flourishing state and
condition, to the constant residency of the Lords Lieutenants, and Lords
Deputies of Ireland, and the four Courts of Judicature there; yet so ungrateful
were the Popish Irish party therein, and so little sensible of their own good;
as that when the Lords Commissioners (upon the first discovery of the
Conspiracy in October 1641.) having happily provided for the security of the
Castle of Dublin; Their Lords took next into their care how to secure the City
in some sort against any sudden attempts, which proved a work not easy to be
effected; not only in regard of the crasiness of the Walls, the large Suburbs
and weakness of the place; but much more in respect of the corrupt ill
affection of the Popish Irish Inhabitants within the City: who for the most
part were so strangely deluded with the ill infusions of their Priests, as they
did certainly (as was found afterward by woeful experience) do all that in them
lay, to promote the Rebellious designs then set on foot (as they believed) only
for the re-settlment of their Religion, and recovery of their Liberties. They
were the Instruments to convey away privately most of the chief Conspirators,
who would have surprised the Castle on the 23d of October. They secretly
entertained many of the Rebels that came out of the Country, they likewise sent
them relief that were abroad, by secret ways; conveying as well Ammunition, as
intelligence of all passages from thence. And such wrong aversions had they
against all Contributions for the maintenance of his Majesty's Army; as in the
very beginning of the Rebellion, when the Lords sent for the Mayor and
Aldermen, and laying before them the high necessities of the State, together
with the apparan danger of the City and Kingdom, desired to borrow a
considerable sum of money for the present, which they undertook to repay out of
the next Treasure that should arive out of England. The Popish party amongst
them was so prevalent, as that after a most serious consultation and very
solemn debate among themselves, they most impudently returned this answer, that
they were not able to furnish above forty pounds, and part of that was to be
brought in in Cattle: And when in the height of the distractions there were no
fortifications about the Suburbs, nor any manner of defense for the City, but
an old ruinous Wall, part whereof fell down about that very time; so careless
were the Citizens, and so slowly went they about the making up that breach, as
that under pretense of want of money, they let it lie open till the Lords sent
unto them forty pounds toward the reparation.

As for those of Limrick and Gallaway, And those of Lymrick and Gallaway.
they had no less obligations laid upon them by the State of England, under
whose prosperous and benign Government, they flourished (during the last forty
years peace) in such an extraordinary manner (witness those many stately
Buildings erected, and vast Estates acquired by their Citizens during the said
time) as neither they, nor any of their Ancestors did ever hope to enjoy, or
expect to ever see the like: who by reason of the foul dealings of their
neighbor country men, were (till of late times) at such perpetual enmity with
them, as that they never trusted them (as the old saying is) No farther than
they could see them; and for this cause continually intermarried amongst
themselves, and so became (as it were) of one Kindred and Relation through each
Town; all being comprehended under a very few Sir names. But surfeiting with
too much prosperity, and trusting too much to their own strength, they declared
themselves at last, as rank Rebels as any of the rest of their Countrymen; for
though by reason of the miscarriage of the maine plot of surprising Dublin
Castle, it made them at first to stand at a gaze, were put to take up second
Counsels; yet, (which seems miraculous) notwithstanding they saw the power of
the Northern Rebels begin to decline, and that the Parliament of England had
with great alacrity and readiness undertaken the War, and not only engaged
themselves to his Majesty to send over powerful supplies both out of England
and Sco^land, but by their public order of both Houses, sent over to the Lords
Justices, and Printed at Dublin in the month of November, fully declared their
resolutions for the vigorous prosecution of the War of Ireland; And that some
Forces were arrived at Dublin out of England, the Siege of Drogedah or Tredagh
raised, those bold perfidious Traitors beaten back into the North, the Lords of
the Pale banished by force of his Majesty's Armies, of their own Habitations,
which were all spoiled and laid waste; yet I say, Such was the strength of the
Conspiracy, and so deeply were they engaged in it, as that Limrick and Gallaway
did openly declare themselves for the Rebels; The one, by besieging the English
(who had betaken themselves for protection) in the Castle of Limrick; And the
other, those who had (upon the like score) possessed themselves of the Fort of
Gallaway; both being at last forced to yield for want of timely relief; by
means whereof many thousands of the English were exposed to the slaughter of
their barbarous Enemies, in a great part of the Provinces of Connaght, Leinster
and Munster, which otherwise might have been wholly preserved from ruin, if
these two Towns alone (which are admirable for their strength and situation)
had but cheerfully opened their Gates to the destressed, and firmly continued
in their ancient Loyalty to the Crown of England; But seeing they so wilfully
acted this mad part by the powerful advice of their Popish Priests and Lawyers
(wherewith they did at that time mightily abound) having then but a very
inconsiderable number of Protestant Families to bear any sway amongst them; I
shall therefore conclude, that next to a good Standing Army, the most
infallible way (under God) to secure both the Government and the British
Planters in Ireland, is to have the chief Towns and Fortresses thereof, for the
most part (if not altogether) Inhabited by Protestant Families; A brief
Character of the principal of which, are here presented to your view and
consideration, in hopes that many more (well worthy of notice) will shortly be
added to this number, by such ingenious persons as are thoroughly acquainted
with, and well affected to that Country.

The Characters of the Chief Towns and Cities of IRELAND, as they lie in each
Province, and first of those in the Province of Munster, viz.
MUNSTER.
WATERFORD Waterford.
on the River Shoure, a well traded Port, a Bishops See, and the second City of
the Kingdom; of great fidelity (till of late) to the English, since the
Conquest of Ireland, and for that cause endowed with many ample Privileges.
First built by some Norwegian Pirates, who though they fixed it in one of the
most barren parts, and most foggy Air of all the Country, yet they made choice
of such a safe and Commodious Site for the use of Shipping, that of a Nest of
Pirates it was soon made a Receipt for Merchants, and suddenly grew up to great
Wealth and Power: And though it stands at a reasonable good distance from the
main Sea, yet Ships of the greatest burden may safely sail to, and ride at
Anchor before the Key thereof, which (I presume) is the handsomest of any in
the Kings Dominions: And for the convenience of conveighing Commodities in
smaller Vessels, to several Towns in the adjacent Countries, and namely,
Clonmell, Carricke, Rosse, Kilkenny, Carloe, etc. by two brave Navigable Rivers
more, near Neighbors to this, viz. the Noare and Barrow, commonly called the
three Sisters, because a little below Waterford they all empty themselves in
one channel into the Sea, no place in Ireland can any way compare with it,
except Limrick. This may be farther observed, that this is the nearest Port,
and the readiest place in all Ireland, to correspond with Bristol and all other
Towns of Traffic upon the River Severn, by a due Easterly wind from Bristol
hither, and so back from hence to Bristol by a due Westerly wind without any
variation, which necessity of various winds in the same Voyage occasions
oftentimes passages at Sea to become both tedious and dangerous.

Kingsale Kingsale.
upon the Mouth of the River Bany, a commodious Port, opposite to the Coasts of
Spain, and fortified in Tirones Rebellion by a Spanish Garrison, under the
command of Don John D' Aquila; but soon recovered (after the defeat of that
Grand Rebel near the Walls thereof) by the valor and indefatigable industry of
Charles Lord Montjoy, the then Lord Deputy of this Kingdom. This Town has this
peculiar property, that it is the only safe and ready Port in all Ireland for
our English Ships, and others, to victual at, or refresh themselves, bounding
for, or returning homewards from the West Indies, and many other parts of the
World.

Cork Cork.
(by the Latins called Corcagia) the principal of that County, and a Bishops
See; well walled, and fitted with a very commodious Haven, consisting chiefly
of one Street reaching out in length; Inhabited by a civil, wealthy and
industrious people being now generally all English. This may be farther said in
praise of this place, that it is like to be ere long (as in good part already)
a very flourishing City, being the Shire Town of the largest, richest, and best
Inhabited County, with English and Irish, of any in Ireland; And withal, the
only throughfare of all English Goods and Commodities (as they term them)
namely rich Broad-Cloaths, Stuffs and Linen, Fruits, Spices, etc. sent most
commonly this way out of England, for those two remarkable Port-Towns of
Limrick and Gallaway.

Yonghall Yonghall.
upon the Sea, provided of a safe Road or convenient Haven, it has this
peculiar, that it is the most convenient place in all the South parts of
Ireland, from whence to transport Cattle, Sheep, etc. to Mynhead or to any
parts of the West of England.

Limrick Limrick.
the principal of that County, and the fourth in estimation of all the
Kingdom: Situate in an Island compassed round about with the River Shannon, by
which means well fortified: A well frequented Empory, and a Bishops See;
Distant from the main Ocean about sixty miles, but so accommodated by the
River, that Ships of burden come up close to the very Walls. The Castle and
the Bridge, pieces of great strength and beauty, were of the foundation of King
John, exceedingly delighted with the situation. This may be farther observed
touching the happy situation of this place in relation to Traffic and
Commerce; that though by reason of some Cataracts or Rocky Falls in the River
Shannon (a little above Limrick) the Merchants are necessitated (for the space
of about eight or nine miles) to convey their Goods by Land as far as Killaloo;
but being brought thither, they may be carried up along the said River by Boats
of indifferent good Burden into many parts of the Provinces of Leinster and
Connaght for the space of about fourscore miles, (except the necessity of once
unloading, the same by reason of Athlone Bridge) which notable inconvenience (I
mean of the Cataracts) was propounded by some, and absolutely intended to be
quite taken away (in the Earl of Straffords time) for the sum of twenty
thousand pounds Sterling, by turning the Watercourse of the River Shannon
somewhat Eastwards through a large Bogg near adjoining to its old Channel,
which will appear very feasible to any judicious person that will view the
same: But the unhappy troubles that soon ensued, there, quite overthrew this,
as well as many other Noble designs of public concerns, which undoubtedly
should have been both undertaken and effected ere now (if peace had continued)
to the infinite good and honor of that Kingdom.

Clonmell Clonmell.
in the County of Typperary, a place of great strength and consequence, and
likely to become very rich (as in part already) both by reason of its
convenient situation upon the River Shoure, passable to it by Boats twenty
miles above Waterford; and for that it is the place of Judicature for the said
County (lately made Palatine) which County for goodness of Land, large extent,
and convenient situation, may be esteemed the second best, or at least, one of
the second best in all Ireland.

In the Province of Connaght.
Gallaway Gallaway
the Principal of this Province, a Bishops See, and the third City of this
Kingdom for beauty and bigness: situate near the fall of the great Lake or
River Corbes in the Western Ocean: A noted Emporie, and lately of so great fame
with foreign Merchants, that an Outlandish Merchant meeting with an Irishman
demanded in what part of Gallaway Ireland stood; as if Gallaway had been the
name of Ireland, and Ireland only the name of some Town. That Gallaway is but
of late Erection, or at least not grown noted and famous for Trade till this
last Century, appears both by the Buildings of the Town, which are all new (as
it were) and uniforme; and by some Figures upon the Town Walls, which
intimates, that a great part thereof was either newly erected, or at least
reedified in Queen Elizabeth's Reign: And one may be farther confirmed in this
opinion, by the information of knowing persons in those parts, who confidently
affirm by Tradition, that Gallaway (till of late times) was but a poor
Fisher-Town, to which many poor people resorted yearly in the Month of
September to take Herrings, where many are most commonly caught about that time
of the year, to the great enriching of the place, and the employment of many
poor people; and that Athenree (eight miles distance from Gallaway now but a
ruinous place (though still pretty well walled about) was anciently esteemed
the principal Town of those parts, and then likely but a sorry one too; but
good enough for those times, and place, when generally the whole Province of
Connaght, and most part of Ireland, lived in a rude and barbarous manner,
neither eating (excepting Irish Spoale without Salt or Sauce) nor drinking
well, nor yet wearing good Clothes, and then what need was there of Merchants,
Manufactory, and consequently of good Towns.

Sleygo Sleygo.
being the chiefest Town of that County, was but a very poor one about the
latter end of the year 1652. having been totally ruined by the late Wars, and
nothing left of it but some few bare Walls, and a company of poor Irish Cabbins
to distinguish the place where it stood. But when one reflects upon the
excellent situation thereof; as first, seated on a great Pass, the best, and
upon the matter, the sole convenient through-fare of all Connaght into the
Province of Vlster; flanked on the West by a Bay of the Sea, which safely
brings to it Ships of indifferent good burden, and on the East with a Loch or
Lake of about five miles in length, out of which runs into the Bay a good
stream of water, passing under a Bridge, dividing the Town into two parts,
wherein are frequently taken great store of brave Salmons, Pikes and Trouts;
and overlooked also from a near Hill, by a very strong Fort to protect it; The
whole Country about it enriched with as good Land as any in Ireland, and
planted with a late English Colony, the better to secure this great Pass;
Resorted to from far and near by very many people to buy Cattle, as Sheep, and
Horses, etc. being one of the famousest Marts for that purpose, of any in that
part of that Kingdom; and neighboring within few miles of the great Lake Earne
(bounding between the Province of Connaght and Vlster) being thirty miles in
length, and fifteen in breadth, by which, Merchantable Commodities may with
much convenience be conveyed by Boats of good burden into many parts of
Vlster, and other adjacent Countries bordering upon that Lake; I say, Sleygo
being thus happily situated, and accompanied with so many advantages, will
without doubt become ere long a very handsome Town, from lately (as you have
heard) but a very poor and beggarly Village, to the great strengthening of the
English Interest thereabouts, which will be always of great consequence, by
reason of the advantageous situation of the place, and will therewithal conduce
much to the enriching of all that part of the Country.

James-Town James-Town.
in the County of Letrim, so called by reason King James was the first Founder
of it, well Walled, but the Buildings within almost wholly ruinated at the end
of the last War. A place commodiously seated for Trade upon the River Shannon,
being passable by Boats from thence as far as Killaloo near Limrick, which is
fourscore miles, or thereabouts, except the necessity (as I said) of once
unlading by reason of Athlone Bridge. A Town fit to be carefully looked after,
both for the benefit of Trading, as also for the strengthening of those parts
against any ill disposed Irish, who either living thereabouts, or resorting
thither from other parts upon design of trouble, may very much annoy the
British Planters in the adjacent Counties, the Countey of Letrim being one of
the strongest Fastnesses, by reason it overmuch abounds with Boggs and Woods,
fit places for Rebels to shelter themselves in, of any one County in Ireland;
And bordering upon the Province of Vlster, being formerly the very Nest for
them, caused it to be too often frequented by those kind of unhappy Creatures.

Athlone Athlone.
a place of great strength, and the Key of Connaght, being on both sides of the
River Shannon, and joined by a stately Stone Bridge, built at the charge of
Queen Elizabeth; That part of the Town on Connaght side, whereon stands a
goodly Castle, having been enlarged of late, and strongly fortified with an
Earthen Wall; So that lying thus commodious for Traffic, the River Shannon
being passable, as I said, by Boats from James-Town hither, and from hence to
Killaloo; And moreover, like to be much resorted to upon the account of the
Court of Presidency to be held here for the Province of Connaght; And being
also the greatest Throughfare from Lynster to Connaght, and so from thence to
Dublin, will in all probability, cause it in time to become a flourishing
place, though now but beginning to revive from its late dessolation, to its
pristine luster,

In the Province of Ulster.
Both situated on the Sea side, Carlingford and Dundalke.
and within the County of Louth, likely to be thriving places by reason of
their convenient situation for Traffic, and the brave planted Countries with
English thereabouts.

Knockefergus Knockefergus.
the chief of Antrim, more proper Rockefergus, and in that sense called
Carigfergus by the Irish, from one of the Kings of the Irish-Scots who there
suffered Shipwreck: Seated upon a large and capacious Bay which gives it both
a safe and Commodious Port, as well by natural situation as the works of Art,
very strongly fortified; by reason of the Neighborhood of the Scots in
Cantire, from which little distant.

Londonderry Londonderry.
a Colony of Londoners, the best built Town of any in the North of Ireland:
Situate in a Peninsula of forty Acres, on the one side environed a great part
of it, with a River, and on the other side impassable by reason of the Soil
always deep and moorish: This City being thus strongly situated by Nature, and
made stronger by Art, will, with the rest of the chief Towns of this Province,
soon become very considerable in point of Wealth and Power, by reason of the
speedy planting of this Northern part of the Kingdom, by the great confluence
of the Neighboring Scots, with many others who yearly repair hither out of
England and Wales upon the same score: which benefit and advantage, was timely
experimented by the Officers of the Army, who have been conceived to be more
fortunate, especially at first, by receiving their Lots in this Province,
though computed the meanest, and so accordingly rated in their Quit-Rents, than
they who got their respective proportions of Land for their Arrears in the
other two Provinces of Lynster and Munster, which fell in the main, upon the
first settlement, much short of men's expectations as to this particular.

In the Province of Lynster.
Weishford or Wexford Wexford.
situate on the mouth of the River Slane: The first of all the Towns in Ireland
which received a Colony of English. This Town holds a very good correspondency
by way of Traffic with the City of Bristol, and has before it, within a Sandy
Bar lying between it and the Sea, a fair Pool, wherein most commonly are taken
yearly, great store of Herrings, which are Transported beyond Sea, to the great
benefit of this place: The River is Navigable by small Boats up to Ynish-corfey
about six miles above this Town, where there is a good quantity of Iron made,
which is carried down this River to be dispersed into several parts of Ireland,
etc.

Kilkenny Kilkenny.
on the River Newre the chief Seat of the Bishop of Ossery, and the fairest
Town of all the Islands: So called quasi Cella Cannici the Cell or Monastery of
Canninus, a man of great renown in those days for Piety in these parts of the
Country. This City, besides that is situated in a very brave and well inhabited
Country, is also honored with two Noble Seats of the Duke of Ormond in and near
it, that is to say, the Castle of Kilkenny in it, and Donmore House near it.

Ross Ross.
once populous, well Traded, and of large circumference, but of late very
ruinous, nothing almost remaining but the Walls, which were built by Isabel the
daughter of Richard Strongbow Earl of Pembroke, the fortunate Conqueror of this
Island for King Henry the Second; now beginning to be pretty well inhabited,
and well deserving to be farther improved by the advance of Manufactury and
Commerce, as being situated upon a brave Navigable River where Ships of four or
five hundred Tun may safely ride before the Key of it. As yet destitute of any
considerable Trade by reason of its too near neighborhood to the City of
Waterford; But when the Country thereabouts comes to be better inhabited with
English, then it may be well hoped this Town will become a place of good
consideration and consequence.

Caterlough commonly, but corruptly Carlough, Carlough.
having in it a strong Castle, and being the chief of that County, is now from
a very mean beginning (having been wholly destroyed by the late Wars) grown to
be a very fine Market Town, increasing both in Wealth and good Buildings;
Situated near a pleasant River Navigable by Boats from Ross hither; placed in a
fertile and well inhabited Country, thirty miles from Dublin, and in a very
convenient Stage thither, from the greatest part of Munster, and a good part of
the Province of Leinster, which does and will hereafter, much conduce to its
enlargement.

Tredagh, Tredagh.
more properly Droghedagh, situate on the River Boine, on the edge of Vlster,
to which Province belongs so much of the Town as lies on the North side of
that River. A very fair and populous City, as well by Art as Nature very
strongly fortified, and furnished with a large and Commodious Haven. It took
the name Droghedah from the Bridge there built upon the River for the
convenience of passage (as the word signifies in that Language) and therefore
called Pontena by some Latin Writers.

Dublin Dublin.
supposed to be the Eblana of Ptolomie; by the Irish called Balacleigh, because
being seated in a fenny and moorish Soil, it was built on Piles as the word
does signify in that Language: Situate at or near the mouth of the River
Liffe, which affords it a commodious Haven, but that the entrances thereof
are many times encumbred with heaps of Sand. The City very Rich and Populous,
as being the Metropolis of all the Island, the Seat of the Lord Deputy, an
Archbishops See, and an University, besides the benefit redounding from the
Courts of Justice. In those respects well fortified against all emergencies;
and adorned with many goodly Buildings both private and public. The Principal
of which, are the Castle, wherein the Lord Deputy resideth, built by Henry
Loundres once once Archbishop here; a College founded by Queen Elizabeth, to
the honor, and by the name of the Blessed Trinity; The Cathedral Church
dedicated to Saint Patrick, the Apostle of the Irish Nation; a fair Collegiate
Church called Christ-Church; besides thirteen others destinated to Parochial
Meetings. Being destroyed almost to nothing in the Danish War, it was
re-edified by Harald, surnamed Harfarger, King of the Norwegians, then Masters
of most part of the Island; and after the subjection of it to the Crown of
England, was peopled with a Colonie of Bristol men.

This may be farther observed, that though Dublin is not seated in the best and
most convenient place, that is in the middle, yet it is seated in the second
best, that is, over against the middle of Ireland; and directly opposite to the
nearest passage into England, being Holy Head, twelve hours Sail with a
prosperous Gale of Wind, and about twenty Leagues distance from this place. The
first affords it an excellent convenience for all manner of businesses to be
transacted to and from this City (as well by Water as Land) into all parts of
the Kingdom, with as little charge as possibly may be. The other, a rare
advantage for the maintenance of Traffic and Commerce with England, and all
other parts of the World, especially with the City of London, from whence (upon
the least notice given) Merchantable Goods of all kinds are soon dispatched
hither, or into any other parts of this Realm, as occasion requires; And that
with far more speed than formerly, by reason of the late erecting of
Post-houses in all the principal Towns and Cities of this Kingdom, which
accommodates all persons with the convenience of keeping good correspondency
(by way of Letters, and that most commonly twice a week) with any, even the
remotest part of Ireland, at the charge of eight pence or twelve pence, which
could not formerly be brought to pass under ten or twenty shillings, and that
sometimes with so slow a dispatch, as gave occasion many times of no small
prejudice to the parties concerned. All these conveniences and advantages have
so far contributed to the present splendour and great increase of this City, as
that it now may be justly conceived to be grown (within this fifty or sixty
years) twice as large, and for handsomness of Building, beyond all compare, of
what it might any way pretend unto in any former Age.

Dublin thus wholly deriving her present luster and happiness from the late
prosperous Settlement of Ireland under the English Government, being but a very
mean and inconsiderable Metropolis for so Noble a Kingdom, during the long
continued misgovernment of that Realm, bares in some particulars somewhat a
like resemblance with that of the City of London; Which, first, since quitting
our selves from our expensive Relation and Correspondency with the Church of
Rome; The declining of our unprofitable Contests with France; The Reducing of
Ireland to an Orderly Commonwealth; And last of all by the happy Union of the
two Kingdoms of England and Scotland in the Person of King James of blessed
memory, thereby succesfully affording us a veny fit opportunity of turning the
curre^t of all our vast former expenses both of Blood and Treasure, into the
honorable, and profitable undertaking of a gallant Trade with both the Indies,
and many other parts of the World; But especially by planting of already very
considerable Colonies in the West Indies, has grown, since the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign till this present (being about an hundred and twelve
years) to be twice as large, and much more beautiful then ever it was, since
the first foundation thereof, being some two thousand five hundred years ago.

It is therefore well observed; That there is required to the Magnificence and
Splendour of Cities; First a Navigable River, or some such easy passage by Sea,
which will bring thither a continual Concourse and Trade of Merchants; as at
Venice, London, Amsterdam. Secondly, some Staple-Manufactories and Commodities
which will draw the like resort of Merchants, though the convenience of Sea or
Rivers invite them not; As at Newremberge in Germany, a dry Town, but mightily
Traded. Thirdly, the Palace of the Prince; for ubi Imperator, ibi Roma, where
the Court is, there will be a continual confluence, of Nobles, Gentry and
Merchants, and all sorts of Trades: And by this means Madrid not long since a
poor and beggarly Village, is grown the most populous City in all Spain.
Fourthly, the residence of the Nobility beautifieth a City with Stately, and
Magnificent Buildings; which makes the Cities of Italy so much excel our in
England, their Nobles dwelling in the Cities, and ours for the most part in
their Country-Houses. Fifthly, the Seats or Tribunals of Justice, on which both
Advocates and Clients are to give attendance; as in the Parliamentary Cities in
France, and in Spires in Germany. Sixthly, Universities and Schools of
Learning, to which the Youth from all parts are to make resort; which has been
long the chief cause of the flourishing of Oxford, Cambridge, Bononia in Italy,
and other Cities of good Note beyond the Seas. Seventhly, Immunity from Tolls
and Taxes, most men being desirous to inhabit there, where their Income will
be greatest, their Privileges largest, and their disbursments least: So
Naples, Venice, Florence having been dessolated by Plagues, were again suddenly
re-peopled by granting large Immunities to all comers in; All which Requisites,
are (as I conceive) inherent and inseparable in, and to the above mentioned two
Cities, to wit, London and Dublin.

The City of Dublin in times past, for the due Administration of Civil
Government, had a Provost for the Chief Magistrate: But in the year of Man's
Redemption, 1409. King Henry the Fourth granted them liberty to Elect every
year a Mayor and two Bailiffs, and that the Mayor should have a guilt Sword
carried before him for ever. And Edward the Sixth (to heap more honor upon
this place) changed the two Bailiffs afterward into Sheriffs: And of late, our
Gracious Sovereign King Charles the Second, honored this City with a Lord
Mayor; So that there is nothing wanting here that may serve to make the State
of a City most magnificent and flourishing.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Christopher Wilkinson and Thomas Burrell.
AErius Redivivus: Or the History of the Presbyterians. Containing the
Beginnings, Progress, and Successes of that Active Sect. Their Oppositions to
Monarchical and Episcopal Government. Their Innovations in the Church; and
their Embroilments of the Kingdoms and States of Christendom in the persuit of
their Designs from the year 1536. to the year 1647. By Peter Heylin D. D. in
Folio. Price bound 10 s.

Regale Necessarium, or the Legality, Reason and Necessity of the Rites and
Privileges justly claimed by the Kings Servants, and which ought to be allowed
unto them. By Fabian Philips Esquire; in Quarrto. Price bound 5 s.

God, the King, and the Church: to wit, Government both Civil and Sacred
together Instituted; Public Solemnities in Consecrated places, from the
beginning Celebrated; true Zeal in opposition to Luke-warmness, consistent with
moderation, stated; And throughout all, the Church of England in the strictness
of its Uniformity, against both false accusers, and false Brethren, vindicated.
Being the Subject of Eight Sermons, Preached in several places, and now
Published by George Seignior, Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and
Domestic Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Burlington, in Octavo.
Price bound 2 s.

The Gentleman's Companion, a Learned discourse, Written Originally in French,
now faithfully Englished, by a well-wisher to the English Gentry, Octavo, price
bound 3 s.

A Catalogue of the Baronets of England, by William Dugdale Esquire; price bound 1
s.

Poems upon the War, Pestilence and Fire, Octavo, price 1 s.

A short Exposition of the Catechism of the Church of England, by Edward
Boughen, D. D. in Octavo. Price stitcht 6. d.

Two Cases of Conscience, viz. the Engagement and a Rash Vow deliberately
iterated, Resolved by the Right Reverend Father in God Robert Sanderson, late
Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Twelves. Price bound 6. d.

Divine Breathings; or a Pious Soul Thirsting after Christ, in 24. Price bound
1. s.


