THE PARABLE OF THE PUPPIES: OR THE Top-Knots Vindicated.
Licensed and Entered according to Order.
THE Bookseller has promised you a Parable, and a Parable you must have: Tho
the Subject of this Paper needs no Mask, yet for Fashion's sake we'll dress it
up Ala-mode.

Not long ago a young English Spaniel Bitch, called Fancy, was big with
Puppies, and having gon^ creeping and sniveling about as long as she was able
to bear her Burden, at last she Litter'd, and brought forth a parcel of
hopeful Male-Whelps, without ever calling for Lady Lucina's help: I cannot
exactly remember their number, tho some say they were a Dozen; but I can tell
you some of their Names; for they were soon Christened without either Parson or
Godfather to assist at the Ceremony: There was Fopling, Drunkard, Gamester,
Tory-rory, Delicate, Amorous, Sharper, and more that I have forgot.

They were fine forward Puppies to look upon, sucked eagerly, and were mighty
fond of their Dam. They soon got over their Nine Days Blindness, and began to
play the Wanto^ justling each other for Precedence whelking, snarling,
curvetting, and twenty pretty Tricks besides.

It chanced that some of these Puppies, as soon as they were able to travel,
were sent beyond Sea to learn Fashions, how to Fetch and Carry, to beg with a
boon Mien, jump over a Stick for the King, and the like. Now among the rest,
Fopling was sent to France, where he learnt to fawn, wag his Tail with a Grace,
lick, cringe, hunt a Duck, and all the Accomplishments fit for an English
Spaniel; so that at his return for England, his Dam Fancy smelling to him,
presently knew him to be her none dear Puppy; and there were a World of
Endearments, Dog and Bitch Complements, fawning Hugs, Horse-Busses, and such
like Ceremonies passed between 'em; and Fopling began to be some body in the
Family, every Whelp was in love with his Carriage; he barked, hunted, fought,
licked, cring'd and curvetted a-la-mode de Paris: All his Actions and his whole
Air was French, so that he was set for a Pattern of Good-Breeding to all the
Whelps of the Family. But nothing proved so advantageous to his Whelp-ship's
Person, as the Dress which he brought over with him from France. For it being
the Fashion there for all the Puppies to be shaved, and have Perukes made of
Shock-Dogs long Hair, our English Spaniel, little Fopling, must needs be in the
Fashion too, and gets him a swinging Shock Wig, which made him look vary
gracefully, much like Trinkala's Monster in the Tempest, or like a Barbers
Decoy-Block set out with polite Chedreuz, to draw Customers to the Shop. And if
^ou'd know the Truth on it, it is this has ^ade the Shock-Dogs so Currish ever
^nce, to see themselves mocked by every Apish Spaniel.

However, little Fopling was mightily admired for his Shock-Wig, and all the
Whelps of his Litter were resolved to imitate his Example: Drunkard produced
Physical Reasons for it, and said 'twas good for the Headache after a Debauch
of Wine. Gamester and Sharper said, 'twas a Politic Fashion, a cunning
Disguise for Rooks and Cheats. Tory-rory said, it made a Dog look Great, and
created a respect in the Vulgar Whelps of the Neighborhood. Delicate and
Amourous pleaded, That it rendered the Face more amiable and charming. The rest
of the Whelps also had their several Reasons, and all agreed in this, That they
would be in the Mode.

So they all went to Tonsor's, a Puppy that had been bred in France, but now
Kennel'd in the Neighborhood. His whole Gift lay in Lavering and Shaving the
Whelps, in curling and crisping their Hair, washing, patching and painting
their Mangy Faces, and making of Shock-Wigs. It Is incredible what a Trade
Tonsor got in a small time among these Whelps, and the rest of the Litter. For
in the first place, as soon as Fopling walked in a Morning, and shook his
stinking Ears, was almost choked with his own Hogo, till he had sent for
Puppy-Tonsor to perfume and powder him. Then for Drunkard, he was a Noun
Adjective, and could hardly stand alone, till Puppy-Tonsor had with Comb,
Wash-Ball, and Benjamin settled his Addle Brains. Neither could Tory-rory,
Gamester or Sharper do any business, till they had passed through Tonsor's
Office. And as for Delicate and Amorous, they had no other Business to do, but
to see and be seen, and therefore Tonsor's Art was as necessary to them, as
their Meat and Drink. In fine, Tonsor's Office grew so much in Request, that at
long run the better sort of Puppies would have none but Tonsors for their
Valet-de-Chambre. For you must note by the way, that Bitch Fancy had Litter'd
and Litter'd again for many years together, so that in time all England was
stocked with Puppies of the same Breed. You could not set your Foot in a Parish
where there were not some of Phancy's Whelps, Puppies upon Puppies, Tonsors
upon Tonsors, and they multiplied so fast, that one Tonsor could hardly live
for another.

I will not tire your Patience with any more of the Parable, but come to the
plain English, the Intrinsical Marrow-bone of the matter:

The Men do but make Rods for themselves, in lampooning Women's innocent
Dresses: And the Author of the Top-Knots had better held his Peace, than
provoked a Female Pen against the Fops of his Sex; pretty Womanish things, that
first taught us, and now exceed us in all manner of Effeminacy.

Is it not a pleasant and very diverting Spectacle, to see a Fellow, as soon as
he is out of his Bed in a Morning, run to the Looking-Glass, and pay his first
Devotions to the worshipful Figure of himself? To play the Narcissus with his
own Shadow, and make his Court with an hundred and twenty Grimaces to his
pretty Pigs-nies? Is it not a manly Exercise to stand licking his Lips into
Rubies, painting his Cheeks into Cherries, patching his Pim-ginits, Carbuncles
and Buboes? To see another striving to outdo Apelles in counterfeiting the
lovely Eyebrow? A third to be two long Hours in careening his Hair or Peruke? A
fourth as tedious in adjusting his Crevat-string? Is it not very comical to see
the Fop strutting up and down his Chamber, surveying himself from Head to Foot,
first turning one Shoulder, then the other, now looking fore-right in the Glass,
then turning his Posteriors, tiffling with the Curls in his VVig, tying and
untying his Crevat, writhing himself into as many Postures as he in the
Pall Mall; and yet after all his Forenoon Speculation, not being satisfied,
till he has consulted his flattering Valet? I will not trouble you with all the
Impertinent Dialogue that passes between 'em; but after they have Parrotted
over the Brandenburgh, Chedreux, Escla't, Orangers, Picards, Pulvilio, Rous,
Surtout, and a deal more of Ribble Rabble, Pedlers French; and after Mounsieur
Gnaw-bone has completely equipped his Master en Chevalier, the spark sallies
forth of his Chamber like a Peacock, beseeching the Winds to favor his
delicate Friz, and not put a Lock or a Curl out of Joint. Then it is very
edifying to mind how the Coxcomb angles for Admirers: The good-natured Animal
fanceis every Body's in Love with him, that casts an Eye on his Accomplished
Phis'nomy and Dress as he walks along the Street, I should have said danced
along, for he scorns to walk the vulgar Mechanic Pace.

You Would be no less taken with the Scene, when our Spark, as he is moving along,
like an Image of Wax, or Piece of Italian Clockwork, deeply occupied in the
Contemplation of this wonderful Fabric, is suddenly accosted by a Friend out
of the Country, whom he has not perhaps seen for a year together; what ducking,
cringing and scraping there is between 'em? You would think at first they were
going to unbuckle one another Shoes, so low go their Hands, as to touch each
others Ankle! Then up they mount again, first over one Shoulder, and then over
the other, slabbering each others Cheeks like a couple of good-natured Colts,
that take turns to lick one another where it itches; you would swear they were
Harlekin's Bastards, and were practicing the Anticks. It must needs be a sweet
Exercise for a couple of Puppies to brush one another Chaps with their
bristled Beards! Especially when perfumed with the odoriferous Scent of Tobacco.

Pursue him to the Coffee-House, where he generally takes his Mornings Draught,
and youd find him either the Cipher, or the Single Ten of the Company. Either
he sits like Jack Adams, and brings forth nothing but a few dull Stories, the
Tackers together of other Men's Words; or if he ventures to let his empty Noddle
take wind, all his Discourse is of Dresses, Pimps and Whores, or the like
insignificant Stuff, embroidered now and then with Oaths and God-d -- mes,
which renders him the Scorn of all Civil Company. Men of Sense Lampoon him to
his Face, and he takes it for a Panegyric: And the very Coffee-Boys having
once found out the Gallants soft place, burlesques upon the Noble Squire, while
the Silly Creature takes all this for Respect.

Trace him from thence to the Ordinary, or Eating-House; if he dines alone, he
may pass for a wise Man, according to the old Rule, That a Fool cannot be known
to be such by his silence. But if he engages with other Company, they make a
double use of him, one to help their Digestion, by affording them continual
matter of Laughter and Ridicule, and the other to pay the odd Money of the
Reckoning, which the easy Fop never refuses, that he may appear a complaisant
and well-bred Gentleman.

And now his Belly's full, the Lambkin begins to grow wanton, and has a great
mind to visit his Sempstress or Milliners Shop, on purpose to be admired by
little Miss that sits behind the Counter, with whom he enters into a profound
Chat about the newest Fashion for Crevats, what colored Ribband is most proper
for that Season? How deep Men wear their Ruffles? When he has run himself out
of Breath with a Catalogue of the various Whim-whams, such Coxcombs as he wear
about 'em, he makes a Parenthesis (by peeping in the Glass that hangs up in the
Shop) finding fault with his Barber, Laundress, Tailor, etc. on purpose to draw
her Eyes toward his Idolized Self. Here begins the Rehearsal of his Morning's
Chamberwork: He picks a Quarrel with his Crevat, that he may engage pretty Miss
to tie it anew for him, and then he has a fair Opportunity to make Love by a
thousand little effeminate Tricks. Then his Ruffles don't sit to please him,
and Miss is employed again. Here Is another advantage, to show his White Hand,
whilst the fond Coxcomb falls in Love by the same methods which he uses to
captivate her; and she laughs in her Sleeve at the ridiculous effeminacy and
softness of him, who might otherwise pass for a Man.

If he goes from hence to the Playhouse on a Day when Sir Fopling Flutter, Sir
Martin Marall, Sir Courtly Nice, or any other Comedy is Acted, that may serve
as a Mirror for him to see his own Folly in, He has hardly patience to sit the
first Act out; but as soon as that is over, he flies out of the Pit in a Huff,
calls for his Half-Crown, plays the Critic, damns the Play, away he troops
like a Knight Errant to hunt for new Adventures; for he knows not what that
Mechanic Thing, called Business, means. He strolls up and down the Streets,
and is never out of his Road, so long as he is within Scent of a Tavern or
Alehouse, where he may idly pass away his Hours, till the Evening Change Time
calls for him to beat the Hoof in Fleetstreet, Cheapside, or the Strand, in
pursuit of some Female Bargain. But here is the Deel on it, tho he means well,
yet his Luck's naught; for he is a Fumbler at Courtship, that the better sort
of Night-Walkers put him out of Countenance, and he is forced either to take up
with some Ordinary Pug, who ^en to one picks his Pockets before she leaves him;
or being balked in this important Design, he sneaks into some Coffee-House, to
end the Day as he began it, and go Home to Bed the same Fop he rose.

After all this, Gentlemen, will you persist to libel Women, because they use
some innocent Arts to reclaim you from these Follies? Believe me, our Towers
and Top-knots are no other than Satyrs on your high crisp'd Wigs, and Dangling
Locks, your Spruce Crevat-strings, Sword-knots, and the rest of your Finical
Dress. I dare be bold to challenge you in the Name of all our Sex; begin you,
and show a good Example, leave off all this effeminate Clutter; abandon your
Fopperies and Vices, and act like Men of Sense, and I Will engage the Women will
quickly follow your Steps, and re-assuming the ancient Spirit and Valor of our
renowned Ancestors the Picts, we'll accompany you to the Wars, and make all the
World to tremble at the Name of the English Amazons.

London, Printed for T. Burdet. 1691.


