MODERATION not SEDITION: Held forth in A SERMON Partly Preached At St.
Matthews FRIDAY-STREET, The 5. of July 1663. And then Disturbed, and since
Traduced as Seditious. Now Published for the Vindication of the Truth, and
Clearing the Innocence of the Deliverer.

By John Price M. A. of University-Colledge in Oxford.

Nonnulla (...) quae curari incisione nequeunt, fomite olei sanantur. Et durus
adamas incisionem ferri minime recipit, sed leni hircorum sanguine mollescit.

Greg. Magnus de Pastore. London, Printed for the Author. 1663.

To the Right Reverend Father in GOD HUMPHRY Lord Bishop of London, Elect.
MY LORD,
I Am a Stranger to you, but I know You are not a Stranger to that which is
noble and just: I have so good an opinion of you as to think you will do
Justice as soon to a Stranger, as to any Friend or Relation. Being uncivilly
and unchristianly disturbed at the Reading of Divine Service, and the Preaching
of this Sermon, and traduced as a Disturber of our Israel, a Sower of Sedition,
I have for the vindication of my Honor, published the Proceedings, and make
bold to throw this mean Discourse at your Lordships Feet: Whom I acknowledge to
be the fittest Judge in this Case, as being called thereunto both by God and
his Vicegerent. I refer my self wholly to you, I own your Authority, I desire
to submit to, and acquiesce in your determinations. I hope you will protect and
pity my accused, distressed Innocence, which flies to your Authority, Wisdom,
and Justice, for shelter; and am

Your Lordships most humbly devoted Servant and Son in Christ Jesus JOHN PRICE.

To the READER.
COurteous and Ingenuous Reader, I am so far conscious of my own disabilities,
and of the Criticisme of this Capricious age, that I am loath to appear in
public: neither would I have done so now, but that I have a great deal of
reason to think, that I am concerned in honor so to do. The occasion of the
publishing of this Sermon, was the uncivil, unchristian disturbance of it at
St. Matthews Friday-street, at the Preaching thereof: Neither did It only incur
this fate, but also the Divine Service, whose Majesty, Authority and Divinity
was not sufficient to Shield it from the Indignities that my Antagonist put
upon it, who would be thought to be one of its greatest Pations. The manner of
the disturbance was thus. Having preached at the aforesaid Church the Lord's Day
before, and being invited by the Minister and the Parish to preach there again,
according to promise I came; he understanding that I had gained somewhat upon
the affections of the people, and not well digesting that; comes to the Church
contrary to my expectation, fraught with rancour and malice, on purpose to
contradict me. When I had read the Divine Service to the first Lesson, there he
makes a public disturbance, I mistaking the 2 Chap. of the 1 of Samuel for the
11: (it is very easily done by reason of the similitude of the Figures) after I
had named the one, he names the other: Not long after he sends to me to read
the second Service at the Communion Table, which I being a Stranger, and it
being in a private Church, refused to do. When I had read to the Collect for
the day, he speaks aloud, This is the Collect for the day; though I had turned
to it at the beginning of the Service. After I had read the first Service, I
betook my self to the reading of the second; which he out of an imperious
humor would and would not have read. These and many other affronts he offered
in the reading of the Service. After I had Prayed and named my Text, and
Preached a quarter of an hour upon it, amongst other arguments for Moderation
this was one, There is no form of Church Government in the New Testament;
therefore we should be Moderate in our opinions, and patiently submit to, and
acquiesce in that form of Government that the steering Authority of the Nation
judges to be most for the advantage of Gods worship, and the good of Souls:
Here he urged it was against the Kings Declaration to treat of Church
Government, that the Sermon was Seditious, and three times with a great deal of
Passion and little reason or Religion bids me Come down, which I did, being
ashamed of the disturbances that were already, and not desirous to create any
more; this is the state of the Case, now for the vindicating of my self, and
for the satisfaction of the world, I shall endeavor to maintain against him,
that his proceedings were very pragmaticall, very antiscriptural, very
irrational, very impious, very injurious to Episcopal Government, and the
Church of England, very offensive to God and men. Very pragmatical, if there
had been any thing amiss, he should have complained to my Lord the Bishop, not
made himself judge in his own cause, to do as he did was as it were to unmitre
the Bishop: very Antiscriptural, the Scripture is not for disturbing but
countenancing the Ministers in the executing of their Function, its language is
do my Prophets no harm, honor them for their works sake, they are in Gods
stead, and to affront them in the delivery of their Embassy is to affront him,
whose person and authority they represent: very irrational because
antiscripturall, we own no reason that does not veil to Scripture; can any
sober man think the mistaking of a Chapter to be a sufficient rational ground
for a general disturbance and discomposure? when it is not done de industria
and in opposition to the authority of the Church, but only through a casual
mistake. The worst that can be made of it is this, it was an imperfection, and
must our Services be disturbed and slighted because they are imperfect? if this
reason were valid we should never perform any spiritual duty because they are
all imperfect: if it was an imperfection it became him rather for the honor of
his profession, and dignity of the divine Worship, (as Constantine the Great
did) to spread a Mantle over it: to take notice of it argued a great deal of
inhumanity, and pride in him: Inhumanity and want of Charity in that He would
expose his brothers imperfections; pride and vanity in that he did it to
magnify himself: very impious; whatsoever is uncharitable and irreverent must
needs be impious, to affront God any where must needs be impious, but to do it
in his own house most impious. To quarrel with any one is a sin; but to
quarrel with a man of God is a Scarlet sin. What did he do in that action but
like the Pope exalt himself above all that is called God, prefer his own
perverse will and enraged passion before God and his Worship, (which he made
Hagar like to wait upon and truckle under them:) very injurious to the
Episcopal party and the Church of England. Such proceedings as these give the
world occasion to believe, that their Religion is nothing but shell and
Ceremony, and no power; that they prefer their own authority before that of the
Scriptures (which is down right Popery;) that they are a Generation of formal,
heady, passionate, immoderate men, that make it their business not practically
to preach Christ crucified, but to strengthen their own Hierarchy. They are
injurious to the Church of England, which is exceeding Moderate both as to her
Doctrine and Ceremonies; for her Doctrine it is aequidistant from Popery and
Calvinisme; as to her Ceremonies in them she is not gaudy but decent, not
meritricious but Matron-like; so that they which speak against moderation
understand neither the one nor the other, very offensive to God and man. As to
God, it could not but offend the great God of peace, to see the Ambassadors of
the Gospel of peace quarrel, and make the Gospel of peace the Instrument of
commotion and disturbances. As for men, it could not but offend them; for
either they were affected or not affected to the Service, for those that were
affected to it, they grieved to see us contend about it, and render it so
unauthoritative and contemptible in the eyes of others: for those that did not
affect it they were glad of such an opportunity, that they might laugh in their
sleeve at our irreverencies and irregularities, so that it is very apparent
that Mr. Wakeman has violated the laws both of God and man; that he has
contrary to Scripture and reason, as it were, thrown dirt into the face of God,
his Ordinances, and Ministry; prostituted the Dignity, Majesty, and Authority
of his profession, and made it cheap and vile in the eyes of men. But in that
he is so weak in himself, let us see whether he can fetch any strength from the
Kings Declaration, which he urges against me; as for His Majesty's gracious
Declaration, I receive it with a great deal of submission, reverence and
obedience, as becomes a good Subject, and a good Christian, which I conceive
does not at all concern me, because I am no delinquent neither have I any way
violated it, the Law is for the Lawless, the great design of that excellent
Declaration was to restrain the inordinacies of the Enemies of the Church
government now in being, which preached up their own forms of Church
government in opposition to it, and to the weakening the authority thereof: it
was to curb those incendiaries that spoke things reflexive on, and derogatory
from the Dignity and authority of the established Church Policy; but in regard
those things that I spoke tended to obedience, and submission to this Church
government by Episcopacy; it was impertinently alleged against me, who have
preached, written, suffered for the established Government both in Church and
State, and am every way conformable to both. I cannot conceive how we should
sufficiently celebrate the 29 day of May, if we are not at all permitted to
speak of the Government, either in Church or State. Another end of the Kings
Declaration was the restraint of Pragmaticall unprofitable Preachers; if so, it
concerned him more, who as I understand in stead of preaching wholesome,
practical truths, for the most part preaches about nothing but Festivalls,
and Ceremonies, and Surplices; if I had offended against the Declaration His
Majesty or the Ministers of State, not he were to call me in question. As for
my Sermon which he says is Seditious; I will do what in me lies to justify it
against him and all opposers, that it is Scriptural, rational, peaceable,
suitable, Christian, and not seditious, either as to the matter contained in it,
the manner of delivering it, or the end of it: if it be not Scripturall let him
produce some scriptures for virulency, bitterness, immoderations, and if it be
not rational let him confute my reasons; if not peaceable let him show me how
it tends to war; if not seasonable let time produce somewhat that is more
seasonable: what ever it is I am resolved to vindicate it from his aspersion.
As to that passage he cavilled at as to Church Government, I am of that opinion
that there is none in the New Testament, but that it is left to the authority
and prudence of any particular Church to determine concerning it: which
position I shall endeavor to make good against all gainsayers, and if I thought
my pains upon this Subject would be acceptable to the World, I would write a
Tract particularly upon it. I am not ignorant how all men challenge their
Governments to be in Scripture, but to stop their mouths I think none of their
governments are there, expressly, formally, as to their whole constitutions and
Ceremonies, as the Government of the Jews was. As for my Antagonist I hope I
shall justify my Sermon, but he cannot his practice: both which I cast at the
feet of the intelligent moderate World that knows how to distinguish between
Moderation and Sedition, and am

Their devoted Servant in Christ Jesus. JOHN PRICE.

MODERATION not SEDITION.
Phill. 4. v. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men, for the Lord is at
hand.
NEver did men prosecute their Designs, Opinions, and Passions, with more
uncharitable ardors then we do in this our Age; but our blessed Apostle does
quench such unchristian antiscriptural heats, he does as it were throw water on
this Fire, in the Words of my Text, Let your Moderation be known unto all men,
etc. In which you may be pleased to observe, 1. A duty, and that is Moderation,
Let your Moderation be known; 2. The Universality and extent of this duty, and
that both as in reference to persons and things, for the word in the original
runs thus, (...). 3. An enforcing reason, for the Lord is at hand. Beloved, you
see your duty, and that is Moderation, Let your Moderation; or you may take it
otherwise thus, Christians should be sober moderate men. In the prosecution of
it, I shall use this Method, 1. Show you what Moderation is. 2. Why we are to
use it. 3. The principal Objects about which it is versant, or those things in
which we are to be moderate 4. Make application. And, 1. This moderation in my
Text, it may be defined thus: it is a modest, indifferent, patient, frame of
soul, a constant equal temper of Spirit, free from all exuberances and
inordinations of extremes rigorous exactions of what peradventure may be due;
The word in the Original is (...) your equity, which is nothing else properly
but an abating or remission of the rigor of some punishment that is due, a
weaker persuing of injuries upon some reasonable grounds. Then may we be said
to be moderate, when we are not over credulous in our opinions, impatient in
our afflictions, fiery in our passions, peremptory in our desires, garrulous in
our discourses, prodigal in our expenses; but when we have a due government of
our selves, according to the principles of reason and Religion, in all those
objects about which this moderation is exercised. When we have our opinions,
but are not wedded to them; when we have our passions, but have them subject to
reason and Religion; when we enjoy the Creature, but do not make an Idol of it;
when we are sorrowful, but not as men without hope; when we are angry, and sin
not; when we resent an injury, but not to revenge it; then we may be said to be
moderate: so much may suffice for the definition of Moderation. I proceed in
the second place to show the reasons why we are to practice Moderation, which
are these;

1. Our understandings are cloudy, and fallible, we know little, and therefore
should be modest, and not too too confident in our opinions; the more ignorant
we are, the less confident we should be; nothing is more ridiculous then to see
a man extremely ignorant and extremely confident: Socrates his ignorance taught
him modesty, says he Hoc unum scio me nihil scire; this one thing I know, that
I know nothing. Man indeed in his innocence was of sparkling intellectuals; the
eye of his Soul was quick and clear; he had cognitionem lucidam and plenam,
claram and fixam contemplationem intelligibilium; a clear and plenary
knowledge, a strong and fixed contemplation of all things intelligible; as the
Schoolmen speak. Adam no sooner saw a thing, but saw into the very essence of
it: but our understandings are so dark, that they can neither see themselves
nor any thing else as they should do. Adam's Candle flamed, but ever since it
has aspired to be a Sun, it burnt the more dimly: Adam's understanding that
Tree of knowledge, was as a tall Cedar reaching up to heaven, but ours are but
as so many humiles myricae, so many grovelling shrubs. What are those monstrous
opinions both in Philosophy and Divinity? but so many sad monuments of a cloudy
ruined intellect. Gassendus tells us that he never knew any opinion so
probable, but its contrary opinion was as probable; and the Scepticks held that
all Propositions were in equilibri^, the scales were even, and did incline
neither to the one side nor other. Lactantius tells us, that Philosophy is
nothing else but opinion; may we not say the like of most of our Divinity;
especially our Controversial and Scholastical Divinity. What do we know? but a
few fundamentals which God has discovered to us, as it were with a Torch from
heaven. There is an ingenious Tract come out not long ago, Entitled The Vanity
of Dogmatizing: or laying down determinations too confidently. To believe
nothing, and to believe every thing, though upon never so weak grounds, is
equally culpable; there are (...) things hard to be understood, not only in
Philosophy, but also in Divinity; and though Scepticisme in Essentialls be
pernicious, yet in things dubious and not so clearly revealed, it is not only
tolerable but commendable. Whether the Pope be (...), the Antichrist or no, is
very disputable: it is a question which has exercised the greatest wits of the
World for many years together; now how ridiculous a thing would it be for a man
to write positively that the Pope were Antichrist, and then it may be a year or
two after upon maturer deliberation, and clearer conviction, to write that he
were not. We are not infallible, we may be deceived in our opinions, therefore
we should not prosecute them with so much fierceness and uncharitableness.

2. The mutability and unconstancy of all sublunary things, should move us to
use Moderation. There is nothing under the Sun, but has Mortality engraven'd
upon it; -- Perpetuum toto restat in orb nihil -- All things here below are
brittle and changeable; and therefore we should not be transported with our
present condition, or over rigorous in our deportment toward others. As is the
object, so should our affections be conversant about it; as Objects are
transitory and flitting, so should our affections be; as God is the most
permanent good; so ^our affections and passions should be most fixed upon him.
Pretty was the story of Sesostres the Egyptian, and the four captive Kings;
Such was the pride of Sesostres, that he would be carried in a Chariot of Gold
drawn by four Kings; on a time one of the Kings fixed his eye upon the Wheel
that was next to him, and so much that the King perceived him, and asked him
what he meant by it; Me thinks, says he, the motion of this Wheel is a lively
Emblem of our condition; for that part which is but even now uppermost, is
presently the lowest of all. Neither have Kingdoms any Immunity from this fate,
for though a Government be never so good in it self, both in Church and State,
yet God may change it for the sins and immoderations of the Governors and
Governed; (which should induce us to use Moderation) of this we have had sad
experience in the time of our confusions: We may be at the Zenith of happiness
to day, and cast down to the very Nadix of misery to morrow; therefore we
should be moderate, and pity those that are in misery.

3. We should use Moderation, because it is the only way to to win upon men,
the Tradesman would win upon his Customer; the Orator would win upon his
Auditory; now the only way to win upon the affections, is by moderation: gutta
cavat lapidem, a few leisurely drops do that which the violent inundations of
an Ocean cannot. The Sun thaws those congealed Mountains of Ice and Snow, which
are unmalleable by any humane Art. Though the boisterous storm could not make
the Traveller put of his Cloak, yet the warmer Beams of the Sun did. Though a
Flint will not break upon a piece of Iron or Stone, yet it will upon a
featherbed or Cushion: he that would break a flinty heart, must do it with
soft, downy, and as it were featherbed-expressions. Many times we see that an
ill timned too too tart reproof makes us more and more in love with our sin,
and hug our iniquity with a closer embrace. When a man has nothing else but
fire in his looks, and thunder in his speeches, when he would rail me out of my
sin; I am apt to think it is not my good, but his own interest, that makes him
Iohu-like to drive so furiously; that in stead of Reason and Religion, he
obtrudes nothing upon me but his own peccant, luxuriant passions: that there is
too much of man in it to have any thing of God; neither is it impossible for a
good truth to fare the worse for an injudicious indiscreet Deliverer.

4. There is no form of Church Government in the New Testament; therefore we
should not pursue our opinions with so much vehemence; and so little Charity,
as oftentimes we do; but humbly submit to the prudence of our Superiors, and
patiently acquiesce in that Government, which the steering Authority of the
Nation judges to be most for the advantage of Gods Worship, and our good; as
also most consistent with and suiting to the constitution thereof. This was the
opinion of the late King Charles of blessed Memory, Sir Francis Bacon, Bishop
Sanderson, and diverse others. How irrational a thing is it for any one to
endeavor to maintain an opinion with bitterness and virulency, which is not
justifiable either by Scripture or reason; though it may be he may erroniously
imagine that it is by both, but really and truly by neither. That there is no
Platform of Church Government in Scripture is most evident; for if there had,
all the Churches in the World must ipso facto have truckled under it, and
acquiesced in it: for what is expressly in Scripture is not to be disputed but
obeyed: and it would have been the same all over the World; but there are not
three Churches in all the World that have the same Government as to all
Circumstantials and Ceremonies: which is an undeniable Argument that there is
no particular determinate Standard of Church Discipline in Scripture. Neither
does this argue any insufficiency in it, as some would on this ground infer; it
has an instrumental Relative sufficiency, as the divine and incomparable Mr.
Hooker has very well observed; and though it be not expressed as to the
circumstantials yet it is as to the substantial of Religion, for it is
sufficient to make us wise unto Salvation; which is all that is requisite. I
must confess that Reverend and gray headed Episcopacy bids fairest, and is most
countenanced of any opinion by Scripture and Antiquity; but though it may be
granted that it is in Scripture fundamentally, radically, virtually, yet it is
not there formally, expressly, and as to all its Appendants Grandezzaes and
Splendors. It is there as to the Substance, but not as to all its Circumstances
and Ceremonies. I humbly conceive that all Church Government is grounded upon
such places of Scripture as these, 1 Cor. 14.40. 1 Tit. 5.
Let all things be done decently and in Order. And I left thee in Creet to
ordain Elders, and to set in order the things that are wanting; this is the
Charter for the Churches power; it reaches only to generals, but not to
particulars, which are determinable by the prudence and Authority of any
Church. Which Truth if men were fully convinced of and would but acquiesce in,
it would be an excellent means to compose all our differences which proceed
mostly from a wresting and mis-interpreting of Scripture.

5. We should be moderate, because the Lord is at hand; This is the Apostles
own Argument; the time will shortly come when all our opinions, desires,
passions, will vanish, and be swallowed up in Eternity: when we must not
wrangle about them, but come and give an account of them. We should be moderate
in our desires as to the World, because the Lord is at hand to satisfy us with
his Alsufficiency; why should we prefer a Beam before the Sun; a drop before
the Ocean; a trivial petty fading, before an Eternal all-satisfying good? We
should be moderate in our Afflictions, because the Lord is at hand in his due
time to release us, to comfort and support us, in them, and under them; and as
to give us a burden, so also a shoulder to bear it: Such is the transcendent
goodness of God that he does adapt the burden to the shoulder; he will not
suffer us to be tempted above measure. We should be moderate in our passions,
such as anger and revenge, because the Lord is at hand to right us, and we are
not competent Judges in our own cause; We are apt also to be too partial, for a
man to revenge himself, it is as it were to unscepter the Almighty, and to take
some of the Jewels out of the Crown Royal; Vengeance is mine and I will repay
it, says the Lord. So much may suffice for the reasons, I proceed in the next
place to show you the Objects about which it is versant, or the things in which
we should be moderate, they are principally reduced to these heads, Moderation
in our opinions, desires, passions, afflictions, recreations, discourses, and
expenses.

Moderation in our opinions; our opinions are versant either about the
essentials or the circumstantials of Religion; the Main Castle or the outworks,
the City or the ^uburbs, the Vineyard it self or the Hedge* Though Moderation
in essentials be pernicious, yet in things adiaphorous and of a middle nature
it is both peaceable and Christian like. Though we are to be Martyrs for an
Article of our Faith, as St. Polycarp and St. Ignatius, and diverse others were;
yet not for a Ceremony or circumstantial, which God does not call us to suffer
for: We are so to have and to hold our opinions, as not to lose our Charity; if
we do not do so, we are like to prove great losers by it. It was not ill spoken
of by Mr. Calvin, when the unhappy Controversy betwixt Episcopacy and
Presbytery was on foot in England; Ego in Controversia Anglicana moderationem
semper tenui cujus me non penituit; In the English Controversies I was always
very moderate, and do not repent of it that I was so. It was well said of one,
Unity in things necessary, Moderation in things indifferent, and Charity in
all. Neither do I speak this as if I would plead for, or countenance an
Exemption from the decent harmless Ceremonies of the Church of England. But
rather because I would have men show their Moderation in yiedling obedience to
them: for when we submit to things that are not in themselves Antiscriptural,
or unlawful, though we had never such an aversation from them before; then we
may be said also to be Moderate, for Moderation as I defined it is betwixt both
extremes, and equidistant: A man may be immoderate as well in underas in
over-valluing the Ceremonies. Concerning the Ceremonies of the Church of
Ehgland, give me leave to present you with the opinion of that Jewel of the
Church of England Bishop Jewel; where in his Apology for the Church of England
he gives this account of the Ceremonies: Retinemus tamen and colimus non tantum
ea quae scimus tradita fuisse ab Apostolis, sed etiam alia quaedam quae nobis
videbantur sine Ecclesiae incommodo far posse. Ea vero omnia quae aut valde
Superstitiosa, aut frigida, aut spurca, aut ridicula, aut cum sacris literis
pugnantia, aut sobriis hominibus indigna esse videbamus; prorsus sine ulla
exceptione repudiavimus. We retain and respect not only those Ceremonies which
we know were delivered from the Apostles, but also others which we thought
might be very well born with, without any prejudice to the Church: but all
those that were superstitious, or ridiculous, or contrary to the Word, or
offensive to sober men, we have without any exception cast off. The Church of
England is moderate, both as to her Doctrine and Ceremonies, and he that speaks
against Moderation will be convinced not to understand its Doctrine. I do
rather approve of those Moderate men, Grotius, Erasmus, George Cassander, and
others, who endeavored to throw water on the fire of Christendom; then of any
turbulent hot spirited men, such as Arrius, Apollinaris, and others.

2. Moderation in our desires; Desires are either Spiritual or Worldly; as to
Spiritual desires, we seldom are immoderate; but it is our great excellency to
moderate our desires as to the World: There is a triplicity of worldly desires,
according to the triplicity of the Object about which they are conversant: they
are conversant either about profit, pleasure, or honor, in all which our
desires should be moderate: as to profit, we are not to desire profit so much
as to disprofit our Souls. For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole
World and lose his own Soul? As to pleasures, it should be our Spiritual
prudence to see that they do not enervate and emasculate the Spirit; that we be
not so far Immersed in the muddy feculent pleasures of this World, as to lose
the rivers of pleasures which are at Gods right hand for evermore; Carnal
pleasures do not become a good Philosopher much less a good Christian. As to
honor, our desires should be modest and sober; we should not eagerly pursue
it, but let it find us out; and stay till Gods providence and and our own merit
prefer us: remembering that Honor is but a brittle, airy trifle, that it is not
in the honored, but depends upon the honourers Mouth, who as he gave it, so
may take it away when he pleases: we should esteem it our only honor to be
honorable in Gods Account. And if we look on the whole World, there is no
object that is extremely desirable: the face of it is not so beautiful that we
should dote on it, it is but a Jonah Gourd, and though it seem for a time to
yield a comfortable shade, yet it soon withers; there is a Worm in it; Desinet
in piscem mulier formosa superne. --
God and God alone is the most amiable and desirable object; therefore it is
but reason that we should desire him above all things; and say with holy David,
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire in
comparison of thee; and with St. Paul, I desire to be dissolved and be with
Christ.

3. Moderation in our passions; Passions are admirable things, the Flower of
the Soul, the cream as it were of the Spirit, if they be placed on right
objects, if they do not prove inordinate, peccant, straying: A wise man is not
without (as the Stoics foolishly imagined) but above his passions: he subjects
his passions to his reason, his reason to his religion, and all to God. He
gives Laws to his passions, and says to them, as the Centurion said to his
Servants, Go, and they go; Come, and they come. O how lovely a thing is a
prudent Decorum! a correspondent Moderation in our passions; when they are
carried toward their Objects according to the Dictates of reason and religion.
Passions according to the Philosophers, are either concupiscible, or
irrascible: Concupiscible, such as love, desire, joy, hope; Irrascible, such as
anger, sorrow, hatred, and the rest: the first are carried toward their object
respectively, as we consider it, as either present, future, or possible, they
do as it were twine about and embrace their object: The second do as it were
run away from it, as distastful, harsh, grating and unacceptable. Now in both
these kinds of passions there is a great deal of Moderation to be exercised; we
may love the Creature but must not adore it, we may not love the Creature more
then the Creator; we may desire, but not all things equally, not earth as much
as heaven; our desires should be intended and remitted according to the
dignity, excellency, and usefulness of the Object desired; We should desire
those things most that are most desirable* We may rejoice, but we may not be
transported with any thing, or be in an e^tacy, like him that being long out of
his Princes favor, and having by some admirable exploit regained it, at the
hearing of the news died for joy, Our joy must be well timed, sober, spiritual,
correspondent to the Object we rejoice in. We may hope but not for
impossibilities; Our hopes must be rational and religious. And as we are to use
Moderation in the first sort of passions; so also in the other; we may be
angry, but it must be without sin, Be angry but sin not; we may mourn but not
as men without hope; moderate sorrow like moderate rain is seasonable, but
violent inundations of sorrow drown the Soul, and untune it for action: we may
weep but not bitterly, unless it be when we sin hainously; we may fear, but it
must not be without cause, there were they in fear where no fear was; a good
Christian can properly fear nothing but God and sin, we may hate, but it must
not be the man but his sin; we may have honorable resentments of an injury,
that we may beware of the injurer, and suck honey out of his poison; but we must
not remember it to revenge it; this were as it were to unking the Almighty; and
to entrench upon the prerogative Royal; who said, Vengeance is mine, and I will
repay it: Besides, it is more noble and Christian-like to forgive, then revenge
an injury; when an uncultivated low spirited man does me an injury; if I
revenge it I make my self but his equal, I do only as he did; but if I forgive
him, I am his Superior. Passion is as it were the fire of the Soul, this fire
is good, when it only heats but not burns it: Igno quid utilius, etc.

I may well compare a passion to fire, for it is a good Servant, but a bad
Master. A Passion is as it were the edge of the Spirit; now this edge must not
be either too blunt or too keen; if too blunt it does not at all affect it, it
has no influence on it; if too keen, it does (...), divide the Soul assunder.

4. Moderation in afflictions; many are immoderately grieved at them, they are
always poreing on them, they dwell too much on them, they do as it were keep
house with their infelicities: they write Gods judgments in Marble, and his
mercies in the dust; they are so sensible of the one, that they are insensible
of the other: But beloved, sense of misery, should not take away sense of
mercy; a wise man and a Christian should compose himself thus; he strikes me
that made me, he that moderates the World, am I a fool or a rebel? A fool, if
I know not whence my Affliction proceeds; a Rebel if I know it, and yet am
discontented. We should look upon God as our Father; now a Father protects,
provides for, cares for, loves, and sometimes corrects his Children; and as St.
Jerome speaks, Happy is the man that is beaten, when the stroke is a stroke of
love: Such are Gods strokes to his Children, (...) Gods Corrections are but as
so many fatherly instructions. Though God sometimes seems to frown upon them,
yet in that very frown you may discern a smile; and though his rod does
chastise them; yet all the self-same time his Staff does support them. When God
casts his Children into the fiery furnace, it is that they may come forth like
gold seven times purified* When God brays his Spices in the mortar of
Affliction, it is, that they may smell the more fragrantly; when God strikes
his Viols it is that they may make the more heavenly Music: Gods Stars never
twinckle more brightly then in the frosty night of Affliction. Astra --
nocte pruinosa splendidiora micant. --
When God throws his Balls to the ground, it is that they may rebound the more
heavenward: Many times the sickness of the Body proves the health of the Soul,
the weakness of the outward, the strength of the Inward man. True it is that a
Child of God may sometimes be cast into the fiery furnace of Affliction, and
(it may by the malice of the Devil and his Pupils) be heated as it were seven
times hotter; but not so much as a hair of his head is singed. He may like
Jonah be in the Whales belly three days and three nights, but he shall be sure
at length to come to shore; though he be tossed to and fro long in the
tempestuous sea of this World; yet at length he lands safe at the haven of
happiness: (which should be a sufficient compensation for all his sufferings)
as the Apostle speaks, our light afflictions which are but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. He may say of his
Afflictions as great Athanasius said of his banishment; Nubecula est and cito
transibit, it is but a little cloud, and it will soon vanish. What though the
way be rough yet it leads to heaven? and who would not run through a
Wilderness for obtaining of a Crown of glory.

5. Moderation in pleasures and recreations; it was Alexanders glory that he
conquered the World, but his shame that he was conquered by his Lust. The soft
and silken effeminacy of Capua, did but emasculate the victorious Armies of the
daring Ironsided Hanniball. How many are there, that Cleopatra-like spends
whole Kingdoms on their pleasures and recreations? Oh how many are there that
are so given to play, that they play away not only their friends, estates, and
credits, but even their souls! But it is a bad game when the soul lies at
stake: but it should be our great care, to see that we be not so plunged over
head and ears in sensual pleasures, as to lose those Rivers of pure
soul-sat^sfying, suitable, and eternal pleasures which are at Gods right hand
for ever more: To see that we be not so given to jucundum, as to forg^t utile
and honestum. Though Religion be not so severe as to forbid all manner of
pleasures, yet it should be our prudence to make choice of those that are most
innocent, and least wasting of time; of all pleasures they are best that are
that are most abstracted from sense; intellectual pleasures are better then
sensual, and spiritual are better then intellectual; sensual pleasures are like
the crackling of a few Thorns under a Pot, they blaze for a while, and then
they vanish: but Spiritual pleasures are like a Lute, which though it sounds
lowest, yet makes the sweetest Music, they have heavenly thoughts for their
Objects, and fill the soul with that ravishing Peace of Conscience which passes
all understanding.

6. Moderation in discourses; many are immoderately given to verbosity; their
tongues are like the perpetual Motion, always a wagging; though they speak
much, yet they speak little; but it is better to speak much in a little, then
little in much: Some speak words without things, some speak things without
words, some neither things nor words: but there is the excellency of it when we
can speak good things and good words. When the babes of our Intellects are not
only handsome but well clothed; many they do as the incomparable Bishop
Andrews speaks (...) pratle, but they do not (...) speak apothegms, wise
Sentences; they are like Anaximines, of whom it was said, that he had an Ocean
of words, but scarce a drop of reason; but it was good Council of the Ancients,
that men should either not speak at all, or speak somevvhat that is admirable,
excellent. The Wiseman tells us, that the Preacher sought to find out
acceptable words, even words of truth; that is, he did not vent out rude,
indigested, unpremeditated notions, but what he studied for, it did olere
lucernam; it did savor of Industry. It is observable we have two eats and
but one Tongue, which should teach us to hear twice as much as we speak. Our
words should be seasonable, profitable, and agreeable to the Word of God:
Whence it is that Holy David prays, Set a watch before my Mouth, and keep thou
the Door of my Lips. Many and signal are the benefits of Taciturnity, when a
Word is unspoken it is in a man's own power, at his own dispose; but when it is
out, it is at the mercy of the Audience, who may choose whether they may give
it a candid construction or no.

Nescit vox missa Reverti --
7. Moderation in expenses, many are immoderate in their expenses, both as to
Diet and Apparel; how many are there that carry whole Parks on their backs:
Their bellies are as it were the living Sepulchers of their Fortunes; but it is
our wisdom to cut our Coat according to our Cloth; to frame our minds to our
condition, if we cannot frame our conditions to our minds, it is our prudence
to frame our minds to condition. Having food and raiment let us therewith be
content, for we brought nothing with us into this world, neither shall we carry
any thing away, the Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name
of the Lord. Contentment does not consist in having of more, but in framing and
suiting our selves to what we have already; it lodges as oftentimes in a poor
man's Cottage, as in the Kings Palace: The body is nothing else but as it were
the Prison of the Soul, as Plato says, While we pamper our bodies, we do as it
were make the Prison stronger; and how great imprudence is this? and as we are
not to be over-costly in our Diet, so neither in our Apparel; Most men are for
the Clothing of the body but care not how naked their Souls are; but by how
much the Soul is better then the body, by so much the more we should be careful
for the Clothing of it. So much may suffice for the objects about which our
Moderation is versant; I proceed in the last place to make Application.

1. This may be for the just reproof of all immoderations and transports on all
hands and parties. Oh with what vehemence and intention of Spirit do some men
hug their opinions, to the loss of their Charity, and disturbance of the
public peace! Many a one had rather be the head of a Faction, then the head of
a Kingdom, his parts, friends, interests, and all truckles under his opinion;
such were Aerius, Photinus, Euytches, those Erostratuses that make it their
delight to fire the Temple. Oh how immoderately does others love the World and
its gilded Vanity! All their projects and designs are for it, so that they can
have earth enough they care not who has heaven: They are like the Turkish
Emperor, that refused the Artificial and Celestial Globe presented by the
Emperor of Germany, whith this Answer, that he did not intend to busy himself
so much in the Contemplation of the Heavens, and lose earth, as the Emperors of
Germany did daily. But such desires as these are a sufficient punishment to
themselves; the very satisfaction of them is their greatest punishment. Oh how
immoderately are some men given to their passions! their passions are too
strong for them, they are like fire in a City, they scorch them up; they are
like Noah's flood, they drown them. Some men love, but not those things most
that are most lovely, their love is not rightly qualified as to the measure nor
object. Some men desire, but not those things most that are most desirable;
some men rejoice, but their joy is neither rational, nor even, they are in an
Extacy. Some men hope, but it is for impossibilities, things that will never
be, whether we have reference to the nature of the things, or the intanglements
or incapacities of the person. Some men mourn, but it is as men without hope.
Some men are angry, but for that time they are mad; so little wit or grace have
they in their Anger. Some men hate, but it is not the sin but the person; they
have a private grudge against the man. Some men fear, but neither fear God nor
honor the King. Some men are so much given to that which is pleasurable, that
they forget that which is profitable and honest. Some men speak much, but it is
not much that they speak. Some men are more solicitous to diet and dress their
bodies then their Souls; but these are all immoderations, and they must be
rectified, the practise^s of them are far enough from the golden mean.

Inter utrumque tene medio tutissimus ibis. --
2. Should Christians use Moderation? then let me as in the presence of God and
his holy Angels beseech you to practice this excellent Christian Duty of
Moderation: give me leave to say to you as the Apostle to the Phillipians, Let
your Moderation be known unto all men in all things, for the Lord is at hand:
Strive to be humble and self denying in your opinions, sober and modest in your
desires, rational and religious in your passions, patient and contented in your
afflictions, discreet and inoffensive in your recreations, pithy and mild in
your discourses, Moderate but yet correspondent in your expenses; strive to
govern your selves with moderation in your opinions, desires, passions,
afflictions, recreations, discourses, expenses, and all other Objects of
Moderation: It is no less commendable for a man to govern himself then a City,
there is as much of a man to be seen in the one as in the other, Moderation is
the Silken string that runs through the Perle Chain of graces, it is as it were
the Ballast of the Soul that keeps it indifferent and even in all emergencies.
And that you may be the more in love with it give me leave to present you with
some few motives and consider it is most rational, most peaceable, most
suitable, and most Christian.

1. It is most rational; there is all the reason in the world for Moderation,
we are all not Angels but men, subject to the like frailties and infirmities,
and we stand in need of the same reciprocal Charities and Indulgence; Alteri
me feceris quod tibi fieri non vis, is an excellent good rule, thou shall not
do to another what thou would not have done to thy self; as we do not love that
others should be rigorous in their deportment toward us, so neither should we
toward others: he that would be pitied himself in misery, must pity others in
misery: he that would be forgiven himself, must forgive others; and Forgive us
our Trespasses as we forgive them that Trespass against us.

Soilicet hanc veniam petimusque damusque vicissim. --
2. As it is most rational so most peaceable; this is the only salve in all
probability to heal our wounds, to close our breaches to compose our
Differences, to settle our Distractions.

Moderation is as it were the Sodder of a divided and uncemented Nation; it is
the Mother of Peace. Peragit tranquilla potestas --
Quod violentia nequit maendataque fortius urget
Imperiosa quies. --
Many spirits break when they are bowed too much and too suddenly; neither can
I impute our late unparrallel distractions to any one cause more rationally,
then to our want of Moderation on all hands. How imprudently and uncharitably
did we pursue our opinions, desires, passions, and interests to the
overthrowing of all Government both in Church and State? Some of us were
immoderately conceited of our own great Abilities, and delighted in nothing
more then to be the Coriphaei of a Fiction: Oh how did we Peacock like Pride
our selves in our intellectual Feathers? some of us were immoderately ambitious
to rule, and knew not how to obey, nec jam far potest Caesarve priorem
Pompiusve parem. Some of us were immoderately covetous, desired to fish in none
but troubled waters: and oh how did our immoderations trouble them? how did
they rend in pieces three goodly Kingdoms? but I could wish that our former
miseries would at length teach us more Religion toward our God, more Loyalty
toward our King, and more Charity and Moderation one toward another: Behold,
now we are made whole let us sin no more lest a worse thing come unto us.

It is most suitable; the Wise man tells us, That a word in season is like
Apples of gold in pictures of Silver; and surely such is Moderation; as is fair
weather in harvest; Physic to the sick; Balsam to the wounded; a Calm to the
almost Shipwrackt Mariner; so is Peace, a Moderation to this Kingdom that
has been so long harassed with a bloody, wasting, and unnatural War. There
have been too too many that have unseasonably applied Corrosives, but this
Nation stands more in need of Cordials. There have been too too many that have
poured in too much Wine, but this Nation stands more in need of Oil: There has
been too too many who have showed themselves Boanarges, Sons of Thunder;
whereas they should rather have approved themselves Barnabasses, Sons of
Consolation: For I take Peace and Moderation to be the most natural and genuine
work of a Minister of the Gospel, who is not to hale, but to woe and beseech
men to their Religion. We beseech you as in Gods stead.

4. It is most Christian; Christianity teaches us to cloth our selves with
meakeness and humility; A moderate temper is the most Christian and Evangelical
temper: A Christian should not be Lion-like but Lamb-like, in imitation of the
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the World, Christianity is (...) a
soft and silken institution: The great design of it is to soften the Asperitys
of a ruder world; it commands us to deny our selves, our peccant wandering
opinions, passions, interests, and to sacrifice them all to Gods glory, and the
good of our Brethren, This is the Language of the Scripture, bear you one
another burdens; be pitiful, be courteous, love as Brethren; forgive one
another, as you would have your heavenly Father forgive you. Now if we are
Brethren, why should we endeavor to devour one another? Nothing is more
unnatural then Contention amongst the Brethren; Nature and Grace teaches
Brethren to love one another, in imitation of our elder Brother Christ. Psalm.
133.1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity. I may say to all dissenting persons as Abraham to Lot, Let there be no
dissentions betwixt us, for we are Brethren.

FINIS.

