THE Present State OF THE PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE. In Three LETTERS.

Written by a Gentleman at London to his Friend in the Country.

The First shows the Privileges granted them by the Edict of Nantes. The Second
sets forth the Injustice that is done them, and the Cruelties that are used to
force them to renounce their Religion. The Third vindicates their Innocence,
and their Loyalty.

LONDON, Printed for John Holford, Bookseller in the Pall Mall over against S.
Alban's-Street. 1681.

TO THE READER.
I Am under a necessity of begging Excuse for what follows: because it will
come short of the Title Page, which promises three Letters. The Truth is, the
third was in a manner ready; when so many fresh Instances of the Barbarity used
to the poor Protestants in France, came to my hands: that I found my self
obliged either to defer any account for some time; or else to publish these two
Letters by themselves: But I must confess I was not long in taking my choice.
For I saw it so requisite to say something presently: that I resolved out of
hand to publish these my two first Letters. The Enemy has been so industrious
as to way-lay these poor people: and whilst they will not suffer them to live
in France, they endeavor to prevent their subsisting any where else. Amongst
some they are represented as Enemies to the Religion established; however, they
profess the same Faith, and desire to be esteemed as Brethren. Amongst others
they are made to appear a mixed multitude, part Protestant, part Papist:
whereas it is as impossible for any number of Papists, or indeed almost any to
thrust themselves in amongst them undiscovered; as it would be for a Black
amongst Whites. Their Ministers are such as have had their Education amongst
them, well known and approved, before admitted to that Office; strictly
observed, and under a careful Discipline after admission: their people well
acquainted and observed among themselves, as is usual for such as are under a
persecution, or the jealous eye of their Superiors. Besides greater care cannot
be taken, than is by the French Churches, to whom the recommendation of all
that come over is remitted, to see that their Attestations and Testimonials are
true and substantial: and I hope the Printed Advertisement has already given
satisfaction in this point. But that nothing may be wanting to augment the
misery of these poor Fugitives, and render them at the same time worse than
unprofitable to their Brethren: It is suggested to the common people, that they
come to take the Bread out of their Mouths, by over-stocking those populous
Manufactures, which seem already rather to be overcharged, and by surfeiting
the Land with people. Which Objection, if we consider strictly according to
interest, comes not up to any weight or consideration. For many of the
Manufactures they bring over, are such as we had not before, and by consequence
of the greatest and most unexceptionable benefit to us. Others, tho not wholly
new, yet bring so great improvement to those we had already of the same kind:
that they do in a manner create a new Manufacture. There are likewise that give
help to a full Trade that wanted hands before to supply it. And now if any are
so unfortunate, as to bring over such as we are more than filled with already:
I would beg, that as men we would consider the common Laws of Humanity, and let
necessity take place of inconvenience, and as Christians, to have especial
regard to those that are of the Household of Faith. Now that we should be
over-peopled, I think there is no danger; when no considering man but will
allow that our Nation wants more than a million of people, and that no Country
is rich but in proportion to its numbers: for multitudes create scarcity, and
that industry. But be the politic consideration what it will; never was there
greater objects of Christian Charity and Compassion, than these poor people. 1.
If we look upon the privileges of mankind, we shall find them here infringed to
the scandal of our being. Men not only forced to renounce their thoughts, and
say the contrary to what at the same time they declare themselves to believe;
but having by violence Holy Water cast upon them, and dragged at a Horse-tail
to Mass, they shall be pronounced Roman Catholics, and made to suffer as
Relapse, if they dare renounce what they never consented to. They are neither
permitted to live at home, nor to go abroad. The Holy and Religious Duty (as
the Papists account it) of Confession is prostituted to Oppression, and
polluted with the intermixture of secular Concerns. For the Confessors now in
France conjure their Penitents, upon pain of Damnation not to conceal any Debt
they owe to a Protestant, and when revealed, immediately they attach it in the
Debtors Hands, under the same penalty. 2. If we consider them as they are
Protestants of France, never had people greater privileges, better settled, nor
upon juster grounds; of which the first Letter will abundantly convince any
reasonable person. And yet it will appear by the second Letter, that no people
were ever reduced to a more miserable Estate, and lived. But that which ought
to move an Englishman in all diversities of his passion at once is, not only
that they are of our Communion, or that our Kings are Garantees for the Edict
of Nantes; but that we are in a manner punished in them. For a great inducement
to this inhumane Usage, not only seems to be, but is really owned by them, to
be from the rage they have conceived against us for preventing their bloody and
hellish Designs by the exemplary punishment of some Popish Traitors. Nay, if
they durst for shame speak out, I am sure they would tell us, That since they
could not execute their malice upon English Protestants, they are resolved to
wreak their Revenge upon the French, and scourge them for our sakes.

THE Present State OF THE PROTESTANTS IN France.
LETTER I.
YOu are not at all mistaken; I can now easily satisfy you in what you desire
to know concerning the Protestants of France. One that is a Friend to us both,
who is lately come thence, has fully acquainted me with the condition they are
in. I saw him the day after his arrival, and found him ordering his Books, and
loose Papers, which were just opened. After our first Salute, I asked him what
they were. They are, said he, French Books; and those Printed Sheets, are the
new Edicts, Declarations, and Acts which the King of France has lately
published against the Protestants of his Kingdom. I am very happy, said I, in
lighting on you at the opening of your Papers. I was extremely impatient of
knowing, with some certainty, what it was drove so many of them from their
Native Country; and I perceive, by the care you have taken to collect all the
pieces which concern them, that I could not have met any one who might better
satisfy my curiosity. They come hither in Troops almost every day, and the
greatest part of them with no other Goods, but their Children. The King,
according to his accustomed Goodness, has had pity on them, so far as to
provide means whereby they may be able to gain their Livelihood; and amongst
other things, he has ordered a general Collection for them throughout the
Kingdom. We were all resolved to answer the charitable Intentions of our
Gracious Prince, and were beginning to contribute freely. But to tell you the
truth, we were extremely cooled by certain Rumors. It is confessed, that their
King is very earnest to make them embrace his Religion: but they assure us,
that he uses none but very reasonable Means, Declaration of the 17th. of June,
1681.
and that they who come hither with such Outcries, are a sort of People not
gifted with much patience, who easily forsake their Native Country, being
dissatisfied, that their merit, as they conceive, is not sufficiently rewarded.
Besides, they are represented to us very much suspected in the point of their
Obedience and Loyalty. If we may believe many here, they have been very
factious and rebellious; such as in all times have struck at the higher Powers
both in Church and State; which, you must needs see, would not be much for our
purpose in these present Conjunctures. In truth, this is intolerable, (cried
our Friend) I cannot endure that the Innocence of these poor people should be
run down at this rate: I perceive Father La Chaise is not content to persecute
them in their own Country with the utmost cruelty, but trys all ways to shut up
the Bowels of their Brethren in foreign parts: he endeavors to ruin, and to
famish them every where; in England as well as France: A Hatred so cruel, and,
if I may so say, murderous, agrees not so well with the Gospel of the Meek
Jesus, whose Companion Father La Chaise styles himself. For, he came not to
destroy men, but to save them. Let this Jesuit alone, said I, and his
Emissaries, I do not doubt but he has too much to do in all the Affairs of
Protestants. But tell me ingenuously, do they give just cause to them of
France, to quit their Country as they do, and are they persons whom the State
and the Church may trust? You your self shall be Judge, said he, and that you
may be fully informed of the Cause, I will give you a particular Account of the
State of these poor People. But before I speak of the Evils they have suffered,
it is fit you should know, what it is that they have right to hope for from
their King, and from their Countrymen; you will then be more affected with the
usage they find.

You cannot but have heard of the Edict of Nantes. Here it is, said he, (taking
up one of the Books that lay upon the Table.) It is a Law which Henry the
Fourth confirmed to establish their Condition, and to secure their Lives and
Privileges, and that they might have liberty freely to profess their Religion.
It is called the Edict of Nantes, because it was concluded of at Nantes whilst
the King was there. It contains 149 Articles, 93 general, and 56 particular.
You may read it at your leisure, if you please: I will only observe some of
them to you at present. Look, I pray, (said he) on the sixth general, and the
first particular Article. Liberty of Conscience, without let, or molestation is
there most expressly promised, not only to them who made profession of the
Protestant Religion, at the establishment of the Edict, Art. 1. Pa^tic.
but, (which is principally to be observed) to all those who should embrace and
profess it afterward. For the Article says, that Liberty of Conscience is
granted for all those who are, or who shall be of the said Religion, whether
Natives or others. The seventh general Article grants to all Protestants the
right of having Divine Service, Preaching, and full exercise of their Religion,
in all their Houses who have Sovereign Justice: that is to say, who have the
privilege of appointing a Judge, who has the power of judging in Capital
Causes, upon occasion. There are a great many Noble Houses in France which have
this privilege. That seventh Article allows all Protestants who have such
Houses, to have Divine Service and Preaching there, not only for themselves,
their own Family and Tenants, but also for all persons who have a mind to go
thither. The following Article allows even the same Exercise of the Protestant
Religion in Noble Houses which have not the right of Sovereign Justice, but
which only hold in Fee-simple. It is true, it does not allow them to admit into
their Assemblies above thirty persons besides their own Family. The ninth
Article is of far greater importance: it allows the Protestants to have, and to
continue the exercise of their Religion in all those places where it had been
publicly used in the years 1596, and 1597. The tenth Article goes farther yet,
and orders that that Exercise be established in all places where it ought to
have been by the Edict of 1577, if it had not been; or to be re-established in
all those places if it had been taken away: and that Edict of 1577, granted by
Henry the Third, declares, that the Exercise of the Protestant Religion should
be continued in all places where it had been in the Month of September that
same year; and moreover, that there should be a place in each Bailywick, or
other Corporation of the like nature, where the Exercise of that Religion
should be established, tho it had never been there before. These are those
places which since have been called, with reference to the Exercise of
Religion, The first places of the Bailywick. It follows then from this tenth
Article of the Edict of Nantes, that besides the Cities and Towns in which the
Exercise of that Religion ought to be continued, because they had it in the
years 1596, and 1597, it ought to be over and above in all those places where
it had been in the month of September in the year 1577, and in a convenient
place of each Bailywick, etc. although it had not been there in that Month. The
eleventh Article grants also this Exercise in each Bailywick, in a second place
where it had not been either in the Month of September, 1577, or in the years
1596, or 1597. This is that which is called The second place of the Bailywick,
in distinction to that other place of the same nature, which is granted by
virtue of the Edict of 1577. When Henry the Fourth sent Commissaries into the
several Provinces to see his Edict put in execution, there was scarce found any
considerable City or Town where the Commissaries did not acknowledge that the
Exercise of the Protestant Religion had no need to be confirmed, or
re-established, because it had been used there in some one of the three years
abovementioned: in so much, that there were whole Provinces which had no need
of those two places, granted out of pure favor, I mean, the two places of each
Bailywick; all the Cities, and all the Towns of those Provinces claiming that
Exercise by a better Title. Ann. 1599, p. 285, and 286, Edit. Amsterdam, 1664.
This is it which made the Bishop of Rodes, (Monsieur Perifix) afterward
Archbishop of Paris, in his History of the Life of Henry the Fourth, to say,
that that Prince by his Edict of Nantes granted to the Protestants Liberty of
Preaching almost every where. But he granted them farther, the means and full
power of breeding up, and teaching their Children. Read, as to that, the thirty
seventh particular Article. It declares, that they shall have public Schools
and Colleges in those Cities and Places where they ought to have the public
Exercise of their Religion. The Edict having secured, as you see, the Exercise
of the Protestant Religion, secures also the condition of them who should
profess it, to the end that they might, without any molestation, each one
according to his quality, follow those Trades, Employments and Offices which
are the ordinary means of men's Livelihood.

Indeed, the thing of it self speaks this. For it is plain that they do not
grant in good earnest the free Exercise of a Religion, who debar the persons
that profess it the use of means necessary for their subsistence. Nevertheless
for their greater security, Henry the Fourth has declared to all Europe by his
Edict, that he would not that there should be any difference, as to that point,
between his Protestant and his Papist Subjects. The thirty seventh general
Article, as to that is express. This it is: We declare all them who do or shall
make profession of the pretended Reformed Religion, capable of holding and
exercising all Conditions, Offices, Honors, and public Charges whatsoever,
Royalties, Seigneuries, or any Charge in the Cities of our Kingdom, Countries,
Territories, or Seigneuries under our Authority. The fifty fourth Article
declares, that they shall be admitted Officers in the Courts of Parliaments,
Great Council, Chamber of Accounts, Court of Aids, and the Offices of the
general Treasurers of France; and amongst the other Officers of the Revenues of
the Crown. The seventy fourth Article puts them in the same state with their
Fellow Subjects, as to all public Exactions, willing that they should be
charged no higher than others. Those of the said Religion pretendedly Reformed
(says the Article) may not hereafter be overcharged or oppressed with any
Imposition ordinary or extraordinary, more than the Catholics: And to the end
that Justice might be done and administered impartially, as the Edict explains
it self, the 30th. 31st to the 57th Articles set up Chambers of the Edict in
the Parliaments of Paris and Roan, where the Protestant Counselors ought to
assist as Judges: and Chambers Miparties in the Parliaments of Guienne,
Languedoc and Dauphine, consisting each of two Presidents, the one Protestant,
the other Papist, and of twelve Counselors, an equal number of each Religion,
to judge without Appeal, (exclusive to all other Courts) all Differences of any
importance which the Protestants might have with their Fellow Subjects as well
in Criminal, as in Civil Matters. In short, this great Edict forgets nothing
which might make the Protestants of France to live in peace, and honor: It has
not failed even to explain it self, as to the Vexations which might be created
them, by taking away or seducing their Children. For, read the eighteenth
general Article. It forbids all Papists of what quality or condition soever
they may be, to take them away by force, or by persuasion against the will of
their Parents: As if it had foreseen that this would be one of the ways which
their Persecutors would use, to vex and ruin them. But the 38th. Article goes
farther yet: That Wills, that even after their death, Fathers shall be Masters
of the Education of their Children, and consequently of their Religion; so long
as their Children shall continue under Guardians, which is by the Laws of
France till the 25th year of their Age: It shall be lawful for Fathers, who
profess the said Religion, to provide for them such persons for their
education, as they think fit, and to substitute one or more, by Will, Codicil,
or other Declaration made before Public Notaries, or written and signed with
their own hand.

You perceive then plainly, continued our Friend, that by this Edict King Henry
the Fourth made the condition of the Protestants equal almost in all things to
that of his other Subjects. They had reason then to hope that they should be
allowed to exercise their Religion, to breed up and instruct their Children in
it, without any disturbance; and that they should have as free admission to all
Arts, Trades, Offices and Employments as any of their Fellow Subjects.

This is very clear, said I, and I am much obliged to you for explaining to me
what this famous Edict of Nantes is, which I had heard so much discourse of.
But they who have no affection for the Protestants tell us, that it is a Law
which was extorted by violence; and consequently, is not to be kept. I will not
stand now (said our Friend) to examine whether that consequence be good; you
cannot but perceive that it is dangerous. But I dare assure you that the
Principle from whence it is drawn; namely, that the Edict was extorted by
violence is very false. I would not have you take my word for it. But I will
produce an unexceptionable Witness. It is the Archbishop of Paris; he who writ
the Life of Henry the Fourth. That one Witness is worth a thousand; for he was
a declared Enemy of the Protestants. According to him: The general Peace was
made, the Ligue extinguished; and all persons in France had laid down their
Arms, when this Edict was granted in favor of them. It is ridiculous now, to
say, that it was extorted by violence, there being then no party in all the
Kingdom in a condition to make the least attempt with impunity. Moreover, that
Prelate could not forbear owning expressly what it was moved the King to grant
them that Edict: It was the sense of the Great Obligations he had to them. See
the Book it self; read the Passage. The Great Obligations which he had to them
would not permit him to drive them into despair; and therefore to preserve them
a just balance, he granted them an Edict larger than any before. They called
it the Edict of Nantes, etc. Indeed the Obligations he had to them were not
small. They had testified an inviolable Loyalty to him in all his Troubles.
They had spent freely their Lives and Fortunes to defend his Rights, and his
Life against the Princes of Lorrain, who made so many Attempts to keep him from
the Throne of his Ancestors, and to usurp his place. Had it not been for their
Valor, and their Loyalty, the Crown had gone into the hands of Strangers; and
(since we must speak out) had it not been for them, the Blood of the Bourbons
would not this day have been possessed of the Throne.

The Edict of Nantes then, was the Effect and the Recompense of the Great
Obligations which King Henry the Fourth had to his Loyal Protestants, and not
as is slanderously reported, the fruit of any violence, gained by force, and
granted against the hair. But farther, the Law of Nature and common policy
might challenge such an Edict for them as well as Gratitude. It is true, that
Sovereign Magistrates are appointed by God to preserve the public peace, and
by consequence, to cut off, or prevent, as much as in them lies, whatever may
disturb it: It is true also that new Establishments in matters of Religion may
cause great troubles in a State, and that there are Religions which have Maxims
so pernicious, that when Magistrates are of a different opinion, or but so much
as tolerate such a one, their Lives and their Kingdoms are never in safety. But
Henry the Fourth found the Protestant Religion wholly established in the
Kingdom when he came to the Crown: Besides, he who had so long professed it,
knew perfectly well that it had none of those dreadful Maxims, which makes
Princes and States jealous; that on the contrary, in it, Loyalty and Obedience
of Subjects to Sovereigns of what Religion, and what humor soever, was to them
an Article of Faith, and an obligation of Conscience. He knew that Protestants,
by their Religion were peaceable men, who sought but to serve God according to
his Word, and were always ready to spend the last drop of their blood for the
service and the honor of their King.

But he knew also that the zeal of the Romish Clergy always animated the Popish
Common People against them, and that they would be sure to fall upon them,
unless he took them into his protection. The Law of Nature then did not permit
him to abandon to the rage of the multitude so many innocent persons; and
common policy warned him to preserve so many faithful Subjects for the State,
so capable of supporting it on occasion, as he had so freshly experienced. It
being certain, that had it not been for them, the Pope and the Ligue had ruined
the whole Kingdom; But it was not possible, either to defend them from the fury
of the People, or to preserve them for the service of the State, if he had
granted in favor of them any thing less than the Edict of Nantes: so that this
Edict in truth was to be ascribed to common Equity and Prudence no less than
Gratitude.

But, said I to my Friend, do you believe that the Grandson of Henry the Fourth
is bound to make good what his Grandfather did? I do not doubt it at all
(answered he) otherwise there would be nothing secure or certain in Civil
Society; and woe be to all Governments if there be no Foundation of public
Trust. 1. For if ever Law deserved to be regarded by the Successors of a
Prince, it is this. It was established by a Hero, who had recovered the Crown
for his posterity, by his Sword: and this Establishment was not made but after
mature and long deliberations, in the calm of a profound Peace, obtained and
cemented by many and signal Victories. That Hero has declared expressly in the
Preface of the Edict, that he established it in the nature of an irrevocable
and perpetual Law; willing, that it should be firm and inviolable; as he also
says himself in the 90th. Article. Accordingly he made all the Formalities to
be observed in its establishment, which are necessary for the passing of a
fundamental Law in a State. For he made the observation of it under the quality
of an irrevocable Law, to be sworn to by all the Governors and
Lieutenant-Generals of his Provinces, by the Bailiffs, Mayors, and other
ordinary Judges, and principal Inhabitants of the Cities, of each Religion, by
the Majors, Sheriffs, Consuls and Jurates, by the Parliaments, Chambers of
Accounts, Court of Aids, with order to have it published and registered in all
the said Courts. This is expressly set down in the 92d. and 93d. Articles. Was
there ever any thing more authentic? 2. The same Reasons which caused the
Establishment, remain still, and plead for its continuance. 1. The Family of
Bourbon preserved in the Throne. 2. The Law of Nature and common Policy. 3. The
two Successors of Henry the Fourth looked not upon themselves as unconcerned in
this Edict. Their Word, and their Royal Authority are engaged for its
observation no less than the Word and Royal Authority of its Illustrious
Author. Lewis the Thirteenth confirmed it as soon as he came to the Crown by
his Declaration of the 22d. of May, 1610, ordering, that the Edict of Nantes
should be observed in every Point and Article. These are the very words. P.
156, and 157, of the Lions Edition.
Read them (said he) showing me a Book in Folio, called, The Great Conference
of the Royal Ordinances and Edicts. I read there in the first Book, Title 6, of
the second Part of the Volume, not only the Article he mentioned, but also the
citation of nine several Declarations published at several times by the same
King, on the same subject. Lewis the Fourteenth, who now Reigns, (says our
Friend) has likewise assured all Europe by his authentic Edicts and
Declarations, that he would maintain the Edict of Nantes according to the
desire of his Grandfather, who had made it an irrevocable Law. He himself
acknowledges and confirms it himself anew; by his Edict of June, 1680, where he
forbids Papists to change their Religion. There it is; pray take the pains to
read it. Lewis by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre, to all persons
to whom these Presents come, Greeting. The late Henry the Fourth, our
Grandfather, of Glorious Memory, granted by his Edict given at Nantes in the
Month of April, 1598, to all his Subjects of the Religion pretended Reformed,
who then lived in his Kingdom, or who afterward should come and settle in it,
Liberty of professing their Religion, and at the same time provided whatsoever
he judged necessary for affording those of the said Religion pretended Reformed
means of living in our Kingdom, in the Exercise of their Religion, without
being molested in it by our Catholic Subjects: which the late King, our most
Honored Lord and Father, and we since have authorized and confirmed on other
Occasions, by diverse Declarations and Acts. But this Prince is not content to
tell what he has formerly done, in confirmation of the Edict of Nantes; read
some Lines a little lower, and you will see that he repeats again his former
Engagements. We declare, that confirming as much as is, or may be needful, the
Edict of Nantes, and other Declarations and Acts given in pursuit of it, etc.
That is to say: That by this new Edict he signs once more the Edict of Nantes,
and for a more authentic confirmation of that important Law, he ratifies
together with it, and seals with his Royal Seal all the Declarations which had
already confirmed it. If all this is not sufficient to render His Word Sacred
and Inviolable, there is nothing in the World can do it: all things are lawful,
and it is to no purpose to talk of any Obligation, or of any Bond in humane
Society. They cannot make void, or break the Clauses of an Edict so well
deserved by the Protestants, so just and so wise in it self, so solemnly
established, so religiously sworn to, and so often, and so authentically
confirmed by three Kings, without shaking all the Foundations of public
Security, without violating, in that Act, the Law of Nations, and filling the
World with fatal Principles, which by ruining all mutual Faith among men,
render Divisions in States incurable; and consequently immortal.

Dear Sir, said I, I am much pleased with what you have informed me. O how I
shall dash them out of countenance, who hereafter shall compare the condition
of our Papists in England with that of the Protestants in France. There is no
sort of good usage but what is due to these in their own Country; of which they
have deserved so well by preserving that Family which now reigns there. What
have they not a right to hope for under the protection of an Edict so
authentic? But our Papists in England have they ever deserved a like
protection? Has there ever been passed any Act of Parliament in favor of
them, like to this Edict? On the contrary, have not there been passed 1000
against them? And not one, See Statutes at large.
but upon the provocation of some Sedition, or open Rebellion. You need but
review the Fundamental Laws of the Land now in force against the Pope, 1
Elizab. 1. 5 Eliz. 1. 13 Eliz. 1. 23 Eliz. 1. 27 Eliz. 2. 35 Eliz. 2. 1 Jacob.
4. 3 Jac. 4, 5, etc.
against the Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and in general against all the Papists.
There is decreed justly against them all the contrary that by the Edict of
Nantes is promised to the Protestants.

You are much in the right (said our Friend) when you use the word justly on
this occasion: Princes and Protestant Magistrates cannot look upon, nor by
consequence, treat Papists otherwise than as declared and mortal Enemies of
their Persons, and of their States. They may disguise themselves as they
please: But in truth, every Papist is a man who takes the Pope to be the
Sovereign Head of the Universal Church, and believes that on that very account,
there is no Prince, nor King, nor Emperor who is not subject to his Censures,
even to Excommunication. Now who knows not that it is a general Maxim of that
Religion, that they ought to treat all excommunicated persons, as common Pests?
Upon this all Subjects are dispensed with from their Oaths of Allegiance to
their Princes, Kingdoms are laid under Interdicts; and they are no way obliged
to keep faith with Heretics. This is the original and damnable Cause of the
many Conspiracies that have been made against the Sacred Lives of our Kings:
And if you will search our Histories, you will find none of the forementioned
Acts ever passed but upon some previous provocation given by the Papists
Insolence, or Rebellions: of the Massacres in France and Ireland, wherein they
of Rome have so triumphed, and of the general consternation into which so
lately our Nation was cast. They would fain persuade us, that these pernicious
Maxims are peculiar to the Jesuits and some Monks: Printed for Henry Brom,
1674.
But a little Treatise, called, The Difference between the Church and Court of
Rome, proves undeniably, that it is the judgment of all true Papists. I could
produce other invincible authority, if this point were here to be proved. There
cannot then be too great caution against such persons: whatever they pretend,
they do not design simply the exercise of that Belief which their Conscience
dictates to them, they grasp at the Power, and aspire at Dominion: they design,
whatever it cost them, to have their Church reign once more here in England.
There is nothing they dare not attempt, nothing they are not ready to act, that
they may compass it. They are implacable Enemies who wait but for an
opportunity to cut our Throats: and we must needs be very senseless and stupid,
if after so many proofs as they have given us of their desperate malice, we
should repeal those Laws which tie up their hands. You are much in the right, I
replied, but let us leave them for the present, and return to our Protestants
of France. You have showed me their Rights, now let me understand their
Grievances. I am willing to do it, said he; but it is a little late: and if you
please, being somewhat weary with my Journey, we will defer it till to morrow.
I will expect you here in my Chamber at the same hour you came to day. I told
him with all my heart. And as our Conversation ended there, I think it not
amiss to end my Letter also, intending in another to let you know the present
condition of those poor People.

I am your, etc.
LETTER II.
I Did not fail to wait on my Friend at the appointed hour. Sit down (said he)
as soon as he saw me in the Chamber, and let us lose no time in needless
Ceremony: I was just putting my Papers in order, by which I would desire you to
judge of the Protestants Complaints, and the Reasons that have made them leave
their Country: But since you are here, take them as they come to hand.

The first is a Verbal Process of the extraordinary Assembly of the Archbishops
and Bishops held in the Province of the Archbishop of Paris, in the Months of
March and May, this 1681. It is a Piece which justifies a Truth, that the World
will hardly believe: Namely, That whereas the Protestants by Virtue of the
Edict had the Exercise of their Religion almost every where, they have it now
scarce any where. See the proof in the tenth Page of that Verbal Process, where
one of the Agents, General of the Clergy of France, alleges as so many
public Testimonies of the Piety of their King, An almost Infinite Number of
Churches demolished, and the Exercise of the Religion pretended Reformed
suppressed. I leave you to imagine what a consternation such a terrible Blow
must have put those poor people into; not to mention their Grief to see those
Holy Places beaten down, whose very Stones they took pleasure in; instead of
having the Heavenly Mannah shower down at the Doors of their Tabernacles, at
this present they are forced to go 30 or 40 miles through the worst of ways, in
the Winter, to hear the Word of God, and to have their Children baptized. But
let us go on to a second Piece.

Here is a Declaration has lain heavy upon them, in reference to an infinite
number of living Temples, who are far otherwise to be lamented for, by reason
of the rigor they are used with, than the Temples of Stone that are demolished.
It is of the thirteenth of March, 1679. Pray read it. It forbids all Popish
Clergymen, whatever desire they have, to turn Protestants; and even all those
Protestants, who have forsaken their Religion out of Lightness, or Infirmity;
to return to it again, upon better knowledge of the truth, pressed to it by
their Consciences, and desiring to give glory to God. This dreadful Edict, will
not suffer, that any of them shall satisfy their Consciences, in so important
an Affair, under any less penalty, than that of the Amend Honorable, perpetual
banishment, and confiscation of their Goods. I beseech you (said I) what does
the Declaration intend, by making Amend Honorable? You have reason to ask,
replied he, it is that you ought not to be ignorant of. Know then, that for
them to make Amend Honorable is to go into some public place, in their Shirt,
a Torch in their Hand, a Rope about their Neck, followed by the Hangman, in
this Equipage (which is that of the most infamous Criminals) to ask pardon of
God, the King, and Justice for what they have done: that is to say, on this
occasion, for having dared to repent of sinning against God, for having
forsaken a Religion which they believed Heretical and Idolatrous, and
consequently, the infallible way to eternal damnation; and for being willing
thence forward to profess the Protestant Religion, in which only they are
persuaded they can be saved. This is, dear Friend, what they inflict upon all
Popish Ecclesiastics to whom God vouchsafes Grace to discern the true
Religion, and upon all Protestants, who having been such Wretches as to forsake
it, are afterward so happy as to be convinced of their Sin; and to repent.
They call the first Apostates, and the other Relaps. But Names do not change
the nature of things: the Misery is, that all this is executed with the utmost
rigor. The Prisons of Poictiers, and those of other places are at this present
filled with this sort of pretended Relapsed Persons; and it is not permitted to
any one to relieve them. What possibility is there then for such as are in like
Circumstances, and whose number every day increases, to continue in France?

But the mischief is much increased since this Declaration. What was particular
to Ecclesiastics and Relapse Protestants, is now become universal to all Roman
Catholics. I showed you the Piece yesterday. It is that very Edict of June,
Art. 1. par.
1680, wherein they pretend to confirm the Edict of Nantes. A Blessed
Confirmation! The Edict of Nantes, as I have showed you, allows the Liberty of
Conscience to all them who were then Protestants, and to all such as would be
afterward, Inhabitants, or others. But what does this new Edict declare! Our
Will and Pleasure is, that our Subjects, of what quality, condition, age or sex
soever, now making profession of the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion, may
never forsake it, to go ever to the pretended Reformed Religion, for what
Cause, Reason, Pretense or Consideration soever. We will that they who shall
act contrary to this our Pleasure, shall be condemned to make Amend Honorable,
to perpetual banishment out of our Kingdom, and all their Goods to be
confiscated. We forbid all Ministers of the said pretended Reformed Religion,
hereafter to receive any Catholic to make profession of the pretended Reformed
Religion, and we forbid them and the Elders of their Consistories to suffer in
their Churches or Assemblies any such, under penalty to the Ministers of being
deprived for ever of exercising any Function of their Ministry in our Kingdom,
and of suppression for ever of the Exercise of the said Religion in that place
where any one Catholic shall be received to make profession of the said
pretended Reformed Religion. Lord! what a horrible proceeding is this! (cried
I, as soon as my Friend had read it) do they call this confirming of Edicts in
France? what a Violence is this to the Consciences of Ministers and Elders, to
command them to shut the doors of the Church of Jesus Christ to all their
Neighbors who come thither for admission: (and to have this done) by them who
are called by God to open the Door to all the World? Is not this to force them
to violate the most Essential and Sacred Duty of Christian Charity? In truth,
if there were nothing else but this; I do not see how they can stay there much
longer with a safe Conscience. They must swallow worse Potions than these (said
my Friend) you shall see presently quite other Preparations. What (replied I)
have they the heart to use thus cruelly those poor Churches within whose Walls
any Roman Catholic changes his Religion? Don't doubt it (said he) they make no
conscience at all to exceed their Commission, whenever they are enjoined to
execute any penalty. I will give you an Example, which will amaze you There is
a great Town in Poitou called La Motthe, where the Protestants have a Church
consisting of between three and four thousand Communicants: a young Maid of
about seventeen years old, who from a Protestant had turned Papist, had stole
her self into the Congregation upon a Communion-day. Now you must observe, that
the Protestant Churches are full on those days. For they would believe
themselves very much to blame, if they lost any Opportunity of partaking at the
Lord's Supper. Nevertheless, without considering how easy it was for that
young Maid not to be discovered by the Consistory in such a Crowd, and tho
those poor people were not at all within the Letter of that rigorous Edict,
they have made them undergo all the penalty. The Exercise of their Religion is
wholly suppressed there, and their Minister not allowed to preach in France.
This is very cruel (said I to our Friend) and tho it were true that those
Ministers and those Elders were guilty upon such an account, why should the
whole flock be punished? Those poor Sheep what have they done? That is very
usual for those Gentlemen (answered he:) I have a hundred Stories to instance
in. I cannot forbear telling you one, which many of their own Devotees were
scandalized at. S. Hippolyte is a place in where all the Inhabitants are
Protestants, except the Curate, and it may be, two or three poor wretches, who
are not Natives of the place neither. A fancy took the Curate to put a Trick
upon the Protestants; for this he chose a Sunday; and the very moment that they
came out of the Church, he came and presented himself before them with his
Sacrament, as they were almost all come out. You must know that the Church is
on the farther side of a Bridge, which must be passed over, going and coming.
Several of them were upon the Bridge, others had passed it, and part were yet
on the other side; when the Curate appeared, all of them, who could possibly,
got away and hid themselves: but neither the place, nor the great haste of the
Curate would permit all of them to do so. He went up directly to one of the
Company, whom he had born an ill will to for some time: he bids him kneel: and
the other answering that his Conscience would not suffer him to do it; he gave
him a Cuff on the Ear. He that was struck grumbled; and so did two or three who
were about him. The Curate went on his way, threatening hard. Next day there
were Informations made on both sides: the Curate in his, not complaining of any
person but him he had struck, and two or three others who had grumbled at it.
The Friends of the Curate perceiving that he had done the wrong, proposed an
Accommodation. It was by misfortune consented to. Prosecution ceased on each
side, and it was believed that there was an end of that business: there was not
a word spoken of it in above a year. But the Intendant of Languedoc revived it
last Winter, when they thought of nothing less; and of a matter particular to
two or three, made it a general Concern of the whole Congregation. He cites
them before the Presidial of Nismes, to whom he joined himself. He condemns
them to demolish their Church in a Months time. Those poor people go and cast
themselves at the feet of the Court; but to no purpose. The King's Council
hears and confirms this strange Order of the Intendant, and the Church is rac'd
to the ground. The Council which gave this Sentence was the first in which the
Dauphine was present. The Report of such an Order being spread among the
Courtiers, and all being amazed that heard it, a certain person took the
liberty to tell the Dauphin, that for the first time he had been at the
Council, he had assisted to a great Injustice. What say you to that? said a
Duke and Peer, to the Dauphin, who had made no reply to the former. I say,
answered the Dauphin, that he may be much in the right. I told our Friend, I
had enough of this. You must not be weary, said he, this is but the beginning
of sorrows. Let Us go on to the rest. Here is, said he, a Little Book which
comes just now to my hand, in it are stitched up together, three Acts
concerning Schools. The first is of the ninth of November, 1670. It forbids all
Protestant Schoolmasters to teach any thing in their Schools, but to read and
write, and Arithmetic. The second, which is of the 4th. of December, 1671,
ordains, that the Protestants shall have but one only School in any place where
they have the public Exercise of their Religion; and but one Master in that
School. The third is of the ninth of July, this present 1681. Look upon them
(said he) and give me your opinion. It seems (said I) that the first contains
nothing which the Protestants may complain of, at least, if that which I read
there be true, namely, that by the Edict of Nantes it is expressly ordained,
That in the Schools of those of the pretended Reformed Religion, there shall
not any thing be taught, but to read, write, and cast account. For according to
this, the Edict of 1670 is entirely conformable to that other Edict which is
the Law. You are in the right, said I, but they who framed the Act, have
deceived you, and have made no scruple to ground it upon a matter of fact
entirely false. For the Article which speaks of Schools, does not mention the
least word of that restriction, which the Act assures us to be there expressed,
namely, of teaching only to read, write, and cast account. See the Article at
length: it is the 37th particular. Those of the said Religion may not keep
public Schools, unless in Cities and places where the public Exercise of
their Religion is allowed, and the Provisions which have heretofore been
granted them for the erection or maintenance of Colleges, shall be
authenticated where occasion shall require, and have their full and entire
effect. Where is that express Order? It is expressly ordered to teach only to
read, write, and cast account; upon which the Act is grounded. Is it possible
(said I) that they should have no sense of the horrid shame which must arise
upon conviction of forgery in a matter of fact of this nature? They never stick
at so small a matter as that (said he) in the design they have of rooting out
the Protestants. Those who are in France dare not open their mouths to discover
such kind of Falsities; and Strangers, whom they carry fair with, will not so
far concern themselves as ever to suspect there should be falsehood in a matter
of fact so easy to be made out; and which they make to be so positively
affirmed by so great a King. So that they do not fear at all the shame you
speak of. After all, they are but pious Frauds, at which, they of the Popes
Communion never blush. And what say you (continued he) to that other Act which
reduces all Schools to one, in each City and Town where the Protestants have
the public Exercise of their Religion, and that which requires that there
should be only one Master in that School. I replied that it was an excellent
way to restore Ignorance, the Mother of the Roman Faith and Devotion. In truth,
says he, the care of one Master cannot go far. Besides there is a Protestant
Church which alone has two thousand Children of age to be taught. Those poor
people have done all they could to obtain of the Council, that at least there
might be two Schools in each place, one for Boys, and the other for Girls. But
it was to little purpose that they pleaded good manners for it, which such a
mixture of both Sexes visibly was offensive to. They were deaf to all their
Prayers and to all their Remonstrances. But this is not all yet. In the
Execution of this rigorous Act, they have taken away from them that little
which was left them. For the Judges of the places will not suffer that any
Schoolmaster teach, unless they have first of all approved of him, and received
him in all their Forms. As therefore their approbation is a matter full of
invincible Difficulties; above all, when they are to give it to a man of merit,
and who may do good, it is come to pass by means of these two Acts, that all
the little Schools of the Protestants are shut up. From the little Schools they
have proceeded to Colleges. You see by the Act of the last of July, which
suppresses for ever that of Sedan. They have taken away also the College of
Chatillon sur Loin. So that, hereafter the Protestants in France are to lie
under worse than Egyptian Darkness. I leave you now to judge whether they are
to blame to seek for light in some Goshen. In truth, said I, this is very hard.
But if they who inspire into the King such strange Acts, have no respect for
Henry the Great and his Edicts, at least they ought to be more tender of the
Glory of their own Illustrious Prince, and not to expose him, as they do, to be
ranked with that Emperor against whom the Holy Fathers have cried so loudly. Is
it possible they can be ignorant that this method of extinguishing the
Protestant Religion is exactly the same that Julian took to extinguish the
Christian Religion? I do not think (said our Friend) that they can be ignorant
of a truth so well known; especially since one of their eminent Writers has
published the History of the Life of S. Basil the Great, and of S. Gregory
Nazianzen. Mr. God. Hermant, Doctor of the Sorbon. Tom. 1. Book 2 p. 204. and
Notes of the same chapt. p. 625.
There they might have read in more than one place, that it was likewise one of
the Secrets of that Emperor, to ruin the Christians by keeping them from all
Improvement in Learning, and to prohibit their Colleges and Schools; and which
the Fathers judged to be most subtle policy. But their zeal transports them
above the most odious Comparisons. They stick not to give occasion for them
every moment. I will show you an Example which will astonish you, I have here
light upon the Paper.

They are now come to take the measures of that barbarous and inhumane King who
used Midwives of his own Religion to destroy the Race of the people of God in
Egypt. For by that Declaration of the 28th of February, 1680, It is ordered,
that the Wives of Protestants shall not be brought to bed but by Midwives or
Chyrurgeons who are Papists. This they make to be observed with the utmost
rigor, so far that they put a poor woman in prison for being present at the
Labor of her Sister, whose delivery was so quick and fortunate, that there was
neither time nor need to call a Midwife.

That you may in few words understand of what consequence this is to our poor
Brethren, I need but acquaint you, that the King of France in his Edict of the
Month of June, 1680, where he forbids Papists to change their Religion,
acknowledges himself, what experience does but too plainly justify, namely,
that the Roman Catholics have always had an aversion, not only against the
Protestant Religion, but against all those that profess it, and an aversion
which has been improved by the publication of Edicts, Declarations and Acts.
That is to say, that whatever pretense the Roman Catholics make to the
contrary, they have always been, and still are Enemies of the Protestants; and
that the Protestants ought to look to be treated by the Catholics as Enemies.
After this what can they judge of the Design, and Consequences of a
Declaration, which puts the Lives of their Wives and Children into those very
hands which the King, who makes the Declaration, acknowledges to be hands of
Enemies? But farther, the Declaration it self discovers, that one of its
intentions was, to make the Children of Protestants to be baptized by Midwives,
or by Popish Chyrurgions: And what mischief do they not open a way for by that?
The Protestants will hold that Baptism void, which has been administered by
such hands, they will not fail to make it be administered anew, by their
Pastors. This shall pass for a capital Crime in the Pastors and Fathers, and
they shall be punished as sacrilegious persons who trample on the Religion in
Authority, the Religion of the King: for the most odious Representations are
still made use of. Nay, said I, by this they will likewise claim a right, from
the Baptism's being administered by Papists, to make themselves Masters of the
education of their Children. You are in the right (said he) and that Article
ought not to be forgotten. It is just, will they say, that they should be
brought up in the Church which has consecrated them to God, by Baptism, at
least, that they should be bred up there, till they are of age to choose for
themselves: and when they are of age, they will say then, that it is just they
should, as well as others, be liable to the same Edict which forbids Catholics
to change their Religion. Is not this enough already to make one forsake such a
Kingdom? A Christian for less than this would surely fly to the utmost Parts
of the World. But to proceed.

Here is that terrible Decree which fills up the measure, as to what concerns
the poor Children. It comes to my hand very seasonably. It is the Declaration
of the 17th. of June last. This ordains that all the Children of Protestants
shall be admitted to abjure the Religion of their Fathers, and become Papists
as soon as they shall be seven years old: It declares, that after such an
Abjuration, it shall be at the choice of the Children, either to return home to
their Fathers, and there to be maintained, or to oblige their Fathers and
Mothers to pay for their Board, and Maintenance, where ever they please to
live. It adds extreme Penalties to be laid on them, who breed up their Children
in foreign parts, before they are sixteen years old. But I pray read over the
whole Edict. Upon that I took the Declaration from our Friends hand, read it,
and returning it to him again, could not forbear declaring, that I did not now
wonder any more that the Protestants of France were in so great a
Consternation. They are much in the right (said I) Discretion and Conscience
oblige them to depart out of a Country, in which there is no security for the
salvation of their dear Children. They are of too great a value to be so
hazarded. What is more easy, for them who have all the power, than to induce
such young Children to change their Religion? There is no need for this, to
show them all the Kingdoms of the World and their Glory. A Baby, a Picture, a
little Cake will do the business; or if there want somewhat more, a Rod will
not fail to complete this worthy Conversion. In the mean while, what a
condition are their wretched Fathers in, besides the most inexpressible grief
of seeing what is most dear to them in the world seduced out of the Service and
House of God; they shall likewise have this addition of Anguish of having their
own Children for their Persecutors. For, knowing, as I do, the Spirit of that
Religion, I doubt not but they will all prove rebellious and unnatural, and
renounce all that love and natural respect which is due to them, whom they owe
their Lives to.

They Will give Law to their Parents, they will oblige them to make them great
Allowances, which they will dispose of as they list; and if their Fathers pay
them not precisely at the time appointed, I am sure, no rigors shall be
forgotten in the prosecution. No certainly, said our Friend, and I could give
you an hundred Instances, if there were need. Even before this merciless
Declaration was made, the Goods of Parents were seized upon, exposed to sale,
to pay for the maintenance of their Children, who had been inveigled from them,
and been made Papists. If they dealt with them so then before the Declaration,
what will they not do when they see themselves supported and armed with Royal
Authority? But there is no need I should insist farther on the dreadful
Consequences of this Declaration. It has been lately Printed in our Language,
and Notes made upon it, wherein nothing has been forgotten. The Book is
written impartially: tho I can scarce believe what is expressed in the Title
Page, that it was written in French; however, some Gallicisms are put in to
make you believe it: but the Protestants of that Nation are not used to such
bold Expressions upon such kind of Subjects: and I doubt much whether they
could do it.

If they have reason to fear for the birth, and for the tender years of their
Children, they have no less for themselves. Here is a proof of it. It is the
Declaration of the 19th. of November, 1680: By which it is ordained, That
whenever they are sick, they shall suffer themselves to be visited by the
Papist Magistrates. Thus, having made their lives burdensome to them, they take
a thousand ways to torment them in their Beds, as soon as any Disease has
seized them. It is not henceforth permitted to them either to be sick, or die
in peace. Under color of this Declaration they are persecuted, and all means
are tried to shake their Faith, under the pretense of being asked what Religion
they will die in. First a Judge presents himself with the awe of his presence,
accompanied by one of the King's Sollicitors and two Papist Witnesses. They
begin their Work by driving all Protestants, who are with the sick man, out of
his Chamber: Father, Mother, Wife, Husband, Children, none are excepted. After
that, they do with the sick person as they list: they draw up a Verbal Process,
or such as they like. Lies with them are but pious Frauds. Whatsoever the sick
man answers, he has still abjured, if these Gentlemen please to make a
conversion of it; and there is no possibility of disproving it. The Verbal
Process is drawn up in good Form. If the sick man recovers, and refuses to go
to Mass, immediately he is subject to all the penalties of a Relapse. If he
dies and chances to be the Father of a Family, they take away all his Children,
to breed them up in the Popish Religion; and his Estate, to preserve it, as
they pretend, for the Children of a Catholic Father. Can any one who has any
care of his own salvation, or any affection for his Children, live exposed to
such dreadful Inconveniences, if God offers any means to avoid them?

I am afraid I tire you with the Recital of so many Calamities. Fear not that,
answered I, I am resolved to know all. You do not consider what you say,
replied he, I should need whole weeks to tell you all. Imagine all the
Suprises, all the indirect practices, all the base tricks of Insinuation, and
little quirks of Law are put in ure: together with all manner of violence, to
accomplish the Work. Neither do those Enemies of the Protestants always neglect
the Oracles of the Scripture. It says, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep
of the Flock shall be scattered. These Gentlemen then, that they may the more
easily scatter the Sheep, smite, every where, the Shepherd, and constrain them
to fly. They imprison one, for having by the Word of God confirmed some of his
Flock, whom the Popish Doctors would pervert: another, for being converted to
the Protestant Religion in his youth, long before any Law was made against
pretended Apostates. They hire forlorn Wretches to go to the Sermons of the
Protestant Ministers, and to depose before a Magistrate, that the Ministers
said, that the Church of Rome was idolatrous, or that the Faithful are
persecuted, that they spoke ill of the Virgin Mary, or of the King. Upon this,
without being heard, (and tho it be offered to be made out by the Deposition of
an infinity almost of persons of credit, that the testimonies of these two or
three Wretches are absolutely false) Orders are issued out for the seizing the
Bodies of the Ministers. They are clapped in Jayl as soon as taken: they are
condemned to pay excessive Fines: they force them to make the Amend Honorable,
they banish them the Kingdom. The Intendant of Rochefort suppressed one there,
upon the most extravagant Deposition that was ever taken. The Deponent having
been at the Sermon of that Minister, said, That there was nothing to be found
fault with in his words, but that he perceived his thoughts were not innocent.
If there are any amongst them so happy as to confound so the false Witnesses,
that the Judges are ashamed to use all those rigors; none of the Charges of
Imprisonment, or of the Suit are ever recovered against any one. A Minister who
may have sixty or seventy pounds a year, and seven or eight in Family to
maintain, must be condemned with all his innocence to pay all these great
costs. I could, upon this Head, tell you a hundred Stories, but that it would
be too tedious. I have met both at Paris and in other Provinces many of these
persecuted Ministers, who acquainted me with their Adventures, Germany, Holland
and Switzerland are full of them, and I am told, there are some of them here in
England. Their absence from their Flocks is but too good a proof how hot the
persecution is against them. And so let us go on.

You may remember that the Edict of Nantes judged it necessary for the
preservation of the Estates, and Credit of the protestants, and for the safety
of their Lives, to erect Tribunals where supreme Justice might be administered
by Judges of the one, and of the other Religion. But all these Tribunals are
suppressed: namely, the Chambers of the Edict of Paris, and of Rouen. It is
some years since the Chambres Miparties were suppressed by the Delaration of
July, 1679: so that here is their Fortunes, their Credit, their Lives, all at
the mercy of their sworn Enemies. For you have not forgot that the King of
France acknowledges, in one of his Declarations, that the Papists have always
hated the persons of the Protestants. Judge then if it be safe for them to stay
longer in such a Kingdom.

But there is no method proper to ruin them, which is not made use of, that if
one fails, another may be sure to take. Synods and Conferences are absolutely
necessary, for the Admission of their Ministers, for the Correction of
Scandals, for the preservation of Peace in their Congregations, for the
subsistence of their Colleges, and for the support and exercise of their
Discipline. At first they kept them with all sort of Liberty. Under Lewis the
Thirteenth, they thought fit to forbid them to hold any Synod, unless some
Protestant Commissary, who was to be named by the Court, were present. This was
observed till the year 1679, when a Declaration was published, requiring that
there should be a Papist Commissary in their Synods. That is to say, Sir, said
I, interrupting our Friend, they will pry into their hearts, and perfectly know
where their strength or their weakness lies. If there were nothing but that in
it, replied our Friend, that Declaration would not allarm them so much as it
does. For there is nothing done in their Assemblies, which they are not willing
all the world should know. They defy their most mortal Enemies to prove the
contrary. Can there be a more undeniable proof of this, than the practice of
the Protestant Commissary, who sends to the Court a Copy well attested of all
the Results of the Deliberations which are made, while the Synod or Conference
is held? What do they fear then, replied I, from the presence of a Papist
Commissary? Because they know that the end of the Court cannot be to discover
their Secrets, since they have none; therefore it is that they justly fear,
that this Papist Commissary has been set over them, to create them trouble in
the most innocent Affairs, to hinder those Deliberations which are most
necessary for the due preservation of their Flocks, to silence those Ministers
among them whom he shall perceive to be of greatest Ability, and of Credit, to
dishearten one by threatenings, to corrupt another by promises, to sow
Dissension and Division among them, and to employ all means possibly to ruin
them. These are the just fears which have hindered them till this present, from
assembling any Synods with this so destructive a condition, hoping continually
that, it may be, God would touch the heart of their King. But perceiving no
favorable change, and not being able to subsist without holding their Synods,
I learned, as I came out of France, that these poor people are resolved to run
these hazards, and that their Synods are upon assembling in several places. May
God vouchsafe to preside in the midst of them by his Grace, and remove far from
them all the Evils they have cause to fear. It may be, by their good Examples,
and their Religious Behavior they may convert them, who are set over them for
a snare, as it happened to their Fathers in the last Age also. Then was
contrived the placing of Papist Commissaries, to spy out their liberty. But
these Commissaries were so taken with the Modesty, the Piety, the Charity, the
Decency of Order, and the devout Prayers of the first Reformers, that they gave
Glory to God, and embraced the Religion which they had persecuted.

The Jesuits nevertheless have thought all these Evils of which I have spoken,
too slack and gentle. That they may not be at any more trouble, they will do
the business once for all. They have contrived to starve all the Protestants:
and to effect this, they have made all the means of gaining a livelihood, to be
taken from them, by the Acts of the Council of State, of the sixth of November,
1679, and the 28th. of June, 1681. 1. They have turned out of all Jurisdictions
and Seignuries (which are almost infinite in France) all Protestants who had
been admitted Officers in those Jurisdictions. All Stewards, Bailiffs,
Sollicitors, Officers of the Exchequer, Registers, Notaries, Clerks, Sergeants
and Ushers that were Protestants, of all sorts, throughout the whole Kingdom,
are cashiered by virtue of these Acts; they have reduced to Beggary thousands
of Families, which had no other subsistence, but by these Employments. 2. Look
upon those two Pieces, which they procured also, for the same intent. The Title
of the one is, The Order of the Council Royal of the Finances (or Treasury) of
the 11th. of June, 1680. The other is, An Order of the Council of State of the
17th. of August of the same year. By the means of these two Pieces, the
Jesuits have made the Protestants to be kept out of all the Affairs of the
Finances, Customs, which they call Traites Forains, of Aids, Gabelles, Taxes of
all sorts of Commissions, to which the Edict of Nantes ordered, that they
should be admitted indifferently with the Papists. This second has taken away
the Bread of a vast number of Families more. 3. They every day make the
Protestant Captains and Officers (who have served so worthily by Land and Sea)
to be turned out of their Commands. Those brave Men after they have spent their
Estates to advance their Masters Honor, and ventured their Lives a thousand
times for his Glory; see themselves shamefully, as so many Cowards, cashiered,
without any exception for them who having signalized and distinguished
themselves by particular Actions, had deserved extraordinary Pensions. Because
they will not be less faithful to God, than they have been to their King: they
are resolved Disgrace and Beggary shall be the Reward of their Service. By
this, they take away from all the Protestant Nobility the means of maintaining
themselves in that Rank in which God by their Birth has placed them. 4. As to
the Merchants, look what the Jesuits have thought upon to ruin them. They have
obtained an Order of Council of State, of the 19th. of November, 1680, which
grants to all Protestants who change their Religion, the term and forbearance
of three years for the payment of the principal of their Debts, with
prohibition to all their Creditors to bring any Action against them, during
that time, upon pain of Nonsuit, Noli prosequi, and all Charges, Damages,
Costs and Interests. I perceive very well, (said I to our Friend) that this
puts those who revolt in a way to secure and withdraw their Goods; and to enjoy
in peace the Fruits of their turning Bankrupts. But I do not see how this tends
to the ruin of those Merchants in general, who persevere in the Protestant
Religion. That is (said he, smiling) because you have not so subtle a wit, nor
are so quick-sighted as the Jesuits. You know very well that Merchants subsist
by their Credit: if their credit be low, they must fall; there is no more
trading for them, their business is done. Now do you not perceive, that the
credit of all Protestant Merchants is ruined by this Order, which puts them in
a way of turning Bankrupts as they please, with all indemnity; and of enriching
themselves with those Goods they have been trusted with? Who do you think after
this will be so silly as to take their word? Who can tell, with any certainty,
whether they with whom they deal, are persons who will continue in the
Protestant Religion? Is there any thing more common than such Changes in
Religion now adays? It Is enough (said I) I was mistaken, I perceive now very
well that the ruin of the Protestant Merchants is unavoidable. Go on to the
other Professions. For I see they are resolved that no Protestant shall get
Bread among them. You are in the right (said he) you have seen it in many of
them, I Will show it you now in the rest. 5. All Papists who drive any Trade, or
exercise any Art, are forbid to take any Protestant Apprentice. I have seen the
Order, but have it not now by me. By this you see that all young men of the
Protestant Religion (who have not means of their own) are reduced to this
extremity, either of starving in France, or turning Papists, or forsaking that
Kingdom. For the same Order forbids any Protestant who drives or professes any
Trade, to have under them any Apprentice, either Papist or Protestant, that so
they may not be able to do work enough to maintain their Families. 6. The Grand
Master and Grand Prevot have given notice, by Virtue of Letters under the
Signet, to all Protestants who had Privileges, whereby they had right to keep
Shops, as Chyrurgions, Apothecaries, Watchmakers, and other Tradesmen, to
forbear using their privileges any longer, and to shut up their Shops, which
has been punctually executed. 7. They have established Societies of Physicians
at Rochelle, and in other places, where, as I am assured from good hands, there
were none ever before. None but Papists will be received into those Societies.
By this, the Jesuits have found out the way, at one stroke to hinder the
Practice of all the Protestant Physicians; however able and experienced they
may be. In so much that the Lives of all sick Protestants are by this means put
into the hands of their Enemies. 8. In short, there is scarce now any place in
all France where they may get their livelihood. They are every where molested
and hindered from exercising in quiet any Trade or Art which they have learned.
To dispatch them quite; they require of them not only that they shall continue
to bear all the Burdens of the Government, although they take from them the means
of doing it: but also that they bear double to what they did; that is to say,
they use a rigor far greater, than what was practiced upon the People of God,
when they were commanded to deliver the same tale of bricks, and yet had not
straw given them as formerly. In effect, at the same time that they will not
allow them, of the Protestant Religion, to get a penny: they exact of them to
pay the King double, nay, treble, to what they paid before. Monsieur de
Marillac, Intendant of Poitou, has an Order of Council which gives him alone
the Power of the Imposition of the Tax in that great Province. He discharges
the Papists, who are at ease, and overcharges the poor Protestants with their
proportion, who before that fainted under their own proper burden; and could
bear no more. I will tell you farther on this occasion, that the Jesuits have
obtained an Order of the King, by which all Protestants who change Religion,
are exempted for two years, from all quartering of Soldiers, and all
Contributions of Moneys which are levied on that Account, which also tends to
the utter ruin of them who continue firm in the Protestant Religion. For they
throw all the burden upon them, of which the others are eased. From thence in
part it is, that all the Houses of those poor people are filled with Soldiers,
who live there as in an Enemy's Country.

I do not know if the zeal of the Jesuits will rest here: For they want yet the
satisfaction of keeping S. Bartholomew's Day, as they kept it in the former
Age. It is true, what is allowed them is not far from it. For which is the
better of the two, to stab with one blow, or to make men die by little and
little, of hunger and misery? As to the Blow (said I to our Friend) I do not
understand you. Pray, if you please, explain your self, what do you mean by
keeping S. Bartholomew's Day? Monsieur de Perifix, that Archbishop of Paris,
who has writ the Life of Henry the Fourth (answered he) shall tell you for me.
There Is the Book, the place may be easily found. Surl' an. 1572 Edit. Amsterd.
p. 30.
Here it is: Six days after, which was S. Bartholomew 's Day, all the Huguenots
who came to the (Wedding) Feast, had their Throats cut, amongst others, the
Admiral, twenty persons of the best quality, twelve hundred Gentlemen, about
four thousand Soldiers and Citizens: afterward through all the Cities of the
Kingdom, after the Example of Paris, near a hundred thousand were massacred. An
execrable Action! Such as never was, and I hope to God never will be the like.
You know then well, continued our Friend, directing his Speech to me, you know
well now what it is to keep S. Bartholomew's Day, and I believe that what I
said is no Riddle to you. The Jesuits and their Friends set a great value on
themselves in the world, because they forbear cutting the Protestants Throats,
as they did then. But, Merciless as you are, do you ere the less take away
their lives! You say you do not kill them, but do you not make them pine to
death with hunger and vexation? He who gives slow poison is he less a poisoner,
than he who gives what is violent and quick, since both of them destroy the
life at last? Pardon this short Transport (said our Friend) in good earnest I
cannot restrain my indignation, when I see them use the utmost of cruelty, and
yet would be looked on as patterns of all moderation and meekness. Let me
impart to you three Letters which two of our Friends who are yet in France have
written to me since I came from Paris. I received the two first at Calis,
before I got into the Packet Boat; the last was delivered me last night after
you went away from my Chamber. You will there see with what Gentleness they
proceed in those Countries. He thereupon read to me his Letters, and I have
since took Copies of them send them here enclosed.

A Copy of the First Letter.
WE are just upon the point of seeing that Reformation which has cost so much
labor and pains, and so much blood, come to nothing in France. To know the
condition of the Protestants in the several Provinces of this Kingdom, you need
but read what the first Christians suffered under the Reigns of the Emperors
Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Maximin, Dioclesian and such like. There are four
Troops of Horse in Poitou who live at free Quarter, upon all of the Protestant
Religion without any exception. When they have pillaged the Houses of them who
will not go to Mass, they tie them to their Horse Tails, and drag them thither
by force. The Intendant whom they have sent thither, who is their most bitter
Enemy, has his Witnesses ready suborned, who accuse whom they please, of what
Crimes they please, and after that cast the poor men into dark Dungeons, beat
them with Cudgels, and then pass sentence of death to terrify them; and
afterward underhand, send others to try them by fair means, to promise them
that their mourning shall be turned into joy, if they will but go to Mass.
Those whom God gives the grace to resist, die in the Dungeon, through
unspeakable anguish. Three Gentlemen of Quality who went about to confirm some
of the poor people in their Village, that began to waver, were presently clapped
up, Flax put about their Necks, then set on fire, and so they were scorched,
till they said they would renounce their Religion. There would be no end if I
should relate all that is done. This you may be assured of, that the People of
Israel were never so oppressed by the Egyptians, as the Protestants are by
their own Countrymen.


A Copy of the Second Letter.
TO make good my promise of giving you an exact Account of the continuance of
the persecution which is raised against the Protestants in France, I shall
acquaint you that they of Poitiers are threat'ned with being made a Garrison
this Winter. I say they, the Protestants: For none but they must quarter any of
them. Monsieur de Marillac gives himself up wholly to the making of Proselytes.
The Deputies of Poitiers are now here to make complaint of the violences they
still labor under. They offer, by a Petition which they have presented, at the
cost of their lives, if they are found guilty of any Falsehood, or if they do
not make out what they say. They set forth, that by the Orders of Monsieur
Marillac, the Protestants are dealt with as declared Enemies; that their Goods
and their Houses are plundered; their persons assaulted; that the Soldiers are
employed as Executioners of these Outrages. That they are quartered upon the
Protestants only, that besides the excessive expense they put them to, they
exact money of them with dreadful Oaths and Execrations. They knock them down,
they drag Women by the hair of the Head, and Ropes about their Necks, they have
put them to the torture with Screws, by clapping their Fingers into a Vice, and
so squeezing them by degrees, they have bound aged Men, eighty years old, and
beaten them, and have misused, before their Eyes, their Children, who came to
comfort them: They hinder Handicrafts men from working; they take from
Laborers what they use for their Livelihood; they set their Goods openly to
sale, and they clap their Swords and Pistols to their Breasts, who are not
frighted with their other Usages: they drag them in Sheets into their Churches,
they throw Holy Water in their Faces, and then say they are Catholics, and
shall be proceeded against as Relapsed, if they live otherwise. It is not
permitted to these miserable persons to complain; those who would have
attempted it have been seized on, and the Prisons are full of them. They are
detained there without any Process being made against them, and even without so
much as having their Names entered in the Jayl-Books. If any Gentleman speak to
Monsieur Marillac, he answers them, that they should meddle with their own
Business, that otherwise he will lay them fast. This is a Taste of what they
are doing here.


A Copy of the Third Letter.
BEing very busy, it shall suffice at this time to send you a Copy of a
Letter; which I just now received from Saints, concerning the Protestants of
this Kingdom; Sir J. P. our common Friend writ it me. He is now making his Tour
of France. I entreated him to inform himself as well as he could how they
treated the poor people in those places he was to pass through, that he might
give me a full Account. This is the Letter, dated the last of August, Old
Style. I am now going out of Aulnix, where I meet with nothing but Objects of
Compassion. The Intendant of Rochefort, which is Monsieur Du Muins, lays all
waste there. It is the same person concerning whom at the Marquis de Segnelay's
we were told so many pleasant Stories last Winter at S. Germain. Do not you
remember that they talked much of a certain Picard, who owed all his Fortune to
his Wife, and whom the Marquis de Segnelay treats always as the worst of men?
That Is the Man, he is born to do mischief as much as ever man was, and his
Employment has increased bis insolence beyond measure. To this he has added,
to the Protestants grief, all the barbarous zeal of Ignorance. And if the King
would let him do it, he would soon act over again the Tragedy of S.
Bartholomew. About ten days since he went to a great Town in Aunix, called
Surgeres, accompanied with his Provost, and about forty Archers. He began his
Feats with a Proclamation that all the Huguenots should change their Religion,
and upon their refusal he quartered his Troop upon those poor people: he made
them to live there at discretion, as in an Enemies Country; he made their Goods
to be thrown into the Streets, and their Beds under the Horses Feet. By his
Order the Vessels of Wine and Brandy were staved, and their Horse Heels washed
with it; their Corn was sold, or rather given away, for a fourth part of what
it was worth, and the same was done to all the Tradesmens Goods: Men, Women and
Children were put to the Torture, were dragged by force to the Popish Churches;
and so great Cruelty was used toward them that the greatest part not being
able longer to endure the extremity of the pain, renounced their Religion. By
the same means they forced them to give it under their hands, That they had
abjured without constraint, and of their own free choice. The Goods of those
who found means to escape, are sentenced to be sold, and to be pillaged. Proud
of so noble an Expedition, our good man returns to Rochefort, the place of his
ordinary abode, forbids all the Protestants, who are there pretty numerous, to
remove any of their Goods out of the Town, under penalty of confiscation of
what should be seized, and corporal punishment over and above; and he commands
them all to change their Religion in five days. This was done by sound of
Trumpet, that no one might pretend ignorance. The Term expires to morrow. After
this he marched to Moze (it is another great Town in Aunix) where there is a
very fair Church of the Protestants, and a very able Minister, there he set out
the same Prohibitions, and the same Commands that he had at Rochefort. Upon
this a very worthy person of the place, and Elder of the Church, named Mr.
Jarry, addressed to him with a most humble Remonstrance; and this cruel and
barbarous man made him presently to be clapped up in Irons. After this he
quartered his Men upon those of the Protestant Religion, where he exercises
the same violence which he did at Surgeres. Nevertheless hitherto no one has
made Shipwreck of his Conscience in this place. They suffer all this cruel
persecution with an admirable constancy. God of his Mercy support them to the
end. All the rest of Aunix is in extreme consternation. There are likewise
Prohibitions made at Rochelle, against the shipping of any Goods. In so much
that all they who fly away run a great hazard of carrying away their lives
only for a prey. Adieu. I will end mine as Sir J. P. does his: all your Friends
--


Do you intend to conclude there, said I to our Friend? I have a mind to do so
(replied he) tho I have a thousand Insolences and Outrages more yet to acquaint
you with. But it is late; and I have produced but too much to justify the
French Protestants who forsake their Country, from any suspicion of impatience
or wantonness. You see now what are the Reasonable Means that are used to
convert them. Those goodly means which have been employed are, To despise the
most Sacred Edict that was ever made by men; to count as nothing promises
repeated a hundred times, most solemnly by authentic Declarations; to reduce
people to utmost Beggary; to make them die of Hunger, in my opinion, a more
cruel death than that by Fire or Sword, which in a moment ends life and
miseries together; to lay upon them all sorts of afflictions, to take away
their Churches, their Ministers, their Goods, their Children, their liberty of
being born, of living, or of dying in peace, to drive them from their
Employments, their Honors, their Houses, their native Country; to knock them on
the head, to drag them to the Mass with Ropes about their Necks, to imprison
them, to cast them into Dungeons, to give them the question, put them to the
Rack, make them die in the midst of torments, and that too without so much as
any Formality of Justice. This is that they call Reasonable Means, Gentle and
Innocent Means: For these are the Terms which the Archbishop of Claudiopolis
uses, at the Head of all the Deputies of the Clergy of France, in the
Remonstrance they made to their King, the last year when they took leave of his
Majesty. I must needs read you the passage: here is the Remonstrance, and the
very words of that Archbishop: Those gentle and innocent means which you make
use of, Printed at Paris cum Privilegio Chaz Leonard, Imprimear du Roy. 1680.
Sir, with so much success to bring the Heretics into the bosom of the Church,
are becoming the Bounty and Goodness of your Majesty, and conformable at the
same time to the mind of the divine Pastor, who always retains Bowels of Mercy
for these strayed Sheep: he wills, that they should be brought back, and not
hunted away, because he desires their salvation, and regrets their loss. How
far is this conduct from the rigor wherewith the Catholics are treated in
those Neighboring Kingdoms which are infected with Heresy. Your Majesty makes
it appear, what difference there is between Reason and Passion, between the
Meekness of Truth, and the Rage of Imposture, between the Zeal of the House of
God, and the Fury of Babylon. In good truth, cried I to our Friend, after the
reading of this passage: this is insufferable, and I cannot forbear taking my
turn to be a little in passion. Methinks they should blush to death, who call
those Cruelties, which have been executed upon innocent Sheep, Meekness; and
that Rigor, and the fury of Babylon which we have inflicted upon Tigers, who
thirsted after our Blood, and had sworn the destruction of Church and State.
They plague and torment to death more than a million of peaceable persons, who
desire only the freedom of serving God according to his Word, and the Laws of
the Land, who cannot be accused of the least shadow of Conspiracy, and who by
preserving that Illustrious Blood which now reigns there, have done to France
Services which deserved, together with the Edict of Pacification, the love, and
the hearty thanks of all true French Men. And we have put to death in a legal
manner, it may be twenty wretched persons (the most of which had forfeited
their lives to the Law, for being found here) convinced by diverse Witnesses,
who were the greatest part Papists, of having attempted against the Sacred Life
of our King, and the lives of millions of his faithful Subjects. Surely they
would have had us let them done their Work, let them have rooted out that
Northern Heresy, which they were, as they assure us by their own Letters,
Omahon S. Th. Mag. Disputatio Apologetica de Jure Regni Hiberniae pro
Catholicis, n. 20.
in so great, and so near hopes of accomplishing. But we had not forgot the
Massacre of Ireland, wherein, by the confession of one of their own Doctors,
who knew it very well, more than a hundred and fifty thousand of our Brethren,
in the midst of a profound peace, without any provocation, by a most sudden and
barbarous Rebellion, had their Throats cut by that sort of Catholics, whose
fate they so much bewail.

Although your Transport be very just, and I am very well pleased with it, said
our Friend to me, I must needs interrupt you; to bring you back again to our
poor Protestants. What say you to their Condition? I say (answered I) that
there can be nothing more worthy compassion; and that we must entirely forget
all that we owe to the Communion of Saints, if we open not our hearts, and
receive them as our true Brethren. I will be sure to publish in all places what
you have informed me, and will stir up all persons to express in their favor
all the Duties of Hospitality and Christian Charity. To the end (said he to me)
you may do it with a better heart, at our next meeting, I will fully justify
them against all those malicious Reports which are given out against their
Loyalty and their Obedience to the Higher Powers. Let us take for that all to
morrow seven-night. As you please, said I, so we took leave one of another: and
thus you have an end of a long Letter, assuring you, that I ever shall be, Sir,
Yours.

FINIS.

