The Cloudie Clergy; OR, A Mourning Lecture For our Morning Lecturers;
Intended for A weekly Antidote against the Daily Infection of those London
Preachers, who de die in diem do corrupt the judgments of their seduced
Auditors, against the Governors and Government of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND: Grounded upon received Aphorisms, Digested into Chapters; fit to be
considered by those froward Chaplins that have been the Quondam Beautefews
against the late King of England; and are the present Beadsmen for the now King
of SCOTLAND.

The like whereof they may expect from week to week, while they abuse the
Parliament and Army from day to day.

By a friend, who for their timous recovery does CRI IN HOPE.

August 15. 1650.

London, Printed for Henry Cripps, and Lodowick Lloyd, and are to be sold in
Popes-head-Alley.

CHAP. I. Of Just Power and Government.
Just Government is Gods ordinance for man's good^ and the kinds thereof are
man's ordinance for Gods glory; to live without Government becomes beasts and
not men; to live under the absolute arbitrament of any governor, i^ to make men
become beasts; the rise of government or the species thereof is the peoples
vote, Omnis potestes fundata est in voluntate.
the rules thereof the peoples reason, Constitutio populi liber^ constat in
(...) quo se constituit populus.
and the end thereof the peoples safety; Salus populi suprema lex.
all soveraignties are virtually the peoples, though formally their rulers; the
majesty of magistraci^ is di^erst amongst the people, and contracted in their
rule^s, which is not conferred upon their magistra^ to divest the people
thereof; but the better to preserve the people there* Magistratus est custos
and administrator co^munium bonorum non pr^priorum.
neither has the people right to wrong themselves by passing away that
patrimon^ irreversibly, which was first given the^ to preserve the from
slavery; the peoples power (...) is of little use and of great danger; for the^
(...) (...) will b^ (...) ty man's (...), ^and each neighbor may prove a Tiger
each to other without control the peoples power so transferred as that it
should be irreversible, irrevocable, tempts the rulers into T^, and the people
into slavery; which if i^ has been the sin of a forme^ generation, should be
the sorrow of this, and (...) occasion (...) the providence of God in the (...)
of means ^o a (...) ^on to their primitive privileges Eo modo quo quid
constituitur, eodem modo and dissolvi potest.
the children being bo^d to repent and forsake, and not to p^t in their father^
wickedness. God exalts no man for his own b^ other men's (...) the greatest ^ds
are the greatest for^, (...) greates^ glory (...) be d^gent conservators of the
p^oples (...) God has ma^e rulers consorts of his dignity* (...) have (...)
therefore they are not despicable, but they shall die like me^ and therefore
accomptible; f Psalm. 82. 6. ^01. (...). (...)
God is as full of goodness as greatness; of mercy as majesty; of grace as
glory: when men are as good as great, they render themselves like God: not
only honorable but amiable; the glory of greatness is goodness, which (being
commensurably mingled together in rulers) renders their precapts preswasives to
obedience; majesty alone terrifies; and a simple potentiality by divine
permission may be in Satan; love constrains; and the vine may better compel in
government then the Bramble command; and natural ingenuity makes men willing
rather to be slaves to love then servants to meet power,

So ends the first Chapter.
Application.
Is just government Gods ordinance, and that for man's good? and are the kinds
thereof man's ordinance, and that for Gods glory? These principles thus connext,
may serve as a bundle of rods for the backs of those fools; who (like the
unjust judge) neither fear God, nor regard man, but by their pettish pens and
unruly tongues, in Sermons, in prayers, etc. do (as much as in them lies) cast
thereins of government upon the necks of the people, suffering them to run
without control to the Devil (if they will) intimating unto them that they are
not obliged to the present government, T^lle peri^, and vaga pros^iet fraeuis
natura remotis.
and by consequence at least, pro tempore, to none at all; there being no other
government in actis exercito but only that that is now established; and is not
this the practice of several of our morning preachers, whose early
supplications to the God of heaven are little better then envious ventilations
of their distempered minds against his Vicegerents on earth, and whose morning
Sermons de die in diem are little other then nauseous vomitious and servent
ebullitions of their restless thoughts against our present rulers, who (it
seems with Solomon's wicked men) cannot sleep except they have conceived some
mischief against them; and whose sleep is taken away by their pillow
meditations how they may rise in the morning and manage the matter so in the
Pulpit, that they may cause some to fall into the like contempt; who make no
other mention of our governors in prayer and Sermons before the Lord in the
assemblies of his people, then such as Satan did against Job, accusing them,
and enviously repining and complaining of that hedge Job. 1. 10.
of protection which God has made about their house, and about all that they
have on every side, that he has blessed the works of their hands, and that
their substance is increased in the land; most sollicitously pleading with God
that he would put forth his hand against them, and touch all that they have
with his finger of his displeasure, and pull them down and raise up their
enemies (whom they have displaced) in their room, who do so principle their
people against authority, as if their education was in the Schools of those
whose Religion is rebellion, and whose faith is faction, who (to establish the
holy chair and themselves therein) hold it not only lawful but meritorions to
sacrifice the peace and tranquillity of whole Commonwealths, yea and the very
lives of our governors to the service of their distempered passions and
discontents; if they fast, it is for strife and debate, pretending a sacrifice
unto God, and to worship him, but designing nothing more then (as Herod in his
pretense of worshing Christ sought his ruin) to destroy this young
Commonwealth whilst it is in its swaddling cloths; or as Baalam did in
multiplying his sacrifices, from hill to hill, so these from Pulpit to Pulpit
presuming they shall bless the Lord by cursing his people, making their fasts
from day to day in public, in private, with pretense of much zeal for the
glory of God, for no other purpose then as Iezebal did, the end whereof is to
set Naboth on high in the sight of the people, viz the Parliament and Army, to
procure the sons of Belial, the rude multitude, falsely to charge them for
blaspheming God by toleration of error, heresy, blasphemy; etc. that so they
may rise up and stone them, and take away their Vineyard, their present
Authority which the Lord forbids them to part with all. If they pray, instead
of making supplication for those that are in Authority over them, that under
them they may live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty,
which favor they more fully enjoy without the least control (except for
disturbing the public peace) then ever under any former authority; they either
make not the least mention of them, or else so stir up the people against them
by Malignant false scandolus and base reflection of dishonor upon them, that
have been little other then even bloody beautefews to another war. But let us
hear their objections, and return them answers.

Object. It is true. Just Government is Gods Ordinance for man's good; and the
kinds thereof Man's Ordinance for Gods glory; But care that Government be just
that is procured by unjust ways? Potentiality is not Authority. If Jack Straw,
or Wat Tiler, No^* Crumwell and Tom Pride should by force of Arms pull down
our lawful Magistrates, and set up themselves, and rule us with rods of iron,
their glittering swords: is this just Government? must We obey? will not Our
Submission argue our Concession to all that they have done? And shall not we by
our post Act partake of their sin, and so of their curse?

First, we answer; though we grant the Government was altered by force of arms,
and that comparatively, by a small party of the Nation; yet, rebus sie
stantibus, and consideratis considerandis, they had a very sufficient warrant
for what they did; For First, They had authority; Secondly, They had equity;
Thirdly, they had an opportunity for their action. The reason is plain, viz.
because they only adhered unto their trust; and the rest of their fellow
Commissioners, which with them were the Trustees of the Commonwealth, did
plainly, treacherously, and basely, contrary to their trusts, their Votes,
Covenants, promises and ^esolutions, decline the peace and interest of the
Nation, endeavoring to patchup a peace with the late King upon such Terms,
which being acquiesced in, would, and that in the then judgment of the very
Scots, destroy Decla. 4 Mar. 1647. in answer to the papers of the Scotch
Commissioners.
the very ends of all their former proceedings; yea betook themselves unto such
a course by treating with the late King which (^cording to their own
Declaration when there was ^ot the least shadow of restraint upon them) they
professed they could not in conscience do, except they were resolved before hand
to treat away all that they fought for, and to be treated out of all that they
^uld not be fought out of, vea, which course if they should (...), they
declared they should draw the whole g^lt of all the bl^d that (...) shed in the
three Nations upon themselves, and not only ^oo bad do that which they
declared would tend to the apparent destruction of the persons which have
engaged, and the ends for which they did engage in the late (...)* and hereupon
did resolve and orde^* The they would m^e no (...) Addresses who the late King,
Prohibiting all others upon penalty of High Treason, not to makes breath of
that order; That they would receive no Message from him, enjoining, That no
person whatsoever should presume to receive or bring any Message from him, to
either or both Houses of Parliament, or to any other person, and yet after all
this, to the amazement of all men, let there be guilt of blood, or no guilt:
let the persons formerly engaged in the wars, and the ends of such engagements
be destroyed or not destroyed, so they, could shift for themselves, without
regard had either to God or man, they treat with the King, and by the
assistance of the tumultuous Citizens, insurrecting Counties, adjacent and
remote in Wales, the revolting Navy and the base Scot invading the Nation, were
like to reduce us to more intolerable bondage and slavery then ever was known
in this land, and to make us more perfect Vassals then any are in Turkey; and
was it not high time that such treacherous, if not traitorous persons as these
were, should be plucked away even by head and ears that should thus ruin their
Country, and betray their trust? Do we not well remember how the Bells did ring
changes at Westminster while these were among them? how did they wheel and
reel, advance and retreat, go forward and backward, do and undo, say and unsay,
vote and unvote, order and disorder, that the then Kingdom did so shuffle and
shiver, so tremble and stagger, as if it would have run into the old tohu and
bohu of confusion and annihilation, and the poor Inhabitants of the Nation knew
not what to do, nor where to fix? If they closed with the King, beware
sequestration; if they joined with the Parliament, beware; desolation; if they
cleaved to the Army, the City did frown; if they stuck to the City, the Army
must down. This day, Be it ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, that such and such persons be sequestered for malignancy, for
raising up the people by the Commission of Array against the Parliament of
England; The next day, Be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the said
such and such persons be the Deputy Lieutenants for such and such Counties; one
day, These are straightly to charge and command you to take into your safe
custody the bodies of such and such persons impeached of high treason, and this
shall be your Warrant; the next day, These are straightly to charge and command
you to release and set free the persons aforesaid, and this shall be your
Warrant. Yesterday, Be it Ordered by the authority of this House, That such and
such persons be made incapable to sit as members in this House during this
present Parliament; to day, Ordered by the authority aforesaid, that the
Members aforesaid be admitted to sit as Members of this House. Yesterday,
Resolved upon the question, That it is not fit or safe for the Kingdom that a
personal Treaty be admitted with the King until satisfaction and security be
given for the blood that has been shed by his Commissions and commands; To
day, Resolved upon the question, That there shall be a personal treaty with the
King; Notwithstanding no such satisfaction nor security given as aforesaid;
Yesterday, Be it Declared, That his Majesty contrary to his trust, Oath at
Coronation, etc. has raised and levied a bloody and unnatural War, against
his loving, and loyal Subjects, the Parliament of England; To day, Ordered,
That his Majesty come with freedom, honor and safety to one of his Houses, at
such a distance from London, upon his royal word, and verbal promise, That he
shall sign such and such Bills, etc. Yesterday, Be it ordered by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, That such and such persons be Commissioners
for the Militia of the City of London for such a time; To day again, Be it
ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the former persons be no more
Commissioners for the Militia of the said City; but that such and such,
formerly displaced, be restored again; Yesterday, Exit West from being any
longer Lieut. of the Tower, and enter Titchburn; to day exit Titchburn, and
enter West into his place again; was there ever seen such crossings, such
shiftings and shufflings, such Yeas and Noes, such Noes and Yeas in a
Parliament before, was it ever like that a Parliament so constituted, so
uncertain, tottering, staggering, so fast and loose, so up and down, would ever
accommodate the interest of this Nation as the case stood? Nay, did not all men
see that these treacherous Members were ready to deliver all up into the hands
of him that would quickly ruin and destroy us for our adherence even unto
them? so that it was high time for those that were faithful amongst them to
consult how they might though by force of Arms, separate these false-hearted
men from those that would still keep firm to their professed principles, of
preservation of the peace and just liberty of this Nation? and if it was just
to oppose the King, and his Lords and Commons, and that by force of Arms, that
would have ruined us, out of the House in the open field: it is as lawful to
drve away, and that by force of Arms too, those that did endeavor likewise to
destroy us by a Law, the Houses of Parliament, the common safety of the people
being the supreme and sovereign end both of Parliament and Armies; by all this
it appears that they had authority, rebus sic stantibus, to do what they have;
They are a rightful authority, being those that were chosen by the people, and
did adhere unto the ends of their first Election, when the test did not.

Secondly that they had sufficient reason for the altering of the Government
they have declared; and because the reason thereof is not impleaded but the
Authority, therefore I shall wave that.

Thirdly, they had an opportunity hereunto by the power of the Army, as you
very well know, for the thing was done, and they had been unfaithful in their
trust, having such a means at hand to save the Nation, had they not made use
thereof accordingly, so that you see the grounds why we cannot grant that the
present authority did come by their authority by unjust means, though they got
it by force of arms, and that against the consent of the major vote of the
Parliament; for here were votes against votes, the former contrary to the
latter, those importing the peoples good, these their hurt, those made when the
Parliament was free, these when they were under new fears of bringing in the
late King by force of arms; those votes beckt with reason and arguments Feb 11.
1647.
certified by the Parliament to the whole Nation; these grounded upon pleasure.
We know that a Parliament may vote and revoke, and revote again and again,
order, unorder, and reorder, ordain, repeal, and reordain, the same things
over, and over, all conducing in their best apprehensions to common safety; and
faithfulness to their trust, may require them so to do, because it is the end,
viz. common safety, and not the means, viz. their Votes, Orders, Ordinances
etc. that must prostrate them; and as the case may stand, we may be bound in
conscience to submit thereunto; but when they have praepossessed our reason and
judgment not by bare votes, orders, and ordinances, but by strong and
effectual reasons and arguments against treating Decl. of the 4 of March, 1647
p. 24.
with the then King, as bringing upon them (and consequently the whole Nation)
all the blood that has been shed in these wars, yea, as plucking up the
foundatation of ever settling a peace with him which should be just and sure;
yea, that it tended to the apparent destruction of the persons which have
engaged, and loss of the ends for which both the Nations of England and
Scotland did engage in these wars, rendering themselves thereby (according to
their own Declaration) base and dishonorable, being in that condition as they
were in to treat under the Gallows: to treat as traitors, their cause being not
justified, nor the Declarations against them as rebels recalled; yea, and Fools
too, being possessed of the Sword according to their right not to secure it to
themselves and posterity, before they treated of any thing, that neither they
nor their posterity might be put to play another bloody game for the same
thing: when we say, they themselves did thus praepossess our judgments, should
those of them that did still remain faithful unto the Nation, suffer the rest
(because the major vote) having an opportunity in their hands thus to ruin
themselves and friends, and must the people submit unto such votes so
conducing, because the major part turn base and dishonorable; yea, fools, and
take upon them the guilt of traitors; must the minor part of a contrary mind be
concluded, and not hinder and prevent such things if they can? Can a Parliament
vote down their own reasons and arguments which they have argued up in the
minds and judgments of others? doubtless the people ought to acquiesce rather
in those votes enforced by reason then in those contrary Votes evidenced merely
by voting; there they have their reason, here their will. Can we think that it
is the duty of the Army, or others in Parliament, or out of Parliament, to
content themselves with, and to submit unto the mere will and pleasure of the
Parliament in such things as according to their ownjudgements and reasons, yea,
and according to the argued, demonstrated grounds and principles of reason of
those very persons that (after without showing any reason for what they did)
decline the same, that in such a case* they should submit, having an effectual
opportunity (a well resolved power and strength) to prevent the same? No
surely. They that told us that a Kingdom must not be ruined at the mere will
and pleasure of a King have taught us to infer the like touching the mere will
and pleasure of a Parliament; if it be not salus Regis, it cannot be voluntas
Parliamenti, but salus Populi, that is the supreme law; surely he that did
never appoint that the lives of millions of men should be prostrated to the
mere arbitrary will and pleasure of a ^ing, did never ordain that they should
be thus subjected to the reasonless vote of a Parliament; but if a King should
rise up against a people to enforce his pleasure upon them by the sword to
their apparent destruction, the people may rise up in Arms and resist him (for
so you Ministers have instructed the Nation) will it not then follow, that if a
Parliament should do the like by a Vote, that in such a case the like
resistance is alike lawful? neither will it here avail to say, Who shall judge?
For it is already answered, that the Parliament themselves did judge and
determine the matter, and that not simply by bare Votes, but by many reasons,
and a very large Declaration Febru. 11. 1647.
was published by them, importing their many reasons to the satisfaction of the
people therein; and therefore if a Parliaments reason, according to common
principles shall rise up against a a Parliaments Votes impugning the same,
especially when the life or death of a Nation, or the honest party thereof is
concerned therein, it behooves the people to rise up, and join with their
reasons to oppose their Votes; so that you see why we cannot grant that the
present authority had no authority for what they did, though a Minor party of
that authority chosen by the people; which is the first Answer to the first
part of your Objection.

Secondly, though it should be granted that thosethat are in present authority
did unlawfully usurp their authority: will it therefore follow that their
authority it self is unlawful, and that it is unlawful to obey it, in lawful
things? what will be the consequences of such an inference? Surely there is a
distinction to be made between lawful authority, and the persons therein, and
the means whereby they were invested therein; if their authority was unlawful
because acquired by force of Arms, contrary to the vote of those that had it
lawfully invested in them; where shall we find a lawful authority in the
world, when generally, if not universally all the parts of the world in respect
of their Governors are so ruled, viz. by force? would you in a sober grave
Christian and dispassionate manner consult with the holy Scriptures, you cannot
but know how that many Kings of Israel and Judah under the old Testament did
(in regard of their right from man) acquire their Governments by force and
power; you know well how Jeroboam (by the advantage of the distemper of the ten
Tribes raised by the tyrannical threatenings of Rehoboam, That his little finger
should be thicker then his fathers loins, and that he would turn his fathers
Whips into Scorpions, 1 Kings 12.
just as the last King did multiply Oppressions and cruelties upon the Nation
above what his father did) did join himself with the ten Tribes; and the said
Tribes having killed Adoram (with stones) being sent by Rehoboam to purify
them, took the said Jeroboam and made him King by force of arms, and so
alienated the Crown from the house of David, and there was a deadly feude
always after between Rehoboam and Jeroboam (as is now between the Royallists
and Parliamenteers) in their Successors: and yet we find not that God was
displeased, either with the men of Israel, or the men of Judah for their
obedience to their respective Kings: Afterward Baasha, the son of Abiah,
raises war against Nadab, the son of Jeroboam, and killed him, and got the Crown
himself 1 Kings 15.
and reigned in his stead; after Baasha his death Elah his son reigned in his
stead, and his servant Zimri kills him, and got the Crown in his stead; in his
time Omri by the power of the sword still gets the Crown, and forces Zimri
desperately to burn himself; after this 1 Kings 16.
the Kingdom of Israel was divided; one half of the people take Tibni the son
of Ginah and make him King: the other half followed Omri, and then they tried
who had the longest sword sti^, and Ibid.
at last Tibni, and his party being foiled, Omri got all, and reigned alone;
after Omri Ahab his son reigned in his stead; Ahab he takes a wicked Idolatrous
Iezabel (as the late King of England did in the like case) to be his Queen; she
prevails with him (as the case still runs parallel) to rear up Altars for the
service of Baal, (as he did in Somersets House, and elsewhere upon the like
account) multiplying Idolatrous worship and service above his Predecessors;
then the Prophets of the Lord lifted up their voices against him for his
wickedness, (as you know the faithful Ministers did against the late King, you
your selves being some of them that did so) whom he imprisons and persecutes
with a perfect hatred (as you very well know the said late King of England did
abominate from his heart all Puritan Preachers, which was one of his Characters
in all men's mouths;) well; abundance of mischief did this wicked Iezabel the
Queen work in Israel, especially against the faithful Prophets of the Lord, for
their opposition of her Priests; at last Ahab following the counsels of his
false prophets, contrary to the advice of the faithful Prophets of the Lord,
lost his life at Ramoth Gilead (as the late King did his head at White Hall;)
the time would fail to run through all instances of the Kings of Israel and
Judah in this kind. If you look into the new Testament, you know that Christ
was born when the Scepter was got by force of Arms from Israel and Judah, who
^ere subject to the Romans, and paid tribute to Caesar, Augustus Caesar being
then Emperor; Herod the son of (...) had the honor of being the Governor of the
Jews who had the honor^ble name of King bestowed upon him by the said Augustus
Cesars, which title (^s Josephus re^) (...) ^fied by the Senat^ of Rome; yet to
signify that all was at the pleasure of the sal^ Augustus Caesar, he commands a
tax to be levied upon all the Jews, and upon all his dominions, as appears in
the holy Scriptures, and Luke 2. 1.
he exacts tribute from all the Israelites, as he did by his Officers from
Christ himself, who came to Peter (thinking its like to entrap his Master) and
asked him, What say, Does not your Mast^-pa^ Matt. 17. 24, 25.
tribute Sir? Why, yes, Sir, says Peter, he does; and it is observeable that
Christ reasons with Peter upon this argument, viz that they of right ought to
be free, and that it was usurpation, and by mere force and power of the said
Emperor that it was exact^* we are children Peter, and indeed of right we are
fre^; nevertheless Peter, it is but a civil thing, take such a course for so
much money; and when thou have it, give it for us both; let the books be crossed,
let it be discharged; and the false lying Jews when they falsely accused him,
said of him, thinking if any thing would hang him that would do it; This fellow
(say they of the Lord Jesus) (...) ^ound perverting Luke 23. 2.
the Nation: viz. of the Jews, and forbidding to pay tribute (...) Caesar; which
was a most false and scandalous accusation; for ^e himself did pay tribute (as
you see before) you see Christ himself and his ^ii sciples did yield obedience,
and that without any ^uple in things lawful unto that authority that was
acquire^ ^yn mere forc^ of Arms* Again, you know, that after Christ, the
Apostles lived under the same usurpation by the Roman Emperors maintained by
force; yet you know, how that they did not only themselves subject, but left
their minds in this behalf in holy Wri^, exhorting the Churches whom they had
planted to subject unto them i^ l^ful things; and that not only Paul teaches
the be^ing R^ subjection, Romans 13.
of whom it may be replied, that the Rom^ (...) were their own proper
Governors; but the same P^ul instructs Ti^othy also to lay down rules for all
the Churches of Christ whatsoever touching their deportment in their
Assemblies, in reference to their Rulers, never questioning how they ^ame into
this authority, viz. That they should pray for King^, and for all that are in
Authority, that under them they may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in all
godliness and honesty, affirming it to be both good und acceptable 1 Timothy 21.
2, 3.
in the sight of God; this was their judgment, that if so be they could live a
peaceable and quiet life under their rulers in all goodliness and honesty, such
rulers should not only be submitted unto, but earnestly prayed for, that God
would bless them and prosper them. Why then should you haesitate in your
yiedling obedience to the present Governors? cannot you live under them a
peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty? What hinders you? had
you ever such freedom (speak your own consciences) under any government, or
governors before? what strains of Idolatry, what ceremonies are imposed upon
you? May you not preach and pray, and pray and preach, and that not only in
private but in public as often as you will (provided you disturb not the civil
peace of the Nation) and may you not do this not only by the toleration and
connivance, but by the approbation and countenance of those that are in
authority? and let any history produce when you or the rest of the people of
God had the like liberty, and respects from the Rulers of England before: yea,
and let any history produce instances of the like ingratitude, scorn and
contempt cast upon the ruling powers, especially from the grand professors of
the Ministers of the Gospel as your selves are, bedashing them with the blood
of the ^ing, and the imputation of murderers from day to day, scorning all
their Commands, Acts, Orders, though requiring things at your hands in
themselves agreeable to your professed principles and practices, when they
command you to fast and pray for success against your known and avowed enemies,
yea the very You may expect another Lecture upon that subject only.
Rebels in in Ireland, you will not; when they command you to give thanks for
success against them, you pine and mourn, and murmur, and will not give thanks,
to the very amazement of all that know you, behaving your selves in your
prayers; in your Sermons, after such a froward; peevish peltish manner, as if
you had been the sons of the Prophet Jonah, begotten by him in his angry fits;
never did such Ionasnes of spirit appear in so many professors of the Ministry
in this Nation; nay, do you not pray against the present Governors, preach
against them, work all underhand mischiefs against them, tamper in the
Parliament, in the City in the Army (pro^uring their beheading, that so the
body of i^ might fall to the ground) and all, if it was possible to pull them
from their seats of government? surely Christ Jesus and his Apostles (whose
Ministers and Successors you profess your selves to be) were of another spirit;
again, the time would fail if we should insist but upon the tithes of those
instances of Governors, both in our own, and other Countries, who got the
Government by mere power, and of all the people of God that did always obey
them in lawful things; and whereas the Covenant is pleaded by you for your
justification in this behalf; though enough and enough is answered in this
kind, that shift of Covenant and plea of Covenant being indeed almost worn out,
it is most notoriously known that that very Covenant was founded and grounded
in a quite contrary sense to what you now urge it, viz. to justify your taking
up arms against him that had lawful authority over you, though he did not use
it lawfully, as you all very well know; and why may not others plead Covenant
in the like case? if you will but a little consider the exhortation of the
Assembly of Divines to the taking of the Solemn League and Covenant, Ordered by
the House of Commons the ninth of Feb. 1643. to be printed and published; you
shall see that this very Covenant was founded in that which now you call
usurpation in the Parliament, viz. a Covenanted resolution of fighting against
the King, and his Lords and Commons (be they either the major or minor part of
the Parliament, it matters not) that contrary to their trust, did imbondage and
inslave the people, and indeavored the same; and this practice justified in an
instance brought in by the said Assembly of Divines in these words, neither
has this practice or doctrine, viz. of joining by force of arms against
undeserving Governors been deemed seditious or unwarrantable by the Princes
that have sat upon the English Throne, but justified and defended by Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, with the expense of much treasure, and blood in
the United Provinces of Netherland, not only without but against the unjust
violence of Philip of Spain; King James followed her steps, so far as to
approve of their union, and to enter into a league with them as free States*
which is continued by his Majesty now reigning unto this day (speaking of the
late King) who both by his expedition for the relief of Roche^ in France, and
his strict confederacy with the Prince of Orange, and the States General,
notwithstanding all the importunity of Spain to the contrary, has set to his
Seal, that all that has been done by his Royal Ancestors, in maintenance of
those who had so engaged and combined themselves, was just and warrantable; and
what had become of the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of our sister Nation of
Scotland, had they not entered into such a solemn League and Covenant (or if you
will Engagement) at the beginning of the late troubles there? but instar
omnium, to give you one instance more of your own party, we hope that will be
authentic with you (and that is of the Scots (of happy memory, if your
memories will serve you but for two or three years together) who you know when
that the major part of the Parliament of Scotland did Vote the sending into
this Nation and against the same, an Army under Duke Hamilton contrary unto all
their former Vows, Treaties, Covenants, etc. (as the major part of the English
Parliament did Vote a Treaty with the late King contrary to their former
resolutions, Votes, Orders, to the hazard of incurring the guilt of all the
blood and loss of the ends of the late war) yet you know a minor party did
oppose them, and by their own strength and the aid of the now Lord General,
whom they indeed have required most (what shall we say?) Scot-like, did depose
the said major part of the said Parliament (as the now governing party did here
in England) and by the said power and force, were themselves established in the
room thereof (as the example still runs parallel here) and yet did you not
approve of them, pray for them, bless God for their happy success against their
enemies? can you imagine men so thick-skuld so stupefied as not to observe your
partiality? or have you a dispensation to make election and reprobation of
actions of the self same nature, disposition, circumstances, tendencies, and to
reward them in some with honor and glory: and in others with shame and
contempt? to say unto some men, for these actions, well done you blessed of the
Lord: and unto others for the like (every way the like) go ye cursed, receive a
portion prepared for truce breakers, Covenant-breakers, usurpers of Authority:
or can you make the same things good and evil, light and darkness, lawful and
unlawful, and that in the very self same respects, references, and relations?
was it lawful for the Hollanders, and the Netherlanders, and the Scots by
force of Arms to remove their governors upon presumed just reasons: and not for
the English to do the like, having as much, if not sevenfold more reason then
these had so to do? Or is it lawful for the subjects in the forenamed places to
obey their governors established by mere force and power; and not for the
English to obey their governors in lawful things, because so established?

In the third place, have you not protection by this government? and does not
protection oblige unto subjection in lawful things? is it not such a piece of
inhumanity, as is not to be mentioned, but with utter abhorrency, viz. for a
man to seek to destroy that which preserves him? is it not Judas like to
betray those in Authority into the hands of the rude multitude (as he did his
Lord) who through much difficulty and hardship endeavor to save and preserve
you? did not you as well as others (nay were not you the leaders of others who
did) but as yesterday, Spread your garments and Palm Branches before those in
Authority who (contrary to the commands of the late King, his party of Lords
and Commons) did adhere unto the common interest of the people, and those that
would not join with him, by whom you have been protected every since, and cried
out unto them Hosanna, Hosanna; and shall you not only now in your own persons
oppose them, but still be leaders of the people and rude multitude, to
withstand them, crying out in your Pulpits in effect, crucify them, crucify
them? does not your non submission, unto our governors in lawful things
disoblige them unto your protection? non submission in such cases renders you
no subjects, but enemies, no friends, but foes; and is it policy for a State to
protect their enemies, and that in their work of generation and multiplying
their parties by Sermons and prayers calculated for that purpose?

Fourthly, You do not only receive the benefit of Protection, but also You
claim the benefit of Provision established by our present Rulers in all cases
of self-accommodation; And is not this likewise an obligement unto
acknowledgment and subjection? If any of you be injured or wronged, you fly to
the Law, and the present ministers of justice under our present Rulers for
releif and satisfaction; if it be but in case of non payment of Tithe or any
thing else, without hesitancy you will seek a remedy from our present Rulers:
Is it equitable or just that you should have the benefit and interest of the
present Government in all matters accommodations: and your selves be lawless
and not at all commanded in lawful things? surely the provision of peace, of
right, etc. which the law makes, is for the subject, and not for the opposite;
or is this ingenuity becoming the Ministers of the Gospel to render evil for
good, cursing for blessing, to give Vinegar and gall for milk and honey? I mean
trouble, ruin, and destruction unto our present governors for that peace,
plenty, and preservation which through Gods mercy you enjoy under them.

Fifthly, if you who are the teachers of the people may take liberty of casting
behind your backs the lawful commands of our present authority, why may not
all others do the like? and if so, then should we have no government at all (as
the case stands) and would not this public liberty be public
licentiousness? would Toll periclun -- and vaga prosiliet fraenis natura
remotis.
not every man's lust be every man's law, and every neighbor prove a tiger each
to other? and would not such liberty quickly prove the greatest slavery when
the lawless multitude shall command all? what would become of your order and
men of your function in this case, suppose you should charm up among the common
people a spirit of scorn and contempt upon our governors, and prevail with them
to rise up as one man against them, and so wrest the government out of their
hands and cut their throats (for that's the English of your insinuations)? do
you suppose that you can charm them into a reverential and awful respect of
your cloth, and that while they cry out concerning our present governors
crucify them, crucify them, they will in an awful manner (as the giddy men of
Naples to Massileano) observe your nod, obey your commands, go when you bid
them go, and come when you bid them come, and fall down before the Presbyterian
Clergy, saying, Has masters and worship you? be not deceived; though you think
happily that you will for the present make use of the Malignant and Royal
Party to lift up Presbytery and intend to make them hewers of wood and drawers
of water unto you and your party; yet had you but your eyes in your head, you
should quickly perceive that rebus mutatis de vobis fabula narrabitur, and the
Revenge of blood should as severely be taken from your party as you now happily
expect from another party; were it not better we should have any government
then none at all? that of the great Turk, then of the rabble rout? will not
men's wants be measured by their wills and their appetites be their purveyors?
Distracted irregularity is the consequence of Anarchy, and such licentious
liberty the greatest tyranny; well, though you rather choose the hazards of more
bloody fierce and cruel wars, and take pleasure in trumpeting up the people
hereunto by your preachments, and letters, and tamperings, then obey the
present Government in lawful things; Yet how you will be able to stand before
the Lord, when he makes inquisition for blood, let God and your own
consciences secretly debate and determine.

To shut up all, let the response of your consciences in three questions,
witness your designs in the presence of the Lord.

First, whether if the great Turk had made war with this Nation, and by force
of Arms destroyed the late King, altered the government, Established
Mahumetisme only for the people of his own Nation, set up himself as supreme
only in things civil, but should have made a Law that the Christians of the
Presbyterian way and Government only (and no others) should be tolerated in
their serving of God according to their judgments, and enjoy their houses,
lands, and estates; no man upon pain of death should kill them or rob them,
that they should meet as often as they pleased in public or private, and
exercise themselves in the worship of God, no man daring to molest them:
provided always they should subscribe an Engagement never to interrupt the
public peace nor raise up the people against them, but that they should
promise to obey them in all civil and lawful things not violating their
professed principles, etc. whether in such a case you would not willingly and
gladly subscribe that engagement and exhort others to do the like, and bless
God with all your hearts for such mercy, and favor showed unto you, yea and
pray for their preservation, and rather desire the Lord to reward their
kindness for that grace, by preserving them, and converting them unto himself,
then to preach and pray, and write, and tamper, and strive, and struggle to
ruin and destroy them as you now do our present Governors?

Secondly, Whether if this present Parliament (thus constituted, every way thus
acting as they do and have done) had by the joint concurrence and unanimous
assistance of our present Army, lifted up Presbytery according to your own
orders and prescriptions, subjecting all men within their jurisdiction to the
same, suppessing (as you should direct them) all those dissenting brethren or
others whom you now call Heretics, Sectaries, etc. whether in such a case you
would not have prayed for them, and preached them up as the great repairers of
Sion and builders of the house of God, the David's, the Solomon's, the
Zerubbabels of our Age, the Nursing fathers of the Church of God: whether you
would not have cursed all those that cursed them, and blessed those that
blessed them: whether you would not have represented their act of justice upon
the late King as the most glorious piece of justice that ever was acted upon
the face of the earth, and the return of the many prayers often put up by you,
That God would return your prayers upon his heart or upon his head? That his
execution was nothing else but the fullfilling of the many promises made of old
touching the honor of his Saints in the latter days, that they should bind
kings in Chains and Nobles in fetters of Iron; that they were the Gideons, the
Ioshuahs, the Calebs of Israel, that pull down the pride of Princes, and cause
the feet of his Saints to tread upon the necks of Kings, etc. and whether in
case any party in this Nation, or from other Countries should have combined
against the Governors of the Nation thus acting for you, you would not have
exhorted all men upon pain of Meroz curse, to come out and help the Lord
against the mighty etc.

Thirdly, whether in case you your selves had the same power over your
dissenting brethren as they have over you; and that your party did sit upon the
high places of Government in the Commonwealth, you would thus suffer them
openly to pray against you, to preach against you, scorn your commands, orders
and ordinances; to stir up the people by all possible means in City, in Country
and elsewhere, and all this while treat them kindly, continue them their
liberties, protect them from violence, give them an equal share of all the
privileges and Government of the Law, etc.

The Lord (the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth) judge between you and us in
these things.

FINIS.

