A LETTER Written from DOVER, TO THE COMMISSIONERS FOR THE CUSTOMS, London, May
26. Relating certain PASSAGES OF HIS MAJESTY'S Arrival and Reception there.

London, Printed for Thomas Johnson, 1660.

A LETTER Written from DOVER to the Commissioners of the Custom-House London,
May 26.
May it please your Worships,
ALthough I have nothing of Custom Affairs, yet have I something of a more
acceptable Resentment unto you at this time to impart unto you.

It has pleased God to honor this Town yesterday, at about three of the Clock
in the Afternoon, with the happy Arival of His Most Excellent Majesty, with the
Illustrious Princes, the Dukes of York and Gloucester, many Noblemen, Knights,
and Gentlemen with him.

The Town was very much filled with many Lords and persons of great Quality and
their Attendants; as also with several Troops of Horse and Gentlemen of the
County, attending the Right Honorable the Earl of Winchelsey, who were very
much increased by the Accession of his Excellency the Lord General Monck, with
a very great number of Gentlemen, and several Troops of Horse, who came to this
Town at about one of the Clock after Dinner the same day, to wait upon his
Majesty at his first Landing, who with many thousands of people of all degrees,
stood upon the Beach, with longing expectation of that most pleasant vision.

When His Majesty left the Ship, ( Charles the quondam (...)) in which be came,
and went into the Barge that brought him to Land, the Guns from the whole
Fleet, and afterward the Guns of the Castle roared like continued Claps of
thunder, during the space of about half an hour, and the people contended with
them to out-noise them (if it were possible) with joyful Shoutings and
Acclamations, which continued (some short intermissions excepted to take
breath) until his Landing, and a good while after; the great Guns from the
Castle also again thundering forth the Joys of that Garrison.

Upon his Approach toward the shore, his Excellency the Lord General Monck did
hastily run unto the very extreme of a Bridge, made on purpose to accommodate
His Majesty's convenient Landing, and kneeled down to receive His Majesty, and
His Majesty embraced him in his arms; and His Majesty also kneeled down, with
his eyes and hands lifted up toward heaven, but I have not heard of any words
uttered then by him, desiring, it seems, to be as much in secret as such an act
at that time and place could permit him to be, and to speak more to God in his
mind, then he thought mee^ should be heard by men. The two Dukes also kneeled
down, congratulated his happy Arival, and kissed his hand.

Then he advanced toward a Canopy, a Chair, Cushion, and Carpet spread upon
the Beach where the Mayor of the Town, with his brethren the Jurats,
Common-Councel-Men, all in their Gowns, and Freemen of the best quality, in the
best equipage they could, waited for his Majesty's landing; The Trumpets, and
Waits making all possible melody they could in the mean time.

When he came thither, the Mayor upon his knee made a short speech his Majesty
three times bidding him rise up and speak: The Mayors speech contained a
congratulation of his most happy and prosperous arival in such Honor, peace,
and safety, his great preservations in many difficulties, and dangers, the
wonderful providence of God ordering and terminating all our late troubles, and
revolutions of Government with peace, and without blood in the restoration of
his Majesty, and his People unto their respective rights, the most cordial
affections of all his people unto him, and his gracious clemency and goodness
declared unto them etc. resigning up his white staff (the badge of his
authority) unto his Majesty; which he returned again unto the Mayor.

Then the Mayor by the hands of an ancient, reverend, and learned Minister, Mr.
Readdin, presented his Majesty with a rich Bible prepared by the Townsmen for
that purpose, signifying in a very short speech the most confident presumptions
of his people, that nothing would be more acceptable unto him, then the glory
of God, in the defense of the protestant religion contained in that Book.

The said Mr. Readdin upon his knees kissed his Majesty's hand, and beginning to
speak, his Majesty commanded him to rise up, which accordingly he did, and made
a short, but very pious and pithy speech, importing the inestimable treasures
of divine riches contained in that Book, presuming, and bespeaking his
Majesty's most pious care of it, and affections to it concluding with a holy
wish that it might be unto him and his family as the Ark of old was unto the
house of Obed-edom shuting up all with God save the King, and let all the
people say Amen. which they did with a very great shout, joy and cheerfulness.

His Majesty took the Book into his hands from the said Minister with a most
gracious and pleasant Countenance, and with a most grave, serious, and soft
voice said, that nothing was, and should be more dear unto him then the Bible,
and so he gave it to a Gentleman next unto him, and also called for the velvet
bag to put it in, and after it was put into his coach.

His Majesty then embraced several Noblemen who kissed his hand, and the hands
of the most Illustrious Princes, his two brothers, upon which, his Majesty the
said Princes, and the Lord Monck, went into his Majesty's Coach, and immediately
road away with a very great number of Noblemen etc. with him toward
Canterbury. This small Town being not able to entertain them, so many thousands
with their Horses, Coaches and country people etc.

I had the honor and happiness of entertaining some of his Majesty's family,
and other persons of honor, interest, and intimacy with his Majesty, from whom
I had so many assurances, convincing Arguments, and instances of his Majesty's
piety, clemency, sweetness of nature, temperance, meekness, patience,
mercifulness, tenderness of spirit toward all honest peaceable men, readiness
to forgive, aversness to revenge, etc. as I must confess I did not expect, and
which (being true) gives great cause to bewail, and lament the evil of those
that have otherways represented him, especially if against their knowledge, and
consciences; as also the unhappiness of the Nation that has been so long
injured by his detention from them. And which gives great assurance of our
future felicity, if we know, consider, and wisely improve the things belonging
unto our peace.

One of the said persons assured me that within these very few days his Majesty
was speaking with some Gentlemen concerning his party in England, and had these
words -- I hear there are many swearers, drunkards, and profane persons that
say they are of my party, but they are of the devils party, and not of my
party, I renounce them.

I have heard also several other expressions and instances to the same purpose,
which because they cannot be mentioned without some reflection of disparagement
to persons who cannot but know themselves concerned and meant therein, if it
should be spoken of, I think not fit to particularize.

I have seen also a letter of his Majesty's own hand writing which was
accidentally produced upon occasion of our discourse, arguing a very pious and
excellent temper and disposition in him, which because his Majesty's letter,
and fearing it should both offend his Majesty and also the Gentleman himself,
should that also be spoken of which his Majesty writ privately, and was
privately discoursed of by us, I forbear to mention.

I pray pardon my prolixity, and let the happiness of the occasion, and subject
thereof attain the same, and accept of the humble respects of,

Right Worshipful, Your Humble Servant, John Price.
Dover, 26 May, 1660.
FINIS.

