The Illustrious GEORGE MONCK Duke of ALBEMARLE and Captain General of all
his Majesty's Landforces. etc.


THE MYSTERY AND METHOD Of His Majesty's Happy Restoration, Laid Open to
PUBLIC VIEW.

By John Price D. D. one of the late Duke of Albemarle' s Chaplains, and Privy
to all the Secret Passages, and Particularities of that Glorious Revolution.

LONDON,

Printed for James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near St. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1680.

To the Right Honorable John Earl of Bath; Viscount Greenvile of Lansdown;
Baron Greenvile of Biddiford and Kelkhampton, Knight; Groom of the Stole; First
Gentleman of the Bedchamber; Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Devon and
Cornwall, and one of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council,
etc.
My Lord,

WHat I have here presented to your Lordships View, I did once design to have
transmitted to Posterity, in a large Draught, and in a Freer Style; and to have
reserved it as my last Testament, to the care of my Executor, in Confidence
that it would Then have Entertainment with such as should not be tempted, by
Impulses of Prejudice, Interest or Malevolence, to asperse the Generous and
successful Attempt of General Monk, toward the Restoring of our Present
Sovereign, whom God preserve long among us: But, finding that of late his
Loy^lty to his Prince has been day^y more and more q^estioned and traduced,
his Conduct aba^ed; nay, and that my self have been charged to my F^ce with the
Rude (...) of Forgery upon my undertaki^g, (...), in ^rivate Discourses to
Vindic^te and assert His Integrity and Sincer^ty; (knowing so well as I did
upon what Grounds he first Engaged) And this too by ^uch Persons, generally, as
of all men in the World had the least Reason t^ do it: I am forced to alter my
first Re^olution, as not being able to answer it t^ the Sacred A^hes of my
Deceased Lord and Patron, the withholding of th^e Papers (h^w rude and
Imperfect soever) a^y longer from the Public. It might po^bly be one Grain in
the Scale also; the (...) that there are none (that I know of) now Living (but
your Lordship and your Servant of this Memorial) that were Pri^y to the Motives
of the Generals First Engagement, when Sir George Booth was at the Head of some
Confederates in Cheshire.

Now though true it be that, that Combination took not effect: and indeed it
was well for the General, nay and possibly for the King and Kingdom too that it
did not; yet from the time of Lamberts turning out of Doors his Masters at
Westminster, I do avouch that my Lord did all along with a direct Eye aim at
the Kings Restoration. Neither is it Improbable but that this second Attempt
would have miscarried likewise, had not the Conduct of it been in the hands of
a Superior Providence: For upon the Generals open Protesting in Scotland
against the English A^my for disturbing the Rump; the Cavalier and Presbyterian
(the then two Royal Parties) became Rampant in their hopes; though neither of
them altogether forgetting their old Animosities. Wherefore the more discerning
Independents fearing an approaching Ruin (adjudging it Prudent to make
advantage of these Heart-burnings) began to make fresh Court to the
Presbyterian; he being of a nearer Alliance, as having fought under the same
Colors and pay with themselves against the Late King. These two great Part es
comprehended in a manner the ^dy of the Engli^h and Scottish Subjects; though
^th of them o^eraw'd, and kept under ^y the then Domineering Faction of the
Sectaries. The former of these had been in the Field for Charles the First
against his Two Houses of Parliament: whom He (by a Law of his own making)
having ^ermitted to conti^ue The^e as ^uch, whether for him or (...) him; it
was soon foun'd ^y w^ful experience that he had l^st his Crown before a stroke
was st^uck.

The Cavaliers (who were of the Nobility and Gentry of England, and of whom
your Lordship was one) came in freely, and generously adhered to the King, as
the^r Sovereign. And yet (which is dolorous to remember) he lost his Life by a
Mockery of Justice. This was a Piece of Villainy not to be Paralled in any
H^story: And Bishop Andre^s has delivered as much in his Notes upon the Sixth
Commandment. Cap. 2. In these w^rds. Yet never any People in the World (says
he) pretended by any Color of Legal proceedings, or show of M^ck-Justice, to
touch the Life of a Prince. etc. Neither p^ssibly could This have entered his
Fancy, had not the fresh death of Mary, Queen of Scots, and the Monumental
Lines of a Prophetical Poet (to be found in Archbishop Spotwood's History)
suggested the C^nsequences to his thoughts thus; that since one Sovereign
Prince had executed another equal to her self in Regalities; the case might be,
when a People would do the like to their Prince. Now the Cavaliers had not only
lost their Estates, by the Fortune of War; but even their Hopes also of ever
being in a Condition to appear again, by themselves, for the Recovery of their
own Losses, or the Crown of England, which fell with their Masters Head.

My Charity induce^ me to believe that the soberer part of the Presbyteri^ns
had been decoyed into a War, with the In^cription of Loyalty upon their Arms,
and under the plausible pretenc^ of Fighting for King and Parliament. But
however, they lived to repent of the Felicities of them; for, having acted
their parts too far, they were forced to yield to more su^til Enginiers of
State, who had a further game to play; Bishops Lands not being Booty enough,
for so many sharers. Thus themselves suffered as well as acted a Reformation,
and so went of the Stage.

Now though their Name was not so offensive to the then Parliament and Army, as
was that of the Cavaliere; yet they still kept an Eye equally wakefull over
them both; Especially now, upon their finding that they were neither of them
capable of concealing their inward satisfaction at General Monk's Remonstrating
against the Army in England. And indeed their Hopes upon this Occasion were so
luxuriant, that some of them durst pray for his Success; others not only Drink
His Health but the Kings too; and that Publicly. Nay he had not Marched many
days from h^s cold Quarters on the North of Tweede, (his March being without
orders too) before the sound of Bells that welcomed us into England, had filled
the Ears even of his very Officers with the noise of Jealousies and
Apprehensions, touching the end of his making this long Journey. And though
they had learned the Duty of Soldiers not to Mutiny, no nor so much as to
expostulate with him; yet it was evident that several of them deemed there was
more in the Action, then did openly appear.

But though the General was able to deal well enough with these; yet could he
not overcome those of his Masters at Westminster; who did not well relish this
hasty March even of their Restorer. Yet they could not in gratitude refuse him
and his Army the liberty of a Visit: and besides, should they by express orders
remand him back to his Scottish Quarters, they could not be assured of security
at home for the future, because the English Army being but newly returned to
their Duty, did not appear to be fast and well-confirmed; they fearing that
Ambition, in their Officers, was rather laid a slecp, then extinguished. And
indeed they did not so much as suspect General Monk to be guilty of This; his
Deportment in their service being so modest, that none of them ever thought he
aimed at the Government; (whatsoever other Jealousies might be buzzed in their
Ears touching Charles Stuart) And this truly was the greatest advantage he had
of them: Besides, his natural Taciturnity was such, that most of his Friends
(who thought they knew him thoroughly) looked upon George Monk to have no other
Craft in him, then that of a plain Soldier, who would obey the Parliaments
orders, as well as see that his own were. So that had not the more subtle
Smell-Plots of the Council of State (Scot their Secretary amongst the rest)
divined something of Mr. Nicholas Monks Journey into Scotland the Summer
before; the Generals March into England without, or rather against orders had
been little suspected. But their Distrusts of him more and more increased, the
nearer he approached toward them.

And this he soon discovered, and was fully satisfied in upon his coming to
Whitehall: For then his Authority was lessened by the presence of Co-General,
and Impatient Hazlerig, who had much the ad^antage of him, as being a Member of
the same Parliament, and able to vie with him in point of merit; he having been
their Restorer in the South at Ports-mouth, as the other was in the North at
Cold-stream. Nor was Monk himself without his suspicions that he should not
only lose his limb of Generalship, but be questioned for a Delinquent, rather
than honored as a Restorer. So that having no Counsel left him, but sudden
Action; what he was to do he did quickly, and made the Change as swift as
Comedians do theirs: For in one Week's time he Courted the Parliament and
Counsel of State not with words only, but with Deeds, and such too as must
render him wholly their own; Unhindg'd all the Gates of the City of London,
brake some of them, pulled up their Posts and Chains; defeated all popular
expectations of him to such a Degree that I heard him reviled in the streets
(Himself but hard by too) to this Effect. Is This That Monk that would bring in
the King? This is the Scottish Devil. What more mischief thence? But Sir Arthur
Hazlerig (on the other side) sang his Paeans, Now George (said he) we have thee
for ever, Body and Soul. Nay our little Scottish Army it self was astonished;
and the Officers, in doing this Drudgery, spoke merry di^contents when they
took up the Posts and Chains; These are the Chains and Meddals, (cried they)
that the Parliament promised us, at Cold-stream. Many of them would not act in
this Tragic Comedy, but offered to lay down their Commissions; which the
General would not suffer them to do; but reprehended them in this style. What?
will you not obey the Parliaments Orders? (...), as if this odious action had
been unavoidably forced upon him; and indeed by the frowns and clouds in his
Face they ^asily perceived whereabout he was, and readily took the Hint to
Cabal into new Counsel's against such TaskMasters. This now he accepted; for
upon his return out of the City, a Letter was framed in the night, sent the
next Morning from Whitehall to the Parliament, and then he immediately Marched
his Army into the City; where he continued till he had let in the Secluded
Members of 1648. Thus did he free himself from the Danger that threatened him
for his forward Loyalty in August before; complete his own safety, and the
first step to the Kings Restoration, all at a Blow.

Although by premising these Things (my Lord) I have (designedly too) violated
the Laws of Method, yet I have not forgot that I am in a Dedicatory Preface;
and that my business is, to implore your Lordships Patronage.

Now so Conscious am I of your Condor and Goodness, that this Humble Request
will (I persuade my self) without much difficulty be granted. For your Lordship
may possibly still Remember that upon the first introducing of ^r. Nicholas
Monk and my self into the Kings Presence, you were pleased to assert his Zeal,
and readiness to serve his Majesty, and in what ins^ances he had done it;
particularly mentioning his Journey to Scotland, (and his Negotiation with his
Brother there) as being undertaken, upon your express Commands: For he was then
the Parson of your own Parish of Kelkhampton in Cornwall, which is a living of
about 300. l. Pounds Per Annum: And this you had freely bestowed on him without
any other Symony then an obligation from him to serve the Public when ever you
had occasion to make use of him; you having even then an eye upon his Brother
in Scotland, whom your Family had obliged likewise. Now Mr. Monk (who had not
Learned the Artifice to dissemble the merits of mean Men, (it being the first
hour too of his coming to Court) was so just to me, as to enform the King in
your Lordships Pre^ence, that he imparted his Message, and Communicated the
concerns of so importa^t an affair, to me his Brothers do^estick Cha^lain at
Dalkeith; and that he found that I entertained it willingly, and was careful
and faithful in it; with sundry other Eulogies which the honest plain hearted
man thought fit to give of me to His Majesty. To This Relation the King gave
such Credit, that, after he had vouchsafed me the Honor to Kiss His Hand, he
was ple^sed to tell me, that by this he well understood, the service I had done
him; and commanded me to make my Application to him, as often as I desired his
favor, or any Preferment. And I soon after acquainted the General with these
gracious expressions of the Kings.

Bnt though your Lordship may have forgotten this; yei (I Am sure) you can never
forget how far, and to what end you were engaged, when you sent Mr. Nicholas
Monk into Scotland to his Brother. And yet what has been already published as
to this Particular, has not met with an universal Credence* for many Politic
and some spight^ul Infidels there are, who will needs look upon General Monks
design to Restore the King, as a Postnate-Juggle, framed on purpose to salve
His Honor, and not to serve the ends of Truth; reflecting upon it as not fit to
be received into the Annalls of History; as a Prosperous Chance, as a Deodand,
not designed to enrich this or that Particular Coast, but only by the Winds and
Waves driven hither.

Let God have the Glory, for the gift was only His. But if the wrath of man
shall Praise him, the Loyalty of Man shall both Praise and Please him. And
Loyal he was even above the Temptation of Sovereignty it self, as did after
wards fully appear: Nay and so glorious was the atchievment also, that there
was more in it then the single Restoration of Charles the Second, even the
recovery of lost Monarchy to the Royal Family it self* to whom the Diadem of
Right belonged, though at that time it was left a prey to Usurpers, as they
could play their Game. He Loved his Prince, and he loved his Country; and as a
True Englishman, judged them to have one and the same Interest. And thus his
Actions justified his Declarations; which were, to reduce the Military Power in
obedience to the Civil* The Soldiers of England having, then, Erected a
distinct Interest from the People of it; Nor was it an easy matter to have
reduced them; had not the Army, by His most Excellent conduct, (I will rather
say by a Divine) been divided, and set at odds.

It now only remains (my Lord) that I deliver this Memorial to Posterity under
your Patronage: In which I purpose not to touch upon things known, and allowed,
any otherwise then barely for Method sake; the stress of the Controversy not
depending upon Them, but upon General Monks designed Loyalty to restore our
Sovereign, and our Laws to us. Now because he was short sighted, and could not
discern at a Distance; it has been suggested to me (more sarcastically then
wittily) as if that Imperfection had reached his understanding also, and that
he could not see so far, as to the Restoring of the King.

Let others (who are as tender of the honor of the late Duke of Albemarle as I
am, (and ought to be) contribute to the vindicating of his Memory from this
Calumny, in what proportion, and with what solemnity of attestation they
please, to gain Credit. As for my self, being of an Inferior rank, I do foresee
that what I shall deliver will not, by a great many, easily be believed (yea I
am before hand threatened that it shall not;) whether it be upon the Score of my
fidelity and secrecy, in that great affair, or of the prosperous close and
Issue of it in my deceased Lord, I shall not trouble my self to determine,
against spite and Prejudice: But, contenting my self with the answer of a good
Conscience, that I have not forged things either to greaten his Honor, and
Loyalty, or to lessen it, by relating some few passages to which I was privy,
or in which I acted; (Envy having pursued even a Fly upon this fortunate Wheel
of Revolution, though not making the noise of a Qualem or Quantem pulverem) I
shall presume to pray your Lordships protection of the ensuing Narrative, and
of the unworthy Author of it; who is

My Lord, Your Lordships Obliged and Devoted Servant

John Price.

THE MYSTERY AND METHOD Of His MAJESTY'S Happy Restoration, etc.
AUGUST 1. 1659. Sir George Booth, (now Lord De la Mere) by compact, at his day
appeared in Arms; (be it Recorded to his Eternal Honor) and ^ent forth a brisk
Declaration manifesting the justice and necessity of them. For at that time the
whole Nation groaned under the insupportable Servitude of the Tyrannical
Oligarchy, sitting at Westminster under the notion of a Parliament; against
whom a very powerful Combination was then made. Many of those who had sormerly
fought under them, complained that they w^e deceived; nay, and diverse, even
then actually in their service, were so ingenuous as to confess, that That
could not be their Countries Freedom, where the worst of Tyrannies, (under the
(...) of a Commonwealth, and the good old ^use) were like to be perpetuated.
And however the great Officers might thrive whilst they were in power; yet they
saw full well, that their Posterity would be forced to pay back to t^ose
li^entious Usurpers whatever their (...) had got, should the Government still
rest^ an Oligarchy, which is the corruption of the worst of Governments, (a
Democrasie) and consequently the worst of Tyrannies. Thus we ^ee tha^ the State
o^ Three Kingdoms was (then) most deplorable.

The King compassionated their condition; for himself had the greatest share in
the calamity; and though his Royal Person was safe from the fury of his
Enemies, yet was he so nea^, that by his authority he was still ready to
contribute to the vindicating the just rights of his Subjects, and his own. To
this end there were constantly residing at London, some Noble Persons of great
Honor, and (...) Loyal^y, (in spite of Axes an Gibbets) after they had lost
the Field) who were commissioned by his Majesty, both to hold correspondence
with him, and to issue forth such commands from time to time, as occasion
should offer for his Majesty's Service.

And the occasion was eminent, now, upon the return of that Thing called a
Parliament; who had been respited from their Power by the Monarc^ical
Interposition of their General (Oliver Cromwell) and his Son; and that too by
the space of about five years. This Restitution was mostly procured by the
Army, who feared that a National Interest, like a Deluge, would have broken in
upon them, had they suffered Cromwell's Son, and his MockParlia^ent, to sit
longer in Authority. And the Armie's pretenses being for Commonwealth, they had
no nearer a Sanctuary to fly unto, then this Long Parlia^ent, (as they called
it) whose guilt they knew to be at least equal with Theirs, and distasted and
abhorred by all tha^ were not their own, and even by ^ome of Them too:
wherefore the Presbyterian Party began now at last to awaken into Loyalty; and
chose ^ather to join with the Cavaliers, (as they pretended) then to see their
Country ^o enslaved: and indeed the Cavaliers (...) quieted their Jelousies:
for his Majesty's Commissioners consented that the Presbyterians should have
the chief command in all places, and that their Declaration should only be for
a Free Parliament, and against public grievances. And now Sir George Booth,
(Lord De la mere) undertook ^or Cheshire, and the Counties adjacent; Sir Thomas
Middleton, for North Wales; Major General Massy, for Gloucester, and South
Wales; The Lord Fairfax for the North; The Lord Roberts (now Earl of Radnor and
President of the Council) for the West; Colonel Alexander Popham, and Col.
Robert Rolls for Wiltshire, Somersetshire and Devonshire; Col. Norton for
Portsmouth, and Hantshire; and Sir Horatio (now Lord Townsend) for the
associated Counties* and in like manner diverse others in all places through
out England; solemn Protestations, and Assurances being given, that they would
not fail each other.

Not long before this, Sir John Greenvile (the now Earl o^ Bath) who was one of
those Honorable Commi^sioners residing at London for his Majesty's Service;
had received a particular Commission to treat secretly and privately with
General Monk in Scotland: The King, it seems, having these thoughts about him,
that if a dexterous Application could be made to him, he might be gained to his
Service, as having been in his Fathers, in which he was taken Prisoner, and his
Releasement neglected: But the Parliament, having experienced hi^ usefulness
and Conduct in Ireland against the Rebels there, set him at liberty, and sent
him back again thither into their Service: and afterward Cromwell, who knew how
to value a good Soldier, took him with him into Scotland.

Sir John Greenvile, by an express Messenger, with a Letter in Cipher, dire^ted
to Chancellor Hide at Brussels (with whom only, by his Majesty's order, he was
to correspond) Proposed the sending of Mr Nicholas Monk to his Brother in
Scotland; which was allowed: The King leaving the whole management of the
Business to the Secrecy and Prudence of Sir John, who could not be said to
have declined a Journey t^ the General in Scotland for the Danger of it, for he
daily conve^ed with as great, as being one of his Maje^ties Commissioners in
Town: besides that He and the Monks were Cousin Germans, and both of them
obliged either by himself or his Family. However, sure I am, that he did the
King and the General more Service in not coming to us; for his very Person,
then, would have been suspected, though he had come without any Commission, or
Message. So he sent for Mr. N. Monk out of Cornwall, to whom he imparted the
Kings Commission to treat with his Brother.

Mr. Monk fraught with hopes and instructions; (the design of revolting from
the Parliament, being now universal too; Sir George Booth actually in Arms
against their Authority, and Insurrections from all Counties in England daily
exp^cted) embarked for Scotland; with a prosperous Gale, within few days after
arriving at Leith, and so from thence, five Miles, to Dalkeith, where the
General resided. He gave out that the intent of this Voyage was only to f^tch
his Daughter Mary, in order to bestowing her in Marriage to her advantage;
hoping that his Brother would add some weight and encouragement to it: this
pretense for his Journey was real too, and so signified by Letters.

Col. Jonathan Atkins (afterward Knighted, and (...) Governor of Barbados) was
now at Dal^eith, where he had been about two days before Mr. Monk came to his
Brother, and was preparing for his journey further, to visit some Relations of
his in Fife; having already received his answer from the General. For this
Gentleman, either upon confidence of the Generals Lo alty, or of his Friendship
and Interest in him, (they having been formerly Soldiers under the same
command in Ireland, and I think in Holland also) imparted to him the Designs of
the Gentlemen of the North of England, who being ready (he said) to appear in
the quarrel, and assistance of Sir George Booth, solicited the help of his
Arms, or at least, that he would not disturb them in their Levies. To whom the
General smartly returned, that if they did appear, he would send a Force to
suppress them and that by the duty of his Place he could do no less.

The Colon^l afterward came to my Chamber, and propounded the Business in wa^y
Terms, yet so as to be understood. But I (unconcernedly) replied, that to me it
appeared, as if the Malcontents in England labored only how to ruin
Themselves and their Cause* for so long as London was the Magazine of Arms and
Men, the Country Plots, without it, could never prove very effectual for what,
I ^upposed, he aimed at: But if that City could be engaged (as it was
disconten^) upon this Return of the Parliament; and would shut up their Gates
and rise as one man* and had done so, now, whilst Lambert was ma^ching against
Booth: the design would carry a much better prospect of success, then it did.

This Intrigue of Colonel Atkins (a^ b^ing first in order of time) I relate
before the success of Mr. Monk's message to hi^ Brother; that so it may appear
what weight the King's A^thority had with General Monk, tho but v^baly
delivered by his Brother* he depending upon the Faith and Integrity of Sir John
Greenvile, and the truth of his Brother's Relation: For he might well suppose
(as wary as he was) that they did not deceive, nor would betray him: And I
believe he relied upon the word o^ a King as much as if he actually had
received a Commission from his Majesty, for he told me afterward, that he was
resolved to Commission the whole Scotch Nation against Parliament and Army and
all, before he would be taken tamely by them: But he had no other Authority to
do it, than this aerie word of mouth, conveyed to him from Sr. John Greenvile,
who had it in Writing from the King.

Mr. Monk found his Brother engaged in Business, and in several Dispatches too,
though it was in the declining part of the day; and indeed it was rare to find
him otherwise: so the General sent him to my Chamber, under the conduct of an
Highland Footboy in the House, who proclaimed his Arrival at my Study-Door. I
courteously received him, and asked how Affairs stood in England; for Booth's
being in Arms, and Lamberts march toward him, were now the common
entertainment of News. I soon perceived that he had a mind to say something to
me, which he as soon disclosed: The Tenor whereof was, that he was sent to his
Brother by Sir John Greenvile to invite him in this juncture of time, to appear
for his Country; telling how the design was laid, and universal in all
Counties; and he did not doubt (he said) ^ut that his Country Men in the West
had already made an Insurrection: adding further, that this was not barely a
Combination; without Authority, for though the King was not named in the
Declaration, sent out for a Free Parliament, and against Taxes and Grievances
complained of; (some of which Declarations he ventured to bring with him) yet
all this was done by his Majesty's Privacy and countenance: Therefore was he
sent by his Cousin Greenvile, to try if he could bring over his Brother into
the King's Service, and, at this time, to espouse his Cause; and that Sir John
Greenvile hoped that his Brother might be as succesful in it, as was the famous
Stanly, who determined the day in Bosworth field to Henry the Seventh, tho he
came thither to the succor of Richard the III. These were high hopes, but that
which now puzzled Mr. Monk was, that he knew not how to break this Message to
his Brother; but if he would undertake so glorious a Work as the restoring of
the King, no encouragement (he was sure) would be awanting: he might set down
his own Conditions, and the King would (upon his Royal Word) perform them: For
he had seen his Majesty's Commission to Sir John Greenvile to treat with his
Brother: And indeed in that Commission Sir John was left at large to promise or
assent to any conditions of reward: But by his secret Instructions he was bound
up to the definitive Gratuity of one hundred thoutand pounds per annum, for
ever, to be disposed of at the General's discretion. So Mr. Monk produced to me
a broken piece or two of Money as Tokens, if need were, to be sent with Letters
of Correspondence to Sir John Greenvile, but under the disguised name of Mr.
Leg.

The Goodman spoke i^ great Secrecy and Earne^t; and seemed to press upon me,
upon my Allegiance, to hearken to His Proposals, and to accept of his broken
Tokens: he promising me, that whatsoever Letters should be sent to Sir John
Greenvile the Messenger, who brought them, and either of those Tokens, should
be more than paid for his Journey.

So I perceived his Embassy was real; but it strangely surprised me: and I went
often to the door of my Chamber, as being appre^ensive least any body should
over-hear him: I paused a while, and then asked him why he imparted a Message
of so great concern (and which was to his Brother too) first to me; For I had
never seen him before, and then not half an hour. He returned, that tho he did
not know me, yet he had understood who I was, and what thoughts were conceived
of me; as if I could not but have an inward and true Affection for the King and
his Service; it being very notorious that Mine had been a great Sufferer for
His Majesty's Father: And so indeed he was, even to the loss of All: for
otherwise, I had not then been found in that Employment. And it seems I was so
well known in Scotland, as soon as I came there, that some of the Remonstrating
Clergy, and of our own Officers too, told the General, that he had entertained
a Cavalier for his Chaplain. And he was so kind as to tell me of this, and give
me good Counsel upon it: But I am not, to this day, conscious that eve^ I
discovered my self, or gave them any distaste by word; tho my Actions were not
a little Offensive, I believe, in regard that several of the Montrossian Party
would apply themselves to me, as an Intercessor for Ordinary Favors from the
General.

Mr. Monk pressed for instructions how to open this Message to his Brother: I
told him, that his brother must be satisfied of his secrecy, as well as of his
Love and fidelity to him; for that an affair of this importance must sleep in
as few breasts as might be; and that he would find, that he would put himself,
his brother, and his negotiation for the King, into a very gr^t hazard, should
he (relying upon characters given of the secret Loyalty of any persons among
us) attempt to make any more such rude communications of his Embassy: but that
he had revealed this great secrecy to me, I was content (I said) that he
should tell his brother; which I knew he did.

Now, to encourage him, I told him, that I did believe his brother would be
willing to close with any fair overture to redeem his Country from the slavery
of the Army, under which it groaned; that he had been many ways disobliged
since the return of this Old Parliament; and that Officers of the more
extravagant sort of Principles had bin encouraged by Commands given them, in
open contempt of his Recomendatory Letters in favor of others: so that he
talked often of living a Private Life upon his Estate in Ireland: And further,
that there were many jelous eyes upon him, which the Cavaliers, who had been
formerly of his acquaintance, had given much the occasion of: for that
sometimes he received Letters from Holland, by a Dutch-Skipper, minding him of
his Allegiance; which he was forced openly to protest against, as prudently
supposing, that there might be a snare in them.

Nay, Oliver Cromwell himself, not long before his death, writ once to him with
his own hand; and in the Letter there was this Drolling Expression: It Is said
there is a cunning fellow in Scotland called George Monk, who lies in wait
there to serve Charles Stuart; pray use your diligence to take him, and send
him up to me, etc. And this, I suppose, gave the rise to a trifling Report that
Cromwell could not get him out of Scotland. Withal, I told Mr. Monk, that his
brother was but a new-man, brought in by Cromwell, into the English. Army, and
so was disrelished by most of the great Officers of it: and that those that
were heads of distinct Factions, did rather hate than affect him, and would
contribute to give him a Lift out of his Command, could they have an
opportunity to d^ it: and this did afterward appear to be true, when Coll.
Cobbet was sent down to Scotland, upon the very disturbanee of the Parliament
by Lambert, before any ^otice could be returned that the General was
dissatisfied with it; which was no more yet than what himself foresaw: But the
Soldiers, who troubled not their heads with Religion, by abetting Parties, but
fought for their Pay, did generally love him; for they looked upon him as a
good Soldier and a discreet Commander, under whom they might safely Engage; and
of th^se he could at any time make a good Party, when it might be judged fit
and safe to appear.

Besides, I thought it not amiss to insinuate, that his Wife had to some
degrees, prepared him to appear, when the first opportunity should be offered:
For her custom was (when the Generals, and her own work, and the day were
ended) to come into the Dining Room to him in her Treason Gown; (as I called
it) I telling him, that when she had that Gown on, he should allow her the
liberty to say any thing: And indeed, her tongue was her own then, and she
would not spare it; insomuch that I, who still chose to give my attendance at
those hours, (the General being alone) have often shut the Dining-Room-Doors, and
charged the Servants to stand without, till they were called in. It Is easy to
conceive what her discourses were, when a Woman that had Wit enough, always
Influence, and sometimes (as it was thought) too much, upon her Husband, (the
Theme being so copious too) might safely talk extravagancies* in confidence
that they would go no further.

Sometimes the General would make hard faces, and seem to be uneasy in hearing
her, and often address himself to me; as if I were to moderate at the act: To
whom I have as often returned, Sir, what shall I say? she speaks such unhappy
truths, that you, nor I, cannot gainsay them. I cannot forget his usual answer.
True Mr. Price (would he say) but I have learned a Proverb, that he who follows
Truth too close upon the Heels; will one time or other, have his Brains kicked
out. His Lady usually withdrew before it was called to Prayers, and then I had
the opportunity to talk over the same things, in softer language, (as became
me) by which I very well understood his meauing, when he would express a
concern for the unhappiness of the late King, and name some instances in which
he miscarried: He would say, that he had Armies indeed of brave Men, but they
were too great to be Commanded; and fewer men under better discipline would
have done his bu^iness: But that he would never forget nor forgive his not
fighting the Scots, when they first invaded England in 1638. That he imputed
all the shedding of blood since, to the foolish (as he called it) sparing of it
then; and that the Scots did deservedly suffer what they did. I have purposely
noted these things, that it might appear that there were previous dispositions
in the General to serve the King and his Country, whenever he should conceive
it proper to declare: and indeed his zeal to serve Both was so very forward,
that he had like to have lost himself by it, and those who were engaged with
him, and blasted that miraculous Restoration of his Sovereign, which was
after^ards effected by his renowned Conduct. An Achievement which former Ages
(all circumstances being put into the balance) have not equaled, and I do
de^pair of the future!

Thus Mr. Monk and I, after an hours acquaintance or more, (having discoursed
ofserious and dangerous things) grew to be familiar; and we refreshed our
selves with a Glass of Wine, and with Hopes. Mr. Monk had also his Prophecies
of comfort; and told me, that his Grandfather was a Spend-Thrift, and had
wasted much of their Paternal Estate (I think his name was Sir Anthony Monk)
but that it was prophesied to him (by some cuning Man, I must suppose) that a
Grand Child of his should make the Estate far greater than ever his Ancestors
left it him. And another, that the King should come in by a Monk: which he
might understand of the Name, as he did of the Profession. I desired him to
mingle his Prophecies with his Instructions to his brother. Nor was I without
my Prophecies too, viz. that if this Great Confederacy did prosper, we could
not expect much more than a circumscribed and limited King. And yet I am apt to
believe too, that the Army could have made His Majesty as Arbitrary even as
the GrandSeignior himself, upon the assurance of a revvard proportionable to
the merit of the service; nay and they might (probably) have been well enough
disposed that way, upon a right judgment of things; it being evident that the
great Officers of the Army could never be safe under any Government, but a
Monarchical; to which their own thwarting Ambition had ^o far reconciled them
(at least some whom I knew) that they would usually say, that if they must have
a single Person to govern, they would rather give their Vote, that Charles
Stuart should be the Man than any other; whereas they knew that a Democrasie
(however bound less in its own power) would always be jealous of them, and
shift them out of their commands. In this Particular Lambert had much the
advantage of Monk: This had been his true and proper Interest, and of those
under him at Newcastle, could they have trusted the King, and one another; and
Lambert had caution given him, after he had disturbed the Parliament, that if
he did not design to bring in the King, his own Projects would evaporate into
Smoke. But the greatest obstruction on the Kings side was, that though in Law he
was our Only and Rightful King, ^et it was not then known how far he would
Pardon; nor could I, for all Mr. Monk's Errant to his Brother, foresee how fa^
the Church would be Restored, if the King was. But I saw that the Good man had
adventured himself upon a dangerous Message; and so did deserve well, could he
induce his Brother to clo^e with this Overture for the King; which if he should
be able to effect, I ^ld him that I did not then doubt but that I could
procure, that he should be Provost of Eaton-Colledge, and I was as good as my
word to him; the General afterward, upon my reque^, using the Interest of Sir
John Greenvile to do it: And that for ^y self, I would endeavor to succeed in
Mr. Hales's Fellowship There; which the Noble Earl of Northampton (who had been
an E^ton Scholar) obtained for me. This I ^ention in gratitude to his Honor,
as being done without my Application to him: But I mark it yet more solemnly,
to attribute it to a superior disposal of us: and of me more especially; For
the General, upon the King's Return, ^ound me up to wait his leisure for
p^eferment, with promises of after-provision for me. So much for dividing the
Bears skin, now we are to kill the Bear.

It was by this time Evening, when the Ge^eral used to be alone: But when Mr.
Monk and I came into the Dining-Ro^m, we found that several Officers from Leith
and Edinburgh had not yet received their Dispatches; one of whom took me aside,
and asked me, how it was that the General's Brother came to see him Now? I
thought it no rudeness to ask the reason of the Now; but I soon found his
meaning. What Intelligence ^ame from London I cannot tell; but this I can, that
designs of this nature were not so carefully concealed as they ought to have
been: However I did seemingly satisfy the busy Enquirer, with a pretense of
his Daugh^ers Marriage; whose fate it was to be unfortunate in the Overture of
Matches. So we left the General, as ^et, to the work of his place. This
Jealousy did somewhat startle Mr. Monk; and indeed Colonel Atkins and he
being both in the House at a time, were too many* Mr. Monk would have had me
with him at the opening of his Embassy to his Brother; which ^ refused, as
fearing the mischief of it, and knowing the reservedness of the General. But I
gave him Instructions (such as I thought fit) how to insinuate this dangerous
Errant, and told him, that I would watch the time to do my part in it. The
General went late to Bed that Night; where I believe I left him to take little
rest* But I took no notice of what his Brother either Had or was to say to him.
And for what I was to say, having asked his leave to speak, and obtain^d it; I
told him, that the things I was to speak of were of great moment, and I could
not say any thing, unless he would promise to give me no Answer; telling him,
that so, if he judged me either Imprudent, or that I should be Treacherous, I
could have no advantage upon Him, though he might of Me; and I perceived this
did not dislike him. The substance of what I said was; that I knew he had the
Heart of an English^man to pity his Country, and the Courage to redeem it from
Slavery; and I knew that he had Wisdom enough to judge of things, whether he had
an opportunity to do it or no.

The next day before Noon, Mr. Monk came to my Chamber, with the glad News that
his Brother liked the Plot; and much the better, because the Presbyterians were
concerned in it, naming several of them to me, and not forgetting his Cousen
Moric also; but he was most satisfied with the Assurance that the Lord Fairfax
was engaged, with whom, afterward, he kept correspondence. Colonel Atkins was
now gone to make a Visit farther in the Country, but returned to us the Week
after; Thus I found that the General stood Engaged, and from this time I do
date, that his Resolutions were fixed for the Kings Restoration: So happy it
was for His Majesty to employ Sir John Greenvile, and so lucky for him to send
his Clerk, Mr. Nicholas Monk hither; where he omitted nothing of his
Instructions, and prudently managed them, as may reasonably be inferred from
the good effect they had. Thus did the sense of Allegiance, and the Love of his
Country prevail with his Brother against all hazzards: And, if I knew him
right, the revenge of slights was some part of a grain in the Scales. It is not
improbable neither, that he had been in the Night, quickened with a
Curtain-Lecture of Damnation; a Text that his Lady often Preac^ed upon to him,
and sometimes he would complain of it, where he safely might.

Saturday came, and brought Mr. Gumble to Dalkeith, where now and then he used
to give the General a Sermon or Two, and so eased me, for which I gave him
thanks. He was then one of the Chaplains of the unto which Cromwell had Erected;
and which did act, till the Deposition of Richard his Son; nay, the Officers
were still continued upon that Establishment, in expectation of what the
Parliament would do in it: Such a Cabal they found necessary for the support of
their Usurpation; and hereof the General from the time of its first Erection
was nominated a Member. So M^. Gumble's employment was such as made him well
known; beside that he was an acceptable Preacher, and his Company much more so
to very many Officers of Edinburgh, where he resided; and this the rather, both
to them and the General, because he had not engaged into a Congregational
Church, as his Brother Chaplain had done. He was a strenuous asserter of
Freedom, and disrelished the single persons of Oliver and Richard Cromwell, when
they sat successively in the Throne of Usu^pation; he was somewhat better
pleased at the return of the old Parliament; but being of quick apprehension he
soon discerned that those few Members of it would keep themselves within those
Walls of Empire at Westminster, and not suffer the Wheel to turn round; and as
a generous person did not dissemble his discontents, but would speak them
franckly and boldly enough to the General. And this too, was Sir George Booths
quarrel.

So the General (who knew how to make use of men) after some conference with
him, made him his Minister of State: And having received instructions how to
proceed, he came up to my Study, where he found me then busy and alone. So he
bad me lay aside all thought of Preaching, for to Morrow; for he would
undertake it for me. Now at that time there happened to be other work upon my
hands which required a quick Dispatch; for I was transformed into a Secretary
of State; my province being to frame a Letter to the Parliament, according to
directions given, which was to be signed by the General and such of the
Officers as he could bring into this new design: But Mr. Gumble said he was not
fully satisfied of the grounds of the Generals Engagement, now, after his
Brother was come; for he might have done that sooner, and if he had, I am
confident that Mr. Gumble would not have been wanting, on his part, to serve
the Public. But I told him that Mr. Nicholas Monks Journey was for his
Daughter, and it was necessary to try what his Brother would contribute toward
her Marriage, the match being to be with a Kinsman of theirs, which the General
had desired, and approved. So the motives of this Engagement being waved (for
Mr. Gumble did not insist upon them as a hindrance to the good cause in which
he was resolved to embarque himself) we proceeded to the finishing of the
Letter to the Parliament, which was that day done.

The next was the Lords day, and the work of it was carried on by Mr. Gumble,
who, in h^s last Prayer, put up a Petition for the good Intentions of the
General; which soon after were communicated in my Chamber; whither came the
General and his Brother, Adjutant Smith, and Mr. Gumble. But before any
discourse was entered upon, I swore the General (his hands being laid upon the
Bible open) in these words. You (...) swear, that you shall not reveal any
(...) shall be discoursed of by us, or read (...), without the consent of all
here present. So he kissed the Book. The rest I swore in order, one by one,
after this manner. You shall truly swear that you shall not reveal any thing
that shall be discoursed of or read unto you, without the consent of the
General and all here present. And lastly, I ^wore my self; and I will be my own
Casuist for publishing of this; and keep the Bible for a Relic, without fea^
of Superstition.

Our Declaration in deed, but, in form, our Letter or Supplication to the
Parliament, was read; it is supposed to have been prefaced with good words,
clawing them for their glorious actions, which we could not avoid doing. But
yet we took the liberty to mind them that we found the body of the English
Nation disatisfied with their proceedings, as apprehending that their Intention
was to appropriate the Government to their Individual persons; and that though
there might possibly be ^omething of danger in gratifying them, for fear of the
old Enemy; yet however, it did not appear to the good People, who had fought
for their Liberty, that they had entertained any thought of the filling up of
their Number; much less done any thing toward the prescribing of Rules for the
Future Elections of such Parliaments as were supposed to be contained under the
name of a Common wealth, which themselves owned to be the Supreme Government;
and that otherwise their Armies could not protect them in their Authority; this
not being the good old Cause for which they fought, and they could not answer
to their consciences the effusion of so much blood to uphold only a few men in
their Sovereignty. Wherefore to prevent the shedding of more, we became
Petitioners to them (we said) that they would speedily pass such votes, and do
such things as might satisfy all the honest and G^dly People in the Nation,
that they did not design their own greatness but the good and safety of the
Commonwealth.

In the mean time the General declared that he would associate what force he
could, till he saw that their Votes and actions were satisfactory. Here I
confess that I have not related words, but things; for the Paper was the next
day burnt, because our design proved abortive. This was the Substance of our
intended Letter to the Parliament, which having been read by me, (the General,
with his Confederates, correcting or adding such expressions as were thought
fit) the Presenting of it to the Officers of our Army to sign, as their humble
Petition and Advice to the Parliament, was resolved upon. But the^ were to be
Petitioners with Swords in their hands, for the General gave immediate order to
Adjutant Smith to go that night to Edenbu^gh, and Leith, and to secure the
Castle of the one, and the Cittidel of the other; (he relying upon the
discretion and fidelity of this Adjutant in the management of so important an
Affair) for we did not doubt but that Captain Clifton (the Governor of the
Castle) would be ours, and we were as sure that Hughes and Miller in Leith were
devoted to the Generals Service; and he was most confident of his Adjutant,
that he would not fail in the Execution of his trust, as having for some years
been received into his sp^cial Favor and Friendship: And this was the hour of
his probation. So the General, havving a while discoursed with us, left his
orders to the Adjutant to hasten to Horse, for it was not above an Hour to
night; but himself descended my Stairs having other, and more secret designs to
fetch, in assi^tance to this new Enterprise. But long he had not left us,
before he came up again, where he found us still discoursing of the affair in
hand and our engagement in it. His Adjutant was now ready to lea^e us to
Execute his Orders, but the General stopped him and bespake us, Thus.
Gentlemen; it will be no great prejudi^e to our business, if we wait for the
Info^mation of the ^ext Post; for Lambert is Marched toward Booth, and by this
time is ready to Face him, and then we shall know whether Booth has that force
with him that it is said he has, and what likel^-hood there is of the Action,
by any farther Assistance. 'Twas our duty, and it was fit for us, to yield to
the Generals Prudence, who ^nderstood things of this nature better then we did
or could. But it was a rashness in me, which to this day I do not forgive my
self, to solicit the General afresh; for he had not long le^t us the second
time, but I took the opportunity to Steal down after him, whom I found close in
discourse with Gradenker an honest Montrosian, and a good Gray Hound Master,
the latter of which qualities had before recommended him to the Generals
Friendship. I stood at a distance, perceiving the conference was ^erious, till
he would be at leisure to speak with me; and, seeing ^e, he soon was: To whom,
I (being impatient of all delays, and thinking every minute lost in which we
were not visible upon the Stage of so Noble an attempt) addressed my self with
some sort of forwardness, and told him of the danger (as I foolishly thought)
of the delay, and that his Brother had come to us already with the latest. The
General (I can never forget his posture of answering me) laid his hands on my
Shoulders, Frowned, and Paused; and then, in some anger, spoke thus ( Gradenker
being at a good distance) what Mr. Price (said he) will you then bring my Neck
to the Block for the King, and ruin our whole design, by engaging too rashly?
To whom I returned with submission, Sir I never named the King to you either
now, or at any other time. But he dismissed me Thus; well, I know you have not,
but I know you, and have understood your meaning. Now the manner of my
Addresses to him used to be for our known Laws and Liberties, propounding the
attempt as a thing which would render him renowned to all Posterity and the
Three Nations happy: For in those days I durst not name Kingdoms, for the
danger of the Relation. So that night he slept (or did not) in expectation of
the Post, which came the next Morning Six Hours at least sooner than ordinary,
and brought us the glad tidings that Sir George Booth was Beaten, and routed.
Good news Fly apace, and by Noon several Officers (and those the most
considerable of the Sectarians Sort) came to rejoice, and Dine with the
General; but his Ordinary Table served for a Thanksgiving Dinner for them. Mr.
Monk, Mr. Gumble, and Adjutant Smith, had the good Fortune to Dine abroad; but
my Duty was to be at the Generals Table, where I heard the expressions of joy
that passed from Officer to Officer, for the total defeating of Sir George
Booth; and that the mercy was not ordinary, for the greatest part of the Gentry
of England (they said) were engaged in it; and that their old Friends (naming
the Presbyterians) were more forward in the action, then their old Enemies the
Cavali^rs: And that it was apparent that Booth, and his Confederates, would
have brought in Charles Stuart. Upon this the General gave them the Complement
of a Thanksgiving day, that he could wish that the Parliament would make a Law
that whoever should but mention the Restoring of him, should presently be
Hanged. I had reason to think that he was but in jest; otherwise, I could guess
where the Hanging lay. But to let Posterity see how far the Parliaments
Reformation had prevailed against the Liturgy, and Bishops; a very intricate
Case of Conscience was put, before Dinner, whether he could be a Godly Man,
that Prayed the same Prayer Twice. Some were for the Negative, but others said
they durst not be so peremptory. At Dinner the madness continued, and the Joy
increased, insomuch, that in their Jollity they fell to Scoffing at the Name of
Priest: Nay, and even the Presbyterian himself would no longer down with them
for a Gospel-Minister, but he had also his Leaven of Popery. At last one
Captain Poole, of Colonel Fairfax's Regiment, spoke (his Mouth being open)
that there could never be a qui^ and lasting settlement in these Nations, so
long as there was a Parish Priest, or a Steeple-(...). Upon which extravagancy
of Thanksgiving Recreations, the General (who could keep his reserves with Men)
(...) not, or rather would not do it here; but in ^n unexpected Indignation
rose from his Cha^ and (...) to the amazement of all* (...) and softly (says
he) Captain Poole, if you, (...) your Party once come to pluck there, I will
(...) with you. Whereupon there was a sudden damp* they ^ere but Soldiers
before their General and we^e ^ilent; and thus con^luded the Mir^ and the
Thanksgiving Dinner. But the General, and those who were engaged (...) him,
either kept, or I am s^e ought to have done, a (...) Festival Eveni^g; for a
sober and fincere Thanksgiving became us, such as was ex^lusive of the
Hypo^ite, for we (...) not act the ^risee. And reflecting upon (...)
deliverance (as I often have done) I once ask^ ^he General what he thought should
(...) become of ^s, had the tidings of Lam^'s beating of Booth surprised us in
the very (...) ^ppearance of our design, when it had (...) f^r us (our (...)
b^ing (...) into Action*) to have made any safe (...)* He seemed gently to
remin'd me of my (...) with him, but I must not forget (...) (...) Return,
which was ^'doubt not b^ I could have secured to my self the Castle of
^denburgh and Cittidel of Leith; some Officers, and many Soldiers would have
followed (...); and then ^* would have Commiss^oned the whole Scottish Nation
to Rise. This I believe (they would have done at his Whistle, for after the
beating of Sir George Booth, they began to be desperate, and saw that the whole
frame of a National Church was like to be lost. Several of their own
Countrymen would not be kept within the bounds of Discipline; Swinton and
Osborne and others, tacked about timely for Quakers, as that which was most
likely to be the thriving Sect; the Principles of it being such, that they put
no rules to the conscience, but only breathed the Air, and lived in the Region
of Enthusiasm. It was a Trojan Horse of all Heresies, every man might be of
this comprehensive Religion with a Salvo to his own, a Jew* and a Jesuit might
stand with his Hat on his Head, for the Light within him, and all Practical
Villainies might have come in under this Shelter.

I told the General, that if things did continue in this State much longer, it
would* be found that the Quaker would be as great a Goad in the sides of our
new Sects, as ever the Old Puritan was to the Church of England* For about this
time came several Quakers from England, who were cunning Seminaries of this new
Faith, and some of them came to our He^d Quarters, and taught Doctrines not to
be believed by Soldiers, of the unlawfulness of such a bloody calling. They
were all Sheep and Doves to receive and not do injuries. Once i^ was my ill
luck to meet with Two of them in the Generals and his Ladys presence, when they
were upon the Theme of parting with their Coat and Cloak also. His Lady very
pleasantly forced me to stand the Brunt of their Folly, to whom I had no other
Answer to return, but that they might have another Light within the^, one day;
which was, that he that has no Sword, let him sell his Garment, and buy one.
Afterward there was a Number of them in Lambert's Army in New Castle, as it
was related to us; where they bargained for, and sold Horses, to be paid when
^ch, or such a Steeple-House (in our Langua^ a Church) was pulled down.

It was now high time for the General to look out for a Religion for himself,
though it was a Principle that the Marquis of Argi^ ^ad taught, that it was the
Character of a Wise man, not to let the World know of what Religion he was.

But the Generals Lady found him out one, ^or now she declares Mr. Monk is a
Presbyterian, and my So^* Kit is for the Long Parliament and the Good Old
(...). This soon found it is Operation; for t^ C^rgy of S^land made their
Addresses ^o the General as their Patron. They were of Two sorts, the Public
Resolutions, and the Remonstrators: The Division occasioned thus.

After the battle of Dunbar was fought* and lost by the Scotch Subjects, an.
1650* (which consisted only of those who had taken the Solemn League and
Covenant) it came to a debate whether they might not, without breach to their
Covenant, strengthen their Allegiance to the King by taking in a convenient
number of their Fellow Subjects, wh^ had fought for his Royal Father under the
Marquis of Montross against the Covenanters: 'Twas voted that (since they were
reduced to unexpected streights) their assistance might be accepted, and they
entertained into the Kings Service, without damage to the cause of God and the
Kirk: This was the judgment of the Major part of the Clergy, and prevailed:
but there were some whose Consciences being more nice, remonstrated against
this Resolution as ungodly, which by the Artifice of the Marquess of Argyle was
fomented, and so the party withdrew: This became a feud so irreconcilable, even
when the whole Kingdom of Scotand was under the English Obedience, that they
would not converse or receive the sacrament each with other. It was once told
the General; that at Leith there being a boat ready to go off for Fiffe, a
Remonstrating Minister stepped in; but seeing a Resolutioner of his Coat there,
he went out, and would rather loose his passage then sail in the same boat.
This division I have the rather mentioned; because it may be a word in season
to the concerned to beware of the heats and pedantry of such Ecclesiastic
Enthusiasts, who do so much contribute to the ruin of Kingdoms: and sometimes
are destructive to their own Societies. These men, apart (keeping Intelligence
each upon another, that they might not meet) did make their frequent visits to
the General, being now a declared Presbyterian; laid open the lamentable
condition of the Kirk of Christ, and implored his care, and Patronage of it;
who gave them such comfortable words as his station would permit him then to do.

The end of Mr. Nicholas Monk's Embassy to his Brother, was now frustrated* and
it being so, it created some disfidence of his prudence and secrecy. In
Negatives I can avouch for no man, but my self; and under the awe of the
Searcher of hearts I do write and declare, that the secret slept within my
breast till after the King was restored, and actually returned: and next, I do
think so well of Mr. Monk's care and prudence, that he did not in Scotland
communicate it to any, but his Brother and me; for so, upon his return, he told
Sir John Greenvile. But so it was, that there were suggestions of Information,
or rather of Temptation to the General, that the good man was like to be
sacrificed. But this went no further: either that the suggesters would not
stand the Test, or that the probation would be injurious to more the^ one:
However I do conjecture there could have been found no other guilt in Mr. Monk,
than the curiosity of the Suggester.

This was a time of Hearsays and Discoveries of Plots; for all Action ceased
upon Booth's Defeat: Mr. Gumble makes his frequent visits to Dalkeith to hear
and report news: keeps his correspondence with Scot, Secretary of State (to
whom he was known when he was Vicar of Wickham in Buckinghamshire) and by him
understood how affairs went at London, and what jealousies began to arise
between the Parliament and Army, and some of the more eminent Members and
Officers of both; makes his advantage of them, and adds fuel to the fire.

I was taken into his Counsel sometimes, and employed to write: so we sent
Letters by the Post either with no name at all, or what we thought fit; and
this was a divertisement, thus to play in the blind with the Grandees, and to
tell them those things, which themselves knew could not be revealed but by
their Treacherous Confidents.

The General now saw the usefulness and interest of Mr. Gumble, and the danger
of disobliging him; wherefore he was retained as his Confident; insomuch that
when the General appeared against the Army for disturbing the Parliament, the
action was looked upon as proceeding merely upon Mr. Gumble's advice. This was
rather the General's Protection then otherwise; for had it been insinuated,
that his Engagement proceeded from any sinister hand, he would have found at
home among his own Officers, that suspicions would have more increast upon him.
But Gumble was looked upon as the only man, and so represented by Mr. Welsh
from Leith to Wallingford house, who suggested, that had it not been for him,
George Monk had never stirred.

Mr. Nicholas Monk was preparing to return with his Daughter by Sea, as he
came; but before he went we heard of the Triumphant Return of Lambert to his
Masters at Westminster, who employed him to command in chief in the expedition
against Booth, which proved a Conquest easier than it was once thought it would
have been. The Spoil was not yet divided: Nor was the S^ldiery content with
what only appeared to be a Prey; that is, the forfeiture of those Gentlemen's
Estates; who in defense of their ancient Laws and Liberties were found in the
Field. Wherefore a Clamor was raised, and a Supplication framed, to bring
those to condign punishment, who had in any measure, or to any degree assisted
in Booth's Conspiracy, or could be detected as conscious of it: And had this
Inquisition been made, and a Sequestration passed upon it, This After-harvest
would have been worth more pounds, than the former public Sales of the Kings
and Church Land; (as the gleaning of the Grapes of Ephraim were better than the
Vintage of Abiezer) and how for this change of the face of things would have
conduced to fix a new Interest, I leave to be judged.

Though it became the Army to leave this Inquisition after Delinquency to the
Parliament, yet the frame of this Petition seemed just; that they might not be
always exercised with the fears of the Common Enemy. But there was a hidden
intrigue in it, to pick a Quarrel with their Masters; for even some of them had
not utterly lost the Consciences of English men, and were loath to have the
Government of the Commonwealth monopolized into so few hands; nay, and those of
them which yet savoured of Presbytery, were themselves suspected for a sort of
Delinquents.

The general foresaw whither this application of the Soldiery tended; and very
pleasantly told me, I see now that I shall have a better game to play than I
had before. His expression was, I know Lambert so well, that I am sure he will
not let those People at Westminster, sit till Christmas Day.

October was begun, when Mr. Monk left Dalk^ith; and he went from us too with
the Character of an Envoy; for he was to assure the Parliament of his Brother's
fidelity to them, and that he would stand firm to their Interest and Authority,
against all opposition whatsoever. I parted with him upon the Sands of Leith,
not without some grief and reflection upon our distracted Country; charging him
to solicit for the Prayers of good Men. I named unto him Dr. Hammond and Dr.
Shelden, who were, upon the information given me, actually Bishops, but it
seems I was deceived: So we comforted our selves, that God had in reserve his
appointed seasons of Mercy. But the General, about this time, found
encouragement from the Host of Heaven: And a Scoth-Noble man came to him, and
told him plainly (after much Discourse with him) that the King would be
restored, and that within some few Month; that he looked upon him as a
principal instrument toward the effecting of it; and that not a drop of Blood
should be spilt in the action. This was the Earl of Nitzdale, whom I do not
remember to have seen ever before with the General; for his Religion rather
required his retirement, than converse; and this the General informed me of;
and of the Earls Prophetic apprehensions, that there should not be the blood
of a cut Finger in the action; he spoke it merrily, and therefore was assured
of his share in it.

But at the Cockpit I have heard him tell it at large: Consonant hereunto I
have a Paper (among others) by me of one Mrs. Katherin Johnson's (a Copy of
which was by her delivered to Cromwell.) I am very well satisfied of the truth
of the delivery, I knew the Gentlewoman, She being of a good Family: and I can
witness; that when she was in my House (for she was related to me) she spent
much time in Fasting, and Prayer. The words of the Paper are these; Great
General! All the power of the World is in your hands; therefore let humility be
your guide, for none shall correct you but God: The Lord gives, and the Lord
takes, blessed be his Name. Have peace with all Men; refuse None. In the 16th
Year of King Charles his Reign, I delivered him a Manuscript, wherein I told
him of his destruction; but he took none of my Counsel, though I was sent from
God. As for the Scotch King (as he is called) his right, here, must be in
peace, not by the Sword. I can say more, if I be called to an account; but what
I say is by Faith, and I shall justify it with my life. June the 18th. I
conceive the Year was 1653.

I shall not undertake the vindication of the Nobleman, or the Prophetess, but
only, in transitu, relate matter of fact, till the English make us work. That
which Mrs. Johnson forewarned the late King of was, not to sign the Bill for
the death of the Earl of Strafford; which the good King afterward repented of.
And though she had the fate of Cassandra, not to be believed; yet Mr. Lenthal
(the Speaker) who was satisfied of the truth of this, gave such credit to her
warning of him to beware of the Oath of Abjuration against the Royal Family,
that he absented himself from the House for about Ten days, under the pretense
of the Gout: And she assured him he should be forgiven for what else he had
done against the King.

The Prognostic of Doctor ^ayborn is very well known, who told the General
that he should command in the North, and afterward in all England, which the
Doctor owned to me, and for which the General owed him a respect; for he would
ponder on the fancy, and not altogether neglect the belief of them: But
possibly the Man had more credit with him than the Prophet^cy. I know, when he
was in Scotland (speaking of the infelicities that did attend the King's
Family) he was told that the King, after the Twenty Ninth Year of his Age, had
very benign Aspects, pointing at his Restoration: And he who told him this,
added somewhat more: So much of I know not what to I know not whom; desiring in
the first place, that the Reporter may be believed; and next, that the
victuosos of infidelity would not look upon this as a Paralogism; for when a
Man foretells me three things, two whereof are already come to pass, he may
without a tincture of levity be believed for a third: Nay, and I know a fourth
and a fifth,

Mr. Monk was now safely Arrived at London, to give an account of his Old
Embassy, and to impart his N^w. The Old appertained to Sir John Greenvile, who
sent him into Scotland. To Him he said he could give no other account, than
that he could give none at all, for that he was under an Oath of secrecy: but
his Message he had delivered to his Brother, and that he had imparted it to
none besides but to me. Sir John thought this was enough, and immediately
acquainted the King with it; his Majesty being then at Brussels. This gave
encouragement to Sir John Greenvile, afterward to treat personally with the
General, which he was resolved to do; waiting the occasion for it; which in the
process of a few Months, was happily offered; and his negotiation accepted, and
effected.

Mr. Nicholas Monk's new Credentials from his Brother were to be Imparted to
Dr. Clargis; which were, that the General would resolutely adhere to the
Parliament, and declare for their cause, if he found any disturbance given
them. This was so well managed by the Dr. (who was now become Agent for the
Sco^ch and Irish Armies) though Mr. Monk came but just time enough, that the Men
at Westminster in sense of the Generall's Fidelity, and in requital of his
offered kindness, (when they saw they must yield to Lambert's Ambition) in an
expiring Vote of Revenge, before their Authority suffered a Second Rape,
constituted him about the seventh part of a Generalissimo. (the Power by which
he seemed afterward to act, and give Commissions.)

On the 11th. of October, Lambert brake up his Masters Housekeeping at
Westminster; for it was now high time to allow their Servants the Privilege of
Persian Slaves, ^z. To Feast upon Sovereignty. So he began his Christmas sooner
than the General thought he would; but not sooner than he was provided for him;
for his Provide^t Frugality in Scotland, had laid up some Thousands for the Pay
of his Army, if upon any sudden Disturbance in England, he could not be
Relieved from thence, that so he might keep his Soldiers in Obedience to him.
And without a Spirit of Prophecy he did easily foresee this Change.

Three Kingdoms for about 17 years (by our Civil-War) had been deprived of a
Just Government; or the Plenary exercise of it: But now they groaned under a
fatal Ana^chy; which to supply, a Tumultuary Juncto was set up, called a
Committy of Safe^y.

Here I shall not forget to Contribute to the Memory of Mr. Hales (once a
Fellow of Eaton) who told me, after the Battle of Naseby, that he saw now that
Fairfax's Army would Master both King and Parliam^nt too; and Rule as the Roman
Emperors, or Generals, in Despite of the Senate: Adding, that I might live
to see it, but he, as he hoped, was going to his Grave.

At this time the Generall's Lady was her self a Commit of Safety; for she
had found in her Dream, where to place the Empire of 3 Crowns; which she told
me thus.

She saw a great Crown of Gold on the top of a Dunghill, with a numerous Company
of brave Men Encompassed; but for a great while none would break the Ring. At
last, there came a Tall Black Man up to the Dunghill, took up the Crown, and put
it upon his Head.

Upon the Relating of this, she asked what manner of Man the King was. I told
her, that when I was an Eaton Scholar I saw at Windsor, sometimes, the Prince
of Wales at the Head of a Company of Boys; that himself was a very Lovely Black
Boy; and that I heard that since, he was grown very Tall.

On the 17th. of October, by the Post, came the certain News to Dalkeith, that
the Army had Dislodged the Parliament: Of which sad Tidings the Generall's Lady
was to me the first Evangelist; and came up to my Chamber to tell it, seeming
much to bewail her Husbands Infelicity, that he had not left his Command; for
he had Requested it a little before, by a Letter to the Speaker; (whether in
reallity or out of design I do not allow my self to Judge) she adding further,
that she had bought very many Trunks, to carry her Goods over into Ireland (and
indeed, many were but newly bought) and that they could live comfortably There,
upon their Estate; and that the General would delight to be a Planter in hi^
old days.

I told her, well Madam; you come to carry your Trunks now into England; and
that may be as w^ll. I confess I did not promise her to go forth, and be a
Duchess, (no disgrace to her Memory; For at, and before this time, she had
deserved it) but I merrily thought of Ben Johnson's Al^hymist, here is Gold go
forth and be a Knight. She was almost angry with me that I would not look upon
it as ill News: and then asked me what the General should do now. I told her,
Mad^m, he is so wise, that he knows what he has to do: no body need be his
Counselor: And your Ladyship and I, shall find he will not let slip this
opportunity to r^deem and res^e his Country from the slavery and Tyranny it has
lain under. But I had good reason to think that she did but dissemble with me,
unless it were that she was afraid that her band should engage: tho afterward
she did her share to induce him to it.

I perceived she had told the General how merry she found me upon this
disaster; for soon after taking me aside, (he said) I shall not employ you in
any part of my Business, and be not discontented at it, for you know not these
People so well as I do, and cannot dissemble with them. I thanked him for this,
but seeing he was so plain, and fo kind, I made this request to him, that he
would take up one resolution, viz. not to be squemish about the change of
Officers, that would not be wholly dependant upon him, but reform from a
Corporal to a Colonel.

Before it was Noon, the General stood engaged against the Sword of England;
his Protestation being, that he would reduce the Millitary power in obedience
to the Civil: and he was as good as his word. Now he is visible upon the Stage:
where I leave him to Gods good Providence, and his own great Prudence, to place
and di^place Officers; to scure Cittadels and Castles; to enter into Treaties
and dissolve them; to march a forlorn of his Forees into England* and recall
them; to encourage the Arms of the Presbyterians, and not to use them; and to
employ the Counselors of his Camp in a Paper War, leaving them to be the
Dictators of it, and when they had done, to leave them.

For I have not undertaken to give an exact Journal of things publicly known
and allowed, (there being no controversy of them) but of General Monk's
designed Loyalty to restore the King and Liberties of the Subject, and the Laws
of the Realm to the state they were in before our civil Wars commenced* An.
1642. And though I persuade my self that what I have already delivered as to
that particular will be amply satisfactory to the ingenuous and unprejudiced;
yet I shall briefly prosecute the method of this miraculous Resta^ration, and
the difficulties that it met with; declining as much as possible remarks upon
such par^icular persons as would have obstructed this glorious Enterprise, and
most (...) achievement of the late Duke of Albermale, whose memory must be
revered by all the Subjects of these 3 Kingdoms* who delight not in Blood and
Faction. To proceed therefore, that Afternoon the Gen^ral sent his trusty
Adjutant (now Sir Jeremiah (...)) ^o Edinburgh and Leith, which by his
diligenc^, and the influence and int^grity of Hoblthorn Hughes, Miller and
Chlifton, were secured to the Generals Interest. The (...) likewis^ ordered the
March of such Troops of Horse, on who^e Captains he could most rely; as
Johnson, Symnel and others.

At Night he stopped the Packet for England, and the next day left Dalkeith
and his Lady there, to pack up their Truncks; not knowing whether the fate of
the day would carry him.

He came about 2 or 3 hours besore Nigh^ to Edinburgh; where were usually
quartered two Regiments of Foot, (excepting some few Companies, which were sent
out upon particular service) ready to be remanded and exchanged.

The Regiments were is Own, and Col. Talbots: by the assistance of This, He
began the Reformation of his Own, out of which he dismissed several Officers,
and would have imprisoned his Major for ill offiences done, had he not narrowly
escaped his hands: and alth^ the Leiutenant Colonel was absent from his
Command, (as he usually was) yet upon Presumption that he was no Friend to his
Design; the General gave away his Commission to Captain Morgan, and his Majors
to Captain Nichols.

At Night when he came to his Quarter^ he bethought himself, of securing
Berwick, as a Place of great importance to his new affairs. He knew the
Governor ( Col. Meers) was steedy to him, but doubted whether Meer^ could
answer for his Officers; who should they mutiny at the noise of the Generals
Declaration, the Town might run the hazard of being lost. Wherefore a Party of
Horse, (commanded by Captain Johnson) was sent thither to strengthen the hands
of the Governor: and indeed the Captain came but just time enough to do it;
for the Governor had s^arce clapped up his dissenting Offic^rs; but Col. Cobbet
entered there with Instructions, and authority from the Army in England, to
afsert and promote their Inter^st. But Captain Johnson brought him Prisoner to
the General, and he committed him to the Castle of Edinburgh.

But had not General Monk been quick in remonstrating against Lambert's
proceedings; It was thought Cobbet would and could have sent Him thither.

The General was wholly intent upon satisfying his Army of the justice of his
Proceedings, and of the necessity of using the method of force, to restore the
Parliament. To this end now h^ had his Confidents and Adjutators up and down;
of whom Mr. Gumbl^ did him singular service; for he had an excellent dexterity
at spiriting a Cause. The General now resolving to make a thorough Reformation
of his Troops, dismissed all Officers from their trust, who would not be
satisfied with his engagement against the Army in England; and having secured
his homequarters, ^e forthwith extended his care to the Cittadels and Castles
Remote: Captain Witter undertook for the Citadel of St. Johnstons, and Captain
Robinson for that of Air.

Finding now that he had a good Cause, and some ground to stand upon; he
dispacht Letters to Lieutenant General Fleetwood, to Major General Lambert, and
to Mr. Lenthal, (the late Speaker) In one or more whereof was signified, his
Resolution to restore our Laws and Liberties; which expression was afterward
construed in a larger sense, than possibly might at first be intended; and I
know how it was expounded to the Lord Fairfax.

The arrival of these 3 Letters at London, gave some seint Hopes to the Rumpers
of a second Restoration; and infinitely surprised the Army-Grandees, who
neither expected such an opposition, nor would believe they had any reason to
fear it: It being so directly against the Interest of any one part of the Army
to divide against the rest: Besides that it could not enter into the thoughts
of the Men of Wallingford house; that Soldiers should love their Country
better than their Pay. Nay, and though they might have rational Jealousies,
that Monk would not approve of their actions, yet they were assured by some of
his Officers, who were in Town, that he had not Interest enough to make the
Army in Scotland against them.

But this being to some degrees already esfected* Monk was too much a Soldier
to be despised; the place he was in, such, as would enable him to stand a War;
and the Cause in which he engaged so just and plausable, that Lamberts ambition
would have found it difficult to attempt over the Tw^d into Blood against him:
For the true state of the quarrel was whether a second Protector, or the old
Parliament again. And thus much Fleetwood seemed to understand soon after Lam^
March toward the North; and it tended not a little to Monks advantage, that
Fleetwood by express Messengers pretended to court him. True it is indeed, that
Lambert put him self into action under Fleetwood's command; but had success
answered his ambition, the Soldiery would without much difficulty have allowed
him the Superiority.

This Rupture between Monk and the Army, was the talk and joy of London; whose
Lord Mayor and Common Council soon after received a large Letter from him,
inviting them to assist in the Cause he had espoused. The Presbyterians (the
far greater part among them) liked the Man better than his un^ertaking, and the
latter it may be somewhat the worse, because he had but just before solicited
the Independent Churches to the same esfect, and assured them of their
Sp^ritual Liberties, as well as Civil. He likewise sent Letters to the Fleet
(then in the Downs, under the Command of Lawson) and to some Garrisons and
particular Persons in England; and namely to Colonel Overton (Governor of
Hull) and to the Officers and Army in Ireland; desiring them to declare with
him, for the Restoring of the Parliament. But no Encouragement did he receive
from any of these: They Returning, that to them the Offenses of their Brethren
of the English Army did not appear so heinous, as to require a Recourse unto
Arms; and that amicable and calm Treaties were more likely to secure their
Common safety against the Common Enemy, who, by this breach would watch an
advantage against them. Nay, from the then Governing Officers in Ireland, he
was answered with a Resolution to declare against him, in case he advanced
further.

Yet did not these discouragements in the least stagger his firm purpose to go
through with his Work: No not though Dr. Clergis, and Colonel Talbot were also
expressly sent from Fleetwood and Lambert to supersede it; by whom they were
entreated and conjured to use their utmost endeavors to allay the sudden heats
of Monk, which had been kindled (they said) by ill Artifices or mistakes of
their proceedings; of which they assured him that he and his Army should
receive a satisfactory Account. Clergis was Brother in Law to the General,
Colonel Talbot a Gentleman whose Conversation was acceptable to him; both
these came Post haste to us November the Second, with Instructions to cajole
Monk out of his Arms and Reason; but the man would not yield. Talbot could not
make him believe the sincerity of Lambert's Friendship, nor the reality of his
proffers of advantage; and Clergis did but prevaricate with them that sent him,
and informed the General of the instability and Poverty of the Army in England;
they having but little Money, and no means left them of raising any, when that
was spent* but their Swords. Besides, that the Free Quarter-guests could not
long be welcome; for as much as the men at Westminster (foreseeing their Doom)
before their turning out, had Voted it High- Treason to Raise Money out of
Parliament. Now, though themselves were but the shadow of the name, and had for
many Years Usurped a Power not due to them, yet did they cover their Spite and
Revenge with a pretended tenderness for their Countries Freedom.

Lambert waits not for the Return of his Messengers from Monk, but advances
Northward, with what Forces could be spared, at home, and his Troops increase
in his March, for they lay conveniently in the Country, after the defeating of
Booth, to be at the Summons of his Orders. He Arrived at New Castle in
November, with a Force of about 12000 men, wherein were (as it was Reported
among us) 7000 of the chiefest Cavalry of the Army.

Fleetwood sent Captain Deane Treasurer of the Army (a Messenger of his own) to
Monk with a very kind Letter, and an Offer of what Preferment in the Army, he
would himself. He was kindly received, and entertained by the General at
Supper; but he had done ill Offices in his passage to us by dispersing Papers
to seduce ou^ Soldiers; and his deportment to the General at his very Table was
somewhat unseemly, for he told him plainly that he had taken the direct course
to bring Charles Stuart in upon them by dividing the Army, and by his influence
so continuing it, charging him point blank as if Charles Stuart was at the
botton of his Design, Consonant to his dispersed Tickets. Here I had forgot my
self, and told Mr. Treasurer thus. No, it is you that will bring him in, for ye
in England have more than justified the late King; for he did but demand Five
Members of the House of Commons, and ye have Dissolved a Parliament.

The words were scarce out of ^y Mouth before the General withdrew into a
private Room, and ordered a Servant to Whisper me to come to him. When I came,
he told me (with a sort of Anger and Love together) Mr. Price, you know that I
desired that you would not meddle or make with these People; pray let them
alone, I can be Undone by none but you and my Wife. But with Veneration to his
Blessed Memory, I humbly conceive that he had as much reason to be angry with
this Messenger, as with me; for he exceeded the Decorum of an Envoy. I was one
Morning at the Head of a Company of Foot when he passed by, and told them, my
Lord Lambert is coming upon you, and all Monk' s Army will not be enough for a
Breakfast for him. But he met with a Scur^y Answer; that Lambert had a v^ry
good Stomach, this Cold Weather, if he could ^at ^ikes, and swallow Bullets.

The General (to show that he was in earnest, and with a prospect of gaining
Assistance from the Northern parts of England,) sent Major Knight, with Four
Troops of Horse, and Captain Miller with Six Companies of Foot, to enter
New Castle. But Colonel Lilborne had prevented them, and put in a force too
great for them to Attack: So they retreated to Awick, and stayed there till
they were Remanded. Yet did it make for the General's advantage, to be thus
disappointed of enlarging our Quarters; for Lambert was hastening his March, and
Monk's Army was not yet fixed; and these Troops and Companies, with their
Officers, were the choicest of his Men, and most devoted to his Design. So that
the loss of them might have proved injurious to it. But this Project of
Enlarging his Quarters (as I remember) was none of his own; but suggested to
him as a probable expedient to gain him considerable supplies of Horse, which
he wanted.

The effect of the Armies Message from England to us, was, that it produced a
Treaty; which had like to have been Our Ruin, though it ended in Theirs;
because it was necessary for Monk to accept of it, he having not yet Modelled
his Army: For though his procedure to dismiss his dissenting, or suspected
Officers was quick, and Resolute; yet were they gently Treated at first; some
few of them having their Arriers Stated, if not paid, by Special Warrant, and
they su^fer'd to stay among us. But they made but ill use of the General'^
dealing thus gently with them; The loss of their Commands opened their Mouths
against him, and their Tongues were Exercized to Debauch his Soldiers from
their Duty; which being represented to the General, caused their entire
dismission, without any hopes of Arriers to the casheir'd.

So in the beginning of November a Treaty was set on Foot by the General, and
his Officers; Coll. Wilks, Coll. Cloberry, and Major Knight were nominated, and
delegated with instructions, and sent up to Walling ford-house to treat with
Fleetwood and his Officers. Now Lambert being upon his March from London, met
with our peaceable Commissioners at York* and would have spared them a further
journey; for he assured them that he had Power from the Committee of Safety and
the General Counsel of Officers to treat, and conclude with them. But they
insisting upon the return of the Par^iament to their former Power, were
dismissed, and suffered to pass on to London, being public Messengers.
However Lambert was not altogether without hopes, if not from our Commissioners
(when they should further op^n their. Credentials at Walling ford-house,
whither they were sent) yet from Major General Morgan, then at York, who
artificially disliked Monks proceedings; and it was well known that he had a
great Interest in his Friendship, and in the Soldiers of Scotland, his Command
there, being next to the Generals. Coll. Lilburne (who Commanded at York)
taking notice of this, represented it to Lambert; and it was concluded by them
that Morgan was a fit Instrument to send into Scotland; Because that either by
his Friendship with Monk he might create a better understanding between them,
or by his influence draw off a Party of the Scotch Army for himself: which was
indeed not impossible to have been effected, had his distaste of Monks declaring
against the Army been real, as it was feigned. And here I note, that it was
pleasantly observed how Lambert and Fleetwood, a part, would cajole Monk for
themselves.

So Morgan was sent to us, his Message neglected; but his Person most kindly
received by the General, who much wanted him, and soon employed him in the most
difficult s^rvice that yet remained unattempted, which was, the reforming of
our Horse; for very many even of our private Troops were great Malcontents. Of
all evils I believe it was none of the greatest that our Number of Horse was so
small, and that the last Summer Fleetwood had remanded two Regiments of them
out of Scotland; though, it was conjectured, not without some distrust of the
Commander in Chief there. Morgan, and Adjutant Smith, were Itinerant reformers
from quarter to quarter, to dismount the dissenting Troopers, and to set
Foot-Soldiers on Horseback, that could buy Boots. But many prevented their
being unhorsed, and ran from their Colors, others again carried them over to
the Enemy, not without threats to return upon us. In this, Lambert had much the
advantage of us; for we knew of no Revolters from Them, till their money and
hopes were spent; his nearness to us (being at Newcastle) and the noise of the
greatness of his Army, encouraged and frighted away all that would not
cordially join with us: And yet this at the long run proved no inconvenience to
the General; now he thought his Men would stand by it, should he have occasion
to use them.

The Messengers from the Independent party, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil,
pressed the General with set Speeches to desist from his Enterprise. But he
took them up roundly, and with the eloquence and resolution of a Soldier;
silencing their ^ears of the Common Enemy with suggestions of a pretended
necessity of doing his duty, in order to the Restoring of the Parliament. It
took him up a complete Month, the purging and forming his Army to his mind, and
marching the Troops (from their several Quarters) toward the South of
Scotland: But before he left Edenburg, he called a Convention of the Nobility
and Burghers; laid before them the Ground of his Quarrel, required their
peaceable deportment during his absence, and the payment of what they were in
Arrear to him, for his Army; he having, in consideration of the poverty of the
Country, forborne them long. They frankly yielded to his demand; and some of the
Members of that Assembly, by appointment, waited upon him afterward, at
Berwick; moving him to furnish them with Arms, that they might be capacitated
to assist in the opposing of Lambert's Invasion, which seemed equally to
threaten (they said) both us and them. But the General looked upon the request
as too early and too dange^ous for him to grant; because his own men were not
to be disobliged; beside that the two Armies were not as yet become so far
exasperated, as to force us, in despair, to take in the Assistance of those who
were Enemies to Both. In some things however they were gratified, and much was
promised; so that they went not away discontented. Nay some of them better
understood the General, I believe, then his own Officers did; many of which
took it in great dudgeon that orders were given out to the Foot Captains to
fill up their Vacancies with Scots. But indeed the General was necessitated to
take this Course: And the Jealousy (be it where it would) was by most of our
own party deemed groundless, and ridiculous; in regard that the General had not
yet given any advantage to that Nation against the then English Interest.

In which Particular he was so very cautious, that afterward when he saw he
had no need of them, he Marched back a part of his own Force (under the Command
of Ma^or General Morgan) to secure the peace of Scotland. Now this Action was
particularly canvassed, and adjudged an Argument not only of his prudence, but
of his fidelity to that which they called a Parliament, at Westminster. So that
he stopped the Mouths of his Invidious Adversaries, who were wont to be
continually prating as if that Nation would soon be in Arms against them, were
it once left to it self.

Though the Armies attended the issue of the Treaty at Wallingford-house; yet
Lamb^rt being now come to Newcastle, the Commanders on both sides continued to
make preparations for War: Monk both for the smallness of his Army, and his
great want of Horse, (many of his private Troopers being not well resolved
neither) was obliged to Act the defensive.

Now if Lambert had not lingered so long at Newcastle, but with his Horse only
advanced directly into Scotland; beside that he could then have met with little
or no resistance, he would also have confined us to very narrow Quarters; and
all the Villages and Oats and Straw (of which, at that time, there was plenty)
would have been his own: And in truth, being destitute both of Money and
Authority, Sudden Action was his true Interest.

The General on the other hand, had both these; and only wanted Power; so that
His was Delay. But it was the Almighties good time to disappoint the Strong, to
infatuate their Counsels, and to sow seeds of Strife and Division amongst
them; for a great many of those that had followed Lambert into the North were
not through paced to serve his Ambition, some of them looked back upon
Fleetwood, (he being acknowledged to have the Superiority in Command) and
others again began to aba^e of their Jealosies toward Monk, who had been
represented to them as a secret Friend to Charles Stuart. Besides that Lambert
could not, in Justice or Honor, break in upon our Quarters, before he
understood the event of the Treaty; which he soon after did, to his content.

By the Eighteenth of November the General had reached as far as Haddington;
intending for Berwick, and to visit the Passes upon the Tweede, that so he
might be able to Post his Men to the best advantage. Now upon the same night,
and to the same place (after grace had been said at Supper, for Peace) came
Information that our Commissioners had concluded with the Officers at London;
which news, I knew was very unwelcome to him; whereupon very early next Morning
he returns to Edinburgh, consults his Counselors, Convenes his Officers, and
requires their sense upon the matter. It was easy for him (without the help of
a Familiar) to foretell what it would be; for now his Army was not the same
thing that it was Five Weeks ago: And the Officers knew very well that should
they tamely submit to this peace, the consequence must be that his Honor the
Colonel must sink down into a Captain, and the Captain shrink into an Ensign,
and the Ensign return to his Halbert; one Article of the Agreement being this,
that all Osficers who had been suspended, or laid down their Commissions (...)
the 11th of October last, by reason of any differences between the Armies,
should be heard, and their ca^ses adjusted and determined by Fourteen
Commissioners; the one half of them to be Chosen by the Counsel of Officers,
in England, and the other half by the Counsel of Officers in Scotland. Had they
submitted to this Umpire, to foretell which way the Scale would have inclined
(now) was obvious.

This Convention of Officers, on both sides, was by Compact to meet at
Neweastle, the first of December then ensuing. Now since Monk's declaring
against the Army, he had displaced about 140 Officers, who had lately been
shufled upon him by the then Parliament, in lieu of a very considerable number
of his Stoutest and Bravest Men (upon whose Courage and Fidelity he principally
relied) whom they had removed before the 11th of October then last past: And
though the General sent frequent Letters of Intercession for them, yet so great
an Influence had the Factions of the Anabaptist and Independent at that time,
that they prevailed against his mediation: Neither (probably) would they have
stopped here, had not the Westminsterians been interrupted in their Session. All
those who were thus displaced by the Rump and had not yet left Scotland, he had
already restored to their Commands; in confidence of his being able to make his
Peac^ with his Masters for so doing, when they should return again to the
Exercise of their Authority: He having taken up a Resolution to signify to
them, that their best Servants were ill represented to them, by these Factions;
who had before them a list of all the Officers in Scotland, to whose Names they
set these Marks B. for Bad, I for Indifferent, and G. for Godly. Monks men knew
how to fight, and they loved their old General (some of them) better then the
old Parliament; they knew too that their Cause was good, and their hopes of
Restoring the Rump begat new ones also, of living at home in ease. So that they
stood so far off from any terms of peace with Walling ford-house, that some
indignations were expressed against the Commissioners, as if they had betrayed
them.

But our Counselors were more moderate, and came to this resolution, that a
new Treaty should be desired, upon pretense that there were some Articles in
that Agreement, that required a further explication, refusing to ratify any
part of it, till that were done. And this dallying it was that proved the
Break-neck of Lambert, who accepted of this excuse at first, but afterward
found our delays.

So soon as it was known in London, that Monk and his Officers had refused to
ratify the Agreement which their Commissioners had made for them; several
Members began to take heart upon 't, to Caball in corners, and to contrive
toward their own (...): wher^as before, they were tame and irresolute as
scarce knowing to distinguish between Friend, and Foe; the Officers of the
English Army thirsting for the Government. But then on the other side the
popular expectations which were observed in all places to be raised of Monk
touched them to the Quick, and made them apprehensive least Intentions might be
to let in the King and his Party (which they called the Common Enemy) upon
them. Neither indeed were some prying Men, amongst us, less jealous of him: For
one of them coming very late to my Chamber, we entertained each other with
mutual Friendship and Discourse; but he wonld still be ever and anon
interposing for my thoughts, whether the General was for the King or not. But I
told him, that h^ would do the General, and us all a great deal of wrong, if he
did not abhor the very suspicion. He was not satisfied however with this
Answer; and we talked on till it was too late for him to pass by the Sentinels
to his Quarters. So he was forced to lodge that Night with me, but he was still
awaking, and telling me; the General is for the King: and I as often desired
him to forget that idle Fancy, and let us both sleep.

The General now, with mighty Protestations, pretends to adhere to the
Parliament, as it sat the 11th. of October; (the day Lambert disturb^d them)
though to call another Parliament, was the great, and secret In^truction that
he had given his Commissioners and not to be discovered to the English
Officers, without an unavoidable necessity* which (...) Coll* Wilks conceived
himself to ly under; but upon his return he found us of another Opinion.

The Scot^h Army being now disingaged from the intanglements of peace, (...) to
the North side of the Tweede: The General lodged two Nights ( Sunday being one)
at Dunbar; we there observing the place of that Memorable Battle Fought
September (...) third 1650. where the Sol^mn League and Covenant was m^e
effectually e^cuted then when afterwa^ds* Burnt by the hands of the Common
Ha^man in Westmins^er-Pal* lace-yard. But this latter was done legally.

The next day the General came to Berwi^k, where we found the Air to be
somewhat colder. But before we entered it Capt. Ogle (an honest old man,
zealous for the good old Cause) met us, and brought into our Service a Troop of
(...), not Jades, for in those days our Muster Masters ^alled all Hors^s.
Hither also came the General's Lady, with her Son; who some few Weeks after
received orders to go from hence by Sea, to London.

Here we likewise met our forenamed Commissioners, who returned from England
without Peace; and yet their concluding of it at first, was very seasonable
service. Hither also came Zanchy, (Envoy from Newcastle) who mad^ several
Overtures for an accommodation; but was answered both in jest and earnest by
our Wits and Counselors. In this place we might have stayed longer in a good
Winter-Quarter, had not the boldness of the NewcastleDragoons alarmed us:
whereupon Mr. Zanchy was secured, and the General in a most tempestuous, dark
Night marched toward Cold-stream; but took in the Pass at Noram, the Night
being so very dark.

At Cold-stream our first entertainment was suitable to the Name; no Sutlers
being as yet come to us, and no Shambles to be found. All the time westayed
there we drank warm drink, it was brewed in the Morning, we had enough of it at
Noon, and if any was left till Night, it was accounted stale, and only fit for
Officers, What Malt it had within Doors, I know not; but the Ingredients
without were Horse-dung, Ice and Snow; for it was troublesome to come to the
water, yet some we had; for our Brewsters were not careful, or skilful in the
compositions of Ana. Here were our settled Quarters; though the General with a
small retinue made a slip back to Berwick, December the 13, to entertain the
Scotch Convention. At our return, we found Butchers and Sutlers; but the
Sutlers (useful men) had got a whole Barn to themselves: another there was,
(but not all out so good) that served indifferently for a Cow-stall and a
Chapel; our Quartermaster having a Warrant for it, from the Nativity of
Christ.

Here we were fixed in expectation of events; what Lambert, what the Men of the
Parliament, and what the concealed Lord Fairfax would do. We sent and received
Messages, and fought in Paper; laying a side, and reserving Powder and Shot, as
dangero^s things, and not fit to be employed against Brethren. But if Lambert
would have breathed his Horse with 3 or 4 days March almost Bellydeep in Snow,
made of that his Provinder too, and lodged them in it, for scarcity of
Villages, on the South* side of Tweed; he might have attacked us on the North;
where, after he had ascended on even Banks, he would have found a Battalia
ready to rceeive him, filed into Horse and Foot, (which the Countryman may unby
a Lare of Fat, and a Lare of Lean in his Bacon) for Wings of Horse we had^
none, as not intending to fly. This was the Posture in which Morgan by the
Generals Order drew up his Men at Kelsey.

And now comfortable News thronged in upon us; as that they then growing Party
in Ireland had declared for us, and were ready to ^end us assistance; that
Portsmouth ^ad opened her Gates to Hazlerig, Morley and Walton: (three of the
seven Commissioners for governing the Army) and this Col. Wetham (the
Governor of it) did, in respect to the General, as well as in duty to the
Parliament: that the Fleet under Lawson, had owned our Quarrel against the
Army; and that Fairfax was ready to march to fall in upon Lambert's Rear:
should he advance forward upon us: assuring us that, what e're came on it, he
would not fail of being in Arms by the first of January: and he was better than
his word. The Soldiers began now to be revived in these cold Quarters, as
hoping for better. Hither came some of our Officers to us that were absent from
their Commands, when the General first declared; alleging in excuse of their
staying so long away, that they were stopped by Lambert at N^wcastle; but all
was to no purpose, for they found their places filled.

This Stream of good News notwithstanding, the General continued his wonted
care of his Guards: It being now evident, that Lambert within a few days, must
either fight or fall. And as for my self, I must confess that I was inwardly
displeased at thus many favorable expresses; as apprehending that this name of
a Parliament would by nominating and shifting Commissioners for it, engage the
Army so much to their Devotion, and get such other advantages of fixing their
Oligarchy: that it would be no easy matter to dispossess them. With these
foolish whimsies in my head, I was resolved to steal privately to the General;
(who had cautioned me before hand, not to be seen to appear in these public
Transactions) and to do this, I knew between Midnight and the Morning to be the
only time: so between 2 and 3 of the Clock by the help of a Corporal I came to
his Chamber Door, found it only latched, the General in his Clothes, his head
laid on the side of the Bed, and his Body resting upon two Stools or a Form;
Fire and Candles being in the Room: He awaked at my first entrance; I desired
his pardon and he kindly gave liberty of Speech. Upon my representing to him
what I judged to be his Interest and Duty; that is to say, the re^toring of our
known Laws; (for I never used to speak in any other terms) I cannot for get his
Passion and his Posture: Mr. Price (said he) I know your meaning, vnd I have
known it; by the grace of God I will do it, if ever I can find it in my power,
and I do not much doubt but that I shall. So closeing my hands in both his, he
lifted them up, and devoutly uttered., by Gods help I will do it.

I then took the further liberty to mind him of the Papers he had signed to
stand to this Parliament as it sat the 11 of October, and no other; and of
several other Restrictions which he had needlessly (as I conceived, put upon
himself. He Answered me with some regret; you see who ^re about me, and write
these things; I must not show any dislike of them: I perceive they are jealous
enough of me already, bidding me not to look upon it as any act of his. Having
thus discoursed him of diverse things which I thought might be for his service;
(he courteou^ly allowing me the freedom) I left him to his short Rest, for he
was to be early at business. And thus I became further satisfied at what Port
he aimed, however then and afterward with the winds he steered his course.

December was very ^ar spent; but so were not the hopes of accommodating this
breach between both Armies by a Treaty. Wherefore Monk is pressed to depute,
and send his Officers to treat with Lambert's, as it was promised: yet the
doing of this was suspended; we having understood that there would be powerful
diversions in the South: But so soon as we were certainly informed that
Portsmouth had declared for the Parliament, and that the Southern Generals (who
acted by the same authority with our Nothern) began to give out their orders,
and were obeyed, Monk immediately dispatched away an Express to Lambert;
signifying, that He and his Osficers were ready for a Treaty, but that he could
not proceed that way, till he had by Letters consulted his Brethren at
Portsmouth, and obtained their consent for the same, and the choice of the
place where they would have it: wherefore he desired that his Messenger ( Major
Banni^ter) might without any interruption pass on his way to them; subjoyning
Complement. Lambert perceiving the drift of this, detained Bannister, and
vented his Resent against Monk and his Officers, as if they had deluded him.

And now the Mighty Men of Newcastle, (who found not their hands or their
hearts in condition to fight against their Scottish Brethren) sell a raging
into despair; for the next News that they and we hear of, was, that the
Regiments in and about London, had revolted from Fleetwood, and mutined into
obedience to the Parliament. The penitent Soldiers were content to take shame
upon them for their second Apostasy from the good old Cause, (Leiutenant
General Fleetwood, expressing it, that God had spit in their faces:) and
(seeing there was no other remedy) to trust their Masters, a third time, with
the Commonwealth.

So December the 25 (by some called Chri^tmasse* day) in the afternoon, the
Fag-^nd of a Parliament sat down again within those Walls, which by their good
wills they would never have parted with. Sovereignty it seems was so very
sweet, that the bare Privileges of coming thither to give Council, was in
those times canvessed ^or, as if the contest had been for a Roman Tribune-Ship.
But this does not concern Coldstream, whose General was not altogether a
Prophet: for though he told me, after the defeating of Sir George Booth, that he
knew Lambert so well that he would not let the Men at Westminster set til^
Christmasseday; yet he said not, on that day they should return to sit again.
The News of this came not to us till the very end of December: But though it
had not come at all, the General would have marched forward, because the Lord
Fairfax was by agreement to appear on the first of January with what force he
could make, and what Confederates he could gain, by his Interest out of the old
Army. But he found it necessary to be in Arms ^ome sew days sooner, because he
suspected that his intents were discovered by Lamberts Party, and he was too
politic to be taken napping. Thus Intelligence came to us, that the Lord
Fairfax was up, in and about York, and that to him had joined almost all Col.
Lilburns Regiment of Horse, who, neglecting their Col. followed the commands of
their Major Smithson, a very worthy Soldier.

Upon the Neck of this came several other advises; as that the whole Irish
Brigade, who were l^oked upon as the choi^est men in Lambert's Army, were
resolved to revolt from him, (he having no other authority, than what his own
Intere^t could make, and not left money to pay his Soldiers) and that Levies
were preparing in England, by such of Fairfax's old Officers, who bare a sway
in their respective Countries; as Col. Rositer, and others. So that it was now
manifest, that Lambert must of necessity break up his quarters at Newcastle,
and march either against Monk or Fairfax, both Generals of a fortunate name in
War, and acting for that authority from which this Rebel-Army had their
Commissions; their Committee of safety, having never given out any, that ever I
could hear of.

Monk concluded that Lambert would rather look back toward Yorkshire, than
attempt upon Him: He had constant and diligent Spies at Newcastle, to inform
him from time to time of the condition of the Army there: and as soon as ever
Lambert offered to move, the G^neral would have had Inteligence of it; and then
we should have marched from Cold-stream directly to the relief of Fairfax.

But God was pleased to decide the Quarrel without Blood: for upon the return
of the men at Westminster, they immediately voted that all their Armies should
betake themselves to their ^everal Qu^rters they were in the October. before
Lamberts disturbance. The News o^ this was brought to us by Letters only; but
an express order was sent to Newcastle, to break up: which Lambert obeyed, (and
absconded) for it was too late to resist.

These good Tidings created much joy in our little Habitations; though the Vote
for returning into Quarters somewhat perplexed our General. But our Officers
would not understand a bare Letter of News to concern Them; being more
comforted this cold Winter with the hopes of living near their own homes, (now
the Parliament was returned) then of the Golden Chains and Meddals that had
been promised them by those who would have promised Mountains rather than not
have sitten again. For could the People of England ever have once gotten any
tolerable freedom of choice, and reduced the Armies to Terms of Obedience that
every Body might see with half an Eye soon these good old Cause-men would have
been new-named: and whoever has heard of Richard's Parliament, cannot but
estimate this as more than a Probability. 'Twas now the first of January 1660
(it was the Lords day too, and it was his doing) when our General ordered his
Infantry from Cold-stream over the Tweed; and the* next day marched his Horse
likewise; having sent Col. Knight, before, with some Troops toward Newcastle.

'Twas troublesome to descend the River on Horseback, and a supersticious care
was taken that the General should not trip: The Frost was great, and the Snow
greater; and I do not remember that ever we trod upon plain Earth from Edenburg
to London. The Air was this day so very clear too, that we could di^tinguish
the colors of the Pebles in the Tweed, though several Horse had passed before
us. I being behind the General, entertained my self with this waggish thought;
that did but the men of Westminster (for thus he commonly styled the Parliament
to me) know what a Loyal Servant they were likely to have of him; they would
never have suffered him to pass thus quietly! And of this I had afterward
occasion to tell him.

The 2d. of January we came to Wooler; where the General received a kind Letter
from the Speaker, signifying indeed, that they were returned to the exercise of
their authority, but not one word about his marching toward them. This
increased his jealousy.

The 3d. of January we came to a Village, not worth my naming, because here I
met with worse Quarters than at Cold-stream. I and some few more, after we had
consumed our Landlord's Fuel, bargained for his empty Vessels for our Chimney,
drank out his sull ones, and without any disturbance to our Brains, and lodged
that Night in the best Room of his House, which was, within the Chimney*Mantle.
The next Morning, our Landlord had no reason to complain; (though I had) he being
informed that the General himself had no so good Quarters the other Night, as
his Chaplain had at the Parson's House; and therefore had a mind to change with
us here. But I fairly left him; for I saw neither Meat, Drink nor Fire, when I
came in with him; however, I did my Duty, (or a piece of it at least) to attend
him to his Chamber, though he was fain to climb some steps of a Ladder to come
to it, and glad that it wa^ no worse. But my Brother Chaplain ^tragled out of
his Quarters, and found Christmass^Pie, and ^trong Beer, at a Gentleman's
House, who bad him and his company the welcome of a Night; but in the Morning
professed more kindness to Lambert than to Monk: And he was not mistaken in the
Interest of his Religion.

The 4th. We reached to Morpeth; whether came Mr. William Man (Sword Bearer of
London) with Addresses from the City, who had been early Rebels to the
Parliament. The General gave him Letters back; and for Reasons of Camp, sent
along with him Mr. Gumble to the Parliament. The Magistrates of this Place
(whether out of Civility, or to atone for Lamberts long abode with them is no
great matter) presented us with Wine and Sugar. Our next Stage was Durham,
whither came the High Sheriff to us. From hence the General sent Sir Joseph
Douglas, (whom he had formerly obliged) with Letters of moment to Sir Charles
Coot in Ireland. Douglas had long before contracted an intima^y with the
General in Sco^land, was frequent in his Visits to him at Dalkeith, where he
used (for* several days together) (...) be courteou^ly entertained and lodged.
The trust that the General reposed in him, was (it seems) of a great and
dangerous Qu^lity: for Douglas was to negotiate with ^oot in Ireland, that the
vario^s Interests ^here might be so managed, as to engage (...) to confederate
quickly into a De^ for a Free Parliament, as the most proper and effectual
means to re^ress their Grievances. Douglas was credit^, and the desig^ took
effect, even a little with the earliest; for just upon the Pinch of (...) for a
Free Parliament, they were alarmed with the astonishing News of Monk^ having
broken down the Gates of London. (the manner and reason o^ it I shall not here
anticipate) whereupon the Conspira^ in Ireland against the then Parliaments
authority expos^ulated with ^ouglas, as if ^e had betrayed them: But the next
Packet from England assured them, that Monk had ^ikewise declared for a Free
Parliament; and so all was right again. Sir Joseph Douglas is well known at
Court, being at this time, (as I take it) a Gentleman of the Privy* Chamb^r.

In our March afterward, we made no Halt till we came to York. Here we staid
five days, one of them being Sunday, and Mr, Bowls gave us a good Sermon in
the Cathedral. This Gentleman was the Lord Fairfax's Chaplain, Counselor and
Agitator; and dealt with the General about weighty and dangerous Affairs; One
night above the rest keeping him up so very late, that upon my Entering the
Chamber to go to Prayers, I found Him and Bowls in very private Discourse; and
the General ordering me to go out for awhile, but not to Bed: Sometime after
Midnight Bowls went away; so that then our Servants hoped to Sleep: But the
General sent for Me into to Him, and commanded them to stay without, as before.
He took me close to him, and said what do you think? Mr. Bowls has pressed me
very hard to stay here, and declare for the King; assuring me that I shall have
great assistance. I started at the boldness of the Proposition, and asked him
whether he had made Bowls any such promise. He answered me, no truly, I have
not, or, I have not yet: For I found him a little Perplexed in his thoughts;
And I my self was as much: But after a little Pause, I spoke to this Effect;
That after the Famous Gustavus (King of Sweedland) was Slain in Germany, his
Effigies in Wax (with his Queen's and Children) was carried up and down to be
shown for 2 pence; the Spectators being entertained with the story of his Life;
of which I remembered this Passage, That when this King entered Germany, he
said, That if his Shirt knew what he intended to do, he would tear it from his
back and burn it. My Application of it to the General was designed to entreat
him to Sleep between this and the Walls of London; and when he came within
them, (which I doubted not but would be very shortly,) then to open his Eyes
and consider what he had to do. This Advice I also backed with such Reasons as
I conceived to be most prevalent.

But it was not the General only, that was here Solicited upon the Kings
Behalf; some of his Officers being also set upon, and promised great Rewards:
One of whom was Represented to have demanded no less then to be Lord
Chancellor. This Sr. Edward Hide (who was so, when the King came in) told the
General; and he to me.

The Noon before this mighty Intrigue, the Lord Fairfax Dined with the General
privately in his Chamber; and I was then deputed to be his Host, at his public
Table; where he allowed a Half-Crown Ordinary (large Commons!) for Twenty Men.
And the General, to return the Lord Fairfax's kindness, went one day and Dined
with him at his Country House, where He and his Retinue were Hospitably
Entertained, and returned the same night.

Hither Now were brought Orders from the Parliament, to March toward them. The
General expected them sooner; and in requitable of their confidence in him
publicly cudgel'd an Officer who had traduced him by saying this Monk will at
last bring in Charles Stuart: charging his Officers to do the like to those
under their Command that should so offend.

The Parliament were jealous of Fairfax's late rising for them; and therefore
probably thought this no fit place for Monk to lodge his Army in: from whence I
suppose he would not have removed Southward, without orders; and, it might be,
have disputed it had he been remanded Northwards. But if he had so fa^ yielded
to the Parliament, as (overruled by the Apprehensions of the Army of England,
and by the advantages that might have been taken of him in Yorkshire,
outweighing all those that he could then reasonably propound to himself) to
return from whence he came; yet his Army could not but have stomached the
disgrace of the jealousy, to be sent back into Scotland. And this resentment
he might have made good use of; for there the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland
would have been entirely at his devotion; and the assistanc^ from thence,
together with some farther modelling of his Army (the discontents in England
daily increasing too) might have produced some formidable disturbances to the
Government; especially now the Parliament could not well trust their own Army
at home. But the coming of orders to March forward, took away the Umbrage of
all Distrusts. So Auditor Tompson, from London, found us at York; and, in the
remainder of the Generall's March, was entertained by him as one of his
Counselors.

Here we left behind us Coll. Fairfax's Regiment of Foot; and Major General
Morgan, was sent back to Scotland with his two Regiments of Horse and Foot, to
secure the peace of that Kingdom. From York we made no stay, till we came to
Nottingham.

Hither came Dr. Clargis; Mr. Gumble being returned to us, from London, the
Stage before, at Mansfield.

Now the General made a hault to bring ^p the Rear of his Army; and here our
Counselors had leisure to fall into debates. Among diverse other Projects, a
Subscription was propounded that we should be obedient to the Parliament in all
things, but the bringing in of Charles Stuart; But this was as subtly
opposed, by Arguments to the effect following. That this was the way to fall
into the ^ame Error with the English Army; to mak^ our selves Judges, and
consequently Master^ of the Parliaments Actions: For whenever they did any
thing that disliked us, it was but suggesting that they were doing such things
as tended to the bringing of him in* and so make our selves our own Carvers. So
this was waved, and the rather, because the Parliaments Commissioners were to
meet us the next Stage, which was Leicester. However the General (to remove all
distrust of himself) yielded that a Letter should be sent in his Name, to his
Countrymen in the West; wherein were State Reasons alleged, asserting the
impossibility of the Kings Return, and his protestation against it; for now, it
seems, he was informed what hopes these Western Gentlemen had conceived of him.

As we entered the Town of Leicester, we saw the Ir^sh Brigade drawn up by
Colonel Redman, and Colonel Bret, whom the General received with great
courtesy, they being his Cordial Friends. His Counterfeits Mr. Scot and Mr.
Robinson, the Parliaments Commissioners, were now at Hand. From hence, the next
night, we came to Harborow, where Diverse from London waited the Generals
entrance. They complained of grievances, which he durst not promise to redress;
for now Scot and Robinson (Counselors of State, and Abjurers of the Kings
Family) were his Ears and his Mouth. This was a hard task for him to bear; and
yet not so hard as it would have been to most other men; for he never loved to
speak much, and cared for none that did. So he answered them in few and wary
words, with submis^ion to his Superiors; yet what his words did not promise,
his Countenance seemed to do. But these Citizens came full of hopes to find a
more kind reception: For he had sent their City a Letter out of Scotland,
desiring their assistance; however care was taken by others, that they should
not despair of him; and so they returned.

From this place till we came to Barnet, Scot and Robinson would still Quarter
in the same Inn with the General; that they might be present to answer the
Addresses of the Country; of which the most Famous, were at Northampton and St.
Albans.

The sum of the Desires both of the City and Country, were either a full and
free Parliament, or the Restoration of the Secluded Members of This. And it
was observed, that the Gentlemen who made these requests had not been Cavaliers
(the name by which the Royal Party was distinguished) so that they were the
less suspected by our Officers, who saw what the Sense of the Country was.
Those who were present at the making of these Addresses, might have said that
Monk was the Jupit^r, and that Scot and Robinson made one Mercury, for they
only were the Speakers, and answered All: The Gen^rals Return consisting in a
Nod, a Frown, or the Rubbing of his Forehead, if the Speech were long. But at
St. Albans, after Sir Richard Temple, had spoke long and well, Sc^t turned into
Mars, and told him that he would first take up the Sword, as Old as he was,
before the things they Petitioned for should be granted.

January the 28. We came to St. Albans, which was our last Stage: And from
hence Colonel L^dcot (Scot and Robinson not being consulted) was sent to the
Speaker, to desire that the Regiments which attended as Guards to the
Parliament, might be distributed into Country Quarters; which was with some
sort of difficulty obtained: Though the Parliament had no reason to be
Diffident of the General, for his whole Army, with which he was to enter the
Town, was somewhat less then that part which was to move out; and he had left
Four Regiments of his Marching Army behind him; which were now a great way of.
Besides that the Parliament had fresh experience of the restless Spirits of
their English Soldiers; and they could not but look upon their Scotch, as men
of a different Temper; neither indeed could they do less, for these their
Restorers (who had taken this long March, to gratify them) then to take them
for their Guards, the smallness of their Number, not being capable of working
any notable change. Now when they were at London, they were not to be under the
sole Command of Monk, because the Army was Governed by Commissioners; and
Hazelrig stomached, that ou^ General should be called by any other name than
Commissioner Monk.

At St. Albans, besides Addresses made by the Gentry upon the public account,
the General was busied in receiving numerous Visits; both which were distas^ed
by our Honorable Spies ( Scot and Robinson) who sometimes in Civility, or for
dispatch of their own business, would withdraw. But their Appartment was only
distinguished from the Generals by a Wainescot-Door, in which either they found
or made a hole to hear and see. This the General took notice of and complained
of to me, with a sort of scornful Indignation.

But here we spent one day extraordinary at the Church; the Famous Hugh*
Peter's, Mr. Lee of Hatfi^ld, and another, carrying on the Work of the Day,
which was a Fast. Peter's supererogated, and prayed a long Prayer in the
Generals Quarters too at Night: As for his Sermon, he managed it with some
Dexterity at the first, (allowing the Cantings of his Expressions) His Text was
Psalm 107. v. 7. He led them forth by the right way, that they might go to the
City where they dwelt. With his Fingers on the cushion he measured the right
way from the red Sea through the Wilderness to Canaan; told us it was not Forty
days March, but God led Israel Forty years through the Wilderness before they
came thither; yet this was still the Lord's right way, who led his People
crinkledom cum crankledom. And he particularly descended into the lives of the
Patriarchs, how they journy'd up and down, though there were promises of
blessing and rest to them. Then he reviewed our civil Wars, our intervals of
peace, and fresh distractions, and hopes of rest; but though the Lords people
(he said) were not yet come to the City of Habitation, he was still leading
them on in the right way, how dark soever his dispensations might appear to us.
Before he concluded, he seemed to me to preach his own Funeral Sermon, I
looking upon my self to be on the left side of the Cloud. Thus my little
remarques of him, and this Fast, were at an end.

But it was in those days observed of an Army-Fast* that it commonly proved the
forerunner of some solemn mischief, and rendered their Governors, (whose
Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical was not owned by these kind of Subjects)
jealous of them. For they would not scruple religiously to meet to seek the
Lord, without the Mandat and Direction of their Masters; And in Truth they knew
so well at what Turning to find him, that their Seeking was never in vain.

February was now begun; upon the second of which, the General moved with an
easy March, to Barnet; here he parted with his long guests, Scot and Robinson,
and took up Quarters only for himself and his domestique retinue; so we were
better accommodated. Much business was here dispatched; orders were distributed
for our next days March into Town, and that our Soldiers should demean
themselves civilly in their Quarters, and pay for them; for our Money held out
still. But about midnight, Scot, (being frighted with a Letter from
Westminster, intimating that the Soldiers who were to leave their old quarters
were fallen into a high Mutiny, and that there was danger that they would join
with the Prentices, who cried up in the streets for a Free-Parliament)
passionately desired, or rather by his Authority required the General
i^mediately to beat his drums and march. The very posture of Scots coming into
us with his Night Gown, Cap and Slippers, might have made us believe that the
danger was eminent: But the General calmly answered him, I will undertake for
this Nights (...), (says he) and be early enough in the Morning to prevent any
mischief. However he yielded that a Messenger should be sent to see and report
what the matter was. There had been an Uproar indeed, but it was soon qua^ht,
and the Soldiers were leaving the Town as the Messenger entered it. But the
motion for such a hasty March, was looked upon as an Artifice of Scot's, so to
mingle the Soldiers of both Armies, that they might be the less at the Generals
devotion.

The next day, before we came to Highgate, the General drew up his Forces,
which consisted of Four Regiments of Foot, and Three of Horse; their Number
being 5800, allowing 1000 to each Regiment of Foot; and 600 to each Regiment of
Horse, besides Officers. We entered the Town at Gray's Inn-lane; and (the Bells
ringing as we passed along) stopped at the Rolls before the Speaker's door; who
was not yet returned from the House: but we met him in the Strand, at the
opening of the Street. The General allighted, and complemented (after his
Soldiers fashion) this our Representive of Sovereignty, for the Mace was in the
Coach; and so we came to Whitehall. The General's apartment there was the
Prince's lodgings, and his servants were all such. Here our Butler (Sir Ralph
More) who, at Holyrood-house in Scotland, had promised to give a Bottle of wine
at Whitehall on Candlemas day was now mindful of his promise, and his
Prophecy, and presented me with one; and this was but the day after it. This
was a merry Fellow, who with a Table-knife had been mock Knighted into the name
by the late King at Oxford, (being at Supper) upon his relating the dangers he
passed, in bringing intelligence from Newarke. We had more of this Stamp in our
Family, who had served in the Wars for Charles the First. Here we rested on
Saturday and Sunday, (which are the Jewish and Christian Sabbaths) for we were
come into a new World, and would please All.

But on Sunday the General was disturbed by a secret Information, which was
this. A Son of Secretary Scots, who lodged in one Mr. Sturdy's house in Russel
street, had (it seems) fo great a confidence in his Landlord (though a
Romanist) that, upon discourse, he revealed a great secret to him; viz. that
not only Monk's power for Commanding the Army should be taken from him, in a
few days, but that he should be sent to the Tower, and questioned for his Life;
and that it was not doubted but that such things would be proved against him as
would take off his Head from his broad shoulders. Sturdy, very early in the
Morning, came to Captain Morris, (an honest Cavaliere of his acquaintance in
the City) and reveals to him the Discourse of Scots Son. Whereupon Morris
forthwith carries this Sturdy to Mr. Kendall and Mr. James Muddiford, (who were
related to the General) and they bring him with them to Whitehall. The General
gave so much credit to this Relation, that Sturdy (for some time afterward)
rode in the Lifeguard. Thus much Captain Morris (well known in the City) can
avouch.

On Monday, the General saw the Face of his Masters in the House; received
solemn thanks from them by their Speaker, and returned his to them: But
because he took upon him to mind them of some things which he judged were for
the public good, it was not well relished by some, and particularly not by
Scot and Robinson, they reflecting upon him as if he sought to impose his own
sense of things upon the House; yet this was past over, they being content to
impute it to his affection for their service, rather than to any distaste he
had of their Proceedings. Thus (having been first nominated one of their new
molded Counsel of State) he was invited to take his place among them. But then
every Counselor of State was by order o^ Parliament to ^enounce the Title and
pretenses of Charles Stuart, and all the Descendents of the lineage of King
James; nay and of all other single persons who should pretend to the Government
of these Nations: All this was to be done too by the Solemnity of an Oath.

This had been propounded to him before, by those who had argued to this
effect, for the necessity of it: That it was high time for them to descriminate
their own party, that at last they might come to know whom they could trust; it
being now found that there had been a great defection, even among themselves.
The General was not unprovided of an answer, and so craves leave to demurr;
adding that he had not seen any good come of their promisary Oaths, those who
took them making no scruple to break them: He instanced in the Covenant and
Engagement; and suggested that seven besides himself, who were nominated to be
of the Counsel of State, had not yet abjured; beside that he did not know how
it would relish with his Army, who were very tender in that point. And indeed I
knew some of them who (though no friends to Monarchy yet) had taken up a Notion
that it was not Lawful to Swear against the Providence of God. But that they
should see that they had no reason to suspect Him or his Army, he desired that
they would make Trial of his and their Fidelity and obedience to them, and if
they found that he either disobeyed or disputed their Orders, he was then in
their power; for he brought not an Army with him to make them jealous of him;
having sent back a great part of it, after he understood that they were
established in their power.

Hitherto his Actions had not been such as in the least degree, to make the
Parliament or Counsel of State, distrustful of him; nay they were rather such
as ought to have produced a good opinion of his constancy to them, not only by
his sending a great part of his Army back, after they were restored; but also
by contending so eagerly for them: For when a Treaty between both Armies was
first propounded, and the Articles of it were debated in Scotland; it was with
great difficulty that he yielded to the calling of an other Parliament: and
when he did, he recommended this his Condescension to his Commissioners, as the
great secret of their Trust, charging them to try all ways for an
accommodation, before that should be discovered; nay and broke the Agreement
too, as much for this reason as any other; and removed Colonel Wilks, from his
Command, because he disclosed this Instruction unnecessarily; he resolutely
adhering to the Parliament of the Eleventh of October, and no other. And indeed
no other could so well have done his business, for this was become odious to
his People. But fears and jealousies are protestations contra factum; to which,
besides popular expectations at home, the Kings Court abroad administered fuel:
for adversity will lay hold on a Bull-rush.

At this time a Gentleman (whose sufferings were better known to me then I to
him) came to me and told me, with great secrecy, what hopes there were beyond
Sea of Monks March; expressing a desire to gain some from me, but I sent him
away discontented. The General's March without orders, might (at first)
reasonably create some diffidence; but it was soon authorized, and countenanced
by the coming of Orders, and Commissioners, from what we were obliged to call a
Parliament.

It was now the General's business to overcome Scot's suspicions of him, as
knowing him to be his Enemy, and to have plotted his ruin. Scot, in our March,
had very often complained of the great malignancy of the City of London; (for
which, the coming of it is Commissioners gave occasion enough) but the General
would comfort him by hinting that the Parliament need not to fear any danger
thence, so long as they had an Army by them: And it seems he had promised him
to take down the Stomach of the City, if need required. The necessity at this
time was eminent; for now the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Counsel men of
London by a public vote declared that they would pay no more Taxes and
Contributions, till the Parliament was filled up with equal Representitives of
the People. Before this, only a few popular tumults gave the Government a
disturbance; but now the Authority of the whole City rebel'd against the Men of
Westminster; and I amy safely say that the Citizens the rather made choice of
this time, because the General (only with his Scotch Army) was in their
Suburbs, and at Westminster, of whom they had entertained good hopes, from the
time that diverse Citizens of good note had given the General visits at St.
Albans and Barnet; They knew too that many of the Officers had relations and
Friends among them: Nor did any Citizens return from us with the ill news of
despair; nay some of them used to carry more hopes back, then they had reason
for; their affection for their County supplying the deficiency of promises from
us. Thus most of them hoped well, and none would despair of Monk and his Army.

On Tuesday night the General was detained at the Council of State till past
two in the Morning; which (he being no Member as yet because no Absurer)
created some suspicions in his Friends and Servants, as if the Counsel meant
not well toward him; and by some it was whispered as if it was designed that
he should be sent to the Tower. Now to speak the Truth, the Counsel might
(without reproach of jealousy; upon their wisdom) have suspected that the City
would not have thus boldly remonstrated, had not Monk given them some secret
encouragement.

But his Superlative foresight of things defeated the City, the Counsel of
State, and his Friends and all; for he accepted of orders, and the next day
Executed them: He went into the City, and after he had placed his main Guards
for his own Security, he distributed the remainder of his small Army to their
several posts, charged them to pull down the City-gates, break their Port
cullies, and pluck up their Posts and Chains; himself, in the mean time
sending for, and imprisoning the most daring and disaffected Members of the
Common Counsel, persuant to his orders.

It is God's prerogative to change times and seasons, and to set up and pull
down Kings and Governments: And this was the fatal cri^s that so soon changed
the face of things, and made the revolution so swift. For never did Soldiers
with so much regret ob^y their General; obeyed in^eed h^ was, but wi^h scorn to
them who commanded their Commander. It was a pretty medly of pass^on, ^hen I
saw them both merry, and angry at this odio^s drudgery: and a lively pe^ that
had observed and could express their humors, might have made a play of it:
This was the car^iage of the ordinary Soldiery; but our Officers of note ran
wholly into discontent, and offered up their Commissions to the General: But he
was dark, and chewed his Tobacco, and I took notice that he was more angry at
the spies that were about him (as Col. Alured and others) then at the work he
was doing. Hither came his amazed friends, and durst not say a word to him: But
I was not only amazed but inwardly repented of what I had said to him at York:
(imagining that my words, then, were not only for his safety, but for his
honor) not to have the game taken out of his Mines

But no accident of War, (no not if we had engaged into blood against Lambert)
could have more fully assured his Army unto him; for now the Parliament was
detestable even to Us their Restorers. That this was his own contrivance (and,
if so, a Masterpiece of cunning) I have these Inducements to believe* Scot
solemnly told Col. Wetham, that Monk offered himself to him to do this odious
action^, and that the Council of State would not put him upon it, had it not
been for him, who assured them that Monk would undertake it. Thus much Scot
alleged for himself to Wetham, who charged the Change of the Government upon
this Miscarriage: Scot had little reason to dissemble (you may be sure) when he
saw his day was lost, and his life too; for he sat upon his Sovereign's. That
Scot thus excused himself to Wetham, I will name my Voucher; viz. Dr. Barrow
(the Judge Advocate of his Majesty's Army and Guards) a Gentleman who well
deserved of the General for his prudence and integrity; for he was highly
^erviceable to him from his first declaring against the Army, and so continued.
Nay I soon after modestly asked the General how he was engaged to undertake
this detestable piece of service; he merrily answered me, This was a Trick you
knew not of, and I do assure you that I could not have done my Business so soon
with out it, and possibly not at all.

So I confessed that his wisdom out witted m^ expectations; for I thought he
would at first have lodged his Colors within the walls of London: yet true it
is that it was easy for for him to foresee that the City, upon his coming to
Town, would run into discontents; for they looked upon him as a Lover of his
Countrey's Freedom, and therefore judged that he would not endeavor to uphold
a power that was not only usurped, but contemptible and ridiculous; they taking
it in a great disdain, that a bare Remnant of a House of Commons legally
dissolved, should give Laws to their Fellow Subjects; supporting themselves by
an Army, the great Officers of which put them in and out, and out and in at
their pleasure. I knew too, that he would lay hold o^ the first advantage
against the Men of Westminster; and advantages, besides this, could but not be
offered. For they longed to fall upon the sequestration of all those Gentlemen
who had been in Booth's Conspiracy. Now the General could not in honor see
them perish, because himself was con^erned in it, neither was he without his
suspicions that some could prove it against him; beside that his power was not
long lived, and he must have soon found it fo, were it but from his Fellow
Commissioners for governing the Army, whose Interests were bound ^p with that
of the Parliament.

On Friday February the 10th. the General returned from the City to Whitehall,
and his Scottish Army to their quarters in the Suburbs, and Westminster: This
some Members o^ the Council of State signified they were displeased at; saying
tha^ his Return was without their orders. And in truth it was against them: for
he was to stay there till further Order, and they had more work for him there:
Thus would the Parliament have rewarded this City, for their assistance against
the late King!

At this time the Anabaptists and such like Sectaries in and about the City
(who were afraid of Peace and a National Interest) took heart at the pulling
down of the City Gates, and fell to remonstrating to the Parliament, that none
were fit to bear any Office civil or military, that would not abjure Charles
Stuart, and his Title and Family, This was understood to have been the artifice
of some Abjurers in the Counsel of State, to win over assistance to their
narrow and almost despised Party: And could they have gained the point of
encouraging Petitioners of this nature; I doubt not to say but that the Counsel
of State would have given a List to the Parliament it self, as Traitors to
their Trust, because they were such squemish rebels, as not to abjure the heirs
of the Crown. By this means to have engrossed the Sovereignty to themselves,
would have been no hard matter; had but Monk been their friend in reality, as
in appearance he was their Serv^nt, and the Executioner of their odious Or^*

(...) ^ries most grossly flattered the Parliament in their petition, and
renowned them for their glorious actions; tho these were the very men, who but
a few weeks before had been of another temper, being Lambert's confidents, and
the Parliaments Enemies. It was further observed by us, in this little time we
had been in Town, that the Parliament began to encourage those who had
appeared in the English Army against them Ludlow sat in the house, though he
had been accused of Treason by the Irish Officers: and it was said that some
of the house kept Correspondence with Lambert himself. This our Officers
looked upon as done in diffidence of them and their General, who had been their
restorers, and had approved themselves their faithful Servants n the dav of
Trya. l Soldiers are not ordinarily that crafty kind of men that can dissemble
injuries: and some of them were so just to their Country, as not to think it
vvorth their pay to uphold only a few men in an arbitrary Tyranny, contrary to
the Sense of the whole Nation. Of this sort the boldest came to the General,
dutifully and freely to represent to him the State of things, and that some
speedy remedy was of necessity to be thought upon and applied. The General was
too wise to loose this advantage: but however seemed to require time to
deliberate on it. But they earnestly replied, that if some thing were not
forthwith done, to bear their witness against such proceedings, he would soon
be lost, and they with him; but he in the first place, because he had now
more enemies in the Counsel of State, and Parliament too, then he dreamt of:
for tho he had executed his Orders against the City, and thereby rendered
himself odious to the free born people: yet the manner of doing it was such, as
gave him suspected to his Taskma^ters.

The General yielded at length to their Fears and Counsels, and the rather; for
that he was assured of the Tower of London the Lieutenant of it (Col. Morley)
having before offered it him. This the noble Colonel had done in the City,
(pitying the consternation of its Citizens) when he saw what work was doing
what influence (...) would have upon the Country. In all secresy therefore it
was debated and soon agreed upon, that a Letter should be sent to the
Parliament the day following, and late at night Orders were issued that our
Officers (the more principal of them) should meet early at the Generals
lodgings the next morning: and they came accordingly: To whom the occasion of
their convening was expounded by our Secretaries of the night, who had set up,
and penned the Letter to the Parliament. Their assent to it was desired, the
General being present: he subscribed it first, and ^hey in their Order settting
their hands to it. The tenor of this Letter was very peremptory, viz. That by
the Friday following they should send forth writs to fill up all the vacant
places in the house; and when that was done, fix a determinate time to their
own sitting; and give place to another Parliament.

This now was a State of War between the Scottish Army, and the Parliament.
Heretofore when Cromwell and Lambert turned these few Members of the House of
Commons out of their place at Westminster, they did but respite the exercise of
their power, and it was their good chance to return again to it: For their
Servants, who so usurped upon them, drove on the same interest still with
themselves, and ruled by the force of an Army, which protected the Lives and
Fortunes of these Parliament men: Now all of them being equally guilty; they
were never questioned for what they had done, but enjoyed the Peace and Liberty
of Subjects, even when by their own Indiscretion, and the restless Ambition of
the great Officers of the Army* they lost the Sovereignty: Whereas this Letter
now forced them to be their own Executioners within their walls of Empire: For
to fill up the house with new elected Members out of the Country, at a time
when every village was so exasperated against them, in plain English amounted
to no less. For they were fure to be outvoted, and consequently liable to be
questioned.

The General sent this Letter to the house by two Colonels ( ^lobery and
Lydcot) and not staying for an Answer to it, puts himfelf at the head of his
Army, marches into Finsbury-Fields, and from thence sends to the Lord Mayor of
London, desiring that quarters might presently be set out for his men within
the City. Our Quarter* Masters had no Orders to intimate the breach that was
made between our Army and the Parliament: and so they found the Lord Mayor of
London somewhat astonished at this Message: But he soon after understood the
end of his coming: for some of the Citizens were earlier informed of it. As
soon as the General left Whitehall, I went into the City; and not knowing
where he would quarter that night, I came to the Three Tuns before Guildhall;
where the General had quartered two nights before. I ente^ed the Tavern with
a Servant, and a Portmanteau, and asked for a room; which I had s^arce got
into, but Wine followed me as a present from some Citizens, defiring leave to
drink their Mornings draught with me, I accep^ed of the Civility, but in
requital of their Wine and Company was asked what news, and what might be the
meaning of my so returning hither. I freely told them that we were not now the
same men that we were two days ago; and that this they should find, ere night,
to ^he full satisfaction of the injuries done them. The Goodmen were
tranfported into Joy; and most of them left me and their Wine and all, to run
and communicate this hopeful news.

A Citizen of good quality (Mr. William Stanly) stayed longer; and invited me
to his house to Diner, and most courteously lodged me there, during the
General's stay in the City: For it happened not to be far from his quarters. This
I mention out of a grateful remembrance of his hospitality.

The General came late into the City, and his army later; staying for the Lord
Majors return to his Messengers for quatering his men; when they entered, they
were welcomed as the Restorers of their Country freedom; Bells, Bonfires, Wine
and several Largesses of money among our Soldiers, being the attestations of
the Citizens joy. This was Saturday Febr, 11th. renowned for the night of
burning the Rump (for thus the young men, who were haters of this long usurped
Power, called the Parliament) Butchers had quick Trading for their Rump, and
many Cooks lost their Fees.

The Parliament closely debated upon the* Letter sent them; and wisely
dissembling the insolency of Mo^k and his Officers, in prescribing rules to
them; gave them thanks for their joint care with them of the Commonwealth,
assuring them over and above, that they were considering of qualifications for
the next Parliament. With this Message came Scot, Robinson with some others
that evening into the City to the General: adding that his return to Whitehall
was required by the Counsel of State, (it being for their safety) and that if
he and his Army kept their old quarters, they would be better satisfied with
their proceeding; (being near them) but if his Army continued in the City, they
were afraid (they said) that it would be debauched from its obedience to the
Parliament; they looking upon the Citizens as Enemies to the Government. The
General gave them no other reply, but that if the Parliament will do as they
are desired in my Letter, they need not fear but all things will go well.

The noise of Scot and Robinson's coming to the General so alarmed the
Prentices in the streets, that they were searched for as strictly as were the
Spies that came to Jerico. The General was now at the Bulls head Tavern in
Cheapside; the streets were thronged: Mr. Gumble and I were in a Coach, that
was becalmed in a crowd, coming from Guildhall, where the General had been to
expound the end of his coming: now the Prentices went, it seems, from Coach to
Coach in quest of Scot and Robinson; and when they looked into ours, they cried
out here they are. Plenty of dirt was brought against us in shovels from the
kennel, we defending our selves with the Curtains of the Coach as well as we
could, till the mistake was over; which soon was by the means of our Officers.
But the young men's fury was much longer lived: for, in roasting the Rump, it
was scarce cool till Sunday morning.

There was now a report, that the Parliament bad taken away the Generals
Commission: And there was something of Truth in it too: for upon the Letter
sent them, which so much threatened their very Being, they called for the names
of their Commissioners for governing of their Army, retrenched two of them, and
constituted only five (of which Monk was one and) of which number three were a
Quorum: But it being unhappily moved whether Monk should be of it, it was
carried in the Negative: So tho his Commission was not formally voted from him
(for that they durst not do) yet virtually it was; and Monk and Mor^ey were
lest to stem the Tide against Hazelrigg, Alured and Walton.

The General that night removed from Cheapside, after he had disposed his men
into quarters, and takes up his own at the Glashouse, where there was one large
room se^ apart for him to receive the grateful visits of the Citizens: who had
already forgot their yesterdays injuries: and having long before this repented
that their Treasure and their Arms had been success^ully employed against their
Prince, and their Country; they now promised them to Monk, hoping for a better
Issue of both; and in this he did not deceive them

The Council of State ^till dissembled the affronts put upon them by their late
Vassal, and invit^d him afresh to take his place among them; urging that the
necessity of the Commonwealth required his presence there, and employed such
men as were thought to have insl^ence upon him.

This startled his Friends about him, and the ^ity too, as if he intended to
hearken to these Councels, and to desert them. This was only the effect of his
Native Cunning, that so the Men of Whitehall might not wholly despair of him;
for he gained time by it, he being to fix his Army for his new Designs, which
in one day could not be brought to part with it is Principles and prejudices.
Nay, He was so provident a^idst the Throng of Business and* visi^s; (...) took
care that the SaturdaysPost should carry no other News of that Day ^o the
several parts of the Army distributed in the Country, than what was dictated by
^is own order.

So Monk intimated back to the Council of State, they were the cause of his
(and of diverse others who were chosen to be of that Number) not sitting among
them; for he was resolved not to take the Oath of Objuration.

Neither was this all the advantage that h^ had against them; for they had now
distributed several thousands of Arms out of their stores to thof^ who by their
sactious Principles were known to be Enemies to t^eir, or any Government. Those
Arms he desired might be recalled, in regard they gave offense to his Army, and
to all sober men.

The Parliament and Council of State, upon the first revolt of Monk, and
retiring to the City with his Army, easily saw what they were to trust to;
however they still courted his return: But not trusting to the charms of words
to allure him; they distributed those Arms to Anabaptists and Fifth-Monarchy,
and employed Agitors in their Army (now by Monks succesful artifice dispersed
in Country Quarters) to whisper his Treason against the Parliament, and to give
out openly, that Charles Stuart was like to come in.

Sir Arthur Hazelrig was ta^ed, by the General, as the Promoter of this Ill
Office, but he had not the courage to own it; or (though as good a General as
himself) to rendezvouse his Country Army against Monk's in the City. But it was
Gods time!

For now the Secluded Members of 1648 (who in the House o^ Commons had refused
to serve the Army's design of the total subversion of Monarchy in the Royal
Line) began to appear; and that not without some secr^t encouragement neither.
The General had before moved it, by some of his Confients; and he looked upon
it as the easiest and safest change he could make on the sudden and most
consistent with his Declaration (...) Scotland.

These Gentlemen, (the General now being at Drapers-Hall) insist upon their
Readmission, but with modesty, and prudencebecoming their condition; for they
were then much opposed by the Zealots o^ Oligarchy, who loved their Room better
than their Company. These urge^ Monk's Declaration, when he first appeared for
them against that the Army that he was for the Parliament as it sat the 11 of
October: The secluded replied, that their Readmission was no inf^ingement of
it; for the same Parliament would sit still; adding further that the Purport of
that Declaration was to reduce the Military Power in Obedience to the Civil;
and that they had been ^ecluded from the House only by force of the Sword; they
having no more forfeit^d their right of sitting there, then, had the other: It
was said that, in Law, neither had any.

These were the Occurrences of the more public remark, for about a week; at
the end o^ which the General thought it not safe to hold his design any longer
in suspense, for the Army in several parts in the Country began to g^ow
mutinous, and some of our* Officers to express their ^ears: wherefore he
convened a select Number of both Parties, to debate upon the affair, several of
his own Officers being present. The sitting Members had nothing to allege
(beside their Love of Power) but their own sa^ety, and the Armies; the
consciences of the godly, and the Sale of public Lands; all which they feared
would be disturbed by the Introduction of the secluded Members: But they gave
satisfactory answers to all these objections, and engaged upon their Paroll
(over and above) that they would not look upon what had been done since their
Selusion, nor disturb the propriety or pretenses of any; but would amicably sit
and act for the good of their Country, till by their dissolution they made way
for another Parliament. This now was so fair a Proposition, that no Englishman
who had any sense of the di^tractions of these Nations, and love to the
Commonwealth, could any way except against it: Besides that all their returns
were managed with such modesty of words and behavior, that our Officers soon
enterteined a very good Opinion of the secluded. Nay and many even of the
sitting Members themselves, that were there present expre^t a disposition to
give way to their Readmission; only they could not give their Votes for it, but
in the House. Thus ended the Conference: and in the close of it, one or two of
our Officer^ (more discerning, or more busy than the rest) moved that the
Government might be declared to be by a Commonwe^lth, and a further security
devised for the Sale of the public Lands. This pinched; but it was
artificially shuffled off by suggesting, that the Writs to be issued out for
the next Parliament must necessarily run in the Name and Style of the Keepers
of the Liberties of the Commonwealth of England; and that the State of public
Lands was already as secure as the Government could make it.

The Men at Westminster understanding that the secluded Members were like to
keep House with them again, began to be very froward upon it, as if they should
not have ElbowRoom enough; yet they durst not remonstrate against it, because
they could not get the Crafty General (who was now judged capable with a little
help, of giving check to the Army) out of his Hole in the City: Beside, that
the Popular cry ran for a full and free Parliament; This Rump in the last weeks
debate, touching Qualifications for Members to serve in the ensuing Parliament,
having also exasperated and incensed the People, by voting as if none were fit
to serve in that capacity for the future, who had not contracted equal guilt
with themselves. Now to obviate Monk's design to restore the secluded Members,
some of them fell to offering at a speedy resignation of their own power;
giving out that within a few days they would dispatch the qualifications,
before them, for the next Parliament; for they thought it not fit to resign up
their authority to those who would cut their Throats: But they sound it to be
too late for this Pin to be driven forward.

For the General having gained, in appearance at least, the consent of his
Officers for the resisting of the secluded Members upon certain conditions,
they all of them that were in and about the Town, were sent for; and the
Articles of their Readmission (which were these following read to them*

1 To settle the Command of the Armies in the Three Nations, as might best
secure the common Peace and Safety of them. 2. To raise a Tax for the payment
of the Arrears of the Army and Navy; and what further supplys should be found
necessary for the support of the Forces, and Government of the Commonwealth. 3.
To Issue forth Writs for a Parliament, to sit at Westminster, the 20 of April
then next ensuing; and to constitute a Council of State to see this done. 4. To
confent to their own Dissolution, by a time that should be limited unto them.
To which, with cheerfulness, they agreed and subscribed; and before they left
the place (in confidence that Monk was a true Patriot) promised to make him
Commander in Chief, both by Sea and Land. Thus they went away rejoicing, that
they should be accounted worthy to be the Restorers of their Countries freedom.

So on Tuesday February the 21, these Gentlemen met the General at Whitehall;
(for to that end only, he returned thither) he spoke some few words to them,
reminding them chiefly of their promises to him, and assuring them that he
would not impose any new thing upon them, and he was as good as his word. That
Morning they were conducted by Adjutant Miller, to take their former places in
the House of Commons; which as soon as they entered, some of the sitting
Members arose in a heat, and left the House: Hazlerig and others, openly cried
out (but too late) that Monk was a Traitor; but Hazlerig met with no other
punishment afterward for his Treason, than his own native rage and fury.

Some of the Noble Peers who had formerly agreed with the House of Commons to
draw the Sword against their King, watched the Readmittance of these seculded
Members, and would have entered their own House; but the General having,
before, intimation of their intents, commanded Miller to withstand them, in
case any such attempt should be made. So the surly Soldier obeyed his
General's orders, though he was threatened that he did he knew not what. Now
because the General owned this, one of their Lordships was afterward, even
with him, by laboring to have discovered a Gun-Powder-Treason, at the Cockpit.

The General had now quitted the City, and came to Whitehall, where in the
evening he was informed of that Days Transactions of the Parliam. He was now
his Excellency Capt. General of all the forces of the Commonwealth, both by
Land and Sea; save only that at Sea, General Montague had equal authority with
him: In this there was a ^ailure of Promise: but he had work enough to do at
Land; and Ambition was not his aim.

This day was spent by the General, and his Officers, in signing Copies of
Letters to be sent to the Commanders of the Armies in Scotland and Ireland, and
to several Colonels and Commanders of Garrisons in England; in which was
signified that they had let in the secluded Members to the House, and the
necessity of doing it, to preserve and enlarge the Interest of the
Commonwealth; that they were still upon the same Bottom o^ a fr^e State; that
they would take care that what they had purchased at the expense of their
Blood, should not be lost; that they would effectually mediate with the next
Parliament, (to sit in April next) that the public Sale of Lands should be
confirmed; and that witho^t another Parliament, the Commonwealth could not be
established against pretenders; desiring their dear Brethren and Fellow
Soldiers, to have a vigilant eye upon all such as should presume to abet the
pretenses of Charles Stuart, or any other single person or authority
whatsoever. Then they were sollicit^d to send up some Officer to signify their
concurrence with the Lord General Monk and his Officers; adding further (to cry
Clink in the Close) that no money could have been had to pay the Arrears of the
Army and Navy, without the effusion of blood, unless they had let in the
s^cluded M^mbers: So be it. As for our own Soldiers, they soon learned that
this was the good old Cause still: this being the same Parliament that began
the War against the late King.

The General went to bed that night, not late, but in a very good humor: And
indeed he had good reason for it; for now he had perfected his own safety, and
stood no longer in fear of being questioned for interesting himself in Booth's
Conspiracy. I came into his Chamber, and understood ^e was in bed: so I was
about to retire; but his Lady entertaining me with discourse, he perceived that
I was in the chamber, and so commanded me to his bedside; where I found him
satisfied with what he had done, and pleasant with me. I told him I came (over
and above the Duty of my Attendance) to give him thanks for his Days work. He
answered me (with great courtesy of words) No, no; This is none of your
business; you but dissemble with me: You come now for somewhat else; and I
believe I know for what. I humbly asked him what he could think I came for? Sit
down then (says he) and I Will tell you: You come for Bishops. He spoke it not so
softly, but his Lady overheard it; and mistook it as my proposal: at which she
was angry. But the Curtains and the Generals Favor skreen'd me; he assuring
her, that I had not spoken to him of Bishops. So she went off; but he detained
me with thy serious Discourse upon the thing, that he thought This could never
be done; for not only their Lands are sold (says he) but the Temper of the
Nation is against them. I told him, that as yet he could not see the Temper of
the Nation; the Royal Party having judged it prudence not to appear openly, or
make any Addresses. But since he had mentioned it, I entreatcd him to grant me
one Request; which was, that he would not be drawn to engage against them: and
this I thought he might safely grant me, now, who would not be ensnared to
abjure the King, and the Royal Family. He paused a while; (as his manner was)
and taking me by the hand, Well then (said he) so much I will promise you, that
I will not be engaged against Bishops. I thanked him, and kissed his Hand;
adding, that it was best to leave it to God's Providence and the next
Parliament; when we should be able to discern the temper of the Nation in
reference both to Church and State.

The Secluded Members, from all parts of the Kingdom, returned to the House of
Commons; which was now open for them: of which number Mr. Morris of Devon was
one. This Gentleman was somewhat allied to the General, but more to his Favor,
than his Blood; for he had a great opinion of his Prudence and Integrity. He
was one that much conversed with Books, and had lately written one against the
Practice of Independent Teachers, who would admit none in Parochial Cures, to
the Lords Supper, but such only as, being distinguished by their Separation,
were most peculiarly their own Flock. This had rendered him very grateful to
the Presbyterians, whose Cause he seemed most to serve; for the Ministers of
the Church of England were generally contented with the exercise of their
Religion in private houses; though even These also, were often disturbed by
Soldiers or Constables, who used to hale them from their very Communion-Tables
upon the more solemn Festivals of their despised Church; rending their
Surplices, where any were used, and tearing their Mass-Books (for that was the
Name by which the crafty Statesman, and the more juggling Gospeller taught the
indiscerning Multitude to call the English Liturgy) into pieces.

The General, from and before the beginning of this Enterprise, had pretended
to be a Presbyterian, (and indeed I knew his Godmother, who did her share too)
and had not yet renounced his Faith; but now it most behoved him to appear one,
and to act his part well in it; for it was his last: Wherefore Mr. Morris was
received into his House. This pleased his new Masters at Westminster, who were
most of them of this Religion; some few only excepted, who by beholding the
calamities of the Church, and their own Errors, had been converted to a better
esteem of Episcopacy; which the Learning of Mr. Morris could not but favor:
so that I looked upon him to have the good Repute only of a Presbyterian. Him
the General retained as his Elbow-Counsellor, and a State-Blind; concealing his
own sense of things, and very often speaking contrary to his own thoughts, that
so he might better understand the sense of others, and take his Measures
accordingly. This is a sort of Cunning which will fail no Man, who meets with
the plain and open-hearted. But whether this was inherent in the Gen^ral's
Tempe^, (and consequently a Natural Wisdom) or acquired by living so many
years, both in and under Command, among such whose Cause and Principles he
hated, I will not be positive in the Determination: But I incline to believe it
was the Latter* This I the rather mention, because it has been said that Mr.
Morris found him obstinate against the King's Restoration. Something to this
purpose was once told the General, in my hearing; (possibly with a Design to do
the good man an injury) But I know how he resented it. And if Morris did
entertain any such Opinion, I can assure him and others, that he was not the
only man that did so; for after we came to Town, where the Gene^al received the
Visits of many worthy men, who loved their Country, and of whom some were then
in Authority; These Gentlemen took the freedom of speaking and ^ropounding to
him what they thought expedient for the public Good. Nor in truth have they
be^n wanting to themselves to represent their Doings to advan^ge, which it is
sit to suppose were great and real, because the rewards of them were such; nor
ought any to envy them, because their Assistance was seasonable; they
concurring with the General for the Redemption of their Countries Freedom. But
yet I do not believe that they added any great weight to his Honorable
Designs; for I will ask no leave to assume to my self this honor, that I knew
his Loyalty to his Prince to be most firm, when the time to show it was most
hazardous: and I am well acquainted with the scornful Smiles and Words he used
to give of such Bravad^-pretenders, as sought to lessen his Merit.

And now the Ministers of the Presbyterian Persuasion daily frequented St.
James's; they were in a hopef^l expectation that all those Sects who had
supplanted them, would with little difficulty be put under their feet; that
themselves alone should inherit the Blessing; (the Church of England at that
time being below their fear) for Monk was the Defender of their Faith, and had
wrested the Sword out of the Armies (their Enemies) hands. And indeed he was
their zealous Votary; for one Lords day he and his Lady went and Communicated
at Mr. Calamy's Church; who afterward so far prevailed with him, that none were
to Preach before him, but such only as he recommended. I not knowing that he
had so far yielded to Calamy, consented that Dr. Pierson (the now right
Reverend and Learned Bishop of Chester) should Preach for me on a Sunday
Morning. He came early to my Chamber; but as we were ready to go to Church, we
found two Ministers (sent from Mr. Calamy) come to do the work of the Day among
us; but their Faces and Habits were strangely disguised with Mud and Dirt; for
their Coach had overthrown them by the Park-wall, behind the Pell-mell. I took
what care I could to render them fit to appear; and desired that but one of
them would Preach that Day, and the other should the next; Mr. Pierson being
present, whom they knew. This would not satisfy them; nor could I prevail with
the General to have him Preach, tho I got Mr. Morris to be my Advocate, who
kindly represented the Learning and peaceable temper of Mr. Pierson. To this I
might add a Fast kept at St. Paul's, where Dr. Gauden preached; his very Text
pointing at more than the Return of the Secluded Members. It was Jer. 6. 14.
They have healed also the hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly; saying,
Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace. This Doctor had, before, bewailed the
lamentable state of the Church of England in a Printed Folio; being an elegant
Preacher, and dying afterward Bishop of Exon. So much for the Affairs of the
Church.

But the Civil and Military Affairs were upon the Wheel of Motion; for the
Parliament constituted a new Council of State, took off the Engagement that was
upon the File against the King and House of Lords, and had been imposed on the
Subject, Anno 1648. when the Army (after the Murder of Charles the First) had
set up the Remainder of the House of Commons for a Free State: But the Solemn
League and Covenant, (which was for Monarchy, in some sense, but, in all,
against Prelacy) hung still on the Walls of the House of Commons, with the
Names of the Renowned Subscribers; being left to the Censure of the next
Parliament.

The General kept a vigilant eye upon his Enemy the Army; set new Colonels at
the Head of most Regiments; and removed their inferior Officers, as they were
represented to be either Troublesome, or Disaffected. But the Parliament eased
him of much trouble, by settling the Militia, in which neither Independent,
Anabaptist, Fifth-Monarchy-man, or Quaker, were allowed any sort of Command; a
Cavalier being now become a less odious Name. Thus were things carried all over
the Kingdom, and a fair prospect given of the King's Return, all the ambitious
Officers of the Marching Army being laid aside.

Col. Overton, the Governor of Hull, whose Ambition was equal with theirs,
thought this a fit time to appear, and draw over the Malcontents of the Army
(which every day increased in Number) to his Party. His Garrison was such, and
so placed, as to render his Design practicable; and his Hatred to the General
was known to be most implacable; for about two years before, when Monk
Commanded in Chief in Scotland, and Overton as Major General of the Foot, next
under him, ( Cromwell then being Protector) he had drawn several Officers
(Zealots for a Commonwealth) into ^ Conspiracy against him, New Years Day in
the Morning was the time agreed upon to surprise Monk at Dalkeith; and the
Attempt was not thought easy only, but certain. So the Question was moved,
what they should do with him when they had him? The most desperate ( Syndercomb
was in the Conspiracy) were for killing him upon the place But one of the Godly
judging that it would be a scandal to them to kill a man in cold blood, when he
was in their power; openly protested that hew old discover the Plot, if they
proceeded upon that Resolution: Whereupon the Conspirators broke up the Meeting
for that time. Now because this interposition of Conscience saved the General's
Life, and probably some of his Servants also; I will gratefully mention the
man: It was Mr. Oats, then a Chaplain of Note among those Conspirators, and
afterward Beneficed in a small Living in the Diocese of Chichester. May the
able, who are grateful to the Memory of the Duke of Albemarle, be disposed to
give him a better.

Overton from Hull (a place fatal to the old King) sent forth his Emissaries to
insinuate the appearance of Monarchical Government; (for some men only hate
Kings because they are not Kings themselves) and to tell the Soldiery that the
abandoned Interest of Charles Stuart did seem to shine in the face of the
public Transactions, Conjuring the Brethren in the Army, (who remained
faithful to the True Cause) to signify their concurrence with him. Several
Copies of his Letters were dispersed in the North: and one of them was sent to
the General by Col. Fairfax (Governor of York) where the General had many True
Friends (beside him) that were active to suppress all such practices: As Col.
Bethel, Smith, and others.

The General did not only use his own Authority, to command Overton out of
Hull, but recommended the matter to the of State also; who sent thither Col.
Alured, and Major Smith. The first prevaricated in his Trust, and went
privately to the Governor, staying late with him at night. But Smith getting
Intelligence of this, with Sums of Money borrowed in the Town, being he was
well known there) forthwith bought off the Soldiers, at the Parade, to their
obedience to the Parliament. So that Overton was forced to obey the General's
Orders, and came up to Town; though he soon became so far reconciled to
Monarchical Interests, (his own expression) that he declared for King Jesus.
But his Soldiers rather followed Smith's Money: And the Parliament knowing
what Money would do with such people, Voted no less a Tax upon England and
Wales, for six Months together, than an hundred thousand pounds per mensem. Now
though they did not follow the Examples given of extending their Assessments upon
Scotland and Ireland, yet the Generals care reached even these also; In
Scotland he had not forgot his Trusty Friend Major General Morgan; by a more
Authoritative Commission constituting him to command there, and sending him
more strength.

In Ireland so many persons of eminent quality appeared for him, that he
apprehended no danger thence, either of a present di^turbance, or o^ playing an
after-game di^tinct from themselves: Though this in Scotland, they might have
done, had not Morgan been true to Monk. But at home, though he had made a very
large reformation in the Army; yet he thought not his time ripe enough, as yet,
for the displacing of some, who now gave him a trouble.

All the Officers of the Army, who kept their Commissions, had under their
hands signed their concurrence ^or introducing the settled Members, and owned
the necessity of it; but ^till they would under^tand their obedience to the
Parliament, to extend no further, than as they were bottomed upon a Free State.
For this was the Phrase of Monk and his Officers Letter to them; which
intimated their readiness to take care that these should not b^ lo^t. But now
they were not satisfied of the good intentions of the Parliament touching this
Government: nor much better of the Generals, who had refused the offer o^ the
Honor and Manor of Hampton Court; (the only Portion of Crown Lands yet
unsold) and possessed by Cromwell, when he assumed the Title of Protector. For
the old sitting Members had craftily proposed the giving of this to him: and
the Secluded could not fairly with^tand the motion of rewarding him. But the
General, upon his refusing the Donation of these Lands, as a House too great
for him, was recompense^ with a gift of twenty thousand Pounds. Yet this
Non-acceptance rendered him still more suspected. Now these Officers when they
saw the General had refused these CrownLands, and even the dignity of the Crown
it self, when offered by some who best understood their own saftey; combined
into dangerous resolutions, and contrived a Paper to be universally ^ubscribed
(presenting itto the General for his subscription in the first place) the
Purport of which was,

To declare that the Government of these Three Nations should be a
C^mmonwealth* without Kingship or any other single person by what Name or Title
soever dignified or distinguished: And that this present Parliament should be
required to pass this into an Act, as a Fundamental Constitution, not to be
^haken or questioned by future Parliaments; and that the Army ought, upon no
other Terms, to maintain their Authority. These Officers did assemble very
daringly before the General, Col. Oky being their Prolocutor: This Gentleman
was a better Soldier than an Orator, beside that his Life lay at Stake, having
sat as Judge upon the King's. He was also a known Stickler for the
Commonwealths Party, and but lately as much a General as Mon^ himself; neither
did he want either a courage (...) or ^ossibly a Party of the Army to sollow
him. Wherefore the General did not esteem it prudent to ruffle in words, though
he was resolved not to gratify their request, by subscribing to the Paper. So
that Commissary Clargis (for so now, he was of the Musters) was put upon
undertaking the debate; for he had the Generals good opinion, as favoring his
design: And indeed it concerned him to deserve it; both their Interests being
bound up in the same bottom. I happened to be present at the d^bate; which
Clargis managed with much resolution, and dexterity of words; laying before
them their own danger, in making such an Address at that time to the
Parliament, in regard This was the very Parliament that would not be frighted
with their Arms or Impeachments of Treason before; much less now, when all
sober men saw the Inconven^ency of being Governed by an Army: ^urther
Insinuating, that the General and his Officers were to prefcribe unto them:
that the Parliament had an Authority, in which themselves by their subscription
did acquiess; that they could vote the General, and whom else they thought fit,
out of their Commands; and when that was done, pass a vote for their own
Dissolution, without appointing the issuing out of Writs for the succeeding
Parliament: for if the General (he said) would break his promise of not
disturbing them, they might very well break theirs for calling another
Parliament: And that there would be no fear of a Civil Government, because
none to assume it, (unless they would trust Richard Cromwell) the General
having re^used it, as some of themselves well knevv, who had made him an
offer of it, the reasons these General approved of: and added, that he would
rather be torn in pieces by wild horses, than be sotreacherous to his Coun.
treys freedom.

The Debate was long, and not without some heat of words; but after our
Offic^rs had spent their Fears and Jealousies of losing the Good Gld Cause, the
General with Gravity and Calmness admonished them, that it was contrary to the
Discipline of an Army to meddle with Civil Government; That they and he were
under the Command of the Parliament, their Superiors; That he did not doubt but
the next Parliament would quiet all their Apprehensions; and that this could
not hurt them, for that they were upon the point of dissolving themselves: then
he severely commanded his Officers to have no more of these Meetings, without
his privacy; soon after removing some of them from their Commands. But the next
trouble that the General found, was from the Parliament it self; several of
whose Members were off^ring to break the Articles of their Admission, and not
to yield to the calling of another Parliament. Mr. Prin spoke it openly, That
if the King must come in it was safest for them that he should come in by their
Votes who had made the War against his Father. Whereupon Prin was sent for, and
admonished to be quiet; and it was the bufine^s of Mr. Morris to keep this
expiring Session of Parliament steady, and clear from intermedling with the
change of the Government; in which case he did excellent Service, punctually
observing the Directions of the General, who so passionately longed for their
Dissolution, that at last he took the Liberty to mind them of it; they having
done his work. So they authorized the Issuing out of Writs for another
Parliament, which was to Meet the 25th. of April next, at Westminster (their
Promise being, that it should be the 20th.) But before they broke up, they Vote
(to Justify themselves) That the General should give no Commission to any
Officer to serve in the Army, who should not declare in these Words.

I N. do Acknowledge and Declare, That the War undertaken by both houses of
Parliament in their Defensive part, against the Forces raised in the Name of
the late King, was Just and Lawful.

And Ordered, That the Commission-Officers should further Declare, That they
believed Magistracy and Ministry to be the Ordinances of God. By this may
Posterity understand to what a fine Pass their prosperous Arms had brought
Three Kingdoms.

And there was a Second like to the First, viz. That all and every Person and
Persons, who have advised, aided, abetted or assisted in any War against the
Parliament, since the first of January 1641, he, they or their Sons shall be
incapable to be Elected to serve as Members of the next Parliament, unless he
or they have since manifested their good Affections to this Parliament: The
longest Day will have an end; and this Long Parliament Dissolved themselves
March the 17th. But as for their Votes, they were no more regarded than dead
men's Shoes; the Country hastening to their Elections, as the Writs came down.

The General being at St. James's, was now besieged with Business and Visits;
his own he very well knew how to dispatch; and I do affirm that in all my
several years of Attendance on him, it was rare that ever he left any thing of
the Day to be done on the Morrow: Nay, at Night, when he found his Secretaries
offered him nothing, he used to ask if any thing more was to be done? chiding
them, that they should be sooner weary of Writing, than he of Dictating. But
Visits (though fit to be paid to his Honor and Authority) were a new Employment;
of which the most weighty at that time, was the Address of Sir John Greenvile.
He had before made his Applications, as others had done; and that without
suspicion too; they being public. And though Greenvile had the Misfortune to
be a known Cavalier, yet he was Monk's near Kinsman. But as near as he was, he
could not gain an opportunity of having any Conference with him* for though he
would often spin out his Visits to an extraordinary length, in expectation of
the Rooms being cleared, by the breaking up of the Company; yet so soon as ever
it was, and a convenience offered of unfolding part of his Errand, the General
(well knowing the reason of Greenvile's long Attendance,) would immediately
rise from his Chair, and say, Good Night Cousin; it is late: or otherwise excuse
himself, by pretending Business. But Sir John having been so often frustrated,
and being impatient till he could give the King his Master some further
assurances of the General's good Intentions, than what Mr. Monk (who said no
more to him than that he was under an Oath of Secrecy with his Brother) could
afford him: At last bethought himself of making his Application to Mr. Morris,
by his Mediation to obtain the favor of a little private Discourse with the
General, to whom he was to communicate a Negotiation of great importance.
Morris gave particular heed to what he said, and acquainted the General with
it; but he refused to have any secret Converse with him, in regard that being a
known Cavalier, notice would be taken of it, should he be admitted to any such
privacy as desired. Yet he Ordered Morris to wait upon his Cozen, to try if he
could learn of what quality his Business was; and to make his report
accordingly; giving him leave to assure him in his Name, that he was Authorized
to receive his Message (of what secrecy soever it might be) and he promised to
return the General's Answer to it. This Morris earnestly pressed Greenvile to
do, but he refused the Proposal, and would not give him the least intimation of
his business; only telling him that it concerned none but the General himself;
and yet him so very much, that without all further delay he must necessarily
impart it to him; and in case he still obstinately persisted to deny him a
private Hearing, he was resolved to speak to him wherever he should meet him
next. Upon Morrices reporting of this to the General, he was inwardly pleased
at it; so the next night was appointed for disclosing this Secret,

Greenvile came to Morrices Chamber at St. James's; whither the General upon
Morrice's intimation, soon after came likewise. Sir John Greenvile and the*
General being now alone (and Morris Doorkeeper to the Conference) he
addressed himself to the General in this purport of words; (they are his own)
That he was infinitely obliged to his Excellency, for giving him this
opportunity of discharging himself of a Trust of great importance both to
himself, and the whole Kingdom, that had been long deposited in his hands; and
that whatsoever became of him, he thought himself very happy to have this good
occasion of performing his Duty in obeying the Commands of the King his Master.
At the same instant, he presented the General with a Letter from his Majesty,
and produced another directed to himself, as also the Commission which he had
from his Majesty, to Treat with him.

The General stepped back; and (holding the Paper in his Hand) with a frowning
Countenance demanded of him how he durst to speak to him in such a Matter,
without considering the danger he was to run into? But Sir John's Answer was,
That he had long since duly considered this matter, with all the danger that
might at^end it; which was not sufficient yet, to deter him from the
performance of his duty in this particular, any more than in all others, which
he had cheerfully undergone at his Majesty's Command; but that he was the more
encouraged to undertake this, in regard his Excellency could not but remember
the Message he received in Sc^tland, by his Brother. Whereupon, the General
without any other Reply, approached him with a pleasing Aspect; and embracing
him in his Arms, said, Dear Cousin, I t^ank you with all my heart for the
Prudence, Fidelity, Care and Constancy you have showed ^n this great Affair;
and I am much pleased also at your resolute secrecy in it; for could I have
understood that you had revealed it to any body living, since you first trusted
my Brother with it, I would never have Treated with you; which now I shall most
willingly; and with you the rather, because you are one of any nearest Kinsmen,
and of a Family to which I owe many obligations. So the General read the King's
Letters, and the Commission; for which he said, I hope the King will forgive
what is past, both in my Words and Actions, according to the Contents of his
Gracious Letter; for my heart was ever faithful to him, but I was never in a
condition to do him Service till this present; and you shall assure his Majesty
thas I am now not only r^ady to obey his Commands, but to Sacrifice my Life
and* Fortune in his Service. To witness this, I call this honest man from the
Door. So he called Mr. Morris to him, who by this time could not but
understand the Design of Greenviles coming to the General. Morris likewise
cheerfully e^braced the Proposal, and was assistant in it. Sir John now
entreated the General to send some Confident of his own to the King; which the
General willingly yielded to; but told him the Confident must be himself; for
he would send no Letters as yet, for fear of the worst; and without them, the
King had no reason to give credit to a Messenger from him: though his Majesty
might well believe his own, whom* he had employed to him. Wherefore at the next
Conference Instructions were prepared, which Greenvile wrote out; and after he
had diligently perused them, and fixed them in his Memory, as he was desired,
the General threw the Paper into the fire, with charge not to commit his
Instructions again to Paper till he came to Brussels (where the King then was)
and there to communicate them to none but his Majesty.

This is that Noble Sir John Greenvile, (the now Earl of Bath) to whom the
Author has Dedicated this Memorial, proclaiming him a Witness of the Designed
Loyalty of General Monk; (the late Duke of Albemarle) whose successful
Negotiation with him, began and completed the Restoration of our present
Sovereign, and with Him, o^ our Laws and Liberties, which we now See and enjoy.
But there was yet more Work to be done.

The Officers of the Army, who from their several Quarters in the Country, came
to Town, to hear and make new disturbance, were remanded to their distinct
Charges by the Council of State: But men of greater Quality than these Officers
(and by some thought to be of a greater guilt too) were very earnest with the
General, that the King, if he must be brought in by the next Parliament, should
be admitted to his Throne upon no other than the Concessions of the Isle of
Wight. These were Articles too straight for Monarchy, and wholly destructive of
the Constitution of the Church, as formerly (and now) governed; Charles the
First having yielded to them when he was a Prisoner in CarisbrookCastle, 1648.
And because the Parliament then Voted them to be sufficient Grounds for a
Treaty with the King, the Army turned out the Voters, who were afterward
called by the Name of the Secli^ded Members. But in truth even These with the
Sitting Members too; were not the whole Body of the House of Commons; for a
great portion of it, and a greater of the Lords, had deserted them at
Westminster* and acted as a Parliament, at Oxford; and had his late Majesty's
Arms been prosperous, might have been esteemed as such: And why they were not,
let others tell the reason. But to make Mirth with that Treaty, of which one of
the P^eliminary Articles for a Peace (as propounded by the Parliament) was,
that neither they nor their Armies were Rebels in making War against the King.
To this his late Majesty answered that then He and His Army were. To this a
late Noble Lord replied, Nay, Sir, if you are thereabout, there is no peace for
us with your Majesty, but the peace of God, which is past all understanding;
from which God of his Mercy deliver us. But it behoved the charitable to pray
that his Lordships Prayer were not heard, for the Blood that was spilt; for in
one and the same Commonwealth there cannot be understood to be two Sovereigns,
who can equally write Dei Gratia; and no less Power than what is delegated from
God, and so bears the Sword, can warrant the shedding of Blood.

The love of Private Intere^ts had f^r a long time obftructed the Public,
which though something more enlarged, was not as yet fully at Liberty; the
secluded Members, before their Dissolution, having taken what care they could
to have preserved their own share in the Government. That which was called the
Commonwealth-Party, had at that time little other Intereft than what was bound
up in the Army, which had been modelled by the General with n^w Officers, and
such old ones as had served in the Parliament's War till the year 1648. And the
Soldiers and inferior Officers were not able to make any great or dangerous
mutinies, as being left destitute of authority to countenance them: Beside that
the Country and City Militia, were of a temper quite different from the Army,
and became no contemptible (...) against them. The Royal Party who had served
the King, as yet bore very little sway; though their hopes were pregnant;
depending upon the Issue of the next Parliament: This being the face of things;
to solicit the General, that the King's Restoration might be hampered with
his Fathers Concessions in the Isle of Wight; was no Idle or unseasonable
Propo^ition, for such as found themselves concerned to look about them. But the
General, at first moving, expr^ssed a resolution of his professed ob^tinacy to
adhere to a Comm^nwealth; though at laft (in regard the Proposers, some of
them; were Men of Honor, and all of Eminency) he seemed to be conquered into a
concu^rence; but so as to hint this to be the utmost Line that he could or
would advance too, in favor of the King. This ftifness endeared him the more
to the Proposers, as increasing their hopes that he would not deceive them.

But soon after; the General's danger was sreely represented unto him, should
he by yiedling to such Proposals, anticipate the next Parliament; because in
probability it would bring a fresh War upon the Nation: for if upon the
opening of the next Parliament, they should vote for the King's Return, and he
assent to it no otherwise than upon the I^le of Wights Articles, and they under
the terror of his Arms not be able otherwise to bring him in; It would take up
much time for Messengers to pass and repass the Seas; and for Articles (as in
all other Treaties) to be explained; so that whilft these things were
transacting, the Army might get Breath, and opportunity to revolt from him.

The Proposers rejoiced that they had so far prevailed with the General; and
sent an Express of their own to the King at Br^ssels; representing to him the
great service they had done his Maje^ty in prevailing with Monk,
(notwithftrnding his being so obstinate ^ Commowealthsman) not to oppose his
Majefties return upon his Fathers concessions in the Isle of Wight and no
otherwise: and that though these were hard Terms, and assented unto by his
Father in his necessity, yet they besought his Maje^ty that he would not now
think hard of them, leaft his refusal might exclude him from the Crown.

But so it fell out that their service and message were postpon'd, for Sir John
Greenvile was got before him to the King, to whom he had related Monk's
acceptance of his service. This ought to be supposed most welcome news to his
Majesty; and the more, because the General had required no conditions of
Restraint to the Royal Power, as none of ^eward; Insomuch as the King upon the
receipt of the Letter from these Proposers (which he showed to S^r John
Greenvile) merrily told him, little do they in England think, that General Monk
and I are upon so good terms; for I my self could hardly have believed it till
your arrival; which has brought me such happy news, and with so great secresy
too, from the General of my Restoration, without conditions, even beyond our
expectation here, or the belief of all our friends in England, excepting your
self, who was alone employed in it.

Afterward when the King was recognized by both Houses of Parliament (it was
the very first day that the Regal Authority had been so owned) several persons
of honor (some who had abetted the King's and others the Parliament's cause)
dined with the General at St. James'. And there arose a hot contest about the
Lawfulness of the late War, and whether the King should be admitted to return
with or without conditions. I observed the General to be silent, tho some hard
words had passed at his Table, so he required me to say Grace ^ather than he
would stay out his Dinner, and the Controversy.

But to return to the matter, Greenvile's negotiation was managed with such
secrecy, and his Journey to Brussels was so speedy and fortunate, that few
knew of it before his arrival t^ere; and those who did, and went in his
Company, did not so much as suspect the errand he was sent on. The King, upon
intimation of his being come, went privately to hi^ Lodgings, and was alone
with him; and Greenvile discovered his Instructions from the General to his
Majefty; by whom he was believed; tho he brought no Letter. For the King (to
debate what was to be done) consulted with his Lord Chancellor Hide, the
Marquess of Ormond, and Secretary Nicholas, in the presence of Greenvile. And
in this privy Council Monks Commission Was signed to be Cap. General of all his
Majefties Land Forces in the three Kingdoms, and public dispatches; according
to Instructions given; were framed, and signed here. Likewise then the King
removed from the Spanish to the United Netherlands, according to the advice
given by the General to Greenvile: and this was done both in have and Privacy.
His Majesty being come to Breda, dated his public dispatches from thence; and
there Sir John Greenvile ^eceived them from his Majesty, in order to his
returning for England: but the King would not send him back empty, and without
a mark of his favor.

Sir John Greenvile when he came first to Br^ssels, and had related Monks
resolu^ion to espouse the Kings Cause and Interest humbly desired his Majesty's
Pardon, is in his negotiation, he had exceeded his Instructions of reward? To
which the King graciously answered, that whatever he had promised in his name,
should be punctually performed upon his Restoration: But Greenvile, then
insormed his Majesty, that he had propounded to the General 100000l pr. annum
for ever, as his Majesty's donative to him and his Osficers, with the Office of
Lord High Chancellor* and Constable of England, for Himself, and the Nomination
of any other the great (...) of the Crown. All which Monk had gener^usly
refused, saying that he would not ^ye the King to any t^rms of reward; and that
he took more comfort and consent in that now he hoped he was able to do his
Majesty and Country service, then in expectations of greatness. Besides that
the General had given him this as a special charge that he should not propound
any thing to his Majesty as a gratification for service, either for himself or
for any Friend or Officer of his, upon His account. The King then pressed
Greenvile to know what he should do for Him; but he, after the General's
example, nobly refused all Proposals of reward for the service in which he had
been so eminently successful, till he should happily see his Majesty at
Whitehall. However the King had then put up into Greenvile's Pocket (though
unknown to him) a Warrant under his Hand and Seal for an English Earldom, and
the assurance of 3000l pr. annum for ever, to support his Honor, together with
a Promise to pay his and his Fathers Debts, which had been contracted in the
War Time in the service of his Majesty and his Royal Father.

So Greenvile was sent back by his Majesty to the General, and brought with him
(besides the above mentioned Commission) his Majesty's Seals and Signet by
which the General was empowred to make a Secretary of State; which he conferred
upon Mr. Morris by the advice of Sir John Greenvile: Morris, upon the Kings
Return was soon after toward the latter end of May, (Greenvils return to the
General being about the beginning of April) was Knighted and confirmed in his
place of Secretary of State. Now besides his public Letters, which were
reserved to be communicated; he brought with him a private one to the General
from his Majesty; written with his Majesty's own hand; to this the General
returned an answer to by Mr. Bernard Greenvile Bro^her to Sir John, who at this
time could not be spared to go over again to his Majesty, because the
Parliament was aproaching, and he to present to both Houses his Majesty's
Letters and Declarations: Wherefore Bernard Greenvile (that this secret
negotiaion might be continued in the Family) was thought to be the most fit,
and the safest express that could be sent. And indeed he could not but be as
welcome to his Majesty, for he brought now the assurances under his hand of the
Generals resolution, to adhere to the Kings cause against all opposition
whatever. I therefore notify this, because it was the first that the General
du^st adventure to his Majesty; Nay and even this was with the soonest, for
Lambert, by the secret connivance the In^erior Trustees of the Tower, was
escaped out of Prison: this was the joy and triumph of such as designed an
after-game by the Sword, for he had the good luck to be beloved by the
Soldiery; for which reason Oliver Cromwell, when he was Protector, revered but
displaced him; as divining that he would not only tread in his Steps, but upon
his Heels

The News of Lamberts escape soon came to us at St. James's, and almost at the
same time a private information where he was hid. Thither the General fen^, and
found it true; but he was got away before, to set up the Trade of War in the
Country. Wherefore as soon as ever it was adver^ised where Lambert was, the
General prepared (or seemed to do itat least) for a March: From which he was
easily prevailed upon to defist by those who represented unto him the necessity
of keeping the Town, in regard the Common Soldiers of the Army were not yet
fixed to him, however he had modelled the Officers of it: and indeed many of
these had already subscribed, that they would rest satisfied in what the
Parliament should determine about Government, as did all of them afterward*
who continued in their commands; and these Subscriptions, not long after, were
required even of private Soldiers. Lambert having gained some accomplices to
his Designs, they shisted Quarters into Northampton and Warwickshires, to pick
up more; all whom the Council of State declared Traitors: But Col. (afterward
Sir R. Ingoldbsy) made them such; for ^e ^ook Lambert Prisoner, and sent him
up^, in Easter-week, to the Council of State. Here it was that I first and last
saw this Renowned Captain, but now a Captive; (to our comfort be it spoken) of
who^e skill in the art of War the General had no great Opinion, and of which I
can make no Judgment. But if Lambert intended to make a Rape upon the
Government, as it was thought he did; he had not unqualified himself for it:
For I never heard that he had listed himself into any Religious Faction; but
being a Latitudinarian to all, he might with less opposition have ruled the
Roast: Nay and even a Party then most odious did not despair of fair quarter
from him.

This unhappy Captain fell sooner than the General once thought he would;
because now the Kings Interest was become visible upon the Stage, and the
Soldiers and Underofficers would soon have resor^ed to him as the Deliverer
of their Country, had he not been thus timely ^uppressed. This piece of Service
none could so luckily have performed as Colonel Ingoldsby; for he was both
known an^ beloved in the Army, and had affection, as well as Courage to do it,
as having been (though covertly) in Booth's Conspiracy.

But whilst Lambert was thus in the Field, and threatened a War, the General
sent for Sir John Greenvile, and told him that if Col. Ingoldsby was beaten,
and the Army so went over to follow Lambert that he could not be suppressed but
by a War; Then he was resolved to put off his disguise, declare the Kings
Commission, own it for the authority by which he acted, and Commission the
royal Party into Arms in all places through England, Scotland and Ireland:
Wherefore he required Sir John to attend him, and receive orders from him for
his Majesty's service.

But Providence had appointed the Kings Restoration to be without Blood; nay
and some few of our Officers (for it was no public combination) expressed
their willingness to do it; making this overture to the General, that if he
would undertake by his sole authority (as Generalissimo at Land and half a one
by Sea) to restore the King, they promised their own assistance and undertook
to promote this design farther in the Army, if he would give them leave to
appear in it; the^ prudently alleging, that such a Course would be more for
his honor, than to give way to a Parliament to do it, and then they might
expect better terms, afterward, for themselves. He knew the Men and their
designs, and returned this answer; That the Parliament which was to be, was
called upon a Commonwealth-Accompt; and it did not* now at least, become
Soldiers to meddle with the change of Government: for he would be true to his
Declaration to keep the Military Power in ob^dience to the Civil: reminding
them that themselves had promised to rest contented with what the Parliament
should do touching Government. To this the Royal Party in and about the Town
had also subscribed, testified their submission to he present Power, as it then
resided in the Council of State, in expectation of the future Parliament, and
promised to bury all rancors and animosities. This Declaration was by them
published, with the subscriptions of several Noble Men and Gentlemen of eminent
quality.

However Affairs now were in a fair procedure toward a National Settlement,
yet there wanted not Agitators to disturb it; who went up and down in the City
and Country to Spirit the Army into Discontent. Wherefore the Reward of 10 l.
was published and promised for the Discovery of any one of them. But Agitators
enough of this sort (as well Lay as Clergy) came to St. James's; Hugh Peter's was
of both Coats; for he had a portion of the Lord Craven's Lands, and feared a
secular Restitution too. This Noble Lord, (Nobler now, being advanced to the
Earldom of Craven,) had never fought against the Parliam. but from his Youth
generously hazzarded his person, and spent his Estate in Foreign wars to the
Honor of his Country; whom the General always honored, and who succeeded him
after his Death in the Command of the Regiment of the King's Guards, (my most
Honorable and Noble Colonel.) And by what contrivance, or for what Delinquency
his Estate was forfeited, is not an Enquiry proper for this place. But the
General's Lady was so bold as to ask Hugh Peter's if he was not for Restitution?
The Ministers of Independency likewise were very solicitous to know what they
must trust to, and disturbed the hopes of the Presbyterians, by telling them
that Episcopacy and Arminianism were comin upon them.

'Twas my Portion to hear these things, being sometimes deputed to attend them:
But I was an Infidel to all these Fears; for the General still adhered to a
Commonwealth, and neither Jest nor Earnest could make any other Discovery of
him: For once he was set upon in Jest by a late
Long-Parliament-Common-wealths-man, who was good at it: He told the General,
that he had always had a great esteem of him (I think he had once at a pinch
happily served him) and asked him what he aimed at, a King or a Commonwealth?
The General answered, you have known me a long time, and you know that I have
been these many years for a Commonwealth, and I am still of that opinion. He
returned, I ought to believe your Excellency; but will you give me leave to
tell you a Story; 'Twasthis; A CityTaylor was met one Evening in the Country
with a Pick-Axe and Spade; a Neighbor of his asked him whither he was going
with those Instruments? He answered, to take measure for a new Suit of Clothes
at such a House, and for such a person. His Neighbor demanded, what with a
Pick-Ax and Spade? Yes, quoth the Tailor, these are the Measures now in
fashion; so he left the Application to his Excellency, whether his new Models
in the Army were fit Tools to make a Commonwealth with,

Nor could Monsieur Bourdeaux (then Resident Ambassador for France) gain any
certainty of his Designs; though he made an attempt to dive into them: He sent
for Commissary Clargys, and propounded the Assistance of Cardinal Mazarine,
either to help the General to the Sovereignty, or to restore our King; adding
his Advice, that the King might be desired to retire into France, and that
speedy notice should be given him to leave Flanders, if the General aimed at
his Restitution. But the General would not allow the Ambassador the liberty of
this Discourse to him, though he refused him not a Visit, upon the Request of
Clergis. The Story is at large related in Baker's Chronicle, page 717. Printed
Anno 1674. whither I refer the Reader, because I knew nothing of it till I
found it there.

The Parliament was now ready to sit down, and the King's Return was visible to
the wise and discerning; provided that the General had not his Reserves to give
a stop to it; for he still kept himself in a Cloud. Wherefore the prying and
suspicious (of which sort were Women) found out little Devices to sound what
were his Intentions, by giving small gifts to his Son (a Child then between six
or seven years of age, the now Duke of Albemarle) who innocently told these
busy Enquirers, that his Father and Mother in Bed had talked of the King's
coming home. I dare promise that he shall not be so easily out, witted or
surprised now; and I doubt not, but that he will be heir of his Fathers
Prudence, as well as of his Estate: And may he live to outdo him in both!
However I wish so; for I love and honor him, whose Education was sometimes
committed tomy Charge.

Though the Parliament were not met, yet all apprehensions of danger were
already over: only a few Libels were thrown in the night at our Guards, against
the King and his Party. Wherefore now we were entertained with Feasting, to
which the Worthy Citizens of London did invite the General and his Officers;
and it would be ungrateful not to mention their great and sumptuous
Entertainments; Thanks being the proper Reward of good Cheer. These Feasts were
performed in the public Halls of the more Ancient Companies; where, (besides
Meat and Music) we had sometimes the Sin-Songs of more than BalladePoets, who
hope yet for better things, than what they saw. At which some of the Officers
would say, that they were Beasts set up a fatting for the Slaughter.

But now came the 25th of April, when both Houses of Parliament (the great
Restorers of their Countries freedom) set down. It was not disputed who called,
and gave them this authority, but the most Rebellious submitted to it. Now it
appeared that Gods) mercy which must be first revered, and eternized) then the
Kings Clemency, the Generals Conduct, and this Parliaments sitting, had
prevented our Officers fears, and the effufion of Blood, either by the Sword of
War or of Justice: for none suffered upon the old score, those only excepted,
who were after adjudged to Death for the Murder of Charles the First; (and some
of these too had their Lives given them) unless I should add the further
exemption of some few others; as Mr. Henry Vane (the very Son of his Father)
and Hugh Peter's, whose whose Guilt was thought greater than some of the
greatest of the Criminals, who sat in a Court of Mock-Justice, upon the Life
of their Sovereign.

The Parliament adjourned for some few days; and Sir John Greenvile consulted
with the General about the delivery of his message from his Maje^ty.

That which was superscribed to the General, to be by him communicated to the
Army and Council of State, was by his appointment delivered to him at the Door
of the Council Chamger, where Greenvile attended, and into which as Col. Birch
(one of the Members of it) was entering, Greenvile requested him (but unknown)
that he might spoke with My Lord General, who upon Birch's intimation came to
the Door, and there in the sight of of his Guards, attending, received
Greenvile's Letters; but not with much regard, either to his Person or his
Business; of which the General seemed to understand somewhat by the Seal, and
asked him if he would stay there, till he had his answer, otherwise his Guards
should secure him; commanding them to look to him. So his Excellency produces
his Letters to the Council of State; Greenvile is sent for in, and Birch
protested that he neither knew the Gentleman, nor his Business. The Lord
President of the Council examined Greenvile from whence those Letters came,
whose they were, and how he come by them; for as yet they were not opened) he
told the President, that the King his Master gave him them with his o^n hands
at Breda. So the opening of them was deferred till the Parliament ^at.
Greenvil^ was to have been sent into Custody, but the General was his Bail, who
said he knew the Gentleman, (being his near Kinsman) and would take his parol
to appear before the Parliament.

But the Monk's Hood was now to be taken off: the Parliament sat, and Greenvile
delivered his Letters, with enclosed Declarations to both Houses; upon whose
owning his Majesty's Right, the General, being ^ Member of the House of
Commons, (chosen both for a Knight o^ the Shire of Devon his Country, and a
Burgess for the Uuiversity of Cambridg) desired that the Kings Letters to him
to be communicated to the Council of State, and the Army, might be read. The
Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the Common Council received theirs (with
enclosed Declarations from the King) and the Fleet, under the command of
Mountague, had theirs delivered them also from Greenvile. All these Letters and
Declarations are extant, and well known, so that there is no need of a
Rehearsal, but one of them, which was the private concern of Sir John Gr^nvile,
(of which I have before given the substance) I have asked leave here to insert;
that it might be better understood what sense the King had of his service in
his negotiation with our General, and how grateful his Majesty's intentions
toward his Restorers were. The Letter (or rather Warrant) under the Royal
Signet runs thus.

CHARLES R.

IN consideration of the many Services done us by our Right trusty and
well-beloved Servant Sr. John Greenvile (one of the Gentlemen of our
Bedchamber) and his Father, the most Valiant and Loyal Sir Bevile Greenvile,
who most Honorably lost his Life at the Battle of Landsdown, in the Defense
and Service of the Crown, against the Rebels, after he had performed many other
great and signal Services.

But more especially in consideration of the late most extraordinary Services
(never to be forgotten by us or our Posterity (which the said S. John Greenvile
has lately rendered us in his Person (in his secret, prudent and most faithful
Transactions and Negotiations, in concluding that most happy Treaty which he
had lately, by our special Command and Commission, with our Famous and Renowned
General Monk; and wherein he alone (and no other) was entrusted by Us,
concerning the said Treaty, about those most important Affairs for our
Restoration, which he has most faithfully performed with great prudence, care,
secrecy and advantage for our Service, without any conditions imposed upon us
beyond our expectation, and the Commission we gave him; whereof we doubt not
but, by Gods blessing, we shall speedily see the effects of our said happy
Restoration. We are graciously pleased to promise, upon the Word of a King,
that as soon as we are arrived in England, and it shall please God to restore
us to our Crown of that Kingdom; We will confer upon our said right Trusty and
well beloved Servant Sir John Greenvile the place and office of Groom of our
Stole, and First Gentleman of our Bedchamber (with all Fees, Pensions, and
Perquisites thereunto belonging) together with the Title and Dignit^ of an E^rl
of our Kingdom of England: And the better to support the said Title of Honor,
and to reward as we ought those many great services, and to recompense the
losses and sufferings of and his Family; we are further graciously pleased to
promise upon our said Royal Word, to pay all the Debts that he the said Sir
John Greenvile, or his Father have contracted in the late Wars, in our service,
or in our Royal Fathers of Blessed Memory; and also to bestow and settle, in
good Land in England, an Estate of Inheritance to the value of at least 3000l.
per annum, upon him the said Sir John Greenvile, and his Heirs for ever; to
remain as a perpetual acknowledgement for his said services; and as a Testimony
of our Grace and Favor toward him, and that Ancient and Loyal Family of the
Greenviles, unto all Posterity. Given at our Court at Brussels, the 2d of
April, in the 12th year of our Reign 1660.

By his Majesty's Command, Edw. Nicholas:


To conclude, on the 8th of May, the King was joyfully proclaimed in the Cities
of London and Westminster, and Greenvile having received the thanks of both
Houses of Parliament, was sent back to his Majesty at the Hague, with 50000 l.
Sterling from the Parliament; to supply his Majesty's present occasions, till
the arrival of the Commissioners of both Houses, who were hastening after to
invite his Majesty's Return to his Native Kingdom, and to the exercise of his
Royal Authority: So that on the 29th his Majesty with great Solemnity entered
the City. This Day has since 1660 been solemnized by our Church, for his Birth
and Return: and may the Prayers of his Loyal Subjects, for him, ascend, and be
heard by the God of Heaven; who bowed the Hearts of the most rebellious among
us to submit to his Scepter. Of this the General was truly sensible: for when I
came to him at the Cockpit to give him my share of thanks, for this renowned
Restoration, I kneeled to him and kissed his hands; but he took me up and was
pleased to speak some kind words to me; but in speaking broke into Tears,
saying these words. No Mr. Price, It was not I that did this; you know the
Jealousies that were had of me, and the oppositions against me; It was God
alo^e who did it; to him be the Glory, whose is the Kingdom and the Power, over
this and all Governments. But to di^turb all this, there was an
After-contrivance framed, and propounded to the General* viz. that he would
most vigorously declare for the Solemn Leagu^ and Covenant: to do this, there
were invitations of Advantages off^red him. But he was Resolute, and saw that
he had deceived all those with whom he had to do, and had gratified none of
them; and that it was now t^ late to play an After game, by attempting to
impose conditions upon his Prince: He having before, when it was in his power
scorned it; and Now he was to sink or swim with the King, for his Interest was
no wider. These bold words were said, not for his sake, but others; for this
his Loyalty was most truly fixed, and he was glad that he was delivered from
the Impertinencies of the Solicitation of such People. May God of his infinite
mercy deliver us from all narrow Interests, which, in our Age, have been the
ruin of a most famous Commonwealth, left us by the wisdom our Ancestors: And
may the Men of private conceits unite, and bring their hands and hearts to the
support of the public, for Extra Rempublicam non est salus.

THE END
Some BOOKS lately Published by James Vade, at the Cock and Sugar*Loaf, near
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.
THE S^vereign* or a Political Discourse upon the Office and Obligations of the
Supreme Magistrate.

The S^ate and Interest of the Nation, with respect to his Royal Highness the
Duke o^ York; Discour^ed at large ^n a Letter t^ a* Member o^ the Honorable
House of Commons*

The True Protestant Subject; or the Nature and Rights of Sovereignty discussed
and stated.

A Brief Survey (Historical and Political) of the Life and Reign of Henry the
Third, King of Englan.

A Seasonable Memento^* both to King and People, upon this Critical Juncture of
Affairs.

A Survey of the Lord High Steward of England, his Office, Dignity and
Jurisdiction; particularly the manner of Arraining a Peer Indicted of Treason
or Felony; in a Letter to the Lords in the Tower. With Resol^tions to certain
Queries, made by their Lordships relating to Traiterous and Seditious
Practices. Written at their Lordships Request.

The Power of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, in Point of Judicature,
briefly discoursed; at the request of a worthy Member of the House of Commons,

The late K^epers of the English Liberti^* drawn to the Life; in the
Qu^lifications o^ Persons by them declared capable to serve in Parliament.

Naboth's Vinyard: Or the I^ocent (...)* copyed from the Origin^l of Holy
Scripture, in Heroic Verse.

The Sentim^nts, a Poem to the Earl of Danby: Writt^ by a Person of quality.

A Paradox against Liberty: Written b^ the Lord, during their Imprifonment in
the Tower.

ERRATA.
PAge 27. l. 1, and 21. read Grade^ Ker. p. 32, l. 29. ^. Resolutioners. p. 40.
l. 28. r. Pro^esie. p. 41. l. 7. ^. Vi^tuosoes. p. 45. l. 12. r. Husband. p.
46. l. 1. r. Visibly. p. 46. l. 4. r. Se^ure. ib. l. 29. r. Albemarle. p. 47.
l. 25. sor Of^ences* r. Offices. p. 55. l. 5* for Awick r. (I think) Berwick.
p. 57. l. 25. r. Troopers. p. 67. l. 13. after in* r. (...). p. 68. l. 29. for
they, r, the. p. 73. l. 31. for (...) left Money, r. n^ Mo^ey left. p. 75. l.
17. dele that. ib. l. 18. for soon, r. that. ib. l. 19. after would, r. soon.
p. 76. l. 27. dele and. p. 92. l. 21. for seven, r. several. p. 96. l. 4. r.
Abju^er.. p. 97. l. 24. for Min^s, r. H^ds. p. 105. l. 24. r. Rumps. p. 108. l.
25. after State, ^. that. p. 109. l. 13. r. Fifth-Monarchy-men. p. 113. l. 10.
for resisting. r. Resitting. p. 117. l. 16. r. t^is. p. 127. l. 12. for (...),
r. se^luded.


