THE PRESENT STATE OF GERMANY.

LICENSED

Januar. 31. 1689/90. I. Fraser.

THE Present State OF GERMANY.

OR, An Account of the Extent, Rise, Form, Wealth, Strength, Weaknesses and
Interests of that Empire.

The Prerogatives of the Emperor, and the Privileges of the Electors, Princes,
and Free Cities.

Adapted to the present Circumstances of that Nation.

By a Person of Quality.

Reges ex Nobilitate, Duces ex virtute sumunt:
Nec Regibus infinita aut libera Potestas.
Tacit. LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXC.

TO THE READER.
I Need not pretend to apologize for the publishing this small Piece at a time
when the continued Victories of the Emperor of Germany over that once so
formidable Enemy the Turk, and the present War with the French, has made that
Nation the Subject of all our Conversation and Discourse for so many years: and
our present Union with those Princes in a War that is of so great consequence
in the event, be it what it will, is like to make this Country more the Subject
of our Hopes and Fears now, than ever it was before.

It is natural for men to be very desirous to know the Circumstances of those
they are concerned with; and there is nothing excites our Curiosity so much, as
the considering our own Happiness or Misery is wrapped up in the Fate of another.
Our Regards for the Empire of China are very languid, and we read their Story
and Descriptions with little more attention than we do a well-drawn Romance,
because be they true or false, we are nothing concerned in the Fortunes of that
remote Empire, which can have no influence upon our Nation.

If the World desires it, it will not be difficult to give a more particular
account of the Electors, and of the other Princes and Free Cities of Germany,
but without that, this will be sufficient to show the general State of Germany,
which is the thing we Englishmen are most desirous and concerned to know.

I shall make no other Apology for it, because I am beforehand resolved to be
wholly unconcerned for its fate; the Reader is left entirely to his own
liberty, to think and speak of it as he himself please.

January the 24th. 1689.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of the Origene of the German Empire. p. 1. 1. THE ancient and present
Bounds of Germany. 2. The ancient state of the German People, dangerous and
weak. 3. The Franks, who are of an uncertain extraction, the first Conquerors
of Germany. 4. It is highly probable the Franks were originally Germans. 5.
They certainly went out of Germany, and conquered Gaul, now France, and
afterward returned back again and conquered all the other Germans. 6. An
enquiry of what Nation Charles the Great was; he is proved a Frank by his
Father, and was born in France, though he used the German Tongue; and an
account is given of the Language of the Gauls, and of the Origene of the
present French Tongue. 7. The Titles of Charles the Great to his several
Dominions. 8. Germany a part of the Kingdom of France. 9. The Children of St.
Lewis divide their Father's Kingdom, by which means Germany became once more a
Free Independent Kingdom. 10. A short historical account of the Roman Empire,
and of its Fall. 11. Italy and Rome for some time under the Greek Emperors. 12.
The Lombards feared by the Popes, subdued by Charles the Great, and he
thereupon was chosen Emperor of Rome, or rather Advocate of that See; yet
neither he nor any of his Successors would suffer France to be taken for a part
of that Empire. 13. The Fall of the Caroline Race; Otho the first King of
Germany only. 14. The Kingdom of Germany has not succeeded in the Roman Empire.
15. That Title has been damageable to Germany.
CHAP. II. Of the Members of which the present German Empire is composed. p.
24. 1. Germany still a potent State, though much diminished as to its ancient
extent. 2. Which are the Members of that Empire. 3. An account of the House of
Austria; how this Family gained Austria, Stiria, Carniola; it is the first
amongst the Spiritual Electors. 4. It has long possessed the Imperial Crown:
The Privileges granted to it by Charles V. the Low Countries pretended to be
united to the Empire by Charles V. and why, The Males of this House. 5. The
Family of the Count Palatine's of the Rhine; the Dukes of Bavaria, the Palatine
Family; that of Newburg the other Branches; the present King of Sweden of this
House. 6. The House of Saxony. 7. That of Brandenburg. 8. The other Princes of
the Empire. 9. Savoy and Lorrain; Ferdinand II. increases the number of the
Princes, eleven of which are named. 10. The Ecclesiastic States once very
rich, now much diminished, yet they still possess the greatest part of the
Countries on the Rhine. 11. The Ecclesiastic Electors and Bishops that are
Princes of the Empire; the mitered Abbats; the Prelates that are not Princes,
yet have Votes in the Diet. 12. The Earls (or Counts) and Barons of the Empire.
13. The Free Cities make a College in the Diet. 14. The Knights of Germany
divided into three Classes, but have no Vote in the Diet. 15. The Empire
divided into ten Circles.
CHAP. III. Of the Origene of the States of the Empire; and by what Degrees
they arrived to that Power they now have. p. 50 1. The Secular Princes of the
Empire are either Dukes or Earls. 2. The old German Dukes military Officers,
and their Grevens or Earls were Judges; but in time obtained these Offices for
their Lives, and at last by Inheritance. 3. Charles the Great endeavored to
redress this Error, but his Posterity returned back to it. Otho Duke of Saxony
a King in Fact though not in Title; other Princes afterward raised to this
Dignity by the Emperors; others by Purchase, Inheritance, and Usurpation. 4.
Whose Power was after confirmed by the Emperors; upon the failing of the Line
of Charles the Great, Germany became perfectly free; the Princes of Germany now
not Subjects but Allies to the Emperor. 5. Great Emperors are well obeyed, the
weaker are despised: Luxury has impoverished some of the Princes. 6. The
Election of the Bishops renounced by the Emperor. 7. The Bishoprics of Germany
endowed by the Emperors. 8. Who when they became very rich, refused to be
subject to their Benefactor. 9. The Free Cities: Why the Germans of old had no
Cities. 10. The Cities were at first subject to the Kings or Emperors of
Germany.
CHAP. IV. Of the Head of the German Empire, the Emperor; and of the Election
and the Electors. p. 68. 1. The Emperor the Head of Germany: The Empire of the
Romans pretendedly given by the Pope: The Kingdom of France more hereditary
than elective: Germany given freely to Conrade: The Empire of Rome united for
ever to the Kingdom of Germany. 2. The ancient Elections not made by any
certain number of Electors exclusively. 3. The Seven Electors not instituted by
Otho III. 4. Yet they seem more ancient than Frederick II. 5. The Privileges
of the Electors. 6. The manner of the Election. 7. The Electors have deposed an
Emperor. 8. The Electors have some other special Privileges. 9. What is done
during the Interregnum. 10. Of the King of the Romans.
CHAP. V. Of the Power of the Emperor as it now stands limited by Treaties,
Laws, and the Customs of the Empire, and the Rights of the States of the
Empire. p. 82. 1. Of the Limits of the Imperial Power. 2. These Conditions are
prescribed only by the Electors. 3. The usefulness of the German Capitular. 4.
The extravagant Opinions of some German Writers concerning the Capitular. 5.
The Emperor does not appoint or punish the Magistrates in the Empire out of his
Hereditary Countries. 6. Nor can he deprive any of the Princes of their Dignity
or Dominions. 7. He has no Revenues. 8. Nor is he the Arbitrator of Peace or
War; nor of Leagues and Alliances. 9. Nor the general Governor of Religion: An
account of Martin Luther. 10. Many of the German Princes deserted the Sea of
Rome: The Decree of Ausburg for the Liberty of Religion. 11. The Liberty of the
Clergy more fiercely disputed. 12. The Differences of Religion cause great
Disquiet in Germany: The Peace of Religion finally settled. 13. The Legislative
Power not in the Emperor: The Canon Law first introduced: The ancient German
Customs: The Civil Law brought into use in the Fifteenth Century: That at
present in use is a mixture of all these three: Particular or Local Laws made
by the States; and the general Laws in the Diet. 14. The Form of the German
Jurisdiction in several Ages. 15. The old Forms changed. 16. The Innovation
brought in by Churchmen. 17. How the Secular Cases are managed: The Chamber of
Spire erected for Appeals. 18. The present form of Process: In Civil Cases
there lies no Appeal from the Emperor, Electors, or King of Sweden, in their
respective Territories, nor from the rest in Criminal Cases. 19. How the
Controversies of the States and Princes amongst themselves are determined. 20.
The highest Courts in the Empire are the Chambers of Spire and Vienna. 21. When
this last was instituted. 22. The form of executing the Judgments of these
Courts. 23. That the greater Cases ought to be determined by the Diet. 24. In
ancient times the Diets were held every year. 25. All the Members are to be
summoned to the Diet. 26. The things to be debated there are proposed by the
Emperor or his Commissioner. 27. The Emperor has some Prerogatives above any
other of the Princes. 28. The Privileges of the Princes and Free States.
CHAP. VI. Of the Form of the German Empire. p. 135. 1. Of the Form of the
German Empire. 2. All the Hereditary States, and some of the Elective, are
Monarchies: The Free Cities are Commonwealths. 3. The form of the whole Body is
neither of these, but an Irregular System. 4. Yet many pretend the Empire is an
Aristocrasie. 5. This disproved. 6. It is not a regular Monarchy. 7. That it is
not so much as a limited Monarchy. Hippolithus a Lapide considered. 8. The
Arguments of those that pretend it is a Limited Monarchy answered. 9. That it
is an irregular System of Sovereign States.
CHAP. VII. Of the Strength and Diseases of the German Empire. p. 155. 1. The
Subjects of Humane Force, Men and Things. Husbandmen most wanted. A vast Army
may be easily levied in the Empire. An account of the number of the Cities,
Towns, and Villages in Germany. The Inhabitants as warlike as numerous, steady
and constant in their Humor. 2. In the point of strength the Country first to
be considered. 3. That it is well stored with what will carry on a Trade; its
principal Commodities; yet Germany wants Money. 4. The Strength of the Empire
compared with the Turks, to whom a fourth part is equal. 5. With Italy,
Denmark, England, Holland, Spain, Sweden, and France. 6. The Strength of
Germany compared with its Neighbors united against her. 7. Germany weak by
reason of its irregular Form or Constitution: Monarchy the best and most
lasting Government, wherein the Strength of a System of States consists; the
Leagues between Kings and Commonwealths seldom lasting. 8. The Diseases of
Germany. The Princes and the Emperor distrust each other; and the States are
embroiled one with another. 9. The Differences of Religion cause great
Disturbances. The Princes of Germany enter into Foreign and Domestic Leagues.
The want of Justice, and of a common Treasure. The Emulations and Contests
between the Princes and States of Germany.
CHAP. VIII. Of the German State-Interest. p. 186. 1. The Remedies of these
Diseases enquired into. 2. The Remedies prescribed by Hippolitus a Lapide. 3.
His Six Rules Six Remedies. 4. The Author's own Remedies proposed: The German
State nearest to a System of States: The Empire cannot be transferred to
another Family. 5. The Opinions of some great men concerning the different
Religions in Germany. 6. Contemt and Loss exasperate men greatly: 7. The
Tempers of the Lutherans and Calvinists of Germany, and their Differences with
each other. 8. The Temper of the Roman Catholics: The Reason of inventing the
Jesuite's Order. 9. Some Considerations on the excessive Revenues of the Church
in the Popish States: Our Author pretends to be a Venetian. 10. The Protestant
Princes are well able to justify what they have done with relation to the
Revenues of the Church. The Conclusion.



THE PRESENT STATE OF THE German Empire.
CHAP. I. Of the Origin of the German Empire.
GERMANY of old was bounded The ancient Bounds of Germany.
to the East by the Danube, to the West by the Rhine, toward Poland it had
then the same bounds it has now, and all the other parts were washed by the
Ocean; so that then under this Name, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden were included,
with all the Countries to the Botner Sea; which three Kingdoms were by most of
the ancient Writers called by the name of Scandinavia. But then, I think, the
Countries on the East of that Bay, were not rightly ascribed to, or included
in, the bounds of the ancient Germany; for the present Finlanders have a Tongue
so different from that spoken by the Swedes and other Germans, as clearly shows
that Nation to be of another extraction. To this I may add, that what Tacitus
writes of the Manners of the most Northern Germans, will not all agree with the
Customs of the Finlanders, but is wonderfully agreeable to those of the
Laplanders, who to this day live much after the same manner. It is probable
therefore, that the Finni mentioned by the Ancients were the Estoitlanders in
Livonia. Nor is it any wonder that Tacitus should not write very distinctly of
this People, they being then the most Northern Nation that was ever heard of,
and known only by an obscure Fame or general Report. These Northern Countries
have however for many Ages been under distinct Kings of their own, so that
Germany has been taken to reach only to the Baltic Sea; and even here the King
of Denmark has deprived it of a considerable part of the Promontory of Jutland,
which he claims as a part of his Kingdom, though it lies on this side of the
Sound or Mouth of the Baltic Sea. But then by way of Reprisals she has
enlarged her Borders to the The present Bounds.
South-East, beyond the Danube, to the Borders of Italy and Illyrica, and
beyond the Rhine, to the West and North, she has gained both the Alsatia's,
Lorrain, and the 17 united Provinces, which last were formerly called Gallia
Belgica.

2. This vast Tract of Land was in The ancient State of it.
those early times possessed by various Peoples and Nations, who were much
celebrated on the account of their numbers and valor; yet each of them was
under a distinct Regiment, very different from that used by their Neighbors,
but then they had one common Original, and the same Language; and there was a
great similitude in their Manners. The greatest part of them were under popular
Governments; some had Kings, but that were rather to persuade their Subjects by
their Authority, than to command them by the Sovereign Power; for that Nation
was never able to brook an Absolute Servitude. This Ancient Germany was never
reduced into one Empire or Kingdom, wherein it was like the rest of her
Neighbors, Italy, France, Spain, Greece, and Britain, before they were
conquered by the Romans. But then, as Germany never was reduced by a Conquest,
so it retained more lively traces and marks of the Primitive State of Mankind,
which from separate and distinct Families by degrees united into larger Bodies
or Kingdoms. But then, though The old German state dangerous and weak
this Independent Knot of States and small Kingdoms, by reason of its freedom,
was very grateful to the Germans of those times, yet it was absolutely
necessary they should frequently be engaged in mutual and destructive Wars,
when they were so many and so small. This again exposed them to the Invasions
of their neighbor Nations, though they were a warlike People, because their
scattered Forces were not united in one Empire for their defense. Neither had
the greatest part of these small States so much Politics as in due time to
unite in Leagues against the dangers of their potent Enemies; but they
perceived the Benefit of such a Concord, when it was too late, and they by
fighting separately for their Liberty, were one after another all conquered.

3. The first that reduced Germany The Franks the first Conquerors of Germany,
of an unknown extraction.
from that ancient state were the Franks, which Nation is of so controverted an
Origin, that it is not easy to determine whether it were of Gallick or of
German extraction. For, though we should grant that all those Nations which the
Greeks comprehended under the title of Celtae, that is, the Illyrians, Germans,
Gauls, Old Spaniards, and Britains, did as it were, flow from the same
Fountain, yet it is very notorious, they afterward much differed each from the
others in Language and Manners, so that no man that is any thing versed in
Antiquity, can in the least doubt of it. The foolish Pride of some of the Gauls
occasioned this difference, who being ignorant that many of the Gallick People
in the first Ages had ambitiously boasted they were of G^rman extraction, did
in the later times envy Germany the honor of having been the Mother of the
Franks. These men pretend, that great multitudes of men out of Gaul invaded
Germany in ancient (but unknown) times, and passing beyond the Rhine, possessed
themselves of all the Countries upon the River Mayn, to the Hercynian Forest,
and that after this they returned, and conquering the Parts on the West of the
Rhine, recovered the possession of their ancient Country, but so that a part of
their Nation still inhabited on the Mayn, and left their Name to that Country.
For the confirmation of this Opinion, they cite Livy, lib. 5. c. 134. C^sar de
bello Gallico, lib. 6. Tacitus de moribus ^ermanorum, c. 28.

4 But to all this the Germans may The Franks were a Germ. People.
truly reply. That the Testimony of these Latin Writers is not without just
exceptions, because they testify very faintly of a thing which happened long
before their times, and concerning a People too whose Antiquities were not
preserved in any written Records. Nor is it at all probable, when the Trebocci.
Alsatia, the chief Towns of which were Breuco-magus, (Bruomat) and Elcebus,
(Schelstat.)
Trebocci, Nemetes, the Inhabitants of the Bishopric of Speyr.
Nemetes, Vangiones, the Inhabitants of Worms and Strasburg.
Vangiones, and Treveri, the Inhabitants of the Archbishopric of Triers.
Treveri, and some other People who in those times lived on the West side of
the Rhine, and yet owned themselves to be of German extraction. That the Franks
should on the contrary pass the Rhine, and out of Gaul, make a Conquest in
Germany. And yet, after all, though we should grant, that the Franks were at
first a Gallick Colony, yet seeing they lived about 800 years in Germany, and
both in their Language and Customs differed from the Gauls, and in both these
agreed exactly with the Germans; they are for that cause to be reckoned amongst
the German Nations. This is certain in the mean time, that till about CCC.
Years after Christ, there is scarce any mention of the Franks made in any
ancient History. From hence there arose two very different Opinions, whilst
some believe those People, who are by Tacitus called the The Chauci were the
Inhabitants of East-Friesland, Groeningen, Breme, Lunenburg, and Hamburg, as
they are placed by Ptolemy.
Chauci, changed that name in after times, and called themselves the Franks;
and others think, that a number of German People, or some parts of them, united
in this name, and out of a vain affectation of Liberty, took up the name of
Franks: for in the German Tongue Frank signifies free: And to this purpose they
produce the Testimonies of Francis I, and Henry II, Kings of France, who in
their Letters to the Diet of Germany say, they are of German Extraction. Though
it is very well known at the same time, to all wise men, to what purposes such
ancient and overworn Relations of Kindred are for the most part pretended.

5. But however this be, the Franks The Franks conquer Gaul, now France, and
after it Germany.
for certain first passed the Rhine upon the Vbii, or Inhabitants of the
Archbishopric of Cologne, and after they had conquered the far greatest part
of Gaul, (now called France) turning as it were the course of their victorious
Arms back again, they conquered the greatest part of Germany, and subdued all
the Countries between the Mayn and the Danube, and went Northward as far as
Thuringia: After this Charles the Great extended his Conquests much further by
subduing the Saxons, and Tassilon King of the Bavarians; so that not only the
Countries possessed by the old German Nations were all reduced under his
Obedience, but all those that lay upon the Baltic Sea, and that part of Poland
which lies on the West of the Vistula, which was then inhabited by the Sclaves;
for History says, They also were either Tributaries to that Prince, or
majestatem comiter coluisse, were Homagers to his Crown.

6. The greatest part of the German Of what Nation Charles the Great was.
Writers have very fondly endeavored to have it believed he was their
Countryman, as being born at Ingelheim, a Town in the Bishopric of Mentz, but
now under the Elector Palatine; and in an ancient Charter of the Abbey of Fuld,
the Lands upon the River Unstrut in Thuring, are called The Lands of his
Conception: And that he used the German Tongue, is apparent by the names of the
Months used in his time, which are still retained in Germany, and are thought
to have been introduced by him. But if the Germans would suffer me, (a
Foreigner) to pass my judgment in this Affair, though I am not at all disposed to
favor the French in their other pretenses, to the damage of the Germans; yet I
would persuade them here freely and willingly to renounce their Pretenses to
Charles the Great, and the rather, because it can bring no injury to their
present Empire; for it is certain, the Franks placed the Seat of their Empire
in Germany; and it is no less A Frank
certain, that the Father of Charles the Great By his Father,
was King of France, and all his Progenitors had for many Ages lived in great
Honor, and managed great Employments in that Kingdom. Besides, those parts of
Germany, And born in France.
which lie on the West of the Rhine, and were then subject to the Crown of
France, were possessed by them as Accessions acquired to that Kingdom by
Conquest, and were looked upon as conquered Provinces; and every man is
esteemed to be of the same Nation his Father was, and in which he has placed
the Seat of his Fortunes and Hopes after his Father and Ancestors. The sole
consideration, That a man was born in this or that Country, will hardly be
allowed to make a man of a different Nation from his Father; unless we can
believe, that if the present King of Sweden had been born in Prussia, he had
been to have been esteemed a Prussian, and not a Swede. Nor was that part of
Germany which lies on the West of the Rhine, esteemed a part of France, till
under Charles the Great it was united to that Kingdom: And in the first time^
that followed, when his Posterity had divided their Ancestor's Dominions
amongst them, the Historians frequently distinguish between the Latin or
Western France, and the German or Eastern France, which is the same with
Germany: And it is observed, that after the times of the Otho's, that name of
Germany, by degrees, grew out of use. The objection made on the account of the
use of the German Language by Charles the Great, may be thus easily Though he
used the German Tongue.
answered: The Gauls having been long subject to the Romans, by degrees lost
their own Tongue, and embraced that of their Conquerors; so that at last there
were scarce any footsteps of the old Celtick left amongst them: But then the
Franks brought their German Tongue along with them, and without doubt did not
presently forget it. But then, as the Franks neither destroyed nor expelled the
Gauls, but only assumed the Government and Soveraignity of the Country, from
whence it came to pass, that those who were descended of the Franks, were
employed in the great Affairs, and the Gauls, as a conquered People, were kept
under; but then as two Rivers of different color, uniting in one stream, may
for some time preserve each his proper color, but at length the greater stream
will certainly change the lester into its own color; so in the beginning the
Gauls had their Tongue, and the Franks theirs, till in length of time a third
was made out of both mixed and twisted together, in which yet the Latin is the
predominant, the plain cause of which is, That the Gauls were more numerous
than the Franks, and it was much harder for them to learn the German, than it
was for the Franks to learn the Gallick Latin; for with what difficulty
Foreigners learn the German Tongue, I my self know by experience. From hence it
proceeds, that the most ancient Writers of this Nation call the vulgar Latin
the Rustic or Countryman's Tongue, because the Nobility and Gentry still used
the German, whilst the Countrymen and the rest of the Gauls had no knowledge of
any other than the Latin. And thus we see it is in our own times, in Livonia
and Curland, where the old Inhabitants are by the Germans reduced into the
condition of mere Rusticks; for all the Nobility, and the Inhabitants of the
Cities, speak the Sclavonian Tongue, and the German, but the Countrymen do
scarce understand one German word of ten. Thus Charles the Great might easily
understand the German Tongue, because the Franks, who were a German Nation, had
not quite laid aside the use of it; and also because the Franks, before his
time, had conquered a great part of Germany, and he went on with the work, and
reduced all the rest under his Dominion. Nor was it possible in that unlearned
Age to converse with the Germans in any other than their own Language. But then
he that observes, that there is two very different Questions confounded into
one, will very accurately determine this Controversy; for if the Question be,
Whether Charles the Great were of a Gallick or a German Original? without doubt
it will be answered, That he was not a Gaul but a German, or which is all one,
a Frank. But if the Question be, What Countryman he was? France, and not
Germany, is to be assigned him. and therefore in this respect he was no German,
but a Gaul, or Gallo-Frank. I fear I shall make the Reader think I take him for
a stupid person, if I should dwell any longer on so plain a thing; and yet I
will presume to give the Germans a known example: If you fall upon a Nobleman
of Livonia, and ask him what Countryman he is, he will reply a Livonian, and
not a German; but then, if you still insist, and ask him of what Lineage, he
will say, he is descended of the Germans, and not of the Livonians.

7. This Prince (Charles the Great) had The Titles of Charles the Great to his
several Dominions.
under him diverse Nations, which he had acquired by very different Titles: He
enjoyed France as his Inheritance, devolved to him from his Father by
Succession. For though we read in their Histories, that the ancient Franks had
lodged in the Nobility and People of that Nation, some Authority in the
constituting their Kings; yet I conceive, it was rather a solemn Inaguration,
and an acknowledgment of their Loyalty and Obedience to the new King, than a
Free Election; for they rarely departed from the Order of a Lineal Succession,
but when there were Factions, or the next Heir in the Line was wholly unfit for
Government. A part of Germany was, before this time, united by Conquest to the
Crown of France, and the rest of it was subdued by the victorious Arms of
Charles the Great. Whether any part of this Country freely and willingly
submitted to him out of Reverence to his Greatness, is very uncertain. He also
by his Arms conquered the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy, the Pope of Rome
affording him a Pretense for it; after which, he was by the Pope and People of
Rome saluted Emperor of Rome, and Augustus. Now, what he gained by this Title,
we shall by and by inform you.

8. Thus, under Charles the Great, Germany Germany a part of the Kingdom of
France.
became a part of the Kingdom of France, and was sufficiently subject to the
Absolute Empire or Sovereignty of those Princes. During this state of Affairs,
it was divided into diverse Provinces, which were governed by Counts or Earls,
and Marquesses, who were for the most part of French extraction: yet in these
times the Saxons enjoyed a greater show of Liberty, because Charles the Great
had not been able to reduce them without a long and tedious War, and was at
last to perfect the Work, and establish his Sovereignty, necessitated to admit
them to a participation of the Privileges enjoyed by the Franks, and to unite
them into one Nation with their Conquerors. That he might further assure
himself of this fierce Nation, which was so impatient of Servitude; he called
in the assistance of the Priests, who were ordered to teach them the Christian
Faith, and to inculcate into them how much they were obliged to those who had
shown them the way of obtaining Eternal Life. On this account many Bishoprics
and Abbeys in Germany were founded by Charles the Great. Germany was in the
same estate under Saint Lewis the Son of Charles, but that the Authority of the
Prefects or Governors of the Provinces began to grow greater.

9. But afterward, when the Children of The Children of St. Lewis divide their
Father's Kingdom.
this Lewis had divided their Father's Kingdom amongst them (which was the
first and principal cause of the Ruin of the French Power, and of the Caroline
Family) Germany became separated from the French Empire, and was a distinct
Kingdom under Lewis II. Son of St. Lewis. To it was afterward added a great
part of the Belgic France, (or of the Low Countries, as it is now called)
which lies toward the Rhine, which for the most part was inhabited by German
Nations, which from Lotharius another of the Sons of St. Lewis, was then called
the Kingdom of Lorrain, though at this day only a very small part of that
Kingdom retains the old name. During the destructive Wars, which followed after
these times, between the Posterity of Charles the Great, not only the German
Nobility gained exorbitant Power, but the very Family of Charles was at last
totally extinguished, or at least deprived of the Crown of France, (for to this
day the Dukes of Lorrain, and the Electors Palatine, pretend to be descended of
that Family) and the Germans chose themselves Kings out of the Nobility of
their own Nation; from which times Germany became again a free State, and
Germany a free State.
had no dependence on the Crown of France. Now, because the German State is
commonly called the Sacred Roman Empire, I think it will be worth my pains to
enquire, How it first obtained this Title? what it has gained by it and by what
Right it now enjoys that Name? for the clear understanding of which it will be
necessary shortly to recapitulate the state the Roman Empire in the West was
reduced to before the times of Charles the Great.

10. It is very well and commonly known A short account of the Roman Empire.
after what manner the People of Rome, after they had by the Success of their
Arms subdued the noblest part of the then known World, were at last, by the
ambition of a few over-potent Citizens engaged in Civil Wars, and at length
brought under the Dominion of a single person. But then Augustus the Founder of
the Roman Empire (or Monarchy) when he had by the assistance of the Army gained
the Empire, persuaded himself, that he should easily keep it by the same way.
Therefore though from thenceforward he seemed to leave some of the Affairs of the
State to the disposal of the Senate, that it might still seem to have a share
in the Government; yet he wholly kept in his own hands the Care and Government
of the Army. But then it was his principal care to conceal from the Rabble of
the Army, That the Soldiers were the men who could set up and pull down the
Emperors; which Secret, when it was once discovered, the State of the Empire
became as miserable as the Condition of the Emperors; for the Empire being
weakened by frequent intestine Wars, found it self also often exposed to the
worst of men by a covetous and turbulent Rabble, which oftentimes most wickedly
murdered her best Princes, to her great damage and sorrow: Nor could any of her
Emperors after this entertain any hopes of firmly settling the Empire in their
Families, but was necessitated to be contented with a precarious Title amongst
a parcel of mercenary Soldiers: So that in truth the whole power of making the
Emperors, was in the Army, (which is the common Attendant of all Military
Monarchies, where a strong and perpetual Army is kept together in any one
place) and the Senate and People of Rome were weak and vain Names, made use of
to delude the simple common People, as if the free and voluntary consent of the
whole Body had constituted the Emperor. That Kingdom, thus founded on a
Military License, as it was unfit for continuance, was by Constantine the Great
and Theodosius hastened to its fatal period: the first of these making
Byzantium (now called Constantinople) the Seat of the Empire, and withdrawing
the Armies, which had till then been maintained on the East of the Rhine, for
its preservation; and the later by dividing the Empire between his two Sons
Arcadius and Honorius, soft lasie Princes, and neither of them fit for such a
Command. From thence forward there were two Kingdoms for one, and this Division
was no way useful, but only for the fitting the Western part by separating it
from the Eastern, to be the more easy Prey to the barbarous Nations: and
accordingly, not long after this, an end was put to the Western Empire, and
Rome was taken and sacked by the Goths which before that had been deprived of
all her Provinces by as good Right as she had got them, and now, in her turn,
lost her beloved Liberty, and became a part of the Gothic Kingdom.

11. After this, the Gothic Power being Rome for some time under the Greek
Emperors.
entirely ruined, Rome and a considerable part of Italy returned under the
Obedience of the Greek Emperors, though on the account of her former Majesty, and
for that Constantinople was considered as the Metropolis; Italy was rather
treated by them as an Ally than as a subject Province. But however, the
Supremacy was acknowledged to be in the Emperor of Greece, who exercised it in
Rome and those other parts of Italy which were under his Jurisdiction by his
Exarchs. But by degrees the Popes became weary of this Greek Empire; they lay
the blame however on the Misgovernment of the Exarchs, and because some of the
Greek Emperors were too severe against Images, which they yet judged a most
useful Tool to instruct the Many in the Superficial Rites of Religion, which,
as they said, was become incapable of receiving or bearing a more solid Piety;
nor was it so profitable to the Priests, to let the People know, a good and
holy Life would certainly please God. Perhaps also it was believed, the Church
would be very much exalted in her Authority, if the Pope could by degrees gain
the Secular Empire, as he had already, in a good degree, assumed the Supremacy
in Ecclesiastical or Sacred Affairs throughout the World. And in truth, it did
not seem fit that he should live in subjection to the Slave of a Greek Emperor,
(who sometimes was deprived of his Virilities) whom God had entrusted with such
Power, as his own Vicar in the World, that he being freed from the Care of the
Church, might be at the better leisure to attend the Civil Affairs of the
World, and that they too had been delegated by God to the Pope, if it had not
been apparent, that the holy minds of these Bishops were so taken with the
Pleasures of Divine Affairs, that they wholly declined the being concerned in
these profane Employments. But then, though The Lombards feared by the Popes.
the Greek Emperor was not much feared, both on the score of his distance, and
also because he had enough to do to defend himself against the Saracens, which
then from the East fiercely and successfully attacked the Empire; yet the Power
of the Lombards was more dreadful, and hung like a mighty Tempest over all
Italy, and had almost made themselves Masters of the Suburbs of Rome; and the
Pope not being able alone to grapple with this Enemy, could bethink him of no
body that was able to succor the Sea of Rome in this exigence, but the King of
France; and he too was very much disposed to it by the Prospect of that Glory
which would attend the rescuing from Injury that Person, who like an
unexhaustible Fountain dispensed to all Christian Souls the Waters of Divine
Grace. The Pope also had beforehand very much obliged Pipin the Father, and
Charles the Son, by his ready consenting, That Chilprick King of France should
be shaven and turned into a Monastery: Which could never be equally recompensed
by those Princes, who might otherwise have had painful Scruples of Conscience
to persuade themselves, That a Subject might lawfully shave his Prince, and
make him, of a Monarch, become a Monk, who was guilty of no other fault, but
his having committed more Power to a Potent Minister, than was consistent with
the safety of his Crown and Kingdom. And in this the Fates strangely befriended
the French in giving them so plausible a pretense of invading and possessing
our Italy, which has always been courted by the Vltra-montane Kingdoms.

12. After then that Charles the Great had subdued all that part of Italy which
was before Charles the Great subdues the Lombards, and is made Emperor,
subject to the Lombards, the Pope (who had a good share of the Prey) that he
might show his gratitude, and assure himself for the future a Potent Defender,
declared Charles Emperor and Augustus, with the Approbation of the People. Now
it is not easy to conceive what Charles got by this Title; in truth Rome long
before this was not the Seat of the ancient Roman Empire, being made first a
Part of the Gothic Kingdom, and after that of the Eastern Empire; and
therefore the Romans could not give that to Charles, which heretofore belonged
to the Western Empire: for all that Right was determined by Conquest and the
Right of War, by Cession and Desertion, and was now for a long time in the
peaceable possession of others. And even Rome her self was not sui juris, and
therefore could not give her self to another: And therefore Charles was at
first in doubt, whether he should accept the Title, till he had made an
agreement with the Greek Emperor, and obtained his consent. The Emp. of
Constantinople who was then weak, and needed the Friendship of Charles yielded
the point without any difficulty, to preserve Calabria, and those other Ports
he had yet left him in Italy. So that upon the whole, Charles the Great, under
the Or rather Protector and Advocate of the Sea of Rome.
splendid Title of Emperor, borrowed from the ancient State of Rome (but in a
very different sense) was made the Supreme Defender, Protector, and Advocate of
the Sea of Rome, and of the States belonging to it, either by the Usurpation of
the Pope, or the Liberality of others. Now whether this Defense and Protection
included in it a Supreme Empire or Dominion over that See, as some Civilians
have said, seems a doubt to me, and I should rather think there was a kind of
unequal League only entered between Charles and the Sea of Rome, That he should
defend her against all Invaders, or by his Authority compose all internal
Commotions, which might tend to the damage or dishonor of that See; and on the
other side, the Sea of Rome should pay a due respect to his Majesty, and not
undertake any thing which was of great consequence, without his Authority or
Leave: and in the first place, that no man should be admitted Pope against his
will. From whence it will appear, that the Sea of Rome from thenceforward
became a particular State, and, properly speaking, was not united to the
Kingdom of France. And that Charles the Great was not the Master of the Sea of
Rome, and the States belonging to it, nor did he exercise a Sovereign Dominion
over her, by making Laws, imposing Tributes, creating Magistrates, or
exercising any Jurisdiction, or the like; for all these things are not above
the Pretenses of an Advocate, viz. To expel a Pope that entered by ill Arts, to
reduce into Order such as designed the Ruin of the Church, or any other signal
damage, or to subdue the Romans, or any other who should rebel against the
Pope. Charles, and some of his Posterity, though they seemed fond enough of the
Titles of Emperors and Augusti, and on However, neither he nor any of his
Successors would suffer France to be taken for a part of the Empire.
that account took upon them the Priority amongst the other European Princes,
who willingly yielded it to them on that score; yet after all, for ought that
appears to me, we shall never read, that any of the Line of Charles the Great,
called the Kingdom of France by that Name.

13. When the Caroline Family began to The Fall of the Caroline Race, the Rise
of the Kingdom of Germany under Otho 1.
decline, and the Germans had divided themselves from the Kingdom of France,
and Italy was afflicted with great Commotions, there sprung up other States out
of the Ruins of this House, and amongst them Otho the First, King of Germany,
who having overcome Berengarius, and reduced the Kingdom of Italy, the Popes
(who could not trust to their States) thought fit to put Otho in possession of
the same Power that had been enjoyed by the Family of Charles the Great, and
consented, That for the future the Protection of the Sea of Rome should be
united to the Kingdom of Germany, so that whosoever enjoyed that Kingdom,
should be the Protector of that See. But then, after many of those old German
Kings had courageously executed that Office upon the Sea of Rome, and in the
mean time the Wealth and Power not only of the Sea of Rome, but of the
Bishoprics of Germany, was become very great, the Popes of Rome began to grow
weary of this German Protection too; the Causes of this were, 1. The Aversion
common to all Nations, against a Foreign Dominion. 2. The Indignity which was
offered hereby, to the Italick People, who having ever been celebrated for
Civil Prudence, were by this kept under the Tutelage of the less-politick
Germans. 3. Besides, it was very uneasy to the Vicar of J. C. to be any longer
under the Guardianship of another, whose fingers itched to be giving Laws to
all Princes; therefore for the shaking off this Yoke, they took this course,
viz. They found out ways, by the means of the Bishops, to imbroil the Affairs
of these Kings, sometimes in Germany, and at others in Italy, and the Pope
seconded them with his Fulminations or Censures, which in those Ages were
wonderful terrible. Thus by degrees the Kings of Germany grew weary of Italy,
and being content with their own Kingdom, left the Sea of Rome to the sole
management of the Popes, which they had sought so many Ages, and by such a
variety of Arts, to the embroiling all Europe. After this the Kings of Germany
a long time omitted the being crowned at Rome, yet they retained the old Titles
of Emperors of Rome; and when they entered upon the Kingdom, the Defense of the Sea of Rome was in the first place enjoined them; from which care the
Protestant Electors have since given the Emperor a Discharge.

14. By all that has been said, it will appear The Kingdom of Germany has not
succeeded in the Roman Empire.
how childishly they are mistaken, who think the Kingdom of Germany his
succeeded in the Place of the old Roman Empire, and that it is continued in
this Kingdom; when in truth, that Empire which was seated at Rome, was
destroyed many Ages before Germany became one Kingdom; and that Roman Empire
which was given to Charles and Otho (which was nothing but the Advousion and
Protection of the Sea of Rome) in length of time fixed its Name upon that
Kingdom of Germany, though the States of the Church in Italy never were united
into one and the same Polity with the Kingdom of Germany, much less did either
Charles or Otho submit their proper Kingdoms to Rome, as the Metropolis or Seat
of the Empire. In the mean time, because it was believed the very Title of
Emperor of Rome, upon the account of the Greatness of that ancient Empire, had
something of Majesty and Grandeur in it, it was frequently given to the Kings
of Germany only. And the consequence of this was, that Germany was afterward
called the Roman Empire, by way of Honor; but the different Coronations which
belong to them do not obscurely show, that there is a real difference to be
made between the Roman Empire and the Kingdom of Germany; and the later
Emperors, since Maximilian I. after the Title of Roman Emperor, expressly
subjoin that of King of Germany. The Germans also at this day do commonly call
their State, The Roman Empire of the Teutonick Nation; which form of Speech
seems to contain in it a contradiction. Seeing it is very certain the present
State of Germany is not one and the same with the ancient Roman Empire, yet the
Kings of Germany retain the Title which has been received, though they have for a
long time omitted the Reception of the Crown of Rome, and use very little of
the ancient Rights of an Advocate, which belonged heretofore to them, because
Princes do more easily part with the things in dispute, than with the Titles to
them. Now, whether that Right they once had, is by the lapse of time expired,
or preserved by the use of the Title only, we shall hereafter, when occasion is
offered, enquire.

15. But in the mean time the Title of the The Title of Roman Emperor
damageable to Germany.
Empire of Rome is so far from being any advantage, that it is manifest, it has
been the cause of great Mischief and Inconvenience to Germany. Priests are
always ready to receive, but never part with any thing; and whereas all other
Clients dispose their Masters to favor them by their Presents, if a Priest be
not fed with new Presents, he presently snarles, and imputes his Blessing as a
wonderful Obligation. I should think, that the ancient Princes heaped their
Bounties upon the Clergy of Germany, principally because they were made believe
God expected they should provide plentifully for that Order of Men. And what
has been spent by Germans in Journies to Rome, for the Imperial Crown? What
Treasures and Men have been consumed in Italick Expeditions, in composing the
Commotions stirred up by the Popes, and in protecting them against refractory
men that have attacked them, is not to be conceived. Nor has any Foreigner got
much by attacking Italy, the Spaniards excepted, who have stuck so many years
in the Bowels of The Author, tho'a German, pretends to be an Italian.
our Country, that we have never yet been able to ^epell them. Lastly, no
Princes were oftener fulminated by that See than the German Emperors; nor was
any of them more exercised by the frequent Seditions of the Churchmen than
they; the principal cause of all which misfortunes seem to have arisen from
hence, That they thought these Princes, who had this Title from the Sea of
Rome, in which they took such pride, were obliged by it, above all other Men,
to promote the Affairs of that See: Or otherwise, because that Order of Men is
above all others unwilling to be subject to the Sovereignty of another, and
with Mother Church, is ever seeking how to shake off the hated Secular
Authority; yet I would have this understood with Salva reverentia sanctissimae
sedis, a saving the Reverence and Respect due to that most Holy See, to whose
Judgment I most devoutly submit all this.

CHAP. II. Of the Members of which the present German Empire is composed.
1. AFter the German Nation, by the help Germany a potent State, though much
diminished ^s to its extent.
of the French, became one Body, it has in all times been thought one of the
strongest States in Europe; and at this day it is not less regardable, on the
account of its bulk, though great parts of it have been ravished from it, and
either annexed to other Kingdoms, or formed into separate and independent
States. How much the German Empire is now less than it was anciently, has been
shown by Hermannus Conringius, a most skilful man in the German Affairs, in his
Book, de finibus Imperii Germanici, concerning the Bounds of the German Empire;
but it will be enough for us to observe what she has at present. The principal
Members then of this Body are designed by the Title of The States of the
Empire, who have, as we express it, a Right to Sit and Vote in the Diet, though
many of these are opposed by others, or whose Right to be immediate States is
disputed by other more potent States, who pretend they ought to represent them
in the Diet. The occasion of these Controversies is, because these Potent
States would make those that are controverted Members of their own Provincial
States, and not of the general Diet. But then, as to the Families of the
Princes, it is to be observed, that there regularly belongs to each House a
certain number of Votes in the Diet; as some Houses have only one Vote, some
two, some three, some four, and some five; in some Principalities the eldest
Brother enjoys the whole Estate, and all the younger must be content with an
Apanage, and in others, they have all a share, though not an equal one, with
the eldest; where the first of these is observed, the eldest represents the
Person of the whole Family; where the latter, they may all come to the Diet,
but they have altogether but one Vote, of which they must all agree amongst
themselves.

2. To prove a Person a Member of the Which are the Members of the Empire.
States of the Empire, two things are commonly thought sufficient, 1. if his
Name is in the Catalogue or Matricula of the States; and 2. if he is obliged to
pay what he contributes to the Public, to the Empire, and not into the
Exchequer or Treasury of any other subordinate State; though the plainest Proof
is, to allege the Possession of this Privilege. Some pretend they have by
mistake paid their quota into other inferior States; and others say, that some
others, by mere Usurpation, have passed by the Provincial Treasury to which
they belonged of Right, and have flown with their share to the public
Treasury; and these Allegations are made, as men endeavor to acquire or
deprive others of the Right of being Members of the Diet respectively. Nor was
there ever yet any Matricula extant, in which nothing was wanting or redundant,
and about which there was not some Controversy; though those that were published
in the year 51, 56, 66. of the last Century, are thought the most authentic.
But I should however think, that the most ancient Matricula's which represent
many as Parts of the States of the Empire, who have been long since excluded
out of the Diet, are better than the latter, because they are nothing but Lists
of those who were then in the Diet, when public Instruments were made by
public Authority; and therefore from thence undoubted Arguments may be made
for both the contending Parties. But in the mean time, from this variety in the
Matricula's I may safely conclude, That in the most ancient times the number of
the States of the Empire was never fixed and certain, and that all that were
enabled by their Wealth or Prudence, to contribute any thing to the Welfare of
their Country, had liberty to be present in the Diet. Afterward the Poorer not
being able to attend the Diet, by reason of the Expense and Charge, remained
willingly at home; and that in aftertimes others, who would willingly enough
have been there, were excluded by others, who were too powerful for them to
contend with, till the States were by degrees brought to the number we now see
them. It were too tedious for us to transcribe here a Matricula, but yet I
shall represent the Principal of the States, as a thing absolutely necessary to
the forming a Judgment of the Magnitude of this whole Body.

3. Amongst the Secular Princes, we give An account of the House of Austria.
the first Place to the House of Austria, not so much for its Antiquity, as on
the score of the greatness of its Dominions, and because it has now for some
Ages possessed the Imperial Throne. This unusual Clemency of the Fates has
raised this Family from a very mean original, to an invidious greatness.
Rudolphus, the Its Rise.
first of these, who obtained the Imperial Dignity, was Count of Hapsburg, and
possessed a small Estate, nothing above his Condition and Title in the Borders
of Switzerland, but then he was a good Soldier, and a man of Valor: There
having been in his times an Interregnum of about 20 years. The State of Germany
was in great confusion and disorder; the principal Princes of Germany met, and
to put an end to these Calamities, resolved to elect an Emperor; Wernerus, then
Bishop of Mentz, mentioned Rudolphus, who had civilly waited upon him in one of
his Journeys to Rome, from Strasburg to the Alps, and he much extolled his
Prudence and Courage, and the Electors of Cologne and Trier soon joined with
him. Now he that is any thing well acquainted with the Temper of the Churchmen,
will, without any difficulty, conjecture what occasioned this great desire in
the Bishop of Mentz to raise this Gentleman; he concluded, he would be the more
obnoxious or compliant to him, because the Nobility of his extraction did not
encourage him to act with that freedom another would have used; and besides, he
would in greater degree be obliged to him for his preferment. But then it might
seem a wonder that none of the greater Princes should aspire to the Imperial
Throne, except we consider the confused state of things in Germany, at that
time, which made them all fearful they might not be able to reduce it into
order; and perhaps others of them were not of sufficient age and experience to
effect so difficult a Work. Thus the Secular Electors complied with the
Spiritual; but then the Elector of Saxony, and the Burgrave of Norimburg, would
not give their Votes for him till he had promised them each of them a Daughter
in Marriage; and the same was asked by the Duke of Bavaria, who was then
present, and granted. Thus Rudolphus became allied to the best Families of
Germany, which in the beginning was both an honor and a support to this House.
The Imperial Dignity gave him also afterward opportunity of obtaining a
considerable Patrimony for his Posterity; for when any Fee became vacant, none
could better pretend to it than one of his own Sons, for to take it to himself,
would have been very invidious. Thus Austria, Stiria, Carniola, etc. came into
this House as vacant Fees.
that House obtained Austria, Stiria, Carniola, and the Marquisate of Vindish
in Carniola, and some other Territories, and in process of time many other were
added, by the Bounty of other Emperors, as the Opulent are more frequently
obliged with such Favors than the Poor. Being thus enriched, it became very
easy for this Family to match into the best Houses; and because Ladies are not
only won by Riches, but dazzled sometimes with the glittering of a new and
extraordinary Title, a Son might easily gain in that case, from a less yielding
Father, some new additions, which might set him above the other Dukes, and yet
even here the Prudence of the House of Austria deserves commendation. It would
have been very invidious for this new Family to have taken a Place in the
Diets, above the more ancient; and yet it did not become it to follow the rest,
now it was possessed of the Empire; therefore they took the first place amongst
the Spiritual Electors, who have a Bench distinct The first amongst Spiritual
Electors.
from the Secular Princes; for these being for the most part descended of lower
Families, did without any reluctance yield the first place to this Family; and
yet this their modesty went not unrewarded for on this account they obtained
that Employment or Honor which they call the Directory in the College of the
Princes, to be exercised by turns with the Bishop of Saliburg. These things are
so far from deserving the blame of any wise man, that it would have been the
utmost degree of stupidity to have done otherwise. Thus the House of Austria
gained to it self the greatest part of the Eastern Countries of Germany; after
this, they got the Crown of Hungary, by almost an Hereditary Title, which
amongst other advantages serves as a Bulwark to their other Dominions against
the Irruptions of the Turks, and give the Austrians many pretenses of draining
the Moneys of Germany to maintain its Wars against that dreadful Enemy.

4. We ought well to consider also not only This Family has long possessed the
Imperial Throne.
that the House of Austria has continued its self so long in the Imperial
Dignity, that there is scarce any other House in Germany, which has a Revenue
sufficient to hear the Expense of that Station; but that they have also found
means in the interim so to order their Dominions, that without any difficulty
they can erect them into an Independent separate State or Kingdom, if any other
Family should happen to be advanced to the Imperial Crown; for they have
procured such Privileges, that whenever they shall not be pleased to
acknowledge the Authority of another Emperor, they may say, They have no
business with the Empire of Germany, their Dominions are a separate State.
Which would not only wonderfully maim the Empire by depriving it of so great a
part of its body, but would also set a dangerous Example to other powerful
Princes to do the like, especially if they conceive they are able to preserve
themselves without the assistance of the Empire; yea, if this example were once
given, the meaner and lesser Princes would not continue in the state of
Subjects. And thus Germany would soon be brought into the same state with
Italy; but then it seems to me to be very doubtful, whether it could so well
preserve it self as Italy does. That I have not rashly feigned all this, will
be easily granted, if any one is but pleased to consider, That the Kingdom of
Bohemia has very little concern with the Empire of Germany besides its Vote in
the Election of the Emperor; or if he will but reflect on the greatest part of
the Privileges of the House of Austria. It will to this purpose be sufficient
to represent a few Heads of the Immunities given by Charles V. In the very
entrance of The Privileges granted to this Family by Charles V.
this Grant he is pleased to acknowledge, that Men naturally desire the welfare
of their Families; then he decrees, That Austria shall be a perpetual Fee of
this Family, which no future Emperor shall deprive it off. 2. That the Duke of
Austria, for the time being, shall be such a Counselor of the Empire, as
without his knowledge nothing shall be determined. And yet, 3. He declares his
Dominions free from all Contributions to the Empire. 4. And yet obliges the
Empire to the defense of them; so that in all Advantages it is a Member, in all
Charges it is not. 5. The Duke of Austria shall not be obliged to demand the
Investiture of his Dominions out of the Bounds of them, but it shall be offered
to him in his own Territories; to wit, because for a naked acknowledgment of
the Tenure, he will not confess himself subject to the Empire; or as if he were
to be entreated to own himself a Vassal of the Empire. And then the Ornaments
that are allowed him in this action, do also sufficiently argue, that he is to
be treated like an Equal, and not like a Subject. 6. If he please, he may come
to the Diet; and if he please, he may forbear. 7. The Emperor has no Authory to
rectify any thing done by him in his own Dominions. 8. The Emperor can dispose
of no Fees within the Dominions belonging to the House of Austria. 9. His
Subjects shall not be drawn out of his Dominions to answer in any other Courts.
10. From his Sentence there lies no Appeal. 11. He may without any danger
receive such as are put under the Ban of the Empire, so that he take care to do
Justice to the Party injured; but then those that are banished by the Duke of
Austria, shall be absolved by no other Prince, nor in any other place than in
Austria. 12. He may lay new Tributes or Taxes on his own Vassals, at his own
pleasure. 13. He may create Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen within his own
Dominions, which was heretofore thought one of the Acts of Sovereignty. 14.
Lastly, to perfect his Power, it is decreed, That in case the Male Line fail in
this House, the Estates belonging to it shall devolve to the Female Issue; and
if there be no Females, neither, the last Possessor shall give or dispose of
them as he thinks fit. It is to no purpose to add any more, seeing these are
sufficient to convince any wise man. So that the man must be very silly who
does not perceive the sham designed the Empire by Charles V. when he submitted
his 17 Provinces to the Empire, with a The Low Countries united to the Empire
by Charles V. and why.
magnificent Promise, that they should pay as much as any two of the Electors
paid to the Charges of the Empire; for he well considered that all was to be
spent on the Turkish War, and the Preservation of the Austrian Dominions: and
when the Accounts of the Moneys expended in the Turkish War were to be in the
hands of the Princes of this Austrian Familys, the Low Countries were not
likely to be overcharged, nor to be very ill treated, if they proved slow in
the payment. So that it was easy to observe, That Charles V. by this Promise
only encouraged the Germans to spend their Treasures the more freely in the
defense of his Territories, when they saw him so freely consent to bring his
own Patrimony under the same Burden; though perhaps there might be another
reason too at the bottom of it, viz. That whereas his Son Philip then aspired
to the Empire, it might not be objected against him, that he had no Dominions
in the Empire, those belonging before to the House of Austria, being then
assigned to his Brother Ferdinand: Or, perhaps, that the Germans might think
themselves the more obliged to defend these Provinces, if they were at any time
invaded by the French King. At this time that Line is reduced The Males of this
House.
to two Males, Leopald Emperor of Germany, (who has, since our Author wrote,
had a Son named Joseph) and Charles King of Spain, who has no Issue: I have
heard many of the Germans wish this Prince a numerous Male Posterity, out of
mere fear that the failing of the Line in this Family may cause dreadful
Convulsions in Europe.

5 The Family of the Counts Palatine of the The Counts Palatine of the Rhine,
and the Dukes of Bavaria.
Rhine, and of the Dukes of Bavaria, are, as to Antiquity, equal to the best,
and it enjoys a vast Tract of Land, which extends from the Alps to the River
Moselle, and two Dukedoms in the Borders of the Low Countries: It is divided
into two Lines, the Rudolfian and William; one of these is possessed of the
Dukedom of Bavaria, Bavaria.
and has ever been thought very Rich, and in the last tedious Civil War it got
also the Electoral Dignity from the Palatinate Family; and for almost an
hundred years it has possessed the Electorate of Cologne (Prince Clement, who
was lately chosen, being likely still to continue it in this Family, though
powerfully opposed by the King of France); his Predecessor also possessed the
Bishoprics of Liege and Hildisheim. The Rudolfian The Palatine Family.
Line is divided into many Branches, the Principal of which is the Elector
Palatine, and it enjoys the Lower Palatinate on the Rhine, a Country which for
its strength, pleasantness, and fertility, was equal to the best parts of
Germany, before the French with Fire and Sword barbarously laid it desolate,
not only demolishing, but burning down to the Ground the greatest part of its
Towns, Cities, Palaces, and Churches. The Count Palatine of Newburg The House
of Newburg.
possessed heretofore the Dukedoms of Juliers and Montz, and some Dominions on
the Danube, and in the year 1685. Charles Lewis the last Elector dying without
Issue, Philip William of the House of Newburg, succeeded in the Electorate too,
which in the year 1688. he resigned to his Son John William, being grown very
old, and sorely oppressed by the French. Besides these, The other Branches of
this House.
there are the Palatines of Sultzback, Simmeren, Deuxpont, or Zuibrucken (as
the Germans call it) Birkenfield and Lawtreck. The Family of Deuxpont produced
Charles Gustavus King of Sweden, who The King of Sweden of this Family. His
Dominions in Germany.
now reigns in that Kingdom, who by the Peace of Osnaburg has obtained in
Germany the Dukedoms of Breme, Ferden, and the upper Pomerania, together with
Stetin, the Principality of Rugen, and the Barony of Wismar. This Family enjoys
now also Princes of great worth and virtue; for as the Bavarian Line are
celebrated for their great Piety, so the Electoral Family have been much
esteemed for their Prudence; which character will belong equally to the House
of Newburg, the last of this Family was on that account thought worthy of the
Crown of Poland, though he was no way related to the Families that had worn it.
And Prince Rupert, a Branch of the elder House of the Palatinate, who died in
England, was a Person of great Valor and Worth, and famous over all
Christendom, for the Wars he had managed by Sea and Land.

6. The Dukes of Saxony possess almost the The House of Saxony.
middle parts of Germany, to whom belongs Misnia, Thuring, and a small Country
on the Elbe, called the Upper Saxony, Lusatia, and in Franconia, the Dukedoms
of Coburg, and the Earldom of Henneburg, a Country celebrated in some parts for
its Fertility, and in others for its Mines. This Family is divided in to two
Branches, viz. Albert and Ernest: the last of these is in possession of the
Electorate, and the second Son is to be Bishop of Magdeburg; of the first are
the Dukes of Altenburg, Gotham, and 4 Brothers of the Family of Wimar, and a
numerous Posterity besides.

7. Next these are the Marquesses of Brandenburg, The House of Brandenburg.
the Head of which Family is one of the Electors, who has large Dominions in
Germany, besides Prussia, which is placed now out of the Empire, which also he
lately obtained from the Crown of Poland, he has Mark, the further Pomerania
gained from the Swedes, though it belonged to him by Inheritance, upon the death
of the last Duke without Issue; Halberstad, Minden, and Camin, three
Bishoprics, given him as an Equivalent for the hither Pomerania; and he was
also to have that of Magdeburg after the death of Augustus the present
Possessor of the House of Saxony. These Dominions are large and fruitful, yet
some believe he would have chosen the two Pomerania's entire, before all the
rest. I remember when I was in my return from Germany, being at an
Entertainment at Padoua, in which were present some Italian and French
Marquesses, I had an occasion to say the Marquess of Brandenburg could travel
200 German miles in his own Dominions, without lying one night in any other
Prince's Country (though in some places it was indeed interrupted) whereupon
many that were present, began to suspect I was guilty of the common fault of
Travelers, and my Faith was much questioned, but that an old Soldier, who was
present, and had served long in Germany, and had been one of my Acquaintance in
that Prince's Court, delivered me from their Suspicions: They could not but
blush thereupon, when they considered, that some prided themselves in this
Title in Italy and France, who were scarcely Masters of Two Hundred Acres of
Land: So little did they understand, that our German Marggraves are more
considerable than their Marquesses, There is another Branch of this Family in
Franconia, who (if I am not mistaken) possess the old Inheritance of the
Burggraves of Norimburg, and are divided into two Lines, that of Culemback, and
that of Onolzbeck.

8. Next after the Electors follow some Of the other Princes of the Empire.
other Princes, whose Houses are still extant; and because amongst these there
are various Contests for the Precedence, I would not have the Order I here
observe, give any prejudice to any of them in these their vain Pretenses. The
Dukes of Brunswick The Dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburg.
and Lunenburg possess a very considerable Territory in the Lower Saxony; they
are divided into two Branches; to the first of these belongs the Dukedom of
Brunswick, now enjoyed by an ancient Gentleman; two Brothers have divided the
Dukedom of Lunenburg between them, one of which resides at Zel, the other at
Hannover, and the third Brother is now Bishop of Osnaburg. The Dukes of
Mechlenburg have a Mechlenburg.
small Tract of Land belonging to them, which lies between the Baltic Sea and
the River Elbe; and this Family is now divided into two Branches, Swerin and
^ustrow. The Duke of Wurtemburg has in Franconia Wurtemburg.
a great and a powerful Territory; his Relations have also in the extremest
parts of Germany the Earldom of Montbelgard in Montpelgart. Hassia.
Alsatia. The Lantgrave of Hassia has also a large Country, and is divided into
the Branches of Castle and Darmstad. The Marquesses of Baden have a long but
narrow Baden.
Country on the Rhine, and are also divided into two Lines, that of Baden,
properly so called, and that of Baden Durlach. The Dukes of Holstein possess a
part Holstein.
of the Promontory of Juitland, which by reason of the Seas washing its Eastern
and Western sides, is very Rich: That part of Holstein which belonged to the
Empire, is possessed by the King of Denmark and the Duke of Holstein Gothorp;
which last has also the Bishopric of Lubeck. The Dukedom Lubeck.
of Sleswick does not belong to the Empire. The Duke of Sax-Lawemburg has
Sax-Lawemburg.
a small Estate in the Lower Saxony, and almost equal to that of the Prince of
Anhalt in the Upper Saxony.

9. These are the ancient Princes of the Savoy and Lorrain.
Empire; for the Dukes of Savoy and Lorrain, though Fees depending on the
Empire, and so having Seats in the Diet, yet by reason of the Situation of
their Countries, they are in a manner separated from the Empire, and have
different Interests. Ferdinand II, who, as many believe, Ferdinand II.
increased the number of the Princes.
designed the subduing the Power of the German Princes, and to gain an Absolute
Authority over them, amongst other Arts by him employed, brought into the Diet
many Princes, which depended entirely on him; he intended by their Votes to
equal, if not overballance, the Suffrages of the ancient Princes, if he should
be at any time forced to call a Diet, which yet he avoided as much as was
possible; or that he might show at least, that there was no reason why the
ancient Princes should so much value their Power, seeing he was able, when he
pleased, to set as many as he pleased on the same Level with them: And the
Princes of the old Creation had without question been very much endangered, if
the Emperor could have created Lands as easily as he could give Titles. Amongst
those however that then gained Places in the Diet, are these; the Prince of
Hoenzolleren, The Titles of Eleven of his creation.
Eggenburg, Nassaw-Hadmar, Nassaw-Dillenburg, Lobkowitz, Salm, Dietrichstein,
Aversberg, and Picolomini. But then this Project of Ferdinand miscarrying, and
the Estates of the new Princes bearing no proportion with that of the ancient
Families, their advancement to this Dignity has never been found as yet of any
use to them; and they have also been much exposed to the Reproaches of the
ancient Princes (as the new Nobility is ever slighted by the old) and they have
taken it up as a Proverb against them, That they have got nothing by this
Exaltation, but of Rich Counts, (or Earls) to be made Poor Princes: Yet it is
to be considered, That the most ancient Nobility had a beginning, and that
these Families in time may get greater Estates, though the easiest way is now
foreclosed against them, by restraining the Emperor from disposing of the
vacant Fees as he thinks fit.

10. The Next Bench in the Diet belongs The Ecclesiastic States,
to the Bishops of Germany, and Abbots. Though this Order consists of men of no
very great Birth, as being but Gentlemen, or at best, the Sons of Barons or
Earls, and advanced to this Dignity by the Election of their Chapters; yet in
the Diet, and other public Meetings, for the most part, they are placed above
the Temporal Nobility: For since the Fortunes of the Churchmen in these latter
Ages has been so vastly different from what it was in the beginning of
Christianity, it were very absurd to expect they are now bound to observe those
Laws of Modesty our Savior at first prescribed them; and perhaps those Laws
too were by him designed only for the Primitive Times: For in truth, it would
have been ridiculous for Fishermen and Weavers ambitiously to seek the
Precedence of Noblemen; who were to earn their Bread with the labors of their
Hands, or to subsist on voluntary Contributions. Now the Authority and Revenues
of the Churchmen is very great in all those Countries that ever were under the
Papacy; yet their Riches and Power are no where so great as in Germany, there
being few of them in the Empire O^^ very rich and powerful.
whose Dominions and Equipage is not equal to that of the Secular Nobility; and
their Power and Authority over their Vassals is of the same nature; and many of
them are also more fond of their Helmets than their Miters, and are much fitter
to involve their Country in Wars, and their Neighbors in Troubles, than to
propagate true Piety. But however, in these later Ages there are more than
there were in former times, who are not ashamed to take Orders, and once or
twice in a year to show the World how expert they are in expressing the
Gestures, and representing the Ceremonies of the most August Sacrifice. But
then, whereas of old their Estates Now much diminished.
equalled, if not exceeded, that of the Secular Princes, the Reformation of
Religion, which was embraced by the greatest part of Germany, and the Peace of
Westphalia, in the year 1648, have strangely diminished them; for in the
Circles of the Upper and Lower Saxony the Churchmen have very little left: But
then, in the Upper Germany (if you except the Dukedom of Wurtemburg) they
escaped better. Now the reason of this is this; The Saxons being more remote,
did not fear the Efforts of Charles V. so much as the other Princes, who were
awed by his Neighborhood to them, and oppressed by his Presence: Besides, in
Saxony their Dominions were intermixed with Potent Secular Princes, and
consequently lay exposed to their Incursions; but in the Upper Germany they
were seated They possess the greatest part of the Lands on the Rhine.
nearer one another, and on the Rhine, which is the most fruitful part of
Germany, they were possessed of the whole Country, except what belongs to the
Elector Palatine, which as it interrupts that beautiful Chain of Church Lands,
has, I persuade my self, been looked on by them with an evil Eye. (This their
Neighborhood has in the mean time contributed very much to the preserving them
from the Reformation, one of them assisting another to expel that dangerous
Guest, till the French at last, by a just Judgment of God, (though a Catholic
Nation, as they call it) came in to revenge their Contempt of the True
Religion, and has laid the far greatest part of these populous well built
fruitful Countries in Ashes twice or thrice within the Memory of Man, and now
especially in the year now current 1689. But to return to our Author)

11. Ecclesiastic States, which are not The Ecclesiastic Electors.
come into the hands of the Protestant Princes, are these: The three
Archbishopricks of Mentz, Trier, and Cologne, which Mentz, Trier, and Cologne.
are three of the Electors, and the Archbishopricks of Saltsburg and Besanzon
in Burgundy; for, as for Magdeburg, it is a mere Lay-Fee. The inferior
Bishoprics are, Bamberg, Wurtzburg, Worms, Spires, Aichstad, Strasburg,
Constance, Ausburg, Hildisheim, Paderborn, The Bishops.
Freisingen, Ratisbone, Passaw, Trent, Brixen in Tirol, Basil, Liege, Osnaburg,
Munster, Curen in Curland. The Master of the Teutonick Order has the first Seat
amongst the Bishops: And we must observe too, that in our times there are
sometimes two or more Bishoprics united in the same Person, either because the
Revenues of one single Diocese were not thought sufficient to maintain the
Dignity and Splendour of a Prince's Court, or that they might by that means be
rendered more formidable to those that hated them. The Bishopric of Lubeck is
very little better than a part of the Patrimony of the Duke of Holstein, and
all the Country has also embraced the Protestant Religion. Amongst the Abbeys
which are called Prelates, are these; Fuld, Mitered Abbots
Kempten, Elwang, Murback, Luders, the Master of St. John, Berchtelsgaden,
Weissenburg, Pruym, Stablo, and Corwey; the rest of the Prelates, who are not
Princes, are divided The Prelates that are not Princes but vote in the Diet.
into two Benches, that of the Rhine, and that of Schwaben or Suabia, one of
each of which has a Vote in the Diet, and they are esteemed equal to the Counts
or Earls of the Empire.

12. The Estate of the Counts, or Earls, The Earls and Barons of the Empire
and Barons of the Empire, is also much more splendid and rich than that of men
enjoying the same Dignities in other Kingdoms; for they have almost the same
Privileges with the Princes, and the ancient Earldoms had also large
Territories belonging to them; whereas in other Kingdoms a small Farm or
Manor shall dignifie its owner with that Title. Yet the Division of the
Estate amongst the Brothers has damnified many of the German Families, and is
only to be admitted in Plebeian Families, for its Equity and Piety sake: Some
others have been equally ruined by the Carelessness and Luxury of their
Ancestors, and their prodigal Expenses. At this day the Earls have four Votes
in the Diet, one for Wetteraw, Have 4 Votes.
another for Schwaben, a third for Franconia, and the fourth for Westphalia.
The Earls which are known to me, are these; Nassaw, Oldenburg, Furstemberg,
Hohenlohe, Their Names.
Hanaw, Sain, Witgenstein, Leiningen, Solms, Waldek, Isenburg, Stolberg, Wied.
Mansfeld, Reussen, Ottingen, Montfort, Konigseck, Fugger, Sultz, Cronberg,
Sintzendorf, Wallenstein, Papenheim* Castle, Lewenstein, Erbach, Limburg,
Schwartzenburg, Bentheim, Ostfrisland, (who is now made a Prince) Khine, and
Walts, Rantzow, and perhaps many other, whose Nobility is not to be prejudiced
by my silence; and as to those I have named, I pretend no skill in the
marshalling of them according to their proper Places. There are also many Earls
and Barons in the Hereditary Countries belonging to the Emperor, who being of
late Creation, or subject to other States, have no Place or Vote in the Diets
of Germany, and therefore are not to be mentioned here.

13. There is also in Germany no small The Free Cities make a College in the
Diet.
number of Free Cities, who are subject to no Prince or State, but are
immediately under the Emperor and the Empire, and are therefore called Imperial
Cities. In the Diet they constitute a particular College, which is divided into
two Benches, that of the Rhine, and that of Schwaben. The Principal of these
are, Norimberg, Ausburg, Cologne, Lubeck, Vlm, Strasburg, Frankford, Ratisbone,
Aix la Chapelle, or Aken, Metz, Worms, Spire, Colmar Memmingen, Esling Hall in
Schwaben, Heilbron, Lindaw, Goslar, Mulhausin, North Hausin; the rest have
reason rather to pride themselves in their Liberty than in their Wealth. In the
former Ages the conjunction of two or three of these Cities together made a
great Power, and they were terrible to the Princes, but now their Wealth is
much reduced, and we may probably enough conjecture, they will one after
another be all reduced under the Yoke of the Princes: At least, the Bishops
threaten those very much in which their Cathedrals are. There are also some
potent Cities which preserve their Freedom, though (perhaps) not very well
grounded; for the Dukes of Holstein pretend a Right over Hamburg, which this
Hamburg.
most wealthy City of all Germany will not submit to; and it is thought the
Strength of it and the Jealousy of the neighboring Princes (who envy the King
of Denmark the possession of this fat Morsel) will preserve it. The King of
Sweden has such Breme.
another Dispute with the City of Breme, without which he can never secure that
Dukedom; and perhaps the Kings of Sweden have too much reason to suspect that
City was admitted into the Diet, in the year 1641, when they began to suspect
those Princes would become Masters of this Dukedom, on purpose to keep it out
of their hands, and deprive them of this convenience and security. The City of
Brunswick does strangely weaken and disfigure Brunswick.
the Dukedoms of Brunswick and Lunenburg, and by its Site interrupt their
otherwise well compacted Territories: And yet they will never suffer the Bishop
of Hildisheim to take possession of that City. Hildisheim.
The Elector of Brandenburg is not very favorable to the Cities in his
Dominions, and therefore it is not improbable, the City of Magdeburg may suffer
the loss of Magdeburg.
her Liberty after the death of Augustus, of the House of Saxony. They of
Erford, weary Erford.
of a doubtful Contest for their Liberty, submitted, and for their Folly and
Cowardice were thought worthy to lose their Liberty. Wise men wonder also that
the Dukes of Saxony have not seized the Citadel of Thuring; and I suppose, by
this time, the Hollanders are made sufficiently sensible they ought to have
defended the Inhabitans of Munster against their Bishop; seeing Munstet.
it would the better have became them who took Arms against their own Prince,
for their Liberties, to have assisted their Neighbors in a like Attempt.

14. The Knights of Germany are not all The Knights of Germany
in the same condition, part of them being immediately subject to the Emperor
and the Empire, and another part being under the subordinate States, who are
their Lords. They that belong to the first of these Classes, call themselves
the Free Nobles of the Empire, and the Conjunct, Immediate, and Free Nobility
of the Empire. These, according to the respective Circuits in which their
Estates are, stand divided into three Classes, of Divided into three Classes.
Franconia, Schwaben, and the Rhine, which are again subdivided into lesser
Divisions. They have of their own Order certain Directors and Assessors, who
take care of those Affairs, which concern the whole Body of this Order; and if
any thing of great moment happen, they call a general Convention, but then they
have no Place in the But they have no Vote in the Diet.
Diet, which they look on as a Privilege for the saving of the Expenses
necessary in such an Attendance. And in truth it would be no great advantage to
them to be admitted into the Diet, to give their Votes; in all other things
they enjoy the same Liberties and Rights with the other Princes and Free
States, so that they are inferior to the Princes in nothing but Wealth. To
recompense this, they have great Advantages from the Ecclesiastical Benefices
and Cathedral Churches in which they are Canons; and by this way many of them
become Princes of the Empire. They that obtain this Honor, have learned, by
the Pope's example, to take good care of their Family and Relations; and
besides, there is a wonderful satisfaction in the enjoyment of great Revenues
with small Labor; for they employ their Curates or Vicars to make a noise in
their Churches, so that they are in no peril of spoiling their Voices by any
thing but Intemperance; and as to the inconveniences of living unmarried, their
Concubines, which are not wanting, cure them. Those that make themselves
Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven, are in the mean time very scarce in Germany:
And it is almost as infamous in a Nobleman, to be continent, as not to love
Dogs and Horses. I have heard some of them complain that some of the Princes
have an apparent disgust at their Privileges, and look upon them with an evil
Eye, because living in the midst of their Territories, they enjoy such large
Exemptions: And others say, such vast numbers of small Royolets do much weaken
the Empires in which they are suffered. And if a foreign War happen, they
become an easy Prey to the Invaders: Yet for all this, these Gentlemen will
not part with a certain Liberty for an uncertain Hazard or Danger; and the rest
of the Princes will not suffer so considerable an Addition to be made to the
Power and Riches of the Princes they live under, except some great Revolution
open a way to this change, or by length of time and crafty Projects their
Estates be wasted and consumed.

15. We must here, in a few words, The Empire is divided into ten Circles.
admonish the Reader, that this vast Body of the Empire, by the appointment of
Maximilian I. in the year 1512, was divided into ten Circles, the names of
which are these; Austria, Mentz, Trier, Cologne, and the Palatinate called the
Lower Circle of the Rhine, the Upper Circle of the Rhine, Schwaben, Bavaria,
Franconia, the upper and lower Saxony: Westphalia, that of Burgundy, the
Kingdom of Bohemia, with the Provinces of Silesia and Moravia, belong not to
any of these Circles: Which yields us a clear proof, that it is rather united
to Germany by a kind of League, than a part of that Empire. To which of these
Circles any Place belongs, may be found in common Books, every where to be had.
This Division was made for the more easy Preservation of the Public Peace,
and the Execution of Justice against contumacious States and Princes; to which
end each of them has Power to name a General, for the commanding their Forces,
and the appointing their Diets, in which the principal Prince in the Circle,
for the most part, presides; in which they take care for the defense of the
Circle, and for the levying Moneys for the public use. Yet a man may well
question, whether this Division does not tend more to the Distraction and
weakening of Germany, than its Preservation, the whole Body being by this means
made less sensible and less regardful of the Calamities which oppress or
endanger the Parts of it, and threaten (though at a distance) the Ruin of the
whole. Thus much of the Parts of the Empire.

CHAP. III. Of the Origin of the States of the Empire, and by what degrees
they arrived to that Power they now have.
1. FOR the attaining an accurate knowledge of the German Empire, it is
absolutely necessary to enquire by what steps those that are called the States
of the Empire arrived to the Power they now possess; for without this it will
not be possible to see what was the true cause that this State took such an
irregular form. Now these States are Secular Princes, Earls, Bishops, and
Cities, of the Rise of each of which we will discourse briefly. The Secular
Princes are Dukes or Earls, who have The Secular Princes of the Empire are
either Dukes or Earls.
to these Titles some other added in the German Tongue, viz. Pfaltzgrave,
Landtgrave, Marggrave, and Burggrave; for to the best of my remembrance, none
of the ancient Princes, except he of Anhalt, has the simple Style of a Prince,
without one of these Additions; yet some of them use the Title of Prince
amongst their other Titles. Thus they of Austria are styled Princes of
Schwaben; the Dukes of Pomerania (now under the King of Sweden) the Princes of
Rugen; the Landtgrave of Hussia and Hersfield, etc.

2. Amongst the ancient Germans, before they The old German Dukes military
Officers, as
were subdued by the Franks, a Duke was a mere Military Officer; as appears
plainly by the German word Heerzog, who for the most part were chosen on the
account of their Valor, when a War was coming upon them: In Times of Peace,
those that governed Their Grevens or Earls were Judges in times of Peace.
them, and exercised Jurisdiction, and governed their Cities, Districts, and
Villages, were for the most part chosen out of the Nobility, and were called
Greven, or Graven, which is as much as President, though the Latin word Comes
is more often used for it; because from the time of Constantine the Great
downward, those who were employed in the Ministry or Service of the Court, in
the command of the Forces dispersed in the several Provinces of the Empire, or
in administering Justice and the execution of the Laws, were all styled Comites.
After this, when the Franks had subdued Germany, and were become Masters of all
its Provinces, they, after the manner of the Romans, sent Dukes to govern the
Provinces in it, that is, Presidents to govern them in Peace, and command their
Forces in time of War: And to these they sometimes added Comites, for
administering Justice; and some Provinces were put under Comites only, and had
no Dukes; The Dukes and Earls made Officers for their Lives, and at last became
hereditary Proprietors.
but then all these that were thus employed by them, were mere Magistrates; but
in length of time, it came to pass, that some persons were made Dukes for their
Lives, and the Son for the most part succeeded the Father: So that having so
fair an opportunity in their hands, of establishing themselves, they began to
look on their Provinces as their Patrimony and Inheritance. Nor can a Monarch
commit a greater Error than the suffering these kinds of Administrations to
become hereditary, especially where the Military Command is united to the
Civil: And therefore I can scarce forbear laughing when I read this Custom, in
some German Writers, defended, as commendable and prudent; for it is the Honor
of a Prince to reward those who have deserved well of him: But then, if a
Master should manumise all his Servants at once, I suppose he might, for the
future, make clean his Shoes himself: A Father may be the fonder of a thing,
because he knows he can leave it to his Son after him; but then the more
passionately he loves his Son, the greater care he ought to take, that a
Stranger may claim as little Right as is possible to it. Thus we usually take
more care of what is our own, than of what belongs to another: But then a good
Father will not give his Estate to his Tenant, that he may use it so much the
better. There is a cheaper way of preventing the Rebellions of Presidents, than
that of granting Provinces to them, to be administered as an Inheritance. And
it is a very silly thing to measure the Majesty of a Prince, by the number of
those in his Dominions, who can with safety despise him and his Sovereignty. To
say more were to no purpose; for to expose the Stupidity of these men, it will
be sufficient for us to consider, that they are not ashamed to compare the
German Lawyers with the Italian, French, and Spanish Writers; and yet the
Writings of the greatest part of them show, they never understood the first
Principles of civil Prudence.

3. Charles the Great observing the Error Charles the Great endeavored to
redress this error.
committed by his Ancestors, took away the greatest part of the Dukedoms, which
were of too great extent; and dividing the larger Provinces into smaller parts,
committed them to the care of Counts, Comites, or Earls, some of which retained
the simple Name of Counts, and others were called Pfaltzgraves or Pfaltzgraven,
Comites Palatini, Count Palatins, or Prefects of the Court-Royal, and in that
capacity administered Justice within the Verge of the Court. Others were called
Landegraves, that is, Presidents set over a whole Province. Others were called
Marggraves, Presidents of the Marches or Borders, for repelling the Incursions
of Enemies, and administering Justice to the Inhabitants. Others were called
Burggraves, that is, Prefects or Governors of some of the Royal Castles or
Forts. And these Offices and Dignities were not granted by Charles the Great,
in Perpetuity or Inheritance, but with a Power reserved to himself, to renew
his Grants to the same person, or bestow them on another, as he thought fit.
But after the Death of Charles the Great, his Posterity But his Posterity
returned to the former ill management.
returned to the Errors of the former Reigns, and not only the Sons were
suffered to succeed their Fathers in these Magistracies or Governments, but by
a conjunction or union of many Counties or Earldoms, or by the Will of some of
his Successors, some Dukedoms were again formed, which contained great Extents
of Lands. The Presidents employed by them in the Government of these Provinces,
thought it a piece of Cowardice and Sloth in themselves not to take hold of
these occasions and opportunities of establishing themselves and their
Posterities, (as the nature of Mankind is prone to Ambition) especially when
the Authority of the French Emperors declined, and became every day more
contemptible, by reason of their intestine Dissentions and destructive Wars
with one another. And in the first place, Otho Duke of Saxony, a King in Fact,
though not in Title.
Otho Duke of Saxony, the Father, of Henry the Falconer, having under him a
large and a warlike Nation, so established himself, that he wanted nothing but
the Title to make him a King: And when Conrad I. Emperor of Germany, undertook
to subdue and bring under Henry his Son, he miscarried in the Attempt, and at
his Death he advised the Nobility to bestow the Imperial Dignity on this his
prosperous Rival, thinking it the wisest course to give him what he could have
taken by force, for sear he should canton himself, and disjoin his Dominions
from the rest of Germany. There are yet some Princes, who owe their Other
Princes raised to this Dignity by the Emperors.
Dominions to the Liberality of some of the Emperors; Examples of which occurr
frequently in the Histories of the Otho's; and whether this is consistent with
the Laws of Monarchy, I am not now at leisure to enquire. After these
Beginnings or Foundations, Princes increased their Power afterward by
Purchaces, by Hereditary Descents, not only in the Right of Blood; but Others
by Purchase, Inheritance, or Usurpation,
also by mutual Pacts of Successions, which the Germans call, Confraternal
Inheritances or Successions, which are of the same nature with that League
between the potent Houses of Saxony, Brandenburg, and Hassia, which is now in
force: And by virtue of such a League, the Dukes of Saxony obtained the Earldom
of Henneberg, and the House of Brandenburg the Right of Pomerania, though that
League was not reciprocal; and yet it is apparent, these Leagues are injurious
to the Emperor, who has the Right of a Lord over the Dominions of the Princes,
and ought, upon a vacancy, to dispose of the Fee. Lastly, Some Estates have
been seized by force, by some of them, when Germany was involved in Wars and
Disturbances.

4. But then, in after times, when it appeared, In after times these Powers
were confirmed by the Emperors.
that the Power which these Princes had once gotten, could not be dissolved
without distracting all Germany, and perhaps not so neither, without hazarding
the Ruin of him that should attempt it, it seemed better to the succeeding
Kings, especially after they saw they could not obtain the Empire without it,
to confirm their Possession; so that from thenceforth they enjoyed their
Territories as Fees, acknowledged to depend on the Emperor, and swore
Allegiance to him and the Empire, From hence it is, that by what means soever
the Princes got their Estates, they now hold them as Fees of the Empire: Yet
the name of Vassal has not deprived these Princes of any considerable part of
their Power and Grandeur; for, if I grant a man any part of my Estate, to be
holden of me as a Fee, though I put him thereby into a full possession, yet I
make him my Subject, and I, as the Lord of the Fee, may prescribe what Laws or
Conditions I please to the possession of what I thus grant: But then, he who
consents to acknowledge what he already has, to be a Fee holden of the Party
thus consented to, is supposed only to own the Lord of the Fee as a superior
Confederate in an unequal League, and so to respect his Majesty and reverence
his Dignity. The Line of Charles Upon the failing of the Line of Charles the
Great, Germany was perfectly Free.
the Great failing, Germany became perfectly free, and many of the Nobility,
before that time, had acquired to themselves great Dominions; when therefore it
was thought fit to give the Regal Title to some one Person chosen out of the
Nobility, that Germany might not return into her ancient weak, defenseless
state, by being broken into small Governments: It is not to be thought, that
the Princes were willing to cast away their Dominions, or to submit them to the
Absolute Dominion of another; but rather to seek a strong Protector or Defender
of their Rights. Thus the State of these Princes being once introduced and
confirmed, it was fit that those who were afterward exalted to that Dignity by
the Emperors, in the stead of any Families that happened to be extinguished,
should also be advanced to the same state of Freedom and Power with the ancient
Princes. And in the mean time, those that are well versed in Civil Prudence, or
Politics, will easily acknowledge, that this Feudal Obligation of the Princes
to the Emperor, only made them unequal Allies or Confederates, and not
Subjects, properly so called; for it is inconsistent with the Person or Notion
of a Subject to exercise a The Princes of Germany not Subjects, but Allies to
the Emperor.
Power of Life and Death over all those that are in his Dominions, or to
appoint Magistrates as he thinks fit, to make Leagues, and levy Moneys to his
own use, without being accountable for the same to the Royal Treasury, or
giving to it any more than he himself shall think fit. But then, to force an
Ally by the rest of the Confederates, who offends against the Rules of the
League, is very usual in all such cases, and there are many Examples of it both
in ancient and modern Story. But to acknowledge the Emperor to be the sole
Judge of the Cases for which a Prince may deserve to be deprived of his
Dominions, as it would pull up the Foundations of the Power of German Princes,
so those who have always opposed the Emperors that have attempted at any time
to do it, have thought it a slavish and base Respect or Reverence to him, to
betray their Rights so far, as to suffer him to do it.

5. From thenceforward, as it has ever Great Emperors are well obeyed, the
weaker are despised.
happened in all Empires where the Power of the Subject has been formidable to
the Sovereign, so more signally has it happened in Germany viz. That when they
had Emperors of great Wealth, or very much Reverence, on the Score of their
eminent Virtues, the Princes were most obsequiously subject to them; but when
they have had weak or unactive Emperors, they have had only a precarious
Command over them. And those Emperors again who have endeavored to pluck up
this so deeply rooted Power of the Princes, and to reduce Germany into the
condition of a true Monarchy or Kingdom, have sometimes pulled Ruin down upon
themselves, and have ever failed of their hopes, and gained nothing by it, but
the disquieting themselves and others. Nor have those that endeavored to do it
by Craft made any progress, because some or other have found out the Design,
and disappointed it; and if any thing were gained from the Princes at any time
one way, it was lost another. Thus it is known to all men, what ill Successes,
in the last Age, attended the Attempts of Charles V. and Ferdinand II. yet
Luxury has impoverished some of the Princes.
Luxury, Sloth, and Prodigality have wonderfully weakened some of the Princes,
because they took no care to augment or keep what they had. And several of the
Families are also weakened by dividing their Patrimony and Dominions amongst
their Brethren and Kindred: And some, without any fault of theirs, have been
ruined by the Calamities of the Civil Wars.

6. I must in the next place speak something The election of the Bishops.
of the Bishops too. Now it is certain, that in the first times of Christianity
the Bishops were elected and constituted by the Clergy and the Faithful People;
afterward, about the IV. Century, when Princes embraced the Christian
Religion, a Custom was taken up by them of not suffering any person to be made
a Bishop without their Consent, because they very well understood, that it
tended very much to the preservation of the public Peace, to have good and
peaceable men in that eminent Office. The Kings of the Franks took up the same
Custom, and would suffer none to be made Bishops in their Kingdom, but such as
they approved of. And the Emperors of Germany continued the same Right till the
Reign of Henry the Fourth: Gregory the Seventh began a Quarrel against this
Prince on that Score, which was carried on by his Successors, against the
succeeding Emperors; till at length his Son Henry V. weary of the Broils this
Controversy had occasioned, in the Diet of Worms, in the year 1122, renounced
this Imperial Privilege of constituting and investing the Bishops; but yet the
Emperor Renounced by the Emperor.
had still the Right of delivering to the elected Bishop the Regalia and Fees,
by the delivery of a Crosier. Now it is not easy to conceive what the Emperor
lost by the yielding this great point; for though his power before over the
Secular Princes was not great, yet as long as the Church was subject to him, he
could easily equal, or, if need was, overrule their Forces. In the Agreement
between the Pope and Henry the Fifth, the Election of the Bishops was settled in
the Clergy and People jointly, yet afterward the Canons of the Cathedral
Churches began to claim the sole power of choosing them, the Pope conniving at
this their Usurpation, it being more for his Interest to have this Affair in a
few hands, than in many. At length things came to this: That the Confirmation
of the new elected Bishop was to be sought from Rome, whereas this, as well as
the Consecration before, belonged to the Metropolitan. But then, the Examples
of Men, provided beforehand with Bishoprics, by the power of the Pope, was
very rare in Germany, and I suppose the reason was, because the Chapters would
scarce have submitted patiently to a Bishop, so obtruded on them (though it was
practiced frequently in other Countries.)

7. The Bishops of Germany are indebted The Bishoprics of Germany endowed by
the Emperors.
to the Liberality of the first Emperors, for all those Provinces and great
Revenues they now enjoy; a fervent Piety and Zeal in those times ruling in the
minds of Princes, because they thought the more they gave to the Church, the
more they united themselves to God. Which Opinion is much abated in our times,
because many now (how truly I know not) have taken up another, contrary to it,
viz That over great Wealth, bestowed on Church men, tends rather to the
extinguishing than nourishing of Piety and Religion. The Churchmen also of
those early times seem to have had the Grace of asking, without fear, whatever
might seem convenient for the allaying the Hardships of their Profession. Thus
the Bishops and Churches obtained of these good Princes not only Farms, Tithes,
and Rents, but also whole Lordships, Counties, Dukedoms, with all the Regalia's
or Royalties annexed to them, so that they became equal in all things to the
Temporal Princes. But then, in truth, they obtained the Degree of Princes but
in the times of the Otho's, and those that followed; and they got not the
Regalia all at once, but by little and little, some at one time, and some at
another: And from thence it comes, that some of the Bishops have not yet got
them all, and others have them under the restraint of certain Limitations.
There were two other things contributed very much to the accuring all these
great Riches and Honors for the Church. 1. That many of the Nobility in those
times took Orders, and became Churchmen; and, 2. That all the little Learning
those barbarous Ages had, was in the Clergy. This occasioned the calling the
Bishops to Court, to give their Advice, and the employing them as Judges and
Governors in the Provinces, because these things cannot be well performed
without some Learning. And this was the true reason why the Office of
Chancellor was at first annexed to the principal Bishops Sees. I do also
believe, that the Riches of the Church were very much improved by many Princes
and Noblemen, who resigned their Estates, or a part of them, to the Bishops,
and took them again as Fees from them, that they might so oblige them to take
the more care in recommending them, and their Salvation, to God in their
Prayers, and as their Families afterward were extinguished, their Estates were
united to the Bishoprics. Who knows not also what vast Additions have been
since made by the Wills of Dying Men, when a Nation that is naturally afraid of
Heat and Thirst, saw they must buy off the Roasting in Purgatory, by that means
which they feared above all men?

8. The Churchmen might have been When they became very rich, they would not
be subject to their Benefactors.
well contented with their Condition in Germany, though they had neither
abjured Ambition nor Avarice: But then, as they of all men are desirous to have
others under them, so they could least endure to see others above them, and
therefore thought this was still wanting to perfect their Happiness in this
World, because they were still forced to receive all they had from the Emperor,
and consequently were forced to live in a dependence on him. If the Reverence I
owe that most Sacred Order of Men, did not restrain me, I should say, they were
the worst of men, who, as the event shows, abused the Imprudent Liberality of
the Emperors, to the Ruin of that Majesty and Power that had raised and
enriched, dignified and ennobled them. Certainly, he is not worthy of Liberty,
who is not willing to own his Manumissor for his Patron and Master. That
therefore this Tribe of Levites might wholly free themselves from the
Subjection of the Laics, the German Bishops strenuously solicited the Pope to
send abroad his Vatican Thunders, and raised plenty of Commotions in the
Empire, to second them, by both which they at last gained their Point: For the
Archbishop of Mentz led the way, and the rest of the Flock followed him
faithfully, and would never suffer their Prince to have any rest, till he would
permit them to depend on no body but the Pope. This, as many think, brought a
signal Mischief on the German State, viz. The having so many of its Members
acknowledge a Foreign Head, unless we can think the Pope was so fondly in love
with Germany, that he desired nothing more than its Preservation, and that they
at Rome knew better what was for the Good of Germany, than the very Germans
themselves did.

9. It remains now, that we say something of the Free Cities. Germany, till the
Of the Free Cities.
V. Century after Christ, had nothing but Villages, without Walls, or dispersed
Houses, in all that part of it which lies to the East and North of the Rhine:
Even in the IX. Century, there is only mention made of a City or two in that
part which borders on the State of Venice: But then there were many Cities
built by the Romans, much more earlily in that part which lies on the French
side of the Rhine, of which the Romans were possessed; as also between the
Danube and the Alps, which belonged then to them, but was afterward a part of
Germany. The reason why in those ancient Why the Germans of old had no Cities.
Times they had no Cities, was first, because the old Germans had no skill in
Architecture; which Ignorance still appears in many places of this Country; and
secondly, The Fierceness of the Nation, which made them averse to these kinds
of Habitations, as a fort of Prisons; and also, thirdly, Because the Nobility
placed their greatest Pleasure in Hunting, and therefore neither knew nor much
valued the Conveniences of having Cities and great Towns. Their Diet then was
very mean, their Furniture and Clothes cheap, and they neither knew nor
regarded the Superfluous Effects of Wealth or Luxury; but after their Minds
were civilized and softened by Christianity, they began, by degrees, to affect
the elegant way of living; the love of Riches, and a studied Luxury followed,
and was brought in from abroad, both which are nourished by great Cities: The
Princes also having amassed great Riches, took a Pride in building Cities, and
invited the Rusticks of Germany, and the Inhabitants of other Nations, to
settle in them, by the Grant of large Privileges, especially after the
Christian Religion had abolished Villenage or Slavery, and the Liberti or
Freemen had no Lands to subsist on, they flew by Flocks to the Cities, and
betook themselves to Manufactures and Trading. The Irruption of the Hungarians
forced Henry the Falconer to build many Cities and strong Holds in Saxony, and
he made every ninth man be drawn out of the Country to inhabit them: The
Leagues afterward between the Cities, for their mutual Defense and Trade, gave
them great Security, and by consequence made them populous and rich. The
principal of these Leagues is that made by the Cities on the Rhine, in the year
1255, in which some Princes desired to be included: The Hanse League was
chiefly made on the account of Maritime Commerce, and grew to that height of
Power, that they became terrible to the Kings of Sweden, England, and Denmark.
But then, after the year 1500. it became contemptible, because the lesser
Cities, when they found the greater got all the profit, fell generally off, and
deserted them. And the Nations upon the Ocean and Baltic Sea, by their
example, began, about the same time also, to encourage Trade in their own
Subjects, especially the (English) Flandrians. and Hollanders. Thus their
Monopoly failing, their Strength fell with it.

10. Though in the beginning the Cities The Cities at first subject to the
Kings or Emperors of Germany.
were in a better condition than the Villages, yet they were no less subject to
the King or Emperor than they, and these Princes took care to have Justice
exercised in them by their Counts or deputed Judges, as they called them. After
this, by the enormous and imprudent Liberality of the Emperors, many of the
Cities were granted to the Bishops, others to the Dukes and Counts, and the
rest remained as before) only subject to the Emperor. In the XII, Century they
began to take more liberty. as they found they could rely upon their Riches,
because the Emperors, by reason of the Intestin Wars, were not able then to
reduce them to a due Obedience; some Princes were but just advanced to the
Imperial Dignity, and so were forced also to purchase the Favor and Assistance
of the great Cities, by the Grants of new Privileges and Immunities, that they
might employ them as a Bulwark against their Refractory Bishops and Princes;
after this, by degrees they shaked off the Emperor's Advocates. The succeeding
Emperors observing also, that the Bishops employed their Wealth against them,
encouraged the Cities to oppose the Bishops. The Dukes of Schwaben failing,
many small Cities in the Dukedom catched hastily at the opportunity of being
made free; yet they did not obtain their Freedom all at once, but one after
another, as they could gain the Favor of the Emperor; and that is one Reason
that they have not all the same Privileges, and some of them want a part of
the Regalia to this day. Some of them bought these Privileges of their Dukes
or Bishops, and others shook them off by force, and then entered into Treaties
for the purging that Iniquity; for when these Princes were poor or low, their
last Remedy was, to sell the richest of their Subjects their Liberty; and
others, when they saw they could no longer keep them in subjection, took what
they could get from them, and were unwillingly contented with it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Head of the German Empire, the Emperor; and of the Election
and the Electors.
1. THough Germany consists of so many The Emperor the Head of Germany.
Members, many of which are great and perfect States, yet it has at all times
(excepting the Interregnums which have happened) since Charles the Great, been
united to one Head (which the Ancients only called their King, the later Ages
by the more ambitions Titles of the Roman Emperor, and Casar) and upon the sole
account of this Head, it has seemed, to the most of men, to be one single
simple State: And my next business is, to show how this Head is constituted or
appointed; but then it will be worth my while, by way of Introduction, to
represent this Affair from its Rise, that it may the more clearly appear how
much the present differs from the ancient Election, and what is the true
Original of the Electoral Princes. As to Charles the Great, and his Posterity,
the Roman Empire and the Kingdom of France are to be severally and distinctly
considered: The The Empire of the Romans pretendedly given by the Pope.
first of these was collated upon Charles, by the Pope and the People of Rome,
as the principal Members of that Empire, or rather, as upon one who plainly
designed to make himself Emperor, and that as appears, in an Hereditary way:
So that the Crowning his Successors had not the force of a new and free
Election, but of a solemn Inaguration: For we read, that Charles the Great made
Lewis his Son, and Lewis made also Lotharius his Son their Consorts in the
Empire, and yet there is no mention made of their asking the Consent of the
Pope, or of the People of Rome, on either of these occasions. But then, as to
the ancient Kingdom of France, we cannot affirm, that it was either merely
elective, or merely hereditary, but a mixture of both: For we read frequently,
that the The Kingdom of France morchereditary than elective.
Kings of France were constituted by the Consent and Approbation of the
Nobility and whole People of France, but in such a manner yet, that they never
chose out of the Line of the dead King, but for very great reasons; which kind
of Election is (as we know) still observed in Poland; yet he that shall
curiously observe it, shall find, France had more of a Successive than of an
Elective Kingdom; So that it seems to have been collated on the first of the
Race, with a Condition, that he should transmit it to his Posterity, unless
they appeared to the People very unworthy of it. So that the Children of the
Deceased King did not so much gain a new Right to the Kingdom by this
Approbation of the Nobility and People, as a Declaration, that they were not
incapable of succeeding, by the Right that was at first collated on them:
Afterward the Line of Charles the Great being deposed or rejected, and denied
the Throne of France, the Kingdom of Germany, or, as they then called it, the
East Kingdom of France, was, by the most free Consent of Germany given freely
to Otho, and after to Conrad.
the Nobility, given to Otho the Saxon, who excusing himself on the account of
his Age, by his Advice Conrad Duke of Franconia was by them chosen King of
Germany, who was, as some think, of the Line of Charles the Great. By his
Counsel also afterward Henry the Falconer, Son of Otho Duke of Saxony, was by
a free Election advanced to that Kingdom, who being contented with Germany,
would not accept the Title of Emperor, though the Pope offered it to him; but
Otho the Great his Son, having subdued Italy, so united Rome, and The Empire of
Rome united to the Kingdom of Germany for ever.
the Lands of the Church to Germany, that from thenceforward he that had the
Kingdom of Germany without any new Election, should be Emperor of Rome, the
Crowning by the Pope being nothing but a Solemnity, though before this Ceremony
the Kings of Germany had not usually used the Title of Emperors. The same form
of Succession hereupon was used in Germany, which had been observed in the old
Kingdom of France, viz. That the Consent of the Nobility and People did not
easily depart from the Order of a Lineal Succession in the Royal Family: And
this continued to Henry IV. who being young, and perhaps not Governing well,
the Nobility thereupon, by the procurement of the Pope, rose up against him,
and deposed him from the Kingdom, and, for the time to come, made a Law, That
though the Son of the last King were worthy to succeed him, yet he should
attain the Throne by a Free Election, and not by a Lineal Succession; as the
words of that Constitution run.

2. That old Approbation and Election The ancient Elections not made by any
certain num^^^^ of Princes exclusively.
was made by all the People, though it is not to be doubted but the Authority
of the Nobility and Princes, or of the Bishops and Peers, was much valued: But
now, for some Ages past, Seven choose the Emperor in exclusion of all others;
and since the Treaty of Osnaburg, Eight of the principal Princes are to do it,
who from thence are called, The ELECTORAL PRINCES: Of these, Three are styled
Ecclesiastical Electors, viz. The Archbishops of Mentz, Trier, and Cologne; and
Five are Temporal or Secular Electors, the King of Bohemia, the Dukes of
Bavaria and Saxony, the Marquess of Brandenburg, and the Count Palatine of the
Rhine. It is not very clear how these Princes came by this Right for two Ages,
viz. from the year 1250, to the year 1500, it was a received Opinion, That Otho
III. And Pope Gregory V. instituted the The 7 Electors not instituted by Otho
III.
Seven Electors, but with this Difference, that some Authors ascribe the
principal share in the Act to the Emperor, and others to the Pope, as each man
was affected to them. Our Countryman Onuphrius Panvinius was the first man that
opposed this Opinion in a Book, De Comitiis imperatoriis, of the Imperial
Diets, which is since approved by all the wisest of the German Nation. His best
Argument against it, is, Because this Ottonian or Gregorian Constitution was
never yet produced by any man, and no man has mentioned it from the times of
Frederick II. to those of Otho III, which contains 240 years; for the first
that mentions the Electors was one Martin a Polonian, who lived under this
Frederick, and therefore his Testimony was justly liable to exception, seeing
it was not supported by any better in an Affair which happened so long before
his own times: And yet, after all, he does not mention any such Constitution;
nor does he say, the Electors began in the time of that Otho, but that, after
his times, the Officers of the Empire began to elect: Which is capable of a
double sense, either because they were then possessed of very large Dominions,
who before had the principal Offices in the Court; or because those Offices
were then first collated for ever on Princes that had very great Dominions,
who, though perhaps they had a Signal Authority, as the most eminent men above
all others; yet that the Election belonged to other Princes besides these
Seven, can be denied by no man who is not very ignorant of the German
Antiquities. Others have ascribed the appointing the Seven Electors to
Frederick II, but then there is no Record of any Law to that purpose any where
to be found; nor is it probable, that the rest of the Princes so early and so
easily parted with their Right of Electing.

3. The current Opinion of the most But yet they seem ancienter than Frederick
II.
Skilful in the German Affairs, is, That before the times of Frederick II,
those Seven Princes, as the great Officers of the Empire, and persons that had
great Estates, began by degrees to overtop the rest, and to have the greatest
Authority in the Elections of the Emperors; but after the times of this
Frederick, the German Affairs being wonderfully disordered, whilst the rest
took little or no care of the Public, these Seven assumed it wholly to
themselves. This, after it was confirmed into a Custom by some repeated Acts,
was at last passed into a Law by the solemn and public Sanction of the Golden
Bull, in which the whole form of the Election, and all the Power of the
Electors, is contained; and from thenceforward those Princes added to their
former Titles that of Electors, and were ever after esteemed as persons set in
an higher Station and Dignity than the rest.

5. Thus, though at the first these Princes Of the ^^^viledges of the Electors.
seem to have assumed the power of electing the Emperor, as they were the great
Officers of the Empire; yet afterward, by the Law called the Golden Bull,
those very Offices, as well as the Electoral Dignity, are annexed to certain
Dominions; so that whoever is legally possessed of them, is thereby made one of
the Electors; the Ecclesiastical Electors in the mean time are made by Election
or Collation, as the other Bishops of Germany are; where it is to be observed,
that though these Bishops, to enable them to perform the other Functions
belonging to their Office, stand in need of the Pope's Confirmation, and the
Pall, which they must not expect gratis; yet they are admitted without them to
the Election of the Emperor, because these Secular Dignities pass without the
Character: But then, when the Sea is vacant, the Chapter has no Right to meddle
with the Election: In the Secular or Temporal Electors the Succession passes
in a lineal Paternal Descent, so that neither the Electoral Dignity, nor the
Lands united to it, admit of any Division: But if a new Elector is to be made,
or for some Offense any one is to be deprived of that Dignity, it is, without
doubt, agreeable to the other Laws and Customs of the Empire, for the Emperor
not to dispose of the said Dignity, without the Consent of the other States,
or, at least, not without that of the Electors; though it is not to be denied,
the last Age saw an Example to the contrary, against which however one or two
of the Electors protested, the Emperor despising their words, because he saw
his Arms prosper; yet this Prince had wit enough to bestow the Dignity on one
of the same Line and Family, which tended very much to the abating the Envy of
the Fact, and divided two most potent Families, by raising an endless Emulation
between them, and made that Party that was obliged by the Grant, obnoxious to
the Imperial Family for the preservation of it. If any of the Electors happen
to be a Minor, their Guardians supply their place, and the Minority cease
when the Prince is Eighteen years of age.

6. The manner of the Election is thus: The Elector of Mentz, within one Month
Of the manner of the Election.
after he knows of the Death of the Emperor, signifies it to his Colleagues,
and calls them to the Election that is to be made, who meet in person, or by
their Proxies: When they enter Frankford, each of them is allowed Two hundred
Horsemen, and no more; but this thing at this day is not nicely observed.
Whilst the Election is making, all Strangers are commanded to depart. They
begin the Election in the Chancel of the Church of St. Bartholomew, with the
Ceremony of the Mass, then they come to the Altar, and each of them swears,
that he will choose a fit person to be Emperor. The Bishop of Mentz, as Dean of
the College, gathers their Votes, and first he asks the Bishop of Trier,
then the Bishop of Cologne, and so all the rest in their order, and gives his
own in the last place. The majority of Votes is as good as the whole; but then,
whereas there is now eight, it was never yet certainly agreed what should be
done, in case the Votes should happen to be equally divided. None of the
Electors is excluded from the Right of nominating himself. When the Election is
made, it is recorded in Writing, and confirmed with the Seals of the Electors;
then they all together go to the Altar, and the Elector of Mentz assembles the
People, and declares to them the Name of the new elected Emperor, out of the
Writing: After this, the Empire is committed to him upon certain Conditions,
but so, that he is forthwith bound to confirm to all and every one of the
Electors, all their Rights and Privileges. By the Golden Bull, Aix la
Chappelle is appointed for the City where he is to be Crowned, though for the
most part, ever since, the Coronation is performed in the same place where the
Election is made, and because that City is in the Diocese of Cologne, that
Ceremony has been commonly performed by the Elector of Cologne; yet the Bishop
of Mentz always puts in his Claim for it, and, if I be not deceived, of late
this Controversy is thus determined; That they shall do it by Turns, wherever
the Emperor is Crowned. The rest of the Ceremonies may be easily found in
German Writers.

7. Perhaps it would be too hard, and The Electors have deposed an Emperor.
too invidious, to make a Public and Formal Law, to declare, That the Electors
have a full Right and Power to depose the Emperor, if he deserves it, as well
as to elect him: Yet it is certain, they exercised this Power upon Wenceslaus,
Sigismond, the Son of Charles the Fourth being elected in his stead, in the
year 1411. This Prince, that he might gain the Empire, made the Golden Bull,
and rewarded the Electors with great Gifts, which is very much resented by
those who are not well affected to the Electors. Henry the Fourth was deposed
by the other Princes joined with the Electors: And in truth the Bishops of
Mentz have pretty plainly and fearlesly sung this Tune, and claimed the Right
of deposing the Emperors, to one or two of them, who were engaged in Designs
that were not acceptable to these Prelates.

8. The Electors have some other Princely The Electors have some other special
Privileges.
Rights, beyond what belongs to any of the other Princes; for they are not only
the greatest Officers of the Empire, but they have Right also, in some Cases,
to exclude all the rest of the States and Princes, and to consult amongst
themselves about things of the greatest importance. The Archbishop of Mentz is
Lord Chancellor of Germany. The Archbishop of Trier of France, and of the
Kingdom of Arles (by which Names the most skilful do not understand all that
Country that is now called France, but only so much of it as in the XI. Century
belonged to the Kingdom of Burgundy, and was then united to Germany.) And the
Archbishop of Cologne is Chancellor of Italy: But then, at this day, the first
of these has an effectual Power, and the other two have nothing but mere empty
Titles. The King of Bohemia is Lord Cup. bearer, and in the highest Ceremonies
and Solemnities, gives the Emperor the first Cup of Wine. The Duke of Bavaria
is now Lord High Sewer, and carries the Pome or Globe before the Emperor in
the Solemn Processions. The Duke of Saxony is Lord High Marshal, and carries
the naked Sword before the Emperor. The Marquess of Brandenburg is Lord High
Chamberlain, and gives the Emperor Water to wash, and in the Solemn Procession
carries the Scepter. The Count Palatine of the Rhine is Lord High Treasurer,
and in the Procession to the Palace, at the Coronation, scatters the Gold and
Silver Medals amongst the People. Each of the Secular Electors has his certain
known Deputy for the performance of his Function; Limburg bears the Cup for
the King of Bohemia; Walburg is Sewer for Bavaria; Papenheim carries the Sword
for Saxony; the Counts of Hoenzolleren is Deputy for Brandenburg; and
Sintzendorf for the Count Palatine of the Rhine. There are also other
Privileges belonging to the Electors, which are expressed in the Golden Bull,
as peculiar to them, but are at this day possessed by other Princes too, two
only excepted, viz. 1. That there lies no Appeal from their Judgment; and, 2.
That in the regranting their Dependent Fees, they are above control; and as to
the taking up their own, they do it without any Charge: And perhaps there may
be some others.

9. When there is an Interregnum, or What is done during the Interregnum.
want of an Emperor, the Count Palatine of the Rhine, and the Duke of Saxony,
supply that Defect, and Govern as Viceroys; the first, all the Countries on the
Rhine and Schwaben, and wherever the Franconian Laws and Customs take place:
The second takes Care of all the Countries which are under Saxon Laws; but then
neither of them are allowed to dispose of the Fees of the Empire, which shall
become vacant by the Death of any Prince, which are given by the delivery of a
Banner. Nor can they alienate or mortgage any of the Demeans of the Empire; all
the rest of their Acts are for the most part confirmed by the new elected
Emperor. In the last Vacancy, upon the Death of Ferdinand III. the Duke of
Bavaria disputed the Count Palatine's Viceroyalty; to gain his Point, the Duke
of Bavaria used great Policy, that he might not be disappointed in his design:
He laid Posthorses and Curriers on the Road, who gave him an account of the
Death of the Emperor very early, and upon that he presently sent Letters to
acquaint the Princes and States with it, and that he had taken upon him the
Care of the Empire in the Franconian Circles; whereupon many of the Princes and
States being surprised by this subtle Management, congratulated his Honor
before the Death of Ferdinand was known to the Count Palatine, whose Right it
was. But however, that Count did not patiently suffer his Right to be thus
sliely stolen from him, but declared for the future he claimed this his Vicarian
Power, and entered a Complaint against the Duke of Bavaria, for thus usurping
his Right: And it is very certain, the far greatest part of the Princes
repented they had consented to this Attempt of the Bavarian, but could not then
recall their Letters to him: But then, as is usual in such Encroachments, no
man was willing to join with the Oppressed, and make his Quarrel his own,
afterward they printed Books one against the other. Now, though no man could
wonder that the Duke of Bavaria should venture upon this Practice, who in the
more flourishing state of the Count Palatin's Affairs, had pretended to the
Electorate, and now having got part of the Palatin's Country, had increased his
own Power, and was otherwise well assured of the Concurrence and Favor of the
House of Austria, both on the account of Kindred and Religion; yet the far
greatest part of the indifferent Spectators thought the Count Palatine had
sufficiently shown his Right, and demonstrated that this Vicarian Viceroyalty
was no part of the Great Lord High Sewer's Offices, but was perpetually annexed
to the Palatinate of the Rhine, as the Duke of Saxony has the other half of
that Power in the rest of Germany, not as Elector, but as Palatine of Saxony:
But then, as there were many that openly favored the Bavarian, so the rest
were not willing openly to espouse the opposite side, and that Prince would not
confess he had done wrong, and so the Controversy remains undetermined still.

10. Sometimes there is joined to the Of the King of the Romans.
Emperor Extra Ordinem, a King of the Romans, in pretense as his General Vicar
or Deputy, who in his Absence or Sickness is to Govern the State, and upon his
Death, to succeed without any new Election. But then, though the Good of the
State has ever been pretended, as is usual in such Cases; yet the real Cause
has ever, or, at least, most usually been, That they might with the greater
ease, in their own lifetimes, prefer their Sons, Brothers, or near Kinsmen, to
the Empire, by the Influence or Recommendation of a Regnant Emperor;
foreseeing, that one that was chosen in a Vacancy or Interregnum, would have
harder terms imposed on him by the Electors. Joseph King of Hungary, the eldest
Son of Leopald the present Emperor of Germany, who was born the 25th. of July,
1678. was chosen King of the Romans the 24th. of January, 1689/90. and Crowned
the 26th. at Ausburg. This Emperor has another Son of his own Name, who was
born the 12th. of June, 1682. who ought to have been taken notice of in the end
of the former Chapter, where the Males of the House of Austria are set down,
but it slipped my Memory till that Sheet was wrought off.

CHAP. V. Of the Power of the Emperor, as it now stands limited by Treaties;
and the Laws and Customs of the Empire; and the Rights of the States of Germany.
1. I Have already shown by what degrees Of the Limits set to the Imperial
Power.
and upon what occasions the Nobility of Germany mounted themselves to that
excessive height of Power and Wealth, as is wholly inconsistent with the Laws
of a regular Monarchy. Nor is it worth our wonder, that when the Election of
the Emperor in aftertimes was devolved upon them, they set their Hearts upon
the preserving what they had gotten. By this Change in the State of Affairs the
Kings (of Germany) lost the Power of Disposing or Governing as they thought
fit, the Concerns of that Nation, and were necessitated to consult the Princes
in things of great moment, and transact more of their business with the States
by their Authority, than by their Sovereign Power; and there is no question to
be made, but the Princes inserted a Clause to this purpose very early into the
Coronation Oath of Germany, (which is usually administered to all Christian
Princes, in a very solemn manner, upon their Accession to any Crown) viz. That
the King should Promise and Swear to Defend all the Rights of all and singular
the Inhabitants of Germany, and observe and keep all the laudable Customs in
that Kingdom received and used. But whether in process of time any particular
Laws were added to the old, and comprehended in Writing, is not so manifest,
because before the times of Charles the Fifth, we have no Copies of any such
Capitulations or Agreements; and those that are pretended to be more ancient,
are of no great certainty. And whereas it is said in the Golden Bull, The
Emperor shall presently confirm all the Rights, Privileges, and Immunities of
the Electoral Princes, by his Patent under Seal. This seems to belong only to
them, and therefore is a very different thing from the Agreement by which the
Emperor is now obliged to engage for the Liberty or Freedom of the whole
Empire. Now, the Reasons why the Electors desired to have Charles the Fifth
bound to them, in so many express and tedious Articles and Covenants, was, That
they considering the great Power of that Prince, his Youth, High Spirit,
(testified by his Motto Plus ultra) and his other Advantages, feared lest he
should employ his Patrimonial Estates to subdue the German Nation, and took
this way, to make him consider, That he must Govern Germany after another
manner than he did his other Dominions. And this Custom being once taken up,
has been ever since continued, though there are not the same Reasons there were
at first for it.

2. These Conditions have been prescribed These Conditions prescribed only by
the Electors.
to the Emperors by the Electors, without consulting the other States of
Germany, though they have sometimes complained of it, and in the last Treaty of
Munster it was moved, That in the next Diet there might be care taken to draw
up a standing form of Articles, which should be perpetual. And I heard, when I
was at Ratisbone, that it was then under serious Debate, and that much Paper
had been spent in that Service; but the Wiser part thought the Electors had no
reason to fear the event of this Consultation, because it was the Emperors
Interest, as well as theirs, that the Electors should still be in a better
condition than the other Princes; for they being few in number, might more
easily be brought to a compliance with him, than the other States, which were
more numerous, and therefore it was reasonable on the other side, that he
should rather indulge them of the two. And those Princes of the Empire who were
descended of the Electoral Families were very inclinable to it too, and the
Demands of the rest might be deluded, without much difficulty. Nor does it
agree with the Manners of Germany, to deprive any man of what he has by Force
and Combination, however he came by it. They added, That though what the States
asked was not unreasonable, viz. That they might be equally secured in the
Capitular with the Electors; yet that it was not possible to pen an Instrument
in such manner, but that upon the change of times and things, it would be
necessary to change and correct it. That in the former Agreements there were
many things changed, added, and altered, as the necessity of the times
required, and as they found the Chinks and starting Holes their Emperors had
endeavored to escape out at. That the Electors would willingly, at the request
of the Diet, insert whatever was necessary for the preservation of the Liberty
of Germany; but then it was absurd, to think the Electors would not prefer
their own proper Interest to that of all other men: Nor could they divest
themselves of the common Inclinations of Mankind. Some others suspect there was
another reason at this time, which brought the business of the Capitulars upon
the Stage. The Emperor, who hated the thoughts of a Diet, was then necessitated
to call one, by a Turkish War, which then threatened his Dominions; and this
Affair was then set on foot, to the end he might by this means obtain plentiful
Contributions from the States of Germany; but then they offered Soldiers
instead of Money; and this not answering the Designs of the Emperor's
Ministers, they thereupon clapped up a Peace with the Turks much sooner than they
otherwise intended, and then were doubtful what The Germans call the Law which
they form up on the Debates of the Diet, in the end of it, the Recess.
Recess they should draw up for the Diet: for the business of giving Succors
against the Turks, which has often been the greatest part of their former
Recesses or Edicts, was now wholly at an end; yet, after all, some curious and
inquisitive men must needs know to what purpose so many men were called
together from all parts of Cermany, and sat so many years; what good came of
all the Sack they drank in the Forenoon, and the Rhenish and Burgundy Wine they
drank after Dinner. To answer this, they put them upon an inextricable
business, that they might at their return be able, if need were, to swear they
had not been wholly idle; and that repeating all their vain useless Brangles
about the Capitular, and referring it over to the next Diet, as a thing which
could not now be determined, they might make this Story serve for a Recess, or
parting Edict, such as it was.

3. Whatever was the true cause of that The usefulness of the German Capitular.
Debate, it cannot be denied, but that the introducing the Custom of
Comprehending the Laws the Emperor was to govern them by, in express Articles
in Writing, was a thing of great good use; for this tended altogether to the
Reputation and Honor of the States, that seeing they would not he governed in
the same manner as the Subjects of other Monarchs are, their Liberties which
they enjoyed might not seem mere Contumacy or Usurpation, but the effects of a
Contract made with their Prince when they chose him to be their Emperor. They
consulted hereby also the Safety of their Liberties, the Emperor being limited
in such Bounds, as he ought not in any case to pass over, and being deprived of
all reasonable cause of Complaint, that he was not as Absolute as the rest of
his Neighbour-Monarchs whose Subjects profess themselves, on all occasions, to
be their most Dutiful and Obedient Subjects. The Germans on the other side, in
the introduction of their Capitular, say, Upon these terms the Emperor has
undertaken the Government of the Empire, and has yielded, by way of Compact*
the said terms to the Electors, in the behalf of themselves and the other
States of Germany. Now, if he had disliked these Conditions, he ought to have
refused that Dignity, or to have shown the Electors beforehand, that there was
something of Injustice or Absurdity in them, and they, without doubt, would in
that case have corrected them. But then, when the Emperor has accepted a
Limited Power, it is utterly unreasonable he should endeavor to exercise a
full and Regal Authority over them; or, at least, it will appear much the more
reasonable for them to oppose him in it; for there are none of the more
understanding Germans, who do not believe the Regal Power may be included in
certain Limits. And I suppose, the more understanding Politicians will not
deny, that there may be such a Competent Power assigned to the Head of a
Confederate Body, as shall be very different in Degree from that of a full and
perfect Kingdom or Empire.

4. But then, when one happens ^t read The extravagant Opinions of some Writers
concerning the Capitular.
any of the German Writers which mention the Capitular, he cannot but observe
their abominable Flattery, or wonderful Ignorance in State Affairs, and civil
Prudence. Some of them have the Impudence to assert, That the Capitular does
not set bounds to the Emperor's Power, but only take care that the Forces of
the Empire shall not be lessened by Alienations, Mortgages, and the like; the
greatest part of them do yet acknowledge, that the Imperial Power is limited by
it, and so is not absolute, but yet it is still Supreme; or, as some of them
love to speak, there is something thereby taken from the fullness of his Power,
but nothing from the Supremacy that is the height of it: As we shall in the
next Chapter examine this notion more accurately, it will be sufficient for the
present to say, that they are deceived who think to take away the ground of
this Controversy, by distinguishing between those Laws which oblige, as
prescribed by a superior Authority, and those whose Obligation arises from
our own Wills, and are bound upon us by our Fidelity and the obligation of a
Compact; for all they can pretend to get by this distinction, is to prove, that
the Emperor is not subject to the States, and not that he has a Sovereign
Authority over them: For to invest a Prince with such an Authority, it is not
enough to show, that he has no Superior, but he must also show, that all the
rest of his Subjects are bound, without dispute, to obey all his Commands, and
have no Right to appeal from him, much less will it be sufficient to show, that
he is the Highest in that State. As for example: In our Commonwealth of
Venice; as if the Duke were not the Highest; and yet no man dares ascribe the
Sovereign Power to him: For, as in all Commonwealths, whether they be
Aristocracies or Democracies, there may be Princes properly so called, who may
be rightly styled the Highest in their Commonwealths and yet still not be
Kings. So also in all Systems of co ordinate States, which are Confederates
each to other, there may be some one more eminent person, to whom the
particular Care of the whole is committed, and so he may rightly be called the
Highest, or the Head of that Body, though he has in truth no Sovereign
Authority over the Confederates, nor can or ought to treat them as his
Subjects. But I think it were better here for the present to consider
distinctly what part of the Sovereign Powers are entrusted to the Emperor; for
if a man does not know them, he is utterly unqualified to judge of the German
Government. And here it will befit us rather to follow the Order which agrees
with the Genius of that Empire, than that which is prescribed by Politicians,
as more regular and exact.

5. We will therefore begin with the The Emperor does not appoint or punish the
Magistrates in the Empire.
Appointment of Magistrates, which in every Polity is a part of the
Sovereignty; for if they are at last accountable for the mismanagement of their
Ministers, it is fit they should have a Right to examine their Actions: and if
they have failed in the performance of their Duty, they must have Power to
remove, or some other way to punish them. Now there is no question to be made,
but the Emperor has this Power in a Sovereign Degree, in his Hereditary
Countries; but then, as to the rest of the Empire, it is disputed; for in the
beginning the Dukes and Counts of Germany were Magistrates properly so called,
as we have above shown, and yet now they have Supreme Authority within their
Limits, under those Titles. Nor will any of the Princes of Germany yield the
Emperor the Government of the People within their Dominions, or that they are
the Subjects of the Emperor, though they will with great Ceremony and much
Submission own themselves to be his most dutiful Subjects, and testify their
great Loyalty to him. And although there may be an Hereditary Jurisdiction in a
Kingdom which shall still be a mere Magistracy; yet then the Supreme Authority
must have reserved a Sovereign Power over that person that is invested with it.
We shall give some examples for the illustrating this. The Emperor may give to
one the Title of a Prince or Count of the Sacred Roman Empire; but then he can
give him no Right to vote in the Diet, without the Consent of the rest of the
States, (Cons. Artic. 44. Capitul. Leopoldina.) And seeing he is vainly puffed
up with the Title of a Prince of the Empire, who has no Dominions to sustain
the Dignity and Splendour of his Title, that he may never be able to enrich
these Vpstarts, care is taken by the Thirtieth Article of the same Capitular,
by which all vacant Fees are to be united to the Empire, Art 29, For this there
is a double reason, first, That all the vacant Fees should not be swallowed up
by the House of Austria, nor given to men obnoxious to that Family; and,
secondly, That in time Germany may be able to give something to its Emperor,
besides an empty Title, by which the Charges of that high Station may be born,
that so in their Elections they may not be tied to choose only persons of very
great Estates, but may be able, in time, to assign their Prince a Patrimony
equal to the Title, and set him in a condition which is proportionable to the
rest of the Princes of Germany, which if it had been to have been done at once,
and out of their proper Dominions, would have been too much for them to have
parted with. Perhaps the Emperor might be allowed to admit amongst them a
foreign Prince, who is not subject to any of them. But then, if any of them
could be contented to impair so much his condition, what Place could he hope
for in the Diet? he would be ashamed to sit on the lowest Bench, and except he
were a King, the ancient Princes of Germany would never give place to him. It
is probable, however, there would be less difficulty in receiving foreign
Cities into the number of the free Cities of Germany, 1. Because they are not
so ambitious of Precedence as Princes are, and Buckhorn, and such other Cities,
would perhaps readily yield them their Places for the Increase of the German
Empire: But then it is not likely that any such Free Cities will join with us,
till one or two of our Neighbour-States are dissolved; and the Emperor cannot
raise any of the Cities that are subject to any of the Princes, to the
Privileges and Dignity of a free Imperial City.

6. Much less is it in the Power of the The Emperor cannot deprive any of the
Princes of their Dignity.
Emperor alone to take away or deprive any Prince of his Dignity, or expel any
of the States out of his Dominions, though they are guilty of a great Crime
against the Empire, but in the most notorious Fact he must obtain the Consent
of the Electors, before he can interdict the meanest of them. Capitul. Leopold.
Artic. 28. They thought fit to get this Bar, lest if any of the Princes had by
chance offended the Emperor in his private personal Concerns, he should
presently persecute him as an Enemy to the Empire. Whilst this Capitular was
drawing up at Frankford, some of the States desired there might be a Clause
added to this 38th. Article, That the execution of all Judgments given against
any Prince of the Empire, ought by Law to be committed to the rest of the
Members of the same Circle to which his Dominions belonged; because if the
Emperor himself undertook the execution of the Sentence, he might perhaps seize
the Estate under pretense of the Charges the Execution put him to. On the other
side, the Emperor never concerns himself how the Princes treat their own
Subjects, and whether they flea or fleece their Flock is all one to him,
because one of the principal things he promises in his Oath, is, That he will
save to every of the States their Rights and Privileges, and disturb none of
them in the exercise thereof. And this is one of those Rights in which the
Princes and States of Germany take the greatest Pride; That every one of them
can govern their own proper Subjects, according to his own will, or to the
Compacts he has made with them. See the 3, 7, 8, and 9. Artic. Capitul.
Leopald. Besides, there are few instances in which the Emperor can directly and
immediately command the Subjects of another Prince; as for instance: To give
Testimony or answer an Action in a Suit depending; and he is without any remedy
from the Law in all those Citations, which he sends out in his own Name (if the
Party will not appear.) Yet he may reward or privilege any of the Subjects of
another State, so he does not diminish the Authority or Rights of their proper
Prince; but then this Imperial Privilege seldom goes further than the giving
them Titles of Honor.

7. Let us now see what Power the Emperor has over the Estates of the Princes,
The Emperor has no Revenues from the Empire.
as to the Contributions that are to be raised for the bearing the Charges of
the Government in Times of Peace or War. As far as I can understand, all the
public Revenues (a very few excepted) belong to the respective Princes and
Free Towns, only the Emperor promises, (Articul. 21, 22, and 23. Capit.
Leopold. That he would prohibit overrating the Customs, lest the Princes should
thereby ruin the Trade of Germany: And if any thing of this nature comes into
the Emperor's Treasure, it is not worth the mentioning, and for the most part
belongs to the Officers of the Chancery, who reap the greatest profit of all
others, from the renewing the Fees (or Estates) in the Empire. See Artic. 17.
Capit. Leopold. He can lay no new Impo^^^ions on any Merchandise, imported or
ex^orted within the Dominions of any of the States; and it was never heard in
Germany, that the Emperor should lay any Tax upon any that lives out of his
Hereditary Countries: Neither are the States obliged to any standing Charge
toward the Necessities of the Government, except what is agreed for the
upholding the Chamber of Spire, and even that very small Charge is very ill
paid by many of them. In ancient times, when the Emperor went to Rome to demand
the Imperial Crown, the States of Germany were bound to arm and maintain Four
thousand Horse and Twenty Thousand Foot, to attend upon him during his Journey.
But as these Expeditions have a long time been omitted, so the proportions that
were then fixed serve now only for the approportioning the Rates of the several
Princes in all extraordinary Charges granted in the Diet: Yet there are many
Complaints made against this old Proportion, because the Estates of some are,
in length of time, sunk in their value, and others are as much raised above
what they were. A Turkish War is ever a vast charge to Germany, and they never
more willingly part with their Money than on that occasion; and yet even here
the Emperor does not proceed upon his own Authority; all is granted and
transacted in the Diet by the Princes or their Deputies, and the more easily
commonly, because the Princes are great Gainers by it, for they rarely pay to
the Emperor's Treasury all they levy.

8. The Arbitriment of Peace and War Nor is he the Arbitrator of Peace and War.
is now also included in very narrow Bounds, whilst Money, the Sinew of War, is
thus put out of the Emperor's Power. It is true, the Austrian Dominions will
maintain a potent Army, but then, if they alone bear the charge of it, they
will apparently be very much exhausted. (It is to be considered, An Addition.
our Author wrote before the recovery of Hungary, Sclavonia, Servia, and
Bosnia, out of the hands of the Turks, which are much larger than all the old
Hereditary Provinces, and upon a Peace of Twenty years, will be able to raise
and maintain a much greater Army than the Hereditary Provinces could when they
lay exposed to the Ravage and Incursions of the Turks, as now they will not; so
that the Emperor is now three times more considerable than he was before the
last War, in the extent of his Dominions, the security of his Subjects, and the
acquiring new Countries, to bear the Charges of defending themselves and the
old too.) Except therefore the States consent to the War, and promise their
Assistance toward the Charges of it, the Emperor cannot promise himself any
thing of help from them. As it is not their manner to be wanting to the Emperor
whenever he is invaded by another, so it is certain, if he should begin a War
upon any of his Neighbors, none of them would concur with him in it, except a
few of them, whose Interest unites them to the House of Austria; for it is, of
the two, rather their Interest to hinder him from warring upon others, and that
not only because all Germany may thereby be involved in Troubles, but also
because the very Victories of the Emperor are no welcome News to the States, as
raising his Power (which perhaps is already too great) to the endangering of
their Liberty. (Vide Art. 13, 14, and 16, Capit. Leopold.) The Tenth of these
Nor of Leagues and Alliances.
Articles shows, how the Emperor's Power is bounded as to Leagues and
Alliances. A man here will not be able to forbear wondering why the Emperor is
not permitted to begin a War against any Neighbor upon any pretense
whatsoever, or to enter into any Alliance with a Foreigner, without at least
the Consent of the Electors. And yet we are lately told, many of the Electoral
Princes had had a meeting, and drawing over to them a parcel of Thievish
Soldiers, have made an Inroad upon the Elector Palatine's Dominions, under
pretense of forcing from him some Rights which they are not well pleased he
should any longer enjoy: And when they entered upon this action, they thought it
was sufficient for them to give the Emperor a very superficial and insolent
account of what they intended to do. There was another Bishop of that Nation,
not far from the Hollanders, (Munster) took up Arms, and invaded that State,
which War may involve a great part of Germany. And all these bold Attempts of
the Princes were entered upon whilst the Diet was sitting, and yet it took not
the least notice of them; for it is now become a Custom for some of the Princes
to League with the Swedes or French, both which Nations have for many years
been the Enemies of the House of Austria.

9. Let us see next what Power the Emperor Nor is he the Governor of the
Religion of Germany.
has in the Affairs of Religion: Because the new Politicians will needs have
Temporal Princes, according to their new Divinity, entrusted in things of this
nature; whereas the Roman Catholics constantly believe and profess, That it
would be very prejudicial to the Grandeur and Wealth of the Church, to have any
but the Clergy intermeddle with the disposing of the Church-Preferments, and
therefore would (very wisely) have the Laity content themselves with the Glory
of enriching and defending the Church. When therefore there were no other Rites
received in Germany, but those of the Church of Rome, the few Disciples of John
Huss in Bohemia excepted, and the Jews, who are every where tolerated. Martin
Luther, beyond all men's expectations, An account of Martin Luther and the
Reformation.
sorely weakened the Papal Authority in that Nation, and taking the advantage
of a small Brangle, of no great moment at first, drew off a considerable part
of the Empire from their Obedience to the Sea of Rome. If I may be allowed to
speak the truth, this inconsiderable Spark was blown up to this dreadful Fire,
by the folly of them who at first opposed Luther, and the inconsiderate
rashness and haste of Leo X. for some contemptible Monks contending one with
another, one Party of which was very zealous for Religion, and the other Party
no less concerned for their Profit; and at first both of them had the Papal
Power in great esteem, as Sacred. Now it was certainly here the part of a
prudent Judge, to show himself equal and indifferent to both the contending
Parties, or presently to have silenced both of them, lest his Commodities (his
Indulgences) should become cheap, and suspected by the People: At least, he
ought not so manifestly to have espoused the Quarrel of his Factors, for fear
this highest Priest might be suspected to be more fond of getting Money, than
preserving the Souls of those under his care; or lastly, to prevent being
suspected to be better pleased with the price of Men's Sins (paid to him) than
with the most Innocent and Holy Life. The more indevout sort of men were not to
be tempted neither by this Affair, to suspect, that the Priests were very like
Physicians and Surgeons, who reap too much Benefit from the Diseases and
Wounds of Men, to be heartily sorry for them: So that if it was foolish and
sacrilegious to give Sentence against the Indulgences, to the damage of the
Church, it had been prudent to sweeten a man of too warm a temper with
Presents, Preferments, and Promises, that he might not light the Laity into the
way of shaking off the Church's Yoke; and when so many have by Ambition and
Gifts aspired to the highest Dignities in the Church of Rome, I think, for my
share, it would have been worth the while to have wrapped this Monk in Purple,
to prevent his doing her so great a mischief: For when Martin Luther saw he
could have no Justice done him at the Pope's Tribunal, he began to court the
Grace and good Opinion of the Laity, and soon after, he positively refused to
submit to the Judgment of the Pope, because he had made the Quarrel his own, by
entering into it: And that he might not want a Patron, he began to teach, That
the Care of the Church belonged to Secular Princes, and those who had the like
Authority; and they again reflecting, That the great Revenues their Ancestors
had given to pious uses, were spent in Sloth and Luxury, quickly embraced the
opportunity of turning these lazy fat Cattle to Grass. This was greedily
followed by What is said of the design of enriching themselves by the Revenues
of the Church, is to be understood as spoken in the Person and Name of a Roman
Catholic; for all the Protestant Princes have ever denied they had any such
design, and it is not at all probable at first they could have any such.
many, partly because what Luther said seemed true, and partly because they
sound they could considerably improve their Revenues. There was then a Rumor
also, that the Italians imposed upon the old German Honesty and Simplicity, and
that they spent the Money they had torn from them on the account of their Sins,
in Gaming, Luxury, and filling the insatiable Avarice of the Pope's Officers
and Creatures. They called to mind a Saying of Pope Martin V. which in truth
was very worthy of a Spiritual Pastor, viz. That he could wish himself a Stork,
provided the Germans were turned into Frogs. Hereupon they began to bemoan
themselves to one another, and say, We who of old so valiantly repelled the
victorious Arms of the Romans, are by an unwarlike sort of men, under pretense
of Religion, reduced almost to a necessity of eating Hay with our Beasts. I
cannot tell how much the restoring Learning in this part of the World might
contribute to this Revolution, which was thereupon received with great
Applause. However, we we may well and safely affirm, That Men of Learning are
not easily persuaded to believe what is (or seems) contrary to Reason.

10. The effect of this Controversy was, Many of the German Princes deserted
the Sea of Rome.
that a great part of the ancient Rites, and all those Doctrines which seemed
superfluous to these new Teachers, were laid aside by a considerable part of
the Germans; and at the same time many of the Clergy were deprived of their
Church Lands. Thereupon many Suits were commenced in the Chamber of Spire, by
the Clergy, against those that had deprived them of their Possessions; and that
Court was also very willing to have restored all to the outed Clergy, but then
the Protestants (as they are called) refused in this matter to acknowledge the
Jurisdiction of that Court: For though (said they) the Laws in all Cases
command, that they which have been dispossessed, should be restored to what
they once had; yet, in this Case that was now depending, it was sit and
reasonable, that a lawful general Council, or some other public Convention,
(that is a National Council of Germany) should first consider and determine,
whether the outed Clergy did profess and teach the true Religion; for if this
was not first well proved, (as they believed it could not) it was in vain, and
to no good purpose, for them to expect the enjoyment of those Revenues which
had been given by their Ancestors, for the maintenance of the true Worship of
God. Now, because they were quickly sensible, that Reasons and Protestations
alone would not secure them, the greatest part of these Protestant States and
Princes joined in a League at Smalcald, to repel any Force or Violence which
might be offered to any of them, because they had embraced the Reformed
Religion: At length it came to a War, which proved very unfortunate to the
Protestants, and the Elector of Saxony, and the Landtgrave of Hess, the two
principal persons of their Party, were both taken Prisoners, and their Religion
seemed to be in a desperate and hopeless condition; but then Maurice the next
Duke of Saxony restored it to its former Power, by his Arms, and the R.
Catholics were forced to come to a Treaty at Passaw, for the securing all
Parties; the terms of which may easily be found in any of the German Historians
of that time. After this, in the Diet of Ausburg, The Decree of Ausburg for the
Liberty of Religion.
in the year 1555, the Protestants obtained the securing their Religion by a
Law passed there in favor of it, by which Law they had sufficient Security
given them, that they should live in Peace, and that neither of the Parties
should hurt or invade the other on the account of their different Religions,
nor compel any man by force to abjure that Religion which he professed. If any
Church Lands had been seized by any of the Secular Princes, which did not
belong to any other immediate State or Prince of Germany, it should be left to
the present Possessor, against whom no Suit should be commenced in the Chamber
of Spire, if the Clergy were not in possession of the same at the time of the
Treaty of Passaw, or after it: That the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction should not
be exercised against those who professed the Protestant Religion; and that they
should manage their Religious Affairs as they thought fit: That no Prince
should allure the Subjects of another Prince to his Religion, nor undertake the
Defense of them, on the pretense of Religion, against their own Prince. But
then those Subjects of either side, that were not pleased with the Religion or
Ceremonies of his own Prince, might sell their Estates, and go where they
pleased. And lastly, if this Difference of Religion cannot be composed by fair
and lawful means, this Peace shall nevertheless be perpetual.

11. In the mean time there was a sharp The Liberty of the Clergy more fiercely
disputed.
Contest, Whether the Catholic Clergy should have liberty to embrace the
Protestant Religion, and also possess notwithstanding their Dignities and
Church Revenues; which was urged with the greatest vehemence by the
Protestants, who said, That the contrary Practice was a reproach to their
Religion, if they should consent, that those that entered into it should be
deprived of their Honors and Estates: That the way that leads to the Purer
Religion was by this shut against many: That they had no intention to turn the
Church-Preferments to Secular uses, or to take away the Freedom of Elections
from the Chapters. But then, because it was apparent, that this exposed the
Roman Catholic Religion, in Germany, to the utmost danger, the Catholic
States opposed it with equal obstinacy, and Ferdinand the Emperor favoring
that Party, they got this Clause added to the Law; If any Clergyman becomes a
Protestant, he shall forfeit his Church Preferments, but without any loss or
diminution of his Honor. And although, at that time and after, especially in
the Case of the Archbishop of Cologne, who became a Protestant, the Protestants
complained very much of this Clause, and protested against it, yet they could
not get it repealed.

12. But this Peace was not able to take The Differences in Religion cause
great disquiet in Germany.
away all the Seeds of Discord, which sprung from this Diversity of Religion;
for they that embraced the Protestant Religion, divided it into Parties and
Factions, because the greatest part of them stook simply to the Words of the
first Augustane Confession, whilst some others thought some Doctrines ought to
be more nicely expressed. And although wise men thought this was not a
Controversy that was worth the entering into a Civil War for, yet their minds
on both sides were very much exasperated by the Intemperance of the Preachers,
and the Frauds of the Roman Catholics, who expected to make great use of these
Dissentions amongst their Enemies, as a means to overcome them in the end. And
whereas all those that professed neither the Roman Catholic nor the Augustane
Confession, were excluded from the benefit of the aforesaid Peace, the Roman
Catholics hereupon craftily endeavored to persuade those who simply stuck to
the Augustane Confession, to disown all those that had refined upon it, as not
at all belonging to their Party; though the strict Protestants often declared
publicly, that they would not disown those that differed from them in some
points that were of less moment, but that they also ought to enjoy the Benefit
of the Peace; yet the overgreat Zeal of the Priests divided them so far, that
they began to separate each from the other, and not to consult so frequently
together as they had done before: Nay, after this, when one of the Parties was
oppressed by the Popish Party, the other would unconcernedly look on whilst
they perished, or lend Assistance to their Enemies. Afterward other occasions
of Discontent arose, and last of all, a Fire was kindled in Bohemia, which in a
short time involved all Germany in a War: Here Fortune at first smiled upon the
Emperor, and prospered his Affairs beyond his hopes, so that in a short time
his Armies subdued and brought under the greatest part of Germany; and in the
year 1629. he presumed to publish an Edict, That all the Clergy should be put
in possession of all the Church-Revenues, which had been taken from them by the
Laity, since the Treaty of Passaw. The secret Design of this Edict was, to
bespeak the Assistance of the Clergy and Catholic States, and to persuade
them, that all his Designs tended to the resettling that Religion, and not to
the oppressing the Liberties and Rights of the German States and Princes: But
then, if they had either sat still, or helped him to subdue the Protestants;
nay, if they had not hindered the reduction of them, it would have been very
easy for the Emperor (thus flushed with Victory, and armed with Power) to have
modeled them at his pleasure. How this Project came to fail, is too well known
to be represented here: And at last, in the Treaty of Osnaburg (or Osnabruck)
in Westphalia, in the year 1648, The Peace of Religion resettled in Germ.
by the V. Article, there was a large Provision made for the Security and Peace
of Religion, the Treaty of Passaw, and the Recess of Ausburg, being both
confirmed, and an express Declaration inserted, that it extended equally to the
Lutherans, and to the Calvinists, as they call them now. It was added also,
That all Changes that had been made since the First of January, 1624* in the
State, under pretense of favoring the Church, should be put in the same state
they were then; and that all those Revenues which were then possessed by Roman
Catholics, but were since taken from them by the Protestants, should be
restored back again to them; and the like should be done by the Roman
Catholics, to the Protestants, that all the immediate States which the
Protestants possessed at that time; should be their own for ever. The Right of
changing Religion, which before seemed to be left free to all the States, was
for the future so restrained, that the Subjects of the Catholic Princes, who
were of the Augustane Confession, and in the year 1624. had the Free Exercise
of their Religion, were still to retain it. And they that had been in the mean
time disturbed, were to be restored; those who had not enjoyed their Liberty in
the said year, should have Liberty of Conscience, but should only exercise
their Religion in their own private Families, or the Neighbor places: But if
their Lords should command them to be gone, they should have liberty to sell
their Estates, or manage them by their Deputies: And the Emperor himself, in
some things, indulged his own Protestant Subjects, for the sakes of the
Princes. It was also agreed, that if any Prince should hereafter think fit to
change his Religion, it should be no prejudice to him; and that he might have
Priests in his Court of his own Opinion, but then, that he should not force his
Subjects to his Religion, but should leave that he found in possession but so,
that it might be lawful for his Subjects, if they would take up the Religion
professed by their Prince. It is also to be noted here, that this Liberty of
Religion was settled by way of Compact or Agreement made between Equals, and
the Emperor himself is one of the Parties; so that neither he nor any other of
the Catholic States, though they should happen to be the more numerous Party,
ought to alter any thing of it: And it is also manifest, that the Condition of
the Protestant Princes is better than that of the Roman Catholics, because the
latter are subject to the Pope; whereas the former govern their Affairs of
Religion in their own Right, and as they think fit. Now, if any share of the
Government of Religion belongs, by the Laws of Christian Religion, to the Civil
Magistrate: It is plain, the Authority of the Churchmen will thereby be reduced
into a very narrow compass. Add. Artic. 1. and 19. Capit. Leopold.

13. We proceed now to the Legislative The Legislative Power not in the Emperor.
Power. That it may appear to whom this belongs, we must consider by what Laws
Germany is governed, and how they were introduced. Here the learned Hermannus
Conringius has led the way in his learned Book, De Origin Juris Germanici,
whom I shall very near wholly follow. This Author takes great pains to confute
the commonly-received Opinion, That the Roman or Civil Law was in the year
1130, by the Command of Lotharius the Saxon, then Emperor of Germany, received
both in the Schools and Courts of Justice: Whereas he shows, that to the XIII.
Century, the Courts of Germany did not so much proceed upon any written Laws,
as upon ancient received Customs, and upon Equity and good Conscience; and the
Judges for popular actions were not chosen on the account of any eminent
Learning, but rather ancient men, well esteemed for Prudence, Piety, and
Justice, the far greatest part of the People being then not able to write or
read. In the XIII. Century the Canon Law, by slow degrees, The Canon Law first
introduced.
began to creep into Germany, and not only that begun to be studied, which
concerns Church Affairs, but the Processes of Civil Affairs were regulated or
formed by it, though many stuck stiffly to their own ancient Customs. About the
same time these The ancient German Customs after this set down in Writing.
Old Customs were also put in Writing, amongst which the Laws of Lubeck are
most esteemed, and those of Magdeburg, which in the German Tongue is called
Weichbild; the Mirror of the Saxon and Schwaben Law, aad the Feudale Saxonicum
and Suevicum; and these were very near all the Laws used in Germany, in the
XIII. and XIV. Centuries. In the XV. Century, the Civil or Roman The Civil Law
introduced in the XV. Century.
Law, and with it the Jus Feudale Longobardicum, began also by degrees to creep
in, the Skilful in these Laws being often advanced to the Honor of being
Counselors to the Princes, who took all opportunities to recommend their own
Profession to the good Opinions of Men: And it began thereupon to be taught in
all the Universities of Germany, and that after the manner of Italy, which gave
them the example. After this, when men that had studied it, were called to the
Bar, it began by little and little to be received into the Court: And in the
year 1495, Maximilian I. appointed the Civil Law to be admitted and used in the
Chamber of Spire, but saving all the Ancient Customs, and the Local Statutes of
all places. So that the Law now used in Germany is a Mixture of Civil Law,
Canon That at present In use is a mixture of Canon and Civil Laws, and the old
Customs.
Law, Ancient Customs, and the Statutes of the several Provinces and Cities,
which are very contrary one to the other. And in all Courts this is observed,
That if there be any Provincial Statute or municipial Law extant, concerning
the Case depending, that takes Place in the first place; but if there be none,
then they have recourse to the Roman or Civil Law, as far as it is commonly
received. The States of Germany in Particular Laws made by the several States.
the mean time are allowed to make Laws concerning Civil Causes, in their
respective Provinces, which may differ (if they think fit) from the Common and
Usual Law; and that they shall enact Statutes for their own use, without ever
consulting the Emperor: So they contain nothing in them prejudicial to the
other States of Germany. And although many of them have desired the Emperor to
confirm their Provincial Statutes. And they can also make particular Laws
concerning Criminal Cases. Nor is the Caroline Constitution in all points every
where observed. The States have also a Power to pardon Offenders: But if any
thing is to be introduced that shall bind all, it The general Laws in the Diet.
cannot be settled but in a Diet, and by the Consent of all; and when it is so
passed, it obliges the Emperor as much as any of the other States. Vide Artic.
2. Capit. Leopold.

14. The Jurisdiction of Germany has been The forms of the German Jurisdiction
in several Ages.
very differently managed in different times, as is accurately set forth by
Conringius in his Tract De Germanici Imperii Judiciis, from whom I shall
transcribe the principal Heads, to save my own labor; and I will begin with
the Times of Charles the Great. When any of the Royal Family had any
Controversy, either one with another, or with any other, it was determined in
the Council of the Nobility and People, as were also those Cases of the
Nobility, that were of great concernment. The smaller Controversies the
Nobility had, were determined by the King, or those he sent, (for so they were
then called, who are now called Commissioners, Visitors, or Delegates.) For the
ending the Contests of others, there were settled in the Hundreds and Districts
certain Judges called Graves, who had to assist them, and sit with them, others
called Scabins, chosen out of the Nobility, or the better sort of the People,
and these heard and determined all Civil and Criminal Cases. The Graves, by
reason of the greatness of their Hundreds, had certain Deputies in every
Village, or, as they call them Scultesio's, (like our Constables) from whom yet
there lay an Appeal to the Grave. The Priests also punished the Vicious Lives
of Christian Men by Canonical Censures. The Bishops exercised a Jurisdiction
over the Clergy and the Monks: And the Bishop was also accountable to his
Metropolitan, or a Synod called by him, though afterward Appeals to the Pope
began to be made, on the account of the Authority of that See; yea, the Cases
of many Laymen were promiscuously referred to the Bishops, upon an opinion of
their Sanctity and Integrity: But then the Judgment of the Church Revenues was
not in the Clergy, but in the Advocates or Vicedames, which were particularly
appointed by the Kings, and so the persons of the Clergy were subject to the
Judgment of the Clergy, and their Revenues were subject to the Advocates
Judgments, who were Laymen. From these fixed settled Judges they appealed to
the King's Messengers, who at certain times traveled over the Provinces (like
our itinerant Judges of Assize) and from them to the King's Palace, in which
Appeals the King himself, or the Count Palatine, gave Judgment; which last was
also appointed to determine the Causes which arose in the Court. But then they
hardly admitted an Appeal, but where the Grave or Messengers refused to
administer Justice: And all Cases were determined by a short and very plain
Process, and in a few Sessions or Hearings. So that in all this form there was
nothing wanting, but an Appeal for the Clergy to the Pope, who though an holy
person, was then considered as one out of the Bounds of Germany (and so not to
be taken notice of.)

15. In all these things, in process and length of time, almost every thing was
The old forms changed in after times.
changed. After the Golden Bull, the Electors took cognizance of all the Royal
Cases; and the Pope assumed to himself so great Power on that account, that he
made no scruple to excommunicate the Emperors, and declare, that their Subjects
were free from the Obligations of their Allegiance to them; and he boldly said,
the Emperor was his Vassal, and the Empire a Fee which belonged to his See. As
to the Princes Suits or Cases, this was ever observed from the very beginning
of the French Monarchy, that they were never determined by the Judgment of the
King alone, but were always decided in a Convention of the Nobility, upon a
simple and short Process, according to Equity and good Conscience. And even in
the first Ages of the German Empire, if any of the Emperors assumed a Power
singly to judge of the Fees belonging to any of the Princes, the more
courageous of them always protested against it: Yea, if all the Testimonies we
have were lost, the very form of the whole Empire, or its Constitution, do
sufficiently prove, that things of that consequence which these Suits are of,
ought not (by it) to be left to the single Judgment of the Emperor: And
therefore they are notoriously guilty of palpable Flattery, who pretend, that
this Judgment of the Cases of the Princes of the Empire, which the Germans call
Das Furstenrecht, is a mere Pretense. But then, it was long after these times
that these inferior Princes took upon them to judge arbitrarily of the Cases
of their own Vassals, which was done only by some Families, and imitated by the
Free Imperial Cities, as to their Subjects. The Germans call these Counts in
their Language Austrega's, and it is probable they began about the times of
Frederick and the great Interregnum. Those that trusted more to their Power or
Force than to the Justice of their Cause, would commit the Trial of it to the
Sword. It is also a late Practice, which has been taken up by some of our later
Emperors and Princes, to referr the Cases depending to their Ministers and
professed Lawyers, rather than to give themselves the trouble of hearing them.
But then this became necessary, when instead of a few plain Country Customs, we
had introduced the Intricate, Papal, and Civil Laws, which it would have been
the utmost punishment to have put the Princes to the trouble of learning.

16. As to the Churchmen, they innovated The Innovations brought in by the
Churchmen.
in these particulars: By degrees they drew all the Personal Cases of the
Bishops to the Pope's Tribunal, utterly destroying thereby all the Authority of
Metropolitans and Synods; and they took from the Laity all Right of judging in
any Case a Clergyman. This is by the Protestants returned to the ancient
method, but by the Roman Catholics still retained, though Charles V, and some
other Princes since, have to the great vexation of the Pope, ordered some
things pertaining to Religion and punished some Clergymen for great Offenses
too. In the times also of Frederick II, and those that followed, the Bishops
and Clergy assumed to themselves the free Administration or Management of their
own Church-estates, and shook off their Advocates of Vicedams; yet still the
Ecclesiastical States are subject to the Empire, by reason of their Fees and
other Regalia's, of which they may be deprived, if they act any thing
insolently against the Public Peace and the Laws of the Empire. The Monks, as
to their Persons, were, in the times of Charles the Great, subject to the
Jurisdiction of the Bishops, from whom some ancient Monasteries were exempted,
and were put immediately under the Pope. The new Orders which have arisen since
the XIII. Century, are only subject to their Provincials and Generals, and only
acknowledge the Pope's Jurisdiction as their Supreme Ordinary. The
Administration of the Lands of the Abbeys were at first committed to Advocates,
from which dependence, in length of time, some Houses were exempted, but the
greatest part have still remained in the same state they were at first; and
some few of them are free from all public Taxes and Charges.

17. The Secular Cases of the meaner People Secular Cases, how managed.
were heard in the times of Charles the Great, either in the Secular Courts, or
by the Bishop in his Consistory; which later way has since been much extended
beyond what it was at first. These were first (as to the Secular Courts) to
make their Complaints to the Scabins, which in ancient times were appointed in
all the (Pagi) Hundreds and Villages; from him they might appeal to the Graves
or Comites, (Earls or Sheriffs) whose Jurisdiction was after usurped by many
Dukes and Bishops. From the Counts or Graves they had an Appeal to the
Itinerary Messengers, (or Judges) sent into the Provinces by the King, and from
them to the King himself, who in his Court made a final Determination of all
Cases: But in the XV. Century, when Appeals became very frequent, by reason of
the bringing in the tedious Forms, and the Iniquity of the Rabble; for the more
commodious determining these, it was resolved, to erect a certain fixed
Tribunal or Court, which The Chamber of Spire erected for Appeals.
was at last settled at Spire; the reason of this was not because the Imperial
Court was too ambulatory or unsettled, but because the vast quantity of these
Cases might most conveniently be determined in a place set apart for that end.
(The French, in Since removed to Wetzlar.
the year 1688, having seized Spire, the Diet, in the year 1689, agreed this
Court should be settled, for the future, at Westlar (Wetzlar) a City of Hassia,
seven German Miles from Frankford, to the North, and about fifteen from Cologne
to the S. E. which being approved by the Emperor, Commissioners are appointed
to adjust all things for the opening this Court there; and it is very probable
it will never be returned back to Spire, that City being too much exposed to
the Insults of the French, who, when they please, can seize the Records of this
Court, to the inestimable damage of the Empire. And besides, the French had
before burnt and destroyed the whole Town of Spire, not leaving any thing
standing in it that Fire and Gunpowder could fetch down.)

18. The modern way of Trials now received The present form of Process.
in Germany, is thus: When any private person commenceth a Suit against another
of the same quality, he in the first instance goes to the Praetor (Scabin) of
the City or Village in which he lives, except the Defendant be some way
privileged above the Scabin. There is in all the Principalities which I have
been acquainted with, some superior Court, which is common to the whole
Province, which they call the Palace or Provincial Court, and to this Superior
Court there lies an Appeal from the Scabin: But then the most part of the Free
Cities have only one Court, from which there is no Appeal. The Chamber of
Spire, and the Emperor's Palace-Court, are common to the whole Empire; but then
some of the Princes have a Privilege which restrains their Subjects from
appealing to either of these Courts, of this number are the Electors: Yet there
In Civil Cases there is no Appeal from the Electors, Emperor and King of Sweden.
are some, who question whether this Privilege belongs to the Ecclesiastical
Electors, only because they do not exercise it. The House of Austria, and the
King of Sweden, enjoy the same Exemption for all his German Territories.
(Westphaliae Art. cap. 10. sect. 12.) This last Prince has erected a Court at
Wismar, for the determining all those Appeals which before belonged to the
Chambers of Spire and Vienna; (Add. Capitul. Leopold. Artic. 28, and 27.) but
then all the Princes of the Empire are equal in this, that there lies no
Appeal, except the thing in dispute exceed such a value, which yet in some
places is more, and in others less. In Criminal Cases, not only the Princes of
the Empire, but many of In Criminal Cases there lies no Appeal.
the Buroughs or Corporate Towns, and many of the Nobility, exercise a
Sovereign Jurisdiction without any Appeal.

19. But then, if there be any Controversy How the Controversies of the States
or Princes are determined.
between the States or Princes, the greatest part of them, in the first
instance, have their resort to the Austraega's or Arbitrators: Of these some
are appointed in a peculiar Convention of the States, and others depend upon
the common disposition of the Laws. The first Institution of this Judicature is
very obscure; but their Opinion seems most probable, who date its Rise about
the times of Frederick II. and ascribe it to that long Interregnum. [This
Interregnum began in the year 1198, when Philip Brother of Henry VI. was chosen
by one Faction, and Otho Duke of Saxony Son of Henry the Lion, and Maud of
England by another; from henceforth there was nothing but War and Misery; till
in the year 1212. Frederick II. Son of Henry VI. was, after many other, chosen,
who yet could not obtain the peaceable Possession till the year 1219. so that
it lasted about 21 years. But to return] It is certain, Maximilian the First
was not the Author of this Court, though he gave it a new form, which is extant
in the Ordination of the Chamber in 1495. made at Worms. Of the various forms
of Austraega's there mentioned, there are only two now in use; as, 1. The
Defendant names Three Princes of the Empire, out of which the Plaintiff chooses
one: Or, 2. They obtain by consent of the Emperor one or more Commissioners:
But then there are some Cases which ought not to be brought before the
Austraega, but immediately before the Chambers of Spire or Vienna; which may be
found in many very common Books. Now, there are these Inconveniences always
attending the Judgments given by the Austraega's; 1. That there lies an Appeal
to the Chambers, so that very few Controversies are determined by them. 2. That
great Sums of Money are spent in treating and sweetening the Emperor's
Commissioners. 3. There is a Sequestration of a years continuance of the
Profits of the thing in dispute, which time is allowed to the Austraega's, to
give in their Award; because it is thought an indecent thing to determine a
Suit of moment in less time in Germany.

20. The highest Court in Germany is the The highest Courts in Germany are the
Chambers of Spire and Vienna.
Chamber which was lately fixed at Spire, which was instituted by the Diet of
Germany, under Maximilian I. in 1495. (And after many Removes, fixed at Spire,
in the year 1530, by the Diet of Ausburg, under Charles V. where it remained
till this year 1689.) Now, though this Court uses the Name of the Emperor only
in all its Processes, yet it does not depend on the Emperor only, but acts in
the behalf, and by the Authority of the States of Germany: The Emperor names
the President, who must be a Prince of the Empire, or, at least, a Count or
Baron. By the Treaty of Osnabruck it was agreed, that under this prime
President there should be four other inferior Presidents to be nominated by
the Emperor, and at least fifty Assessors (Judges or Companions with them)
Twenty six of which should be of the Roman Catholic Religion, and Twenty four
of the Protestant, to take from the later all just cause of complaint, that
their Cases were not favorably heard and determined: Yet at this day there is
rarely half this number, the Princes that should nominate and pay them, being
very slow in both respects, they being much offended with the Imperious
Commands of this Court, though they rarely go further than words. He that is
desirous to know the exact form of their Proceedings, must read the Order of
the Chamber, inserted into the Recess of the Diet, in 1495. It is a common
Proverb, That the Suits at Spire are drawing on, but never die, (Spirant non
expirant.) This is owing to the litigious forms and delays or perplexities in
the Processes, and the number of the Cases depending before too small a number
of Judges to dispatch them. But yet, after all, the great Reason is, the
Difficulty of executing the Sentence; for the Princes that have great Estates
do very little regard what the Judges at Spire say: And they again have so much
wit, that they will not hazard the small remainder of their Authority, by
giving Judgment (how justly soever) against a Prince of that Power, that he
will despise both them and their Sentence. But then, in this Court (as in
others) if they catch a small Fly, they will be sure to hamper him. In the year
1654, in a Diet, there were many Rules or Provisions made for the supplying the
Defects of this Chamber: There lies no Appeal from it, but if any man is
aggrieved, he may desire a Revision, which yet, to my knowledge, was never
sought, or never granted.

21. There is also in the Emperor's Palace The Chamber of Vienna when first
instituted.
another Court, which pretends to the same Authority with that of Spire (which
is above called for distinction the Chamber of Vienna.) They both say, that a
Suit begun at Spire cannot be withdrawn and removed to Vienna, and so on the
contrary. Ferdinand the Emperor, in the year 1549, first opened this, and
published the Rules or Laws by which it was to proceed: Maximilian II.
increased them; but Mathias, in the year 1614, renewed it; and Ferdinand III.
changed some of the Rules in the Diet in the year 1654. (See the Treaty of
Peace, Art. 5. Sect. 20. Artic. 41, 42, 43. Capitul. Leopold.) This Court
depends solely on the Emperor, though the Judges of it are bound to the
Archbishop of Mentz, as Lord High Chancellor of Germany, by an Oath. It is not
hard to guess what was the true reason why the Emperors instituted this Court;
to which purpose it will be fit to consider, that these Princes observing, that
all Appeals being tried and determined at Spire, and that place frequented on
the account of Justice, the Court at Vienna was in the mean time neglected, to
the great dishonor and dissatisfaction of the Family of Austria: For the
flying to them for Relief, is the greatest of the Glories of a Prince; and
their Majesty is then most resplendant, when it gives men their Due, and
repells their Injuries: Besides, he that has the Management of the Oracles of
Justice, can best secure his own Interest, and take care that nothing shall be
done contrary to it. Now, the Chamber of Spire depended on the whole Body of
the Empire, and was also seated at a great distance from Vienna, and that
beyond the Rhine, and therefore seemed to take but little notice of the Danube
(that is Vienna.) The form of the Law Proceedings being also changed, it was
now become very difficult to adjust and end the Controversies of the Dependent
States in the Diet, as had been formerly practiced. Now, if the Emperor could
by degrees insensibly draw them to himself only, in conjunction with the Claims
of private men, he should thereby gain a great Step toward the acquiring a
Sovereign Authority over the States. Nor were there wanting plausible Reasons
for the opening this Court; for, Why should he be obliged to administer equal
Justice to all, if all might pass by him, and direct their Addresses to Spire?
This Chamber of Vienna pretended also not to be tied to the slow methods of
Process used at Spire; and men were pleased with the expectation of a quick
dispatch of their Cases; for the Court of Spire is so hampered, that though the
Case is never so plain, and the Judges are never so willing to do speedy
Justice, yet they must omit none of their appointed Forms. Some others, that
pretend to a deeper inspection, say there is a private Council at Vienna, in
which the greatest Affairs of the Empire are considered: Now when any great
Case has been ventilated and debated in this Court, if the Judges find it has
any State-Interest in it, they give the Emperor an account of it, with their
Thoughts of it, and thereupon it is again debated in that private Council, in
which the State-Interest of the Case is more considered than the Justice of it.
As for the Instance; Whether it is for the Emperor's Interest, that this or
that Judgment should be given; and how and which way the execution shall be
made: So that if any Scruple of that nature arises, the Judges have private
Orders to suspend or delay the Judgment. I presume, the Judges of this Court
would also take it very ill to be suspected of Bribery; and yet there are many
that think it is their Interest to clear themselves (if they can) of this
Suspicion, which might be done by showing to the contending Parties, to which
of them the Case depending is committed.

22. As to the form of Execution in The Form of executing the Judgments of
these Courts.
both these High Courts, it is thus: First, They enjoin the Party that is
vanquished to submit to the Sentence they have given against him, upon pain of
forfeiting a certain quantity of Marks of pure Gold, to be paid in part to the
Exchequer of the Empire, and in part to the Person suing; if he does not obey
the Sentence upon notice of this, within the time limited, then the Sum is
increased; but if he still persist, and despise their Threats, he is put under
the Baun, or proscribed, and the Sentence is ordered to be put in execution by
Force and Arms, till the Party submit. If the Party cast is a Subject of any of
the States, the execution of the Sentence is committed to that State or Prince
whose Subject he is. If the Party condemned is a Prince, or Member of the Diet,
then the General of the Circle, or some or other of the Members also of that
Circle to which he belongs, are commanded to execute it: But if the Party is so
powerful, that the Circle is not able to force him to submit, two or three of
the next Circles are commanded to join with them: But this rarely happens, that
there are any such Executions to be made; and when there is, it is more for the
Interest of Germany, and for the securing the Liberties of the several States
to compose their Controversies of this great moment by Arbitrators, than by
Suits and Military Executions thereupon.

23. If any thing arises which may affect The greater Cases ought to be
determined in the Diet.
the whole Body of the Empire, the Emperor cannot determine of it as he
pleases himself, but ought to propose it in the Diet, and it is by the States
to be there ordered as they shall by common Consent agree. (Vid. Capitul.
Leopold. Artic. 39. sub fin.) Now, because all these Affairs have been very
exactly collected by German Writers, it will be sufficient for us to set down
here some of the principal Heads of them. 1. The Emperor has the sole Power of
assembling the Diet, but so, that he is bound, by his Letters or Envoys, to
require the Consent of the Electors, and also to adjust with them the Time and
Place. (Capitul. Leopold. Art. 17.) The Electors also may admonish the Emperor,
when they think it is for the Interest of Germany there should be a Diet. But
then, because the holding a Diet is a thing of very great Charge to the States,
it is expressly said, That the Emperor shall not burden them with the holding
unnecessary Diets. (Capitul. Leopold. D. E.) During the vacancy, the Vicars of
the Empire (the Duke of Saxony, and the Count Palatine of the Rhine) shall
assemble the Diet, and in his absence, the King of the Romans, if there be one.
The calling of it shall not be by any General Proclamation, but by written or
printed Letters, to be delivered personally to each of the States (or Members)
which shall be penned in a kind inviting Style, and not in an imperious
commanding Form like a Citation. The Indiction shall be six months before the
Meeting, that the States may have sufficient time to consider what is there to
be treated of.

24. In ancient times there was a Diet In ancient times the Diet was held every
year.
held every year, and it continued but one Month, as is supposed by the German
Antiquaries; at this day it is not agreed how often or how long it shall sit,
but that is governed by the present Necessities of the public Affairs, or at
least it ought to be so: Yet they have adjudged it expedient for the preserving
the Liberties of the States, that there should be frequent Diets, as for
instance, once in three years at the farthest; that when they are, necessary
care should be taken to expedite the Affairs depending, which now move too
slowly, and occasion vast expense both of Time and Money, which might be saved.
There are some that are jealous, that these affected Delays and Charges are a
State-Mystery, by which the Emperor hopes, in time, to tire out the States, and
make them abhor Diets, which were otherwise the most effectual means to secure
the German Liberty. The Golden Bull has ordained, That the first Diet (of every
Emperor's Reign) should be at Norimberg, which yet is not scrupulously observed
now; for in these Capitulars there is only care taken that it shall be held in
a convenient place, within the Empire, as shall be agreed with the Electors: Of
a long time some one of the Free Imperial Cities has been appointed for that
purpose, the reason of which is not so much in the dark; and, I suppose, the
Princes would scarce meet, if the Emperor should appoint Vienna.

25. All the Members of the States are, All the Members are to be summoned to
the Diet.
without exception, to be called to the Diet; and amongst the Ecclesiastics,
those that are not yet confirmed by the Pope, and before they have obtained
their Palls, and in the vacancy of any See, the Chapter is to be called. And
whereas the Protestant Possessors of Bishoprics, before the Treaty of
Westphalia, were not admitted to the Diet, they in it obtained the Assignment
of a peculiar Place. As to those Secular Princes that are minors, their
Guardians appear for them; and they that are of full age, are to be admitted
before they have asked or obtained their Investiture. This is true, though in
the Diet of Ratisbonne, in the year 1608. John Frederick Duke of Wurtemburg was
excepted against on that account; If in any Family the Right of Primogeniture
prevails, and is received, only the Eldest is called. Those that have divided
their Inheritance, are called by Families in general, but they have all but one
voice: But those that have obtained the Investiture of their Share or Portion
from the Emperor, are personally called. They that are called to the Diet, must
appear in person; or if this is inconvenient, by their Legates (or Proxies)
sufficiently instructed: Those that neglect to appear, are nevertheless
concluded by the majority of those that do appear. By a peculiar Privilege the
King of Bohemia is not bound to appear in the Diet, if it is not held at
Norimberg or Bamberg. The House of Austria, and the Duke of Burgundy, are at
Liberty to appear or not, as they please. It is not worth our while to sum up
the vain useless Rites and Ceremonies.

26. The things that are to be debated The things to be debated are proposed by
the Emperor or his Commissioner.
and settled in the Diet, are proposed by the Emperor, or his Commissioner,
then they proceed to the Debate; where the first Question is, Whether they
shall proceed in the order the things are proposed, to consider and determine
them; or, whether they shall postpone some of them undecided, and pass forward
to the rest of the things proposed? Here the States pretend they are not
religiously bound to observe the Method of the Proposals; but the Imperial
Party (who can easily fore see what the States drive at) have ever stiffly
pretended, the Method of the Proposals is to be followed; that the Emperor's
Concerns have ever been wont to lead the Van, and those of the States to follow
in the next place. If therefore the States will do their own Business, they
must of necessity gratify the Emperor; but then it has been observed, that
when he has gained his own point, he is seldom much concerned for those things
that the States would have. When they come to debate, they are divided into
three Colleges (Houses or Chambers) the Electors, the Princes, and the Free
Cities, which Division is thought to have been first made in the year 1589, in
the Diet at Frankford: In the first of these the Bishop of Mentz is the
Director (Speaker); in the second, the House of Austria and the Bishop of
Saltzburg by turns; and in the third, that City in which the Diet is held: The
Princes vote man by man, the Counts and Bishops by Benches: The greater part
obliges the lesser, except in the Affairs of Religion, in which the States are
not considered as one Body, but as Parties, in opposition each to other.
Whether the same thing ought to be admitted in the matter of Taxes, or granting
Money, is a Question not yet decided. (See the Treaty of Westphalia, Art. 5. n.
19.) I should think this might easily be expedited by a Distinction, viz.
Whether the Grant tends to the Safety and Security of the whole Body of
Germany, or is only granted and designed for the Benefit of the Emperor? No
good German would decline contributing to the first; and as to the latter, it
is fit every one should be left to his own liberty, to determine as he shall
think fit. Their way of Proceeding is this: What is approved by the College of
Electors, is communicated to the College of Princes; this latter returns to the
former their Sentiments of it (which is called a Reference or Conference) and
so it is transacted pro and con between these two till they agree; then they
two join, and communicate their agreed Resolves to the third College or Cities,
and if they consent too, then the unanimous Resolves of the whole Bodies of the
State, are communicated to the Emperor, or his Commissioner, and when he has
approved of it, that Affair is settled: If the three Colleges cannot agree,
their differing Votes are proposed to the Emperor, who in a friendly way, as an
Arbitrator, and not in a commanding way, as a Master or Prince, endeavors to
reconcile them. In like manner, if his Judgment is not the same with that of
the States, it is friendly and fairly argued between them, till he is of their
mind, or they of his. After this, at the breaking up (Recess) of the States,
there is a Solemn Form, containing the things agreed between the Emperor and
the States, in the manner of a Contract. As to the College of Cities, it is to
be observed, that though in the Treaty of Peace (Art. 8. sect. 4.) the deciding
Vote is assigned to it, whereas before others contended, that they were only to
be admitted to the Debates (to offer their Reasons) yet even now they
communicate nothing to this Member of the States, but what is agreed by the two
other Colleges; but then neither can those two Colleges exact Obedience, or
force this third to comply with them against their wills, as a major part; but
where the third College disagreeth from the other two, the thing in dispute is
referred to the Emperor, till a way is found to adjust it, and what cannot at
last be agreed, is wont to be referred to another Diet. What is agreed by the
whole Diet, is by the Bishop of Mentz, who is Director of the first College,
and in a sort, of the whole Diet, drawn and reduced into the form of a Recess,
Edict, Decree, or Law, and then it is again considered by the States; and after
they have all subscribed and sealed it, then it is published.

27. By all this which I have said, it The Emperor has yet some Prerogatives
above any other Prince.
will easily appear how much of the Sovereign Power is left to the Emperor; yet
there are some Prerogatives which belong only to the Emperor in Germany; 1. The
Right of the First Prayers, by force of which, the Elected Emperor has a Right
to present one person to a Benefice in every of the Ecclesiastical Chapters or
Colleges. The Emperor has less reason to be ashamed of this Restriction, than
the Clergy, who owing almost all their Wealth to the Liberality and Bounty of
the first Emperors, have been so ungrateful as to restrain the Successors of
their Benefactors to the Collation of a single Benefice, and that too to be
conserr'd by way of Entreaty, that shall not be denied. 2. He gives all sorts
and degrees of Honors or Titles: Yet, (See Art. 43, and 44. Capitul. Leopold.)
3. He only gives and collates the Investitures of the Princes Fees, and all
others that pass by the Delivery of a Banner. 4. He constituteth Universities.
5. And he only can give leave to build a City. And there are some other too of
less moment.

28. And from hence it is easy to collect The Privileges of the Princes and
free States.
how little is wanting to make every of the States Independent Sovereigns; for
they, or at least the greatest part of them, have the entire Power of Life and
Death over their respective Subjects. They can enact Laws that are contrary to
the common Laws of Germany, in their own States. They have an entire Liberty as
to Religion. They levy Taxes. They make Leagues one with another, and with
Foreigners, so they be not against the Emperor and the Empire, (See the Treaty
of Peace, Art. 8. sect. 2. Capitul. Leopold. chap. 6, and 8.) which Right is
denied the Imperial and Free Cities expressly. (Art. 9. Capitul. Leopold.) They
defend themselves with Force and Arms, and revenge their own wrongs, especially
if they have to do with Strangers. They build Forts and strong Holds in their
Dominions. They mint Moneys, and do all other things necessary to the
Government of their People. (Add. Artic. 33, 34. Capitul. Leopold. Treaty of
Peace, Art. 8. n. 2.) The 5. Art. Capitul. Leopold. belongs only to the
Electors; and all these things they do in their own Names and Rights, and not
as the Ministers of the Emperor. Nor does it affect their Power so much as
express the way of having or coming by it, that they acknowledge their
Dominions to be Fees holden of the Emperor and Empire; for seeing they transmit
them as an Inheritance to their Children, the Investiture is rather to be
considered as a solemn Rite, than as a real and true Collation or Gift, seeing
it cannot be denied to any that desires it within the time prescribed by the
Law. Their Oath of Allegiance, which they make to the Emperor, is understood
with a saving of their Rights and Privileges; and even those that are
acknowledged to be Equals each to other, are yet frequently mutually bound one
to the other by Oaths. Nor does their appearing in the Diet, at their own
Charges, prove that they are Subjects; for that is common to all the Assemblies
of Allies or Confederates. Nor does their contributing to the Necessities of
the Empire prove their Subjection for the same reason. And lastly, That which
seems the hardest of all, viz. That any of these States may be sued in the
Supreme Tribunals, or Courts, or Chambers of the Empire; and if they be
convicted of any great Offense against the Empire, that they may be proscribed,
and deprived of their Dominions; for even this is common to all Confederacies;
and there is an Example of it in Ancient History, in the League of the
Amphyctyones and Achaeans, amongst the Greeks: And in our own times, the
Confederate or United Provinces thus forced Groningen, and bridled it for some
time with a Citadel. But then the States of Germany are very well secured the
enjoyment of these vast Liberties. (Capit. Leopold. Art. 28.) But then, if any
one of a Confederate or United Society should insolently and injuriously insult
upon another Confederate, without pretending to claim any Superiority, the rest
of the Confederates would have reason and right to curb the Exorbitant Member,
and force him to do them Justice.

CHAP. VI. Of the Form of the German Empire.
1. AS the Health of Natural Bodies, and the Strength and Ability of Artificial
Of the Form of the German Empire.
Composures results from the Harmony of their Parts and their Connection or
Union with one another; so also Moral Bodies or Societies are to be esteemed
strong or weak, as the Parts of which they are composed, are found well or ill
formed and united together, and consequently as the entire form or whole of
them are elegantly or irregularly and disorderly formed and united. It will
appear sufficiently in what has been already said, that the Government, State,
or Empire of Germany has something of Irregularity in it, which will not
suffer us to bring it under any of the simple or regular forms of Government,
as they are usually described by the Masters of Politics: We must therefore
the more accurately enquire what its true form is, because the far greatest
part of the German Writers have made gross and foolish Mistakes, through their
Ignorance in Politics, and senceless transcribing one another without any
Prudence or Consideration, by which they have multiplied their Books. I must
therefore here bespeak the Pardon of my Reader, if by the subject of my enquiry
I am forced to use more School-Subtilties or Distinctions than will please
those that love not that sort of Learning, because without them it is not
possible to make a true Representation of, or pass a solid Judgment on the
present State of Germany. The Truth is, a few words would satisfy all wise
men, if the Follies of some men that have had the good fortune to be approved,
had not made it at once necessary and troublesome to consute and expose them.

2. As to the several parts of this Empire, All the Hereditary States are
Monarchies.
separately taken or considered, there is no difficulty; for all the Secular
Principalities which go by Inheritance, the Ecclesiastic, which pass by
Election, and the Earldoms, they are all administered and governed like
Monarchies, but with this difference however, that in some places the Princes
are absolute, and in others they are limited by certain Pacts, or Agreement
with their Provincial States. Amongst the free The Free Cities are
Commonwealths.
Imperial Cities, some are under an Aristocratical Regiment, the principal
management of Affairs being in their Senates, into which their Principal
Citizens are elected by the Suffrage or Voices of the Senate; and here the
Senate is no way subject to the People, nor bound to give any account to them
of their Administration of the Public Affairs. In other places the Populace is
uppermost, and the Form democratical, and here the Senate is filled by the
choice of the Tribes or Companies, and they have also a Power to call the
Senate to account.

3. But then the German Writers are by The Form of the whole Body is neither of
these, but an irregular System.
no means agreed what Form belongs to the whole Body of the German Empire,
which is an infallible sign of an irregular Form, and no less also of the
Ignorance of these Authors, who with small Abilities and little Learning, have
pretended too hastily to write of what they did not understand; yet I do not
remember I ever saw one Author that did say, it was a Democrasie; yet some have
had so little wit as to say, none were parts of this State, but those that had
a Right to vote in the Diet; in this, without doubt, blindly following
Aristotle, who defines a Citizen to be one that has a Right to deliberate and
vote in the Commonwealth Affairs Now, if we could grant this, then it would be
a Democrasie, because all its Parts are composed of the States only, who have
every one of them a Right to debate and vote in the Diet, and the Emperor is
the Prince or Head of the State, but he that should extend that Definition
further than the popular Cities of Greece, for whom only it was made, would
certainly be guilty of very great Absurdities: For, who can think that Freemen
(and Gentlemen too) who have great Estates and Families of their own, and live
in Kingdoms or Commonwealths, are not to be accounted Cives
Members of their Government, though they are admitted to no share of the
Government? or, Who in a Kingdom can think the King the only Member, or in an
Aristocracy would esteem none such but the Senators?

4. The greatest part of those who pretend Many pretend the Empire is an
Aristocrasie.
to exquisite Knowledge in Politics, and a great love of the German Liberty,
pretend it is mere Aristocrasie; these maintain their said Opinion by these
following Arguments. 1. There is no reason (say they) that any man should be
removed from this Opinion by the outside appearance of things which seem to
represent to us a Monarchy, viz. The proud Flourishes of great Titles, and the
usual Forms of Address; much of which is owing to the Genius of the German
Tongue, which abounds in such vain, insignificant, luxuriant Expressions, and
the rest proceed from the ancient form of Government, (which was indeed
Monarchical) though the present is nothing less; for they in truth are in
possession of the Supreme Authority, who dispatch the greatest Affairs of the
State as they themselves think fit, by what Title soever they are called. 2.
That it is not at all contrary to the nature of an Aristocrasie, to have an
Head a little higher than the rest, who may be the Director of their Councils,
and the President of their Senate, and on that Score be of greater Authority
than the rest. 3. That the form of any State ought to be distinguished from the
manner of its Administration; which distinction is to be thus explicated: That
it sometimes happens, that one State imitates the manner of Administration
proper to, or very like, that of another Form of Government, or which at least
may have some signs of it. Thus, if a King that is a real Monarch, thinks fit
to consult his People, or a Senate of them, the first of these will seem to
have something of a Democrasie, and the latter of an Aristocrasie, and yet,
after all, the Form is a real Monarchy, and nothing else; for these Conventions
of the People or Senate are nothing but an Assembly of Counselors, and the
King has no necessary dependence on them. And on the contrary, in a Democrasie
or Aristocrasie, the principal Magistrate or Prince of the Senate, who has the
Office of consulting the Senate or Assembly in all public Affairs, of
executing the Laws, and enforcing their Decrees, and in whose Name the public
Acts and Decrees are made; will indeed be a lively Figure of a Monarch, but yet
still the Supreme Authority will nevertheless still reside in the People or
Senate. There are some indeed who oppose this distinction chiefly on this
ground; Because the Form is the beginning or first mover of Operations, and
they must of necessity follow the nature of their efficient Cause. Now (say
they) the Form of a State is as it were the Fountain from whence all the
Operations pertaining to the Administration of that State flow, and therefore
it is impossible the Form should differ from the Administration. To this others
reply, That we ought to distinguish in these Cases between what one does in his
own Name or Right, and what he does in another. In the first of these there
can be no difference between the Form and the Manner of Administration; in the
latter it is not impossible for a man to seem to be what he really is not: The
thing in short is thus; The different Forms of States or Governments result or
spring from the different Subject, to whom the Supreme Power is committed or
annexed, as it is a single Person, or a Council or Senate, consisting of a few
men, or of all the People; but then, what Ministers are employed by them that
have that Power in the executing of it, is nothing to the purpose, or all one.
I might say also, that Axiom on which the Argument rests, is only true in
natural Agents, but cannot rightly be applied (as it is here) to free Agents,
who can govern their Actions as they please themselves.

5. But then, though these things may The German Empire is no Aristocrasie.
thus with Subtilty enough be disputed in the Schools, yet no wise man will
thereby be persuaded to think the German Empire is an Aristocrasie, especially
if he has any competent degree of Civil or Politic Experience and Knowledge,
because the Essence of an Aristocrasie lies in the committing the Supreme
Authority to a fixed and perpetual Senate or Council, which has a Right to
deliberate, consult on, and determine all the public Concerns and Affairs of
that State, committing only the daily and emergent Affairs to some Magistrates,
who are to execute the same, and are bound to give an account of their Actions
to that Senate: But then there is no such Senate in Germany; for the Chambers
of Spire and Vienna do only judge of Appeals; and the Diet is not holden as a
settled and perpetual Senate, which has the Sovereign Authority, and is to
direct all the public Affairs of a State, ought to be; but has ever been
called upon particular and emergent Causes. There are some so weak, as to
conclude the German Empire is infallibly an Aristocrasie, only because in the
Diet things pass by a majority of Votes; for in many Kingdoms there are
Parliaments or Assemblies of the States, which are of the same nature with the
Diets of Germany, and in them too the majority of Voices prevails, and yet they
are Monarchies and not Aristocrasies; as for example, England, Sweden, and
Scotland. What is more usual, than for a System of States, which are united
only by a strict League and Combination, to hold their Assemblies, Diets, or
Parliaments? And thus have all of them as much Power over the Members of their
States, as the Diet of Germany have over the States, that compose it. The
Society of the Amphyctyones and Achaeans in old times, and the Diets of the
Cantons in Switzerland, and the Grisons, and the Assemblies of the United
Provinces, in their States General at the Hagne, in latter times; are full and
clear Instances of this; and true Aristocrasies have all of them this in
common, viz. That no one in the Senate is superior to the whole Senate; and
they all of them are bound as much to obey the Decree of the major part of the
Senate, as any other Subject; and the Senate has a Power of Life and Death over
all the Members of it, which is by no means true of the Diet of Germany: And in
an Aristocrasie the Senators have their private Estates, which commonly are
greater than those of the private Subjects, yet not only the public Revenues,
but the private Estates of the Senators are as much subject to the Laws and
Decrees of the Senate, as the Estates of private men: But in Germany, if you
remove out of the Computation that which belongs to the several Members of the
State, there will be nothing left for the Diet or Body to dispose of: And it
would be a great abatement of the German Liberty to assert the Diet there has
the same Authority over the Estates of its Members, that the Senate of the most
Serene Republic of Venice has over those of its Senators. As to that famous
Speech of Albert Archbishop of Mentz, when the Electors were considering
whether they should elect Charles V. or Francis I. That the Government of
France was too Monarchical, and that the Princes of Germany did rather incline
to an Aristocrasie, which they ought carefully to preserve. This may easily be
thus answered: There is no reason to suppose that Prelate had any exact
knowledge of Politics, and the sense of what he said is true, though he has
ill expressed himself, viz. That if the German Princes were desirous to
continue in the same condition they then were, they were to avoid the Empire or
Government of a King of France, whose great design it ever was, to reduce the
Nobility of their own Kingdom under the Laws of an Absolute Monarchy, and
would, without all doubt, endeavor to do the same thing in Germany.

6. It remains now, that we consider The German Empire no Regular Monarchy.
whether it may be taken into the List or Number of Monarchies or Kingdoms; of
these there are two sorts, the Absolute and the Limited. In the first, the
whole Sovereign Power is in the hands of the Monarch, (by what Title soever he
is called) and he governs all the public Affairs as he himself pleases. But
in the latter the King is bound up by certain Laws in the exercise of the
Sovereign Power. All those that have not exactly considered the Difference
between these two Species of Monarchies, have committed great Errors, whilst,
because the Emperor has not an Absolute Sovereignty, they falsely conclude, that
he has not a Limited neither. Now, he that can think the Emperor is an Absolute
Monarch, is wonderful silly, and the Arguments that are brought for it, deserve
rather to be hissed at than answered seriously. It is full as absurd to fetch
an Argument to prove the German Emperor absolute, from the Visions of Daniel,
as from the Books of the Civil Law: That the Emperor has no Superior but God,
and the Sword gives him no more Absolute Authority over the Princes of Germany,
than it gives to the State of Holland over the other Six, who may as truly say
this as he. As to the empty Titles, (as for example, that he is by all the
States and Princes styled their most merciful Lord, and that in the conclusion
of their Letters they promise much in the Matter of Loyalty and Obedience to
him) the Genius of the Age, the Style of the Times are responsable for them,
and there is no more to be expected from them than from other Expressions of
Honor and Respect, in which the most unwilling to act is the most forward to
promise what he never means to perform. That Plenitude and Perfection of Power
which the Secretaries and Clerks ascribe to the Emperor, in their Letters and
Decrees, is a mere Jargon of insignificant words. The States do indeed swear
Allegiance to the Emperor, but with a saving of their own Liberties and Rights.
And I have already sufficiently shown what Power is thereby reserved and
secured to them; but to use any more words in so plain a case, were not only
needless but foolish.

7. The Opinion of those who have ascribed That it is no Limited Monarch.
to the Emperor a Supreme Regal Power, but limited and restrained within the
Bounds of certain Laws, has seemed the most probable of all other to the
greatest part of men; and you shall also frequently hear this Opinion defended
and stoutly maintained in the Schools of Germany: The first that appeared
openly against Hippolithus a Lapide considered and confuted.
this Opinion was a nameless Author, under the feigned Title of Hippolithus a
Lapide, in the heat of the Imperial and Swedish War. This Writer says many
things of unquestionable veracity, which no modest man can deny; but then it is
no less apparent, his implacable Hatred to the House of Austria has in other
things misled and deceived him. The prohibiting the reading of this Book was
the only thing that gave it Reputation, and made Learned men inquisitive after
it; so that it was read with unusual Application and Care: Yet however, I
should never have mentioned it, but that I find many still so fond of it, that
they still think it an invaluable Treasure, and that all those that have
pretended to answer it, have rather trifled with the Subject, or basely
flattered the Emperor, than destroyed his Reasons. This Author has well and
clearly proved, that the Emperor has not a Supreme and Regal Authority over the
Princes and States of Germany; but then is strangely absurd, when he makes the
Emperor subject to the States, and gives him nothing but the naked Dignity of a
subordinate Magistrate, that wears a great many proud Titles precariously
bestowed upon him; as if wherever the Monarchy is not Absolute, it must
presently degenerate into an Aristocrasie, and a Prince must presently
acknowledge all those to be his Superiors, whom he could not command and govern
as he pleased. He that observes this one Mistake, will be able by it to unravel
and disbowel all his weak Arguments: And yet, besides this, he mingles many
other silly Fallacies, of which I shall mention some few to expose his Folly.
To prove that the Sovereign Majesty is always in the Princes, he alleges,
That it is in them when the Imperial Throne is vacant. But who knows not that?
In all other Kingdoms, during the Interregnum, the Sovereign Power returns into
the hands of the People, or of their Representatives the States, which yet they
can retain no longer, than till they have made a new King: Nor does a man
presently make every one his Master, to whom he willingly gives an account of
his Actions: It is one thing to give an account to a Superior, who can punish
me if I have not performed my Duty to his satisfaction, and quite another thing
to do it to one who expects it according to an Agreement to that purpose made
between us; and it is yet less, when I do it to preserve my own Reputation, and
without any other Motive or Reason. Thus Kings, when they begin a War,
endeavor to satisfy all the World in the Justice of their Cause. Thus one
Companion or Partner gives the other, and a Guardian gives the Pupil when he
comes to Age an account of his Administration. Nor is he another Master and
Superior, who can remove him from his Office; for that a man may by Compact
and Agreement be preferred to the management of their common Concerns, so that
neither of these may have any direct and true Authority or Sovereignty over the
other, and so when he does not please the other Party, and for that cause is
deposed or turned out of his Administration, it has no other effect or cause
than the breaking off the Bargain made with him, because he has not performed
his part of the Contract, and satisfied the Conditions of the Covenant. And yet
perhaps a man might doubt whether all that was done in the Cases of Henry IV.
and Adolph of Nassaw, were legally and regularly done, but that it is notorious
the Reverend Bishops of those Ages were the principal Agents in those Affairs.
What he so largely argues from the Power of the Diet are true, as to the matter
of Fact, but nothing to his purpose for which he alleges them; for though the
Emperor can in truth do nothing against the Consent of the States, yet I think
it is as true, that no man ever heard the States pretended to do any thing
without the Consent of the Emperor. The Electors, in their Capitular, do
prescribe to the Emperor what he shall, and what he shall not do; not by force
of any Authority they have, or pretend to have over him, but by way of
Contract: So that if the Emperor should pretend to enjoin any thing contrary to
his Covenants with them, they may safely and lawfully not obey him in those
Instances: But then, this springs from the nature of all Contracts, and not
from any Authority the Electors have over the Emperor. That is more probable
yet that he alleges from Ancient Custom and the Golden Bull, viz. That if the
Emperor should happen to be complained of, in certain particulars, he shall be
bound to answer the Complaint before the Count Palatine of the Rhine. And it is
well known, that the Three Spiritual Electors cited Albert I. Emperor, before
Rudolph Count Palatine to plead his Cause and defend himself; but then, when
they had so great a Criminal to contest with, they relied more on their Swords
and Armies, than on their Counsel or Judge. But then, since the Date of the
Golden Bull, there is not one Example to be found of any such Suit commenced
against the Emperor, that I have read of. The Rise of that Authority which the
Count Palatine has, did, without doubt, spring from his Office, which in
ancient time, as Mayor of the Palace, he exercised in the King's Court: For as
he exercised a real Jurisdiction over the other Courtiers, so if any thing was
demanded of the King, which was doubted of, it was wont to be referred to the
Examination of the Count Palatine, to whose Sentence the King stood, not
because he owned the Count (who was his Servant and Subject) for his Superior,
but because when he once knew the Petitioner had Right to what he asked, it was
beneath a King to do him wrong; As we have known many Princes in Germany, and
elsewhere, who when they doubted of any Debt demanded of them, have answered
the Claim in their own Courts. And yet it is not to be supposed that these
Courts have any Authority over their Princes, or could force them to pay those
Debts, if the Reverence they bear to Justice, the Public, and their own
Private Conscience, and the desire they naturally have to preserve a good
Reputation in the World, did not much more powerfully move them to pay them,
than the Authority of these Courts, which are managed by their Subjects and
Servants. And I believe the States of Germany think they are happy enough in
this Privilege, That the Emperor can exact nothing of them against their
wills; and that the Wisest of them would disclaim the Invidious Liberty of
commanding their own Emperor.

8. Doubtless the Emperor would with The Arguments of those that pretend it is
a Limited Monarchy, answered.
great facility compound the Dispute with our Hippolitus, and obtain his Leave
to continue a Prince still, and not be reduced by him to the mean condition of
a Subject: But they are not so easily baffled, who allow the Emperor to be a
Sovereign, but Limited King, and ascribe unto the States great Liberties, but
tempered too by Laws, and so place Germany in the List of Limited Monarchies;
for, as for those who prate of mixed forms of Government, they can never
disintangle themselves from the Objections brought against them, for that not
only all kinds of mixture can produce nothing at last but a monstrous deformed
Government, but it is also certain none of the Notions of that kind will at all
fit Germany, in which the whole Supreme Power is not undividedly in the hands
of many, nor are the Parts of it divided between diverse Persons or Colleges
here. But to return to our former Monarchists, They pretend that the Capitulars
made with the Emperors when they are chosen, are not at all inconsistent with
the nature of a Limited Monarchy; as for instance: That he is bound to
administer the Government according to the Fundamental Laws, and to require the
Consent of the States in their Diet, for those things that are of the greatest
moment: That he cannot enact new Laws without their Consent, nor change any
thing in the matters of Religion, nor make War or Peace, or enter Leagues,
without the Approbation of his Subjects: That he must determine their
Controversies in certain known Courts, and by Stated Laws and Methods. And
whereas the Princes and States swear Fidelity both to the Empire and the
Emperor, this they think may be thus explained: That they will obey the Emperor
as far as he shall employ their Assistance and Treasures to the Public Good,
and as far as is expressed in the Laws; and that as to the rest of the States,
they will live like good Neighbors and true Fellow Subjects. But still at last
there are two things that will not suffer us to reckon Germany amongst the
Limited Monarchies: First, In Two Arguments against This.
every Limited Kingdom, though the King is bound up by some certain Laws in
the management of its Government, yet after all, he so far excells all his
Subjects, that none of them dares presume to compare his Liberty or his Rights
with the Power of his Prince; and therefore all the Nobility depend on the Will
of the King, and are responsable to him for their Actions. Now, that it is
otherwise in Germany, is known to all the World; for none of the German Princes
or States will acknowledge, that the Dominions which are under them are more the
Emperor's than they are theirs, or that they are bound in the Administration of
them to have respect more to the Service of the Emperor, or the People, than to
their own Personal Profit and Advantage. But on the contrary, every one of them
is so far a Sovereign, that he makes War upon his Neighbors at home or abroad,
and enters into Leagues with his Neighbors or Foreigners, without ever
consulting the Emperor; and every one of them that can trust to his own Forces,
or those of his Allies, looks upon the Reverence he ows to the Emperor, as a
mere empty piece of Pageantry. To conclude, every King, how Limited soever he
may otherwise be, must still have sufficient Power left to command all the
Forces of his whole Kingdom, and direct them as he thinks fit, so that the last
Resort may be to him, and the said Forces be united in him as their Head, for
the procuring the Common Good, so that they may seem all of them to be, as it
were, animated and governed by one Soul. Now he that can see or find this in
Germany, must be wonderfully quick-sighted; for there he that is called their
King, has no Revenues from the Empire, but is forced to live by his own Juice,
there being no common Treasure; nor are there any common Forces, but every
Prince and State disposes of the Forces and Revenues in his own Territories,
as he or they think fit, and only contributes to the Public some small matter,
and that after tedious Delays, and much humble Attendance and Courtship for it.
All which things have been fully and clearly proved in the Chapter before this,
and are found evidently true in the Actions of these Princes.

9. There is now nothing left for us to That it is an irregular System of
Sovereign States.
say, but that Germany is an Irregular Body, and like some misshapen Monster,
if it be measured by the common Rules of Politics and Civil Prudence. So that
in length of time, by the Lazy-easiness of the Emperors, the Ambition of the
Princes, and the Turbulence of the Clergy or Churchmen, from a Regular Kingdom
it sunk and degenerated to that degree, that it is not now so much as a Limited
Kingdom, (though the outward Shows and Appearances would seem to insinuate so
much) nor is it a Body or System of many Sovereign States and Princes, knit and
united in a League, but something (without a Name) that fluctates between these
two. This Irregularity in its Constitution affords the matter of an
inextricable and incurable Disease, and many internal Convulsions, whilst the
Emperor is always laboring to reduce it to the condition of a Regular Empire,
Kingdom, or Monarchy; and the States on the other side are restlesly acquiring
to themselves a full and perfect Liberty. But then, as it is the nature of all
Degenerations, that they go forward in their Degeneracy and Corruption with
great Facility, (it being a down-hill motion) but they can hardly, and with
much difficulty, be reduced to the pristine or ancient state; for, as a Stone
laid on the edge of a Precipice or Downfall, is with the smallest Thrust thrown
down to the bottom, but it is not to be replaced again at the top without great
and almost insuperable difficulty: So now Germany, without great Commotions,
and the utmost Confusion of all things, can never be reformed or reduced to the
Laws of a Just and Regular Kingdom, but it tends naturally to the state of a
Confederate System. Nay, if you take away the mutual Bond or Tie between the
Emperor and the States, (I suppose he means their Oaths) Germany would then
truly be a System of States, united in an unequal League, because those that
are called the States, are still bound to reverence the Imperial Majesty, as
their Head. For a Free State, we may take for our Example of this, the League
between the Romans and the Latin People, before the latter were reduced into
the condition of mere Subjects. So the Generalship of Agamemnon, in the Warlike
Expedition of the Greeks against the Trojans, was of the same nature: And it
commonly comes to pass, in length of time, that he that is the Superior in
these Leagues, if he has much the advantage of his Allies in point of Power, by
degrees he sinks them into the condition of mere Subjects, and so treats them.
Thus the best account we can possibly give of the Present State of Germany, is
to say, That it comes very near a System of many Sovereign States, in which one
Prince or General of the League excells the rest of the Confederates, and is
clothed with the Ornaments of a Sovereign Prince; but then this Body is
attacked by furious Diseases; of which I shall treat in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Of the Strength and Diseases of the German Empire.
1. THE Forces of any State may be considered as they are in themselves, or as
by reason of the elegant Structure of its Form or Constitution they may be
used. Forces considered in themselves, consist in The Subjects of Humane Force.
Men and Things. As to the first of these, Men, Germany has no reason to
complain that it wants numbers of them, or they Wit or Ingenuity; there is so
great a multitude of the principal Nobility, and they too are in such splendid
circumstances, that there is scarcely the like to be found elsewhere in all the
World. The Gentry or Inferior Nobility are neither for want of Ground, or by
their overgreat number compelled to condescend to the exercise of mean and
sordid Arts (Trades) Perhaps yet there are more of them employed in Learning
than is convenient, though amongst the many Graduates there are not many
eminent Scholars. Of Merchants, Tradesmen, and Mechanics there is a great
plenty: But then in many places there is now a want of Husbandmen, considering
the largeness of the Country. This is owing Husbandmen most wanted.
partly to the Thirty years War, by which Germany was most miserably desolated;
and partly because the Countrymen are of that Temper, that as soon as they
arrive at any considerable Estate, they put out their Children to Trades, as
thinking those that live in the Cities much more happy than themselves. Though
I can scarce think that any Man had so much leisure as to take an exact account
of the Cities and Buroughs of Germany, yet I believe no man would be suspected
by one that knew that Country, if he should say, that an Army of Two Hundred
Thousand Men might be levied, by A vast Army may be easily levied.
taking out of every City five men, and out of every Burrough-Town one, or two
at most. For a Specimen of this, there are some Authors that say, That in the
Ten Circles there are 1957 Cities, Towns, and Castles, besides the Kingdom of
Bohemia, in which, in the Reign of Ferdinand I. there were 102 Cities, and 308
Towns, and 258 considerable Castles, 171 Monasteries, and of Villages 30363. In
Silesia there are 411 Cities, 863 Towns, and 51112 Villages. In Moravia there
are 100 Cities, 410 Towns, 30360 Villages, and before the Protestants destroyed
them, there were 11024 Monasteries, Priories, Abbeys, and Nunneries. Thus
Ferdinand II. is, by his Zeal for the Church of Rome, said to have brought into
her Communion One hundred thousand men. This Nation is not only thus
wonderfully Populous, but from all times of which any memory has been
preserved, it has been ever The Inhabitants as warlike as numerous.
famous for War, and greedy of Military Glory, spending freely, for a little
Money, its Blood in all the Nations of Europe. As they are not over-hot in
their Passions, so they are very constant, and have Souls very capable of
Discipline and Instruction. Nor is this Nation less to be admired and commended
for their Mechanic Arts and Ingenious Manufactures: And which crowns all,
Steady and constant in their Humors.
and tends wonderfully to the Security and Welfare of Societies, they are not
at all inclined to promote Changes in their Governments, and can with Patience
and Submission endure the most Rigid Government. [I cannot forbear saying, the
English The Temper of the English different.
Nation has all the German Virtues, which they brought over with them, but
these last; for no Government will long please us, being too much addicted to
hope for better days in other Public Circumstances: And we are certainly the
Nation in the whole World that can the worst bear an overloose remiss
Government, or a rigid severe one, especially if not regulated exactly by Laws.]

2. Amongst the things in which the In the point of Strength the Country first
to be considered.
Strength of a Nation consists, the first that is to be considered is, the
Country it self: As to the extent of it, that may easily be known, by
traveling from Cassuben upon the Baltic Sea, in the further Pomerania, to
Montpelgart, upon the River Alain, 33 Miles from Basil to the West; or from the
furthest parts of Holstein, N. W. to the farthest part of Carniola, S. E. or
from Liege in the W. to the utmost Eastern Border of Silesia. In this
vast-extended Region, if you except the top of the Alps, there are very few
places which produce nothing useful to the Life of Man; but there are every
where that Plenty of Necessaries, that it wants nothing from abroad, but what
may promote Luxury and Superfluous Pleasures. The Mines, and some Rivers,
afford a little Gold, and all its Precious Stones are of small value: But then
there is some Silver, and great plenty of Copper, Tin, Lead, Iron, Quicksilver,
and other Metals of less price, dug out of the Earth in very many places.
The Fountains afford as much Salt as the Country needs, though in all the
Countries bordering on the Sea, and the Navigable Rivers, they generally use
Salt brought from France, Portugal, and Holland. They have great. Plenty of
Corn and Fruits of all sorts, Wood, Clothing, both Linen and Woollen; as also
Horses, great Cattle and small, and Wild Beasts; and they want not those
Liquors that will make them drunk. So that in the whole, Germany may be
esteemed a Wealthy Region, because it not only produces those Metals of which
Money is minted, but all other things too, which are required to the Support or
Pleasure of Humane Life, in that plenty, that it can serve all its own
Inhabitants, and afford great quantities to be transported to Foreign Nations,
and those that are imported from abroad, are either much less in value, or such
things as the Germans might conveniently live without, if they knew how to
suppress their Luxury, or lay by their Laziness and Folly. As for example: How
easy were it for them to be well content with their own Wine and Beer? Or if
they are not sufficient to make them drunk enough, they might quicken the
operation thereof with the hellish steams of Brandy, and in the mean time never
know or regard the Spanish and French Wines. How easy were it for the Germans
to cloth themselves with their own Cloth, made of their own Wools, and leave
the Spanish, English, and Hollanders to wear theirs too? Or if they are taken
with the beauty and fineness of them, then they ought to have encouraged their
own Workmen to mend the Manufacture. Nor would it be any Grievance to the
Germans to want the Italian Silks: Or if they must needs be well and finely
clad, the parts about the Rhine produce sufficient quantities of Mulberry
Trees; and so they might have Silk too, if the Inhabitants could once persuade
themselves to mind something besides their Vineyards: Thus having Mulberries
and Silkworms, they might (if they pleased) learn the Art of making Silks. And
though it may perhaps be reasonable to impute the Germans affecting the French
Fashions to the simplicity of this Nation, as believing it becomes them much
more than their own: Yet it cannot be denied, but it is a piece of intolerable
Folly to fetch their Stuffs, which are not fit for us; nay, the very Name of
French Goods enhaunceth the value and esteem of what would otherwise be
slighted: The Frenchmens varying so often the Figures and Forms of their
Stuffs, is not an Argument of their Levity and Inconstancy, as some think, but
a very crafty Design, for by this means they prevent the German Workmen from
ever imitating them; though in truth the greatest part of the Artificers of
Germany think it a Sin to vary from the received method they have once settled
in their Trades; nor can they possibly persuade themselves, that there is any
thing in the new Inventions which is good, or to be imitated, because forsooth
it was not known to their Grandsires. Lastly, If Germany could possibly command
and rule its own Luxury, much less Sugar and Spices, which with other things of
that nature are brought from the East and West Indies, would then serve it.

3. Nor does Germany want the means of Germany well stored with what will carry
on a Trade.
drawing to it self the Riches of other Countries by Commerce: To that purpose
it is required, that the Situation of a Country be convenient for the passage
of its Inhabitants to other Nations, and also the reception of Strangers
amongst them; and lastly, that the Inhabitants may have something to spare,
which they may export into Foreign Nations. Now all those Cities are very
conveniently seated for a Trade, which stand upon the Ocean and the Baltic
Sea, and the Inland Towns which stand upon great and navigable Rivers, on the
account of the cheapness of Carriage: for all Merchandise which is carried by a
Land-Carriage, affords little profit, by reason of the charge. The Goods which
are exported out of Germany are these that follow. Iron, wrought and unwrought,
Their Commodities.
Lead, Quick silver, Wine, Beer, Brandy, Corn, Wool, Course Cloth, and several
sorts of Cloth, Linens, Horses, Sheep, etc. And yet I cannot deny, but after
all, there appears a far greater plenty of Money in other Countries, than in
Germany; and there seems to be many reasons for it: For, 1. What wonder is it,
that a Country Yet she wants Money, and the Reasons why.
should appear exhausted, which has endured a War of Thirty years continuance,
and has in all that time been exposed to the Ravage of its own and foreign
Soldiers. 2. There are other Countries which are placed much better for a
Trade than Germany, because there are very few, in comparison of the German
Cities, which stand well for it; when as on the contrary, the Sea favors
much more England, Italy, Spain, Fortugal, France, and the Netherlands. 3.
There are other Countries which have Countries subject to them that are no
parts of them, and so represent the Wealth' of many Nations in a small room
crowded together. This is the case of Spain, Portugal, England, and Holland;
but Germany has no Dominions without its own Bounds to enrich it. 4. The Beauty
and Greatness of the capital Cities in other Countries, in which the Wealth of
a whole Nation is sometimes contracted, strikes the Eyes, and excites the
Wonder of a Stranger. Thus many ignorant People judge of the Riches of France
by Paris; by London and Lisbonne they judge of England and Portugal; but in so
vast a Country as Germany, the Riches, which are so very much dispersed, must
necessarily seem less than indeed they are. 5. Much of the Money of Germany is
by the Folly of its Natives carried into foreign Countries, for Commodities
they might either have at home, or easily be without. 6. I know not whether I
ought not to add, That the Travels of the German Youth into Foreign Countries,
spends much of their Money, which is drawn over into those parts; for though
perhaps it is not amiss to have the German Rusticity and Dullness allayed and
tempered by the Conversation of Foreigners; yet I think on the other side they
deserve Scorn or Pity, who bring out of Italy no other Improvements, but a Set
of Sins, unknown before in their native Country, together with some new and
unheard of forms of Swearing, and Blaspheming God. Nor does France for the most
part return those that travel in it with any better Accomplishments than that
of a sordid Luxury, and an exact experimental knowledge of the various degrees
and kinds of the Venereal Mange: Yet there are some who had not the patience to
earn the Title of a Doctor at home, by many years Study and Applications, but
having taken a great turn in Italy, or France, are ever after counted
wonderfully learned: And a Foreigner too may purchase the Title of Doctor much
cheaper in Italy than in Germany, and with less Breach of his Modesty; and this
and their Ignorance is all they bring home with them, though in truth for their
Honor it may be said, There are a great many German Doctors as errant
Blockheads as they.

4. But then, seeing no man can properly The Strength of Germany compared with
its Neighbors.
and truly be said to be strong or weak, till he is compared with others, let
us in the next place compare the Forces of Germany with its neighbor Nations.
Germany bordereth to the South-East upon the Ottoman Empire in Stiria, Hungary
and Croatia, these two, though not parts of Germany, being its Ramperts. Now,
though First, with the Turks.
the Turks, from their large Dominions, can raise much more Money and Men, yet
there is no great reason for the Germans to fear them; for he can only assault
a corner of this Empire, where it terminates in a sharp Angle like a Wedg, and
that at a great distance from the Heart or Regal City of Turkey; so that they
never make an Hungarian War, but at a vast Charge and Expense. Nor are the
Turkish Soldiers to be compared with the German, when they are well exercised,
for Strength or Hardiness; and therefore the Asian Forces are with great
difficulty brought hither, where they cannot bear the coldness and sharpness of
the Air; and whilst all their Forces are thus drawn to the Extremity of the
Turkish Empire, the opposite parts are left naked and defenseless to the
Inroads of the Persians, who seldom fail to take these favorable
Opportunities. And then, because Servia, Bulgaria, and that part of Hungary
which is possessed by the Turks, is not sufficient to maintain those great
Armies they must employ against the Germans, the rest of their Provisions, and
all their Ammunition, must be brought by a Land-Carriage, with vast Labor and
Expense; for, to the great Good of Germany, the Danube, and all the other
considerable Rivers, run toward the East; so that Germany has very rarely
employed A fourth part of the German Forces equal to the Turks.
above a fourth part of her Forces against the Turks, and those too much
weakened by the Cowardice and Discord of their Commanders, and the want of
Money and good Discipline; and yet, after all, the Germans have oftener beat the
Turks, than the Turks have the Germans, yet the very Name of the Turks is
become terrible to the common People of Germany, both on the score of their
barbarous and outrageous Customs and Manners, heightened by the Artifice of the
Austrian Family, which by that means the more easily drain their Purses; as
also by the zealous Preachments of the Friars, who find their profit in these
Terrors, which they raise in the minds of their Hearers: [And also on the
account An Addition.
of the dreadful Devastations they have made whenever they have broke in upon
that Nation, by wasting all they could overrun with Fire and Sword, and
carrying the Inhabitants into Slavery: But within the last Seven years, the
Germans have had so continual a Torrent of Victory attending upon their Arms,
that now the Turks are become contemptible to the Germans, and by the Blessing
of God in a few years, might have been driven over the Hellespont into Asia,
from whence they first came, if the French King, who began the present War, by
his Arts, had not, to prevent their utter ruin, in the year 1688, began as
destructive a War on the other side of the German Empire, which will in all
probability force the Emperor to sit down contented with Hungary, Transylvania,
Wallachia, Servia, and Bosnia, and leave the Turks in the Possession of
Bulgaria, Thrace, and Macedonia, and a part of Albania and Dalmatia, but much
sunk in Courage, Reputation, Strength, and Wealth, so that he is never likely
to recover his Loss again.]

5. Italy is very much inferior to Germany, Germany compared with Italy,
both as to Men and Wealth, and being divided into many small impuissant
States, is not in a condition to offer any Violence to its neighbor Nations;
so that the Italians are very well pleased, if the Emperor will but sit down
with the loss of his ancient Pretenses to their Country; especially now that
the Pope's Thunderbolts, which heretofore were very dreadful, are now for want
of the former Zeal, become weak and contemptible. Nor is Poland in a condition
And Poland.
to compare her self in any respect with Germany; and seeing the Interest of
the Polish State is, rather to defend what they have, than to make any
Conquests upon their Neighbors, and that the Necessity of the German Affairs
must needs teach them the selfsame modesty: There can hardly be supposed any
Case in which the German Princes can be tempted to make a War upon Poland,
except any of the Emperors should intermeddle with their private internal
Quarrels and Civil Wars. The Danes were never yet in a With the Danes
condition to subdue their neighbor Hamburgers, much less are they able to
attack the Forces of all Germany, who tremble at every motion of the Swedes.
The Germans are nothing concerned to see the English Masters of her own Ocean,
and, as it were folly in the English to attempt With England.
the subduing the Continent, so the Germans have no Naval Forces that can
dispute their Sovereignty of the Ocean, or ought at all to be compared with the
English Royal Navies. The United States of With the Hollanders.
Holland have neither Will nor Power to attempt any thing against the Empire of
Germany, for these Water-Rats are altogether unfit for Land-service; and
although they have Money in abundance, yet it is not for the Security of their
own Liberty, to maintain too great a Land-Army; So that they are well pleased,
if the Germans will but suffer them to enjoy the Forts and Cities they have
taken and garrisoned to defend themselves from the Spaniards, though belonging
to the Empire. [These Towns belonged to the Dukedoms An Addition.
of Cleves and Juliers, and to the Archbishopric of Cologne, and were all
taken by the French, in the year 1672, and in the Treaty of Nimmegen restored
all to their proper Owners, except Maestriect, which yet belongs rather to the
Spaniards than the German Empire, which having happened since our Author wrote,
was here to be taken notice of.] The Spaniards With Spain.
have no Territories which border upon Germany, which are worthy to be compared
with it; and Spain it self is so very remote, and her Forces so exhausted, that
she is not able to reconquer the small Kingdom of Portugal. Even Charles V.
when Spain was in the height of all its Glory and Power, though Master of it
and all the Austrian Dominions, and Emperor of Germany too, yet after all, he
was not able to oppress the rest of Germany. As to Sweden, though you consider
all those With Sweden.
Provinces she has conquered on the South side of the Baltic Sea, yet she is
not to be compared to Germany in Men or Moneys: For whereas some men have been
so much misled on the account of the old Proverb, which called Scandinavia,
now Sweden, Vagina Gentium, the Sheath of Nations (and on the score also of the
late great Victories obtained by the Swedes in Germany, under the Conduct of
Gustavus Adolphus their King) as to think it is superior, or at least equal to
Germany in Men; yet wise men do very well see and understand the true Reasons
of those great Successes, and that they proceeded neither from the Numbers nor
extraordinary Valor of the Swedes; for in the space of Eighteen years, there
was not brought over out of Sweden into Germany, above Seventy thousand men,
the far greatest part of which returned back again, and yet, during that War,
there was scarce ever less than an Hundred thousand men of the Germans in pay;
so that the true cause of that wonderful Progress was the Discord of the
Germans, the opportunity of the Times, which favored the Swedes, and because
all the Protestants being oppressed
by the Austrians, looked upon Gustavus Adolphus as a Deliverer sent to them
for their Preservation, from Heaven. But as to the now most flourishing Kingdom
of France, we may with greater probability With France.
doubt, whether it be not a Match for Germany; and yet if the Forces of both
Nations be well considered, without their Advantages or Weaknesses, (France
being the stronger for being a regular Kingdom, and Germany the weaker for
being a knot of Independent States) Germany is certainly the strongest of the
two; for, 1. It is much greater than France; and though we should suppose it
only equal to France, in point of Fertility, yet even then it would excel
France as to its Minerals. 2. It has more Men than France, and the Germans have
on many occasions proved themselves the better Soldiers of the two. 3. As to
the quantity of Money, it is very difficult to determine on which side the
Advantage lies, for it is not to be guessed how much Gold the present King of
France has squeezed out of the old Horseleaches of his Kingdom, and how much he
has increased his Revenues, which is not to be taken into consideration without
wonder: But then, at the same time, it is to be observed, that the People of
France are much more harassed, oppressed, and ruined by their excessive Taxes,
than the People of Germany are, and that all the Wealth of France runs in one
Channel; whereas in Germany it is divided amongst many Princes, and so it will
not so easily be computed or estimated, as it might if it were paid all into
one Prince. [Since An Addition.
this Author wrote, there have been two Wars between Germany and France, and
the second is now depending. In the first the Germans were ever too hard for
the French, whilst they fought them in the Field, but the French drawing on the
War, the Germans were at last worsted for want of Money, and much more worsted
in the Treaty, and after it by the Treachery of the French. But now the Turks
are reduced to such an ebb, and all Christendom is united against France, so
that all their Trade is cut off: The Germans have apparently at present the
Advantage, and it is not denied by the French, who do what they can to separate
the Allies one from another; if they fail in this, another Summer may, by God's
Blessing, show the World, the German Nation is much superior to the French,
and force that King to disgorge Lorrain, Strasburg, both the Alsatia's, and the
Franche Comte, which have been got more by Purchase and Surprise, than by the
Force of a generous and open War.

6. But though we suppose Germany superior The Strength of Germany compared
with its Neighbors, united against her.
to any of its Neighbors when singly taken, what may be the event, if they
should unite against her? Here, in the first place we ought to consider, that
Interest of State will not suffer many of her Neighbors to unite against her;
and that the Forces of others are so much inferior to Germany, that there is
no reason for her to be concerned how they behave themselves: And lastly, it
ought to be considered, that the other Princes will not sit still, and suffer
Germany to fall into the hands of any one Prince, who would then be in a
condition to oppress and enslave the rest of the European Princes: So that
there will for ever be some Princes found, who will join with the Germans, and
help them to preserve their Liberty for their own sakes. So that there is in
effect but three Princes in the World, who at present are in capacity of
subduing Germany, viz. The Turks, the House of Austria, and the King of France.
Now, it is not probable any Christian Prince will openly join with the Turks
against Germany, no, not the King of France; for the old Leagues the French had
with the Turks, were only for the curbing the overgreat Forces of Charles V.
who was then much too powerful for Francis I. King of France; but we are never
to fear a League, in which these two Princes shall unite their Forces, and
jointly at once invade Germany, to the end to make a Conquest of it; because it
would be both wicked and foolish to promote the Affairs of that barbarous
Prince to that degree, who bears an immortal hatred to all that is called
Christian. Besides, as it is better for France, that Germany should continue as
it is, than that any considerable share of it should fall into the hands of the
Turks; so it is better too for the Turks, that it should continue in this
divided state, which makes it unfit to wage a War for Conquest upon its
Neighbors, rather than to have it brought by the French into the state of a
well-formed Monarchy; because if France and Germany were once thoroughly united
in one Prince's hand, the Turk would have too much reason to fear what Fortune
might betide his Constantinople. Nor is it the Interest of any of the European
Princes, to suffer the House of Austria to reduce the rest of Germany under
their Dominion; and therefore I cannot think any of them would be so mad, as to
promote them in it, or lend their Assistance to it. And as the Spaniard, who is
under a Branch of this Family, might possibly be contented to do it, so the
French would certainly oppose it with all their Power, with whom, in that Case,
the Swedes and Hollanders would join the more readily, because they never
defended the German Liberty, but to their own very great advantage. Nor would
the Pope in this Case be over-forward to assist the House of Austria, because
though it would be very glorious to him, and profitable too, to reduce so many
straying Sheep into the Church's Fold; yet let the hazard or loss of Souls be
what it will, he is not to hazard the loss of the Italian Liberty, by making
either the Emperor or the King of Spain Masters of that Country: And if now the
French should attempt the Conquest of Germany; Spain, England, Italy, and
Holland would all unite with the Empire against him; the Danes perhaps would
not be much concerned at it, so be they might be delivered from the Terror of
Sweden, though they for ever truckled under France: But then the assistance of
the Swedes would in this case be very considerable, especially if that Nation
happened to have then a Martial and a Warlike Prince. But then it has been long
since observed, that the French must pay the Swedes very well for their
assistance; the French would also expect to be the only Gainers in the end of
the War; for the French would never be pleased to see the Swedes enlarge their
Conquests in Germany, with their Money, to that degree especially, that they
might ever after despise the French Monarch. And on the other side, the Swedes
are very sensible how foolish it is to spend their Bloods to the Advantage of
the French, and not at all for their own Benefit. Nor are they so dull, but
that they very well know and consider, that when the French are once Masters of
the greatest part of Germany, they will then pretend to give Laws to the
Swedes, as well as to the Germans: And from this Consideration it is, that
there has for some time been a very moderate and lukewarm Friendship between
these two Nations. [Which since the War in An Addition.
1672. in which the French exposed the Swedes to all the Forces of the
Brandenburgers, and at the same time seized the Dukedom of Deuxpont, which
belongs to the King of Sweden, though it lies on the Borders of France, is so
much abated, that it is verily believed the Swedes will now heartily join with
the Germans, to humble France; and it is certain, in this present War he has
done what was possible to prevent the Danes from embroiling the North parts of
Germany, which the French passionately desired.] The French King growing weary
of the distant Swedes, thought it more for his Interest, before this, to draw
some of the German Princes on the Rhine into Leagues with him, and as the
Report goes, has not been sparing in his Pensions to them, and upon all
accasions shows himself very solicitous for the general Liberty of Germany;
offering himself as a Mediator, to compose any Difference that happen to arise
between one Prince and another, and is ever ready to send Money or Men to every
one of them that desires either of them; and in short, makes it his great
business to show them, that they may certainly expect more from his Friendship
than from the Emperor's, or from the Laws of the Empire. Now, the man must be
very stupid, who does not see, that the End of all this Courtship is the
opening a Way to the Ruin of the German Liberty, especially if the Male Line of
the House of Austria should happen to fail. [And the French King should
thereupon An Addition.
obtain the Empire. When this Author wrote, the Emperor of Germany had no Son:
The Princes of the Rhine he here hints at, are, the Elector of Cologne, and the
Duke of Bavaria, to whose Sister he afterward married the Dauphin his Son, to
fix him for ever to France; but all would not do, that Prince has since seen
his true Interest, as all the German Princes too by this time do; and now
France finding the wheeling way will never do, has taken the way of Rage and
Conquest, having disobliged the whole World, and what the event will be, is in
the Hand of God.]

7. This bulky and formidable Body, which is thus united in the common
Appellation Germany weak by reason of its irregular Constitution.
of the German Empire, and if it were reduced under the Laws of a regular
Monarchy, would be formidable to all Europe, is yet, by reason of its own
Internal Diseases and Convulsions, so weakened, that it is scarce able to
defend it self. [Nay, it is certain, if it were not powerfully assisted by its
Neighbors, it is not able to defend it self against the French.] The principal
Cause of this Impuissance and Weakness is its irregular and ill-compacted
Constitution or Frame of Government. The most numerous multitude of men is not
stronger than one single man, as long as every man acts singly by himself and
for himself; all its extraordinary Strength is from its Union and Conjunction.
And as it is not possible that many should join in one natural Body, so they
may certainly be united into one Force, whilst they are governed by one Council
as a common Soul. By how much the closer and more regular this Union is, so
much the stronger this Society or Body is: But on the contrary, Weakness and
Diseases ever follow upon a loose Conjunction and an ill-combined and irregular
Union. A well composed Kingdom or Monarchy is Monarchy the best and most
lasting Government.
certainly the most perfect Union, and the best fitted for duration or
continuance; for as for Aristocrasies, besides that, they can scarce ever
conveniently subsist, except when the force of a Commonwealth is collected into
one single City, yet even then in their own nature they are much weaker than
Monarchies; for the serene Commonwealth of Venice is to be reputed amongst the
Miracles of the World. A System of many Cities united by a League, is much more
loose in its conjunction, and may more easily be dissolved, (which is the Case
of the States of Holland.) And Wherein the Strength of a System of States
consists.
here, that there may be some strength in these kinds of Systems, it is in the
first place necessary, that the Associated Cities or States have the same form
of Government, and be not overmuch disproportioned in their Strength, and that
the same or equal Advantages may from the Union arise to every one of them. And
lastly, It is necessary, in this case, that they have come together, upon well
weighed and great Reasons, and associated upon well-considered Laws or
Conditions; for they that unite in a Society rashly, and as it were in a hurry,
without bethinking themselves very seriously what their future state shall be,
can no more form a regular well compacted Society, than a Tailor can make a
beautiful Garment after he has cut his Cloth all into Shreds and small Pieces,
before he has resolved whether he will form it into a Man's or a Woman's
Garment: And it has long since been observed, that Monarchs very rarely enter
into a sincere friendship with The Leagues between Kings and Commonwealths
seldom lasting.
Commonwealths or Free Cities, though it be for a short time: And it is yet
much more difficult to make a perpetual or lasting League, because all Princes
hate Popular Liberty; and the People, or Popular States, do equally detest the
Pride or Grandeur of Kings. And such is the Perverseness of Humane Nature, that
no man does willingly see one inferior to himself in point of Power, live by
him in an equal degree of Liberty; and Men very unwillingly contribute to the
Common Charges, if they reap nothing, or but a very little Advantage from the
Common Profit.

8. Now the State of Germany is so The Disease^ of Germany.
much the more deplorable, because all the Diseases of an ill-formed Kingdom,
and of an ill digested System of States, are conjunctly to be found in it; nay,
it is to be reckoned as the principal Calamity of Germany, that it is neither a
Kingdom, nor a System of States. The outward Appearance and vain Images
represent the Emperor as a King, and the States as Subjects; and in the most
ancient times he was without doubt a King, as he was called; after this, the
Authority of the Emperor was from time to time diminished, and the Liberties
and Riches of the States were increased, till at last the Emperor had nothing
but a shadow of the Kingly Power, as at this day it is, and seems liker the
General of an Association than a King. From hence proceeds a most pernicious
Convulsion in the Body of the Empire, whilst the Emperor and the States draw
counter each to the other; for he, with might and main, by all ways,
endeavors to regain the old Regal Power, The Princes and the Emperor
distrust each other.
and they, on the other side, are as solicitous to preserve the Liberties and
Wealth they have got the possession of; from whence there must necessarily
follow Suspicious, Distrust, and underhand Contrivances to hinder each others
Designs, and break each others Power: The first effect of this is, the
rendering this otherwise strong and formidable Body unfit to invade others, or
to make any Additions to its own bulk by Conquest, because the States are not
willing that any thing should be added to the Emperor's Dominions, and yet it
is not possible to distribute it equally amongst them. And there are The States
embroiled one with another.
very many distracting Differences between the States themselves, on diverse
accounts, and this makes them less happy than a well united System of States
might be. The States are under different forms of Government, some of them
being Princes, and the rest Free Cities, and these are intermixed one with
another. The Free Cities drive, for the most part, a considerable Trade, and
their Wealth excites the Envy of the Princes, but especially when a great part
of their Trade and Wealth arises from any of the Princes Dominions. Nor can it
be denied, but that some Cities, like the Spleen, have swelled too much to the
damage of their Neighbor Princes, their Subjects being drained away, and their
States impoverished to augment the Cities. The Nobility are apt to despise the
common People, and they are as prone to value themselves on the account of
their Money, and to undervalue the Nobilities old Titles and exhausted
Dominions. Lastly, Some of the Princes look on these Cities as a reproach to
their Government, and think their own Subjects would live more contentedly
under their Command, if these Instances of Popular Liberty were removed, and
all occasions of comparing their own Condition with that of their Neighbors in
these Cities were taken away. From hence proceed Envy, Contemt, Mutual Insults,
Suspicious, secret Contrivances against each other, all which Mischiefs are yet
more manifest, and outragiously prosecuted between the Bishops and the Cities
in which the Cathedral Churches are fixed: Yea, in the Diets the Princes do
ever express a great Contemt of the Cities, but the Emperor, on the contrary,
does always cherish and protect them, because he finds them more observant of
his Orders than the other States. Nor do the Princes themselves bear that
mutual kindness each to other they ought, especially the Secular and the
Ecclesiastical Princes; the Spiritual Princes have the Pre-eminence or
Precedence of the Temporal, on the account of the Sanctity of their Office, and
also because their great Experience in the World and Learning is supposed to
make them better able than the Laymen to advise, which in the barbarous times
begat them a great Authority in the State. But then the Temporal Princes are
now very much concerned to see these Prelates, which are for the most part the
Sons of meaner Families than themselves, in a few years time equal, yea, and
mount above them, as if they had more of the Grace of God than themselves. They
are yet more aggrieved, because these men cannot transmit their Estates to
their Posterity, but their Families continue in the same estate it was before,
but that many of these Holy Fathers have learned from the Pope to enrich their
Kindred by Ecclesiastical Benefices and large Donations, out of the Revenues of
the Church: On the other side, the Prelates have more reason to be offended
with the Temporal Princes, who have intercepted and cut off so many of their
old Preferments; of which I shall say more hereafter. Besides all these that I
have represented, the Inequality of their Estates and Riches is another
Fountain of Discontent betwixt them: For first, as is common, the more potent
contemn the weaker, and are but too apt to oppress them; and the weaker are as
ready to complain and suspect, and sometimes to boast unseasonably, that they
are equally free with the most powerful. The very exalting the Electors above
the other Princes, is a great cause of Discontent; whilst the other States are
displeased at their Dignity, and charge them with usurping some things they
have no Right to; and the Electors as stiffly maintain what they have got as
their Right and Due.

9. These would not be sufficient Principles The Differences of Religion cause
great Disturbances and Disquiet.
of Disorder, if the most effectual active Ferment, which can possibly affect
the Minds of Men, I mean the Difference of Religion, were not added to all I
have mentioned, which at this day divides Germany, and distracts it more than
all the rest. Nor is the diversity of Opinions and the commonly practiced,
excluding each other out of the Kingdom of Heaven, (as Priests of diverse and
contrary Opinions use to do) the only cause of their mutual hating each other:
The Roman Catholics charge the Protestants, That they have deprived them of a
great part of their Wealth and Riches, and they (good men) are night and day
contriving how they shall recover what they have thus lost; and the other Party
are as well resolved to keep what they have got: Nay, they think they have
still too much, and that the Revenues of the Church, at this day, are a Burden
to the State, seeing the Priests and Monks depend upon another Head, who is no
part of the German Empire, but a Foreigner, and an everlasting Enemy to their
Country, nay, to all the Laity in the World, which he would fain impoverish,
that so his own Followers might flourish, and flant it with their Spoils. If he
could bring this about, there would then be a State within the State, and an
Head to each of them: And this, to those that love their Country more than the
Church of Rome, seems the greatest Mischief that can betide any State. Nor is
this a less Disorder than the last, viz. That the Princes of Germany enter The
Princes of Germany enter into Domestic and Foreign Leagues.
into Leagues, not only one with another, but with Foreign Princes too, and the
more securely, because they have reserved to themselves a Liberty to do so in
the Treaty of Westphalia, which not only divides the Princes of Germany into
Factions, but gives those Strangers an opportunity to mould Germany to their
own particular Interest and Wills, and by the assistance of their Allies, to
insult on all the rest of the Princes, especially when the Design of those
Leagues is not levelled against other Foreign Princes, which might be born, but
against the Members of the Empire. There are scarce any Footsteps or Trace of
Justice neither left in the Empire; for if any Controversy arise between the
States themselves, The want of Justice, another cause of Disq^iet (...)
(which must often happen where there is such a number of them, and their
Dominions lie intermixed one with another) if they commence a Suit in the
Chamber of Spire, it is an Age before they can hope to see an end of it. In
that of Vienna, (the Palace-Court) there is too much Partiality and Bribery,
and after all, it is suspected to think more than is fit of the Place it is
seated in: So that in Germany men for the most part right themselves by their
Swords, and he that is strongest, has the best Cause, and fears not to do his
own business. Lastly, How weak must that Government needs be, that has no
common Stock or Treasure, nor any Army to resist the Invasions of Strangers, or
for the acquiring some Provinces to bear the public Charge. And how much
better The want of a Common Treasure.
were it for Germany to spend her valiant men, who cannot live in Peace, in her
own Service, than to have them, as they now do, run into foreign Countries, and
there sell their Blood at cheap rates, to those who will employ them as
mercenary Soldiers of Fortune.

10. There are also a vast number of The Emulations and Contests between the
States and Princes of Germany.
Emulations and Controversies, between the Inferior States and Princes, which
do much weaken the strength of the whole Body. It will be enough for us here
only to touch the principal of these Differences. The House of Austria has
raised a Spirit of Jealousy and Envy in all the other Princes of Germany, by
its long Possession of the Imperial Dignity, and the vast Dominions it has by
that means acquired in the Empire and elsewhere: Besides the old Quarrel
between the Houses of the Elector Palatine and that of Bavaria, there is a new
one concerning the Administration of the Public Affairs during the Vacancy of
the Empire, which will hardly be determined, the one House relying on its
Power, and the other on its Right. In the House of Saxony there is a Contest
and Heart-burning between the Lines of Ernest and Albert, because the former
stripped the latter of the Electoral Dignity, in the Reign of Charles V. The
Elector of Brandenburg will never forgive the Swedes, for their usurping from
him the best part of Pomerania. The Elector Palatine is hated by many of his
Neighbors, on the account of some disputed Rights he claims in their
Territories, so that very lately they were for Arming against him to recover
them. And I cannot believe the memory of that old Controversy is extinguished
wholly, which embroiled the Family of Nassaw, with that of Hesse, for the
Territory of Marpurg. Nor will there ever be a sincere Friendship between the
Elector of Brandenburg and the House of Newburg, (which, since our Author
wrote, has succeeded in the Electroate of the Lower Palatinate of the Rhine) on
the account of the Inheritance of the Dukedom of Juliers. Who can number now
the smaller Controversies depending between them? The empty vain Contests about
Precedence have kindled lasting Hatred in the Hearts of some of the Princes
against each other. To this vast Inundation of Diseases in this Politic Body
we may add (although of less consequence) the tedious Proceedings in all Civil
Causes, by which the most manifest and apparent Right is disputed and deluded
for many years: And the great variety of Moneys which is current in Germany,
which being neither of good allay or due weight, brings great damage to the
Commerce or Trade of Germany, and sinks the value of the Estates of private men
very sensibly. But then we are to ascribe the Luxury of some of our Princes,
who being too much addicted to Hunting, take little or no care of their Estates
and Subjects, more to the Men than to the Form of that State; and we must
grant, other States are as liable as Germany to these kinds of Miscarriages,
and we see them suffer as much by it.

CHAP. VIII. Of the German State-Interest.
1. I Suppose by this time it is sufficiently The Remedies of these Diseases
enquired into.
shown, how many and great the Diseases of Germany are; to assign the Remedies
is a Work of greater difficulty, and which will not become a Stranger and a
Traveller. If the Humanity of the German Nation were not so great, that she is
apter to trust and admire Foreigners than her own Natives. I hope too all wise
men will easily pardon the innocent Freedom of a Man who has no Attachment to
any of the contending Parties, and who, next the Prosperity of his own Country,
wishes nothing more than the Prosperity and Welfare of the honest German
Nation. But before I discover my mind in this Affair, I think it is fit to
consider the Remedies proposed by Hippolithus a Lapide, for the Cure of the
German Calamities; for though many men have admired his Prescriptions, yet I
have ever thought they were ill contrived, and not likely to contribute to her
Cure.

2. In the first place he prescribes Six Laws, which he calls the Interest of
such The Remedies of Hyppolithus a Lapide examined.
a State, and says, They ought carefully to be observed in a State like to
that of Germany, that is, in an Aristocrasie, where the Supreme Sovereign Power
is in the States, or great men, and nothing left to the Emperor, but the Pomps
and Images of a King: So (said he) they ought, 1. To study Six Rules by him
prescribed to the Princes of Germany.
the ways and means of Concord, and to avoid Factions. 2. Not to suffer the
Imperial Dignity to continue long in any one Family, lest by the long use of
these Pomps and Images, a desire of acquiring a solid and real Sovereignty
should grow up in them. 3. Though the Power of directing and moderating the
Offices of all the Parts to the Common Good is conferred upon a Prince or
Single Person, for the greater union of the Commonwealth; yet the Nobility
ought always to keep the Stern of the State in their own hands, and the Power
of directing and ordering the things of great moment, to be exercised in the
Diet, which ought to convene frequently; or at least they ought to appoint some
Senate or Counsel, which shall be perpetual; which kind of Regiment was in use
in the beginning of the last Age before this. 4. That nothing but the Ensigns
of Royalty be left to the Prince, but that the Regal Jurisdiction and Power be
reserved entire to the Commonwealth. 5. That neither the Life, Fortunes, or
Fames of any of the Princes be trusted to the single Justice or Discretion of
the Emperor. 6. That neither the Army, Militia, or Forts, be under his single
Jurisdiction or Government. After this he takes great pains to show in how many
particulars these Laws are violated by the Emperor, and some of the States
themselves, being very sharp in his Reflections on the House of Austria, and on
some also of the Electors. Now, though these Laws were not wholly to be
despised, yet seeing I have above sufficiently proved, that Germany is no
Aristocrasie, it is a folly to think the Safety of Germany is only to be found
in the observation of these Laws.

3. The same Author prescribes Six Remedies Six Remedies prescribed by that
Author rejected.
for the curing all the Diseases of Germany. 1. He recommends the Study of
Concord, and a General Pardon, and a removing all Grievances by which mutual
Hatreds are kept alive and nourished in the minds of the Princes against each
other; and that they should not divide into Factions on the account of
Religion, and for that cause neglect the Public Safety. This Remedy affords a
Copious Subject for a Scholastic Declamation, but can never be applied to the
use of Germany, till all the Nobility of that Nation happen to be wise and
good, and to govern the Motions of their Minds by Rules of Philosophy. 2. In
the next place, he would have the House of Austria extirpated, and their
Estates brought into the Common Treasury. Now this is the Advice of a Hangman,
and not of a Physician: As if every one that happens to be a little too rich,
for his Neighbor's advantage, were presently to be rooted out and destroyed
from off the face of the Earth: But suppose we should obey the Tyrannical Law,
who will dare to lay the Ax to the Root of a Tree, which has spread its
Branches over so many Provinces, so that it is not for the Interest of Europe
to have all its Territories added to those of any one or two other Princes?
Besides, a part of the Princes of Germany are heartily united in their Interest
and Affections to this House; a great many of the rest neither love nor hate
it; and the rest of the Princes, when united, are not able to overthrow that
vast Fabric. They must then call Foreigners to their assistance, and who, I
pray, but the French and Swedes? For when Hippolithus wrote this Book, those
Nations were zealously at work to do this, and the Ignorant much applauded
them, because they craftily pretended to defend the German Liberty, which was
oppressed by the House of Austria. But was it civil to expect they should take
so much Pains, and spend so many Men, and so much Money for nothing? Nor was
there to be found any Lord Treasurer, who would faithfully bring this Prey into
the Treasury; wise men more rationally conceive, that if they had prospered in
their undertakings against the House of Austria, the Princes of Germany would
have been forced to take up the old Complaint of Aesop's Froggs, who instead of
a Block had got a Stork for their King: And when the House of Austria had been
ruined, Germany must have had an Head, and therefore our Author would have
another Emperor elected, whom from his common Place-book he adorns with the
attendance and splendour of all the Virtues, only that he might be trusted with
an empty Title, being destitute of all Regal Power, and appointed to be a mere
Director and a Magistrate. Now, there may be some use of such a President or
Director in some Aristocratick City, where the Nobility all live within the
Walls of the same Town: But as for Germany, if he would have spoke his mind
out, he ought to have said, that it has no need of any Emperor. Our Author,
after all, has taken care to add as much to the Exchequer of his Emperor, as he
has taken from his Power. It was great pity so great a Prince, so virtuous a
Man, should live in want. But yet the Dominions of the House of Austria were to
be employed as the Patrimony of the Empire, and if this was not sufficient,
then he would needs have the Electors restore what had been given them by
Charles IV. But in the mean time, this Learned Gentleman seems to know nothing
of the nature and temper of Mankind, who thinks that a Prince who is possessed
of so much Power as these are, will in the turn of an Hand be contentedly
reduced to the state of a private Gentleman; and when the House of Austria is
once dead and buried, these Electors will be much less disposed to part with
what they have possessed above 300 years; for besides that, Princes are so
dull, that they cannot possibly understand the Doctrine of their Confessors,
when they prate to them about restoring illgotten Estates; the Electors have
here something to say for themselves against all the other States; for I will
suppose that very many of them must return to very mean Cottages or
Country-houses, if they be equally bound to give an exact account how they and
their Ancestors got what they now enjoy; and therefore it is but just, that all
men should possess what they and their Predecessors have a long time possessed.
In the 4th. place, Hippolitus would have a mutual Confidence restored amongst
the States and Princes, and all Distrust eradicated; which, he supposes, would
certainly follow, if all Grievances and Injuries were taken away by a friendly
Composition; and he thinks the greatest part of these Jealousies have arisen
from the different Religions professed in the Empire. Now, when these things
had been considered in the first Article, what need was there to repeat them
here? What he further says of settling the Civil Government, of taking away
the Chamber at Vienna, of maintaining a considerable Army in perpetual Pay, of
settling a Revenue for the Army and War, of employing the Annats to that
purpose, shall all of them be considered in the following Sections.

4. It is time now to produce our own The Author's own Remedies proposed.
Remedies, that it may be tried, whether we are more fortunate in discovering
what may abate the German Fever, and please them too at the same time. I know
proffered Advice is seldom well resented, and wise men would never counsel any
man to offer unasked Remedies to those that are sick, because they that are
invited and hired too for that purpose, are often forced to endure the
Reproaches of their angry Patients. Private men do very rarely meet with any
other Reward than that of Contempt and Scorn, when they presume to give Advice
to those that govern others; besides, they will ever pretend, when the Disease
is once found out, it is very easy to discover the Cure also. Yet after all,
lest this small Piece should end abruptly and imperfectly, I will here subjoin
a few things; I lay this as a Foundation to all I shall propose, viz. That the
depraved state of Germany is become so inveterate and remediless, that it
cannot be reduced back to the state of a Regular Monarchy, without the utter
Ruin of the Nation and Government. But then, seeing it comes very near to the
state of a System of several Independent States The German Government nearest
to a System of States*
united by a League or Confederacy, the safest course it can possibly take, is
to follow those methods which the Writers of Politics have prescribed for the
well-governing such Societies, the first of which is, That they should rather
be sollicitous to preserve their own, than think of taking any thing from their
Neighbors. Their next greatest care is to preserve Peace at home; and to that
end it is absolutely necessary to preserve every one in the Possession of his
own Rights, and not to suffer any of the stronger Princes to oppress any of the
weaker, that so, though they are, as to other things, not equal, yet in the
point of Liberty they may be all equal each to other, and alike secured; that
all old out-dated Pretenses should be buried in eternal forgetfulness, and
every one for the future be suffered quietly to enjoy what he now possesses.
That all new Controversies which may happen to arise, should be referred to the
Arbitrament of the other Alies in the League, who are neither by assed by Love
nor Hatred; and those that refused to submit to their Judgment, should be
compelled to do it by all the rest of the Confederates; and if it be thought
fit to appoint a Prince over this System, great care must be taken, that he
does not take into his Hands, or pretend at least to a^ direct Sovereignty over
them. That the best way to prevent this, is to take care that neither the
strong places nor the Soldiery may depend on that Prince. That he is not only
to be bounded by certain and accurate Laws in his Administration, but a
perpetual Council to be assigned him, which may represent the States, and
govern those Affairs with him, which every day happen in the Administration of
the Public Affairs, according to the Laws enacted in the Diets. That all
Foreign Affairs, which concern the whole Body of the Empire, should be likewise
committed to this Council, who shall give an account of them to their
Principals, that at last they may be determined by the general Consent of all
the Parties; and when any difficult Affairs arise, let this Council have a
Power to summon extraordinary Diets, which to the end they may be held with the
less expenses, and dispatch business the more quickly, there ought to be a new
and more certain form of Proceedings thought of: But then it does not seem very
probable, that the Family of Austria will suffer such a Council to be
introduced, because they will ever labor to keep their Power above control.
Nor will the The Empire cannot be transferred to another Family.
Present State of Germany permit the transferring the Imperial Dignity into
another House, as long as there is any Male in that of Austria; therefore their
Modesty is to be wrought on, to persuade them to be content with their present
Grandeur, and not to labor to establish a Sovereign Authority over the rest of
the States and Princes; and it will become the Princes manfully, and with
united Hands and Hearts, to oppose and resist all such Encroachments, which
tend to their prejudice, and in the first place, to take care that none may
league with one another, or with the Princes of the Empire, against any of the
Members of it; and if they do so, to render all such Combinations ineffectual;
and if any Princes have any Controversy with each other, to take all the Care
is possible, that Germany may not be by that means involved in a War: But in
the first place, Care ought to be taken, that Foreigners may not intermeddle
with the Affairs of Germany, nor possess themselves of the least Particle of
it; to that end all ways that are possible are to be considered, that they
that border on Germany may not have the opportunity of enlarging their Kingdoms
which they so passionately desire, by ravishing its Provinces from it one after
another, till their Conquests, like a Gangreen, creep into the very Bowels of
the Empire. If any thing of this nature happen to be attempted, let Germany
presently take the Alarm, provide her Defenses, and seek the Alliance and
Assistance of those whose Interest it is to keep any one Kingdom from mounting
to too great and exorbitant a Power; and then, as long as Germany is contented
with the defending what is her own, she will have no need to maintain any very
numerous Armies, yet she ought in due time to concert the Numbers that every
one shall send, in case of necessity: And Germany may, from her Neighbor the
Swedes, learn the methods of maintaining an Army in the times of Peace with
small Expense, which yet shall be ready when occasion serves, at short warning,
to draw into the Field for her defense.

5. Now it were very easy for wise and The Opinions of some great men,
concerning the different Religions in Germany.
good men to find out all I have said, and all besides which can be necessary
for the Safety of Germany, if they pleased calmly to apply their minds to it,
who have the chief hand in the Government: But then, seeing the greatest part
of the World think the Differences of Religion the principal Causes of the
Distraction and Division of the Empire, it will well become the Liberty I have
taken in this piece to show what wise men have said of this thing in my
company; for I am not so well acquainted with Church Affairs, as to interpose
my own Judgment, and therefore I think it will be less liable to Exception, to
represent the Thoughts of others than my own, which I submit, etc. When I was
once at Cologne, with the most Reverend and Illustrious Nancio of the Holy See,
to pay him my respects, I happened to say, That I could not understand the true
reason of the great Dissentions in Germany, on the Subject of Religion, whereas
in Holland, where I had lately been, there was no such thing, and yet there men
had the utmost liberty to think and believe as they themselves pleased, for
there every man was intent upon his own Trade and Business, and not at all
concerned of what Religion his Neighbor was. Upon this an Illustrious Person,
who had spent a great part of his Life in the Courts of several Princes, but
was now retired to live a very private life, begged the Nunci^o's Leave to
speak his own mind freely, which being granted: Since (said he) that traveling
Gentleman has mentioned a thing I have very long and seriously thought on, I
will now discover what I take to be the most probable cause of this thing, we
being now at good leisure, and I am well resolved not to approve my own former
Thoughts on this Affair, if your Eminence should happen to dislike them. After
this beginning, at a distance from our present times, he showed how many
Heresies had, from the beginning, afflicted and distracted the Church of
Christ, the greatest part of which, in process of time, vanished of their own
accord; but then there had hardly happened any Schism, that had spread so far,
and ruined so many private Families and whole Kingdoms as this, which in the
last Century arose here in Germany, and was occasioned by some few Doctors of
that Nation: There were great Wits on both sides, and they contended against
each other with the most furious Passions, and to this day there is not the
least hope of putting an end to this Quarrel. It is to no purpose to enquire
into the secret causes of this Affait, as far as Fate or Providence are
concerned; but it will not misbecome my Profession, to discourse of the Nature
and Temper of Mankind.

6. It is (says he) apparent, that two Contempt and Loss exasperates men
greatly.
things above all others exasperate and enrage the Minds of Men, Contempt and
Loss. As to the first of these, I would not be understood here to speak of that
Contempt by which the Reputation and Good Name of a Man is directly oppressed
and trodden under foot, but of that which every ordinary man thinks is thrown
upon him, when another shall but presume to differ from him in any thing; for
the Minds of Men are generally infected with this foolish and unreasonable
Distemper: And it is hateful to them, to find another disposed not only to
contradict, but even to disagree with them in any thing; for he that does not
presently consent to what another says, does tacitly accuse him of being, as
to that particular, in an Error; and he that differs in many things from any
man, seems to insinuate that he is a Fool. This Disease haunts the sedentary
part of Mankind, above all others, who are educated in the Schools, and wholly
taken up with solitary Speculations, and consequently not overwell acquainted
with the World. He that shall not reverence all this melancholy man has
embraced as an Oracle, is presently his deadly Enemy. Nor was the War between
the Romans and Carthaginians, for the Empire of the World, managed with greater
heat than that which we have seen between some of the Learned World, about some
few Syllables or small Distinctions. An equal, nay, a greater Fury has taken
possession of the Churchmen, (the Nuncio having in the beginning of his
Discourse promised him the utmost Freedom.) For whilst every Sect of them
believes it has God on their side, if any man differs from them in any thing,
besides the affront offered to their Authority, they are for accusing him
forthwith of Impiety, Contempt of the Heavenly Truth, Obstinacy, and
Unwillingness to be brought over by another from a manifest Error: And yet, in
the mean time, it is a wonder, that they which pretend to teach others the
utmost Clemency and Goodness of the Christian Religion, should not observe what
horrid Passions they carry about them. Or, let them show me some other sort of
men, more ambitious, covetous, envious, angry, stubborn, and selfish than they,
if this is possible, who so soon as ever they meet a man that differs a
little from them, presently damn him to the Pit of Hell, and will not suffer
God himself to reverse their outrageous Sentence. But then, for men to be a
little more than ordinarily warm, when they find their beloved Wealth like to
be diminished, that (though not often mentioned for good Causes) is not
altogether so irrational.

7. But for the more accurate knowledge The Tempers of the Three Religions in
Germ.
of the Causes of our Dissentions, it is necessary here to make a close
reflection on the Tempers of the three Religions which are now allowed a
public Liberty in Germany; I shall not trouble my self with a curious Enquiry
how well each of them can prove their respective Doctrins by the Authority of
the Sacred Scriptures, because we are only allowed the use of them for the
Improvement of our private Piety, and so are not allowed to suppose we can
understand them, and are besides bound to think our Church loves us too well to
destroy us by false Doctrine; yet we may be allowed to see and consider how far
the way they teach us of going to Heaven will agree with our other Temporal
Interests; for I cannot think the Deity ever intended his Worship should
embroil and disquiet the World. That therefore I may The Temper of the
Lutherans considered.
begin regularly, I will consider the Lutherans in the first place, because
they first deserted our Holy Roman Catholic Church: And I say, I could never
yet find any thing in their Doctrine which was contrary to the Principles of
Civil Prudence and Government: The Power they ascribe to Princes, for the
governing Religion, is indeed not so favorable to the excessive Grandeur of
the Priests; so where it has prevailed, their Wealth is little, but the
Commonwealth has the benefit of that Abatement: The People are taught by them
to reverence their Magistrates and Princes, as the Ministers of God, and that
all the good works expected from them, is to do the Duties of Good men: Nor am
I displeased, that they have retained so much of the Ceremonial Part and the
Pomp of Religion, which serves to divert the minds of the People, who have not
sense enough to contemplate the Beauty of simple undressed Piety: So that
though their Religious Mysteries are not adorned to the frightful height of
Superstition, yet they are in a decent and grave Dress, and adapted to teach
Mankind, that the Divine Wisdom and Power is able to effect that which we are
not able thoroughly to comprehend; the very Rusticity and Simplicity that
appears in the Professors of that Religion, and which is so much blamed by
some, is to me a sign and a testimony of their Sincerity and Uprightness: So
that as it is not possible to imagine a Religion that can be more serviceable
and useful to the Princes of Germany, than that of the Lutherans, we may from
hence conclude, that this is the best for a Monarchy of any in the World. And
if Charles V. had not been diverted by the consideration of his other States
and Kingdoms, he must, as Emperor of Germany, have been thought blind and
impolitick, in not taking the opportunity the Reformation offered him, to
enrich the Patrimony of the Empire, when so many of the Princes and Free Cities
had before showed him the way, and would very gladly have permitted him to have
shared in the Prey, and the People were generally so taken with their new
Preachers, that he needed not to have feared them. As to the Calvinists, or
Presbyterians, it differs very The Temper of the Calvinists.
little from the Lutheran, but only in their great Zeal for sweeping out all
the Roman Catholic Rites and Ceremonies with the Dust of their Churches, and
in a design to new polish the Lutheran Doctrine, and to make it more subtle;
neither of which Intentions are accommodated or suited to the Minds of the
meaner People, for they are apt to fall asleep, when the whole Service of God
in public is reduced to a Psalm and a Sermon; and when it is once made a
fashionable thing, to have the meanest of men exercise their Curiosity upon the
most Sacred Parts of Religion, the most perverse and ignorant will soon catch
the Itch of Innovating and Inventing, and when they have once started a new
Opinion, they will persist in and defend it with invincible stubbornness: yea,
some of them have fallen into lamentable Follies, and with them it was a great
Sin to have a comely Head of Hair: And it has long since been observed by
wisemen, That the Genius of this Religion is purely Democratick,
and adapted to Popular Liberty and a Commonwealth: For when the People once
are admitted to a share in the Government and Discipline of the Church, it will
presently seem very unreasonable to them, that one Prince should without them
govern the great Affairs of the State. These two Religions having spread
themselves The extent of these two Religions.
over a great part of Germany, by their mutual Enmity each to other, gave
Opportunities to the Roman Catholics to destroy them both. Now what Reason can
any man assign for this, but the Perverseness of their Ministers, who were on
both sides more concerned to maintain their Reputations than their Doctrine,
and they thought that they should certainly much sink in the esteem of Men, if
they should tamely submit their Judgments to such as explained things better
than they could, or taught them more Humility and Modesty than they had
occasion for? For The Differences destructive.
as for these two Parties, there is no Contest between them, which is attended
with any Gain or Loss, it being equally mischievous to both of them, to be
forced again to submit to the Church of Rome. And therefore seeing the
Ministers could never be persuaded to sacrifice their Obstinacy to the Peace of
the Public, it had been the Duty of the Princes, by degrees to have laid these
Controversies asleep, not by violent methods, (which commonly exasperate
Dissenters) but by oblique ways and Artifice: For if Princes, in choosing their
Ministers, would for the future not regard the Names of Men's Parties, but the
Abilities and Endowments of their Minds; and if the Subjects were inured to
bear an equal regard to both the Religions; if the Ministers were forbidden all
Disputes in their Sermons, and especially to anger the opposite side by sharp
Reflections; and none were suffered to teach in the Schools but moderate and
prudent men, I doubt not but, in a few years, all these Debates would end of
themselves: But I believe, at the same time, he would deserve very ill of the
Church of Rome, who should give this Advice to her Enemies. [And I believe An
Addition.
this Advice would certainly end in the ruin of the Reformation in Germany; for
by that time any Parish had been Lutheran and Calvinist in their Worship by
turns, two or three times backward and forward, as the Ministers changed, they
would care for neither of them, but divide and hate each other mortally; some
would persist in one way, and others in the other, and the major part would
think this fickle unconstancy in Religion an Argument of the uncertainty of it,
and without ever enquiring which were the best, reject both, and sit down in
Atheisin. Were the difference only in point of Doctrine and Speculation, like
that of Predestination amongst us, both Parties might be tolerated; but
different ways of Worship can never be allowed in the same Congregations
without Heart-burning Envy, Hatred, and Detraction, which would break them into
Factions at first, and at last destroy all Religion, the Modes of Worship being
visible, and extremely loved or disgusted.]

8. But now the Temper of our Roman The Temper of the Roman Catholics.
Catholic Religion is extremely different from these new Religions; for their
Clergy own themselves the Servants (Ministers) of the Magistrates and People,
that their Souls being by their Care and Pains endowed with good holy
Principles and Manners, they may, after Death, be fitted to be translated into
Eternal Life: In the mean time, the great Care of the Roman Catholic Priests
is spent in enlarging their own Wealth, Power, and Authority, and not in
forming the Minds of the People committed to their Care to Piety and Honesty.
And in truth, I have a great while admired the Folly of our Priests, in
pretending to decide the Controversies depending between them and the
Protestants, by the Sacred Scriptures, when they might have taken another
course, that for certainty and plainness would have been equal to a
Mathematical Proposition: For if, according to the Use and Custom of the Church
of Rome, the great design and principal end of all Religion be to promote the
Riches and Authority of the Priests, our Adversaries are mad if ever they write
one word more in a Controversy that has spent such innumerable number of Tuns
of Paper, to no purpose. For example sake, let us propose a few Instances. It
is pretended the Sacred Scriptures are very obscure, and all Laymen are
forbidden to read them on that pretense, that so the Priests may have the sole
Power of interpreting them, and that the Laymen may not from thence pick out
any thing that shall be contrary to the Priests Interest. Traditions are added
to the Sacred Scriptures, that if any thing has happened to be omitted in the
Scriptures, which is necessary to the former great Design, it may from thence
be conveniently supplied: Nay, that whole Religion is adorned with so many
gaudy Ceremonies, that the Splendour and Pomp of them, as well as the excessive
number, may amuse the Minds of the common People, that like men in an amazement
and wonder, they may never so much as think on solid Piety. To leave the
remission and forgiveness of Sin only to God, were a thing that would yield no
profit to the Priest, and therefore the Priests challenge that, and know
wondrously well how to improve it to the best advantage, for they will not
dispense so profitable and gainful an Office, upon a general Confession, to a
whole Congregation at once, and then be contented with some mean Present or
Salary, as the Parties concerned shall freely give: No, they have taken order
there shall be an exact Enumeration of Sins, and the Taxing them is then left
to the Discretion of the Priest; and now, if the Party confessing is rich,
Paradise will go at a good price, though the Sins be freely remitted, as they
pretend; for, Who can be so hard-hearted, as not to give liberally to so good a
Father? And if the Party is poor, then the Priest will exercise his Ghostly
Authority with the greater severity. And in the mean time, what a vast
Advantage it is to the Church and Clergy to know all men's Secrets? And who
would not revere the Master of his Soul and Heart? And in short, the Wit of Man
can never invent a thing that shall turn more to the Gain and Authority of the
Priests than the Mass; for, Who can deny the man that performs this saving
Office a good Reward? And who can forbear worshipping him that can by a secret
whisper produce so venerable a Victim or Sacrifice? It is fit to deny the Laity
the use of the Cup to the utmost extremity, that they may think the Church
never did, or can err. The number of the Sacraments was not increased for
nothing, but to the intent men might the oftener need the assistance of their
Priests. Who can tell what profit the Ecclesiastical Courts have drawn from
Matrimonial Cases, all which have been brought under their cognizance, only on
the pretense Marriage was a Sacrament? Yet one would think married men should
understand all these Cases full as well as they. The vast Force they ascribe to
the Merit of Good Works, as it excites, like a Spur, the ambitious and
vainglorious Piety of Men; so on the other hand, they have craftily taken care
to give us such a Catalogue of Good Works, as for the most part tends to the
enriching of the Clergy, and does most incomparably well agree with the rest of
their Theological System. Not can I think the Fire of Purgatory was kindled for
any other purpose, but only to lay, on that pretense, a Tax upon those who by
Death had escaped all other Jurisdictions, (and to make the separate Souls a
Merchandable Commodity, which was never dreamt on before.) The Invocation of
Saints increases very much the Gaity of their Religion, and the Authority of
their Clergy, who by their Vote advance whom they please to be Nobles in the
Court of Heaven. To add more to those who so well know them, were troublesome
and needless; and in truth, whoever tries the whole by this Rule, will see this
was the only thing that all is levelled at. The Hierarchy or Ecclesiastic
Commonwealth or Government, as they have ordered it, is a wonderful artificial
Contrivance, so compacted, so knit, closed, and fixed together, that I think I
may truly say, since the Creation of the World, there never was any Politic
Body so well formed and disposed, and which had such strong Foundations as this
has; for it is formed into a most exact Monarchy; and the King of the Priests
has an Authority given him equal to that of God. This Vicar of God cannot err;
and administreth the Function of a Turn-key to the Gates of Heaven and Hell,
with an Authority above control, and from which there lies no Appeal. And in
the better and more fortunate Ages of this Church, it was most firmly believed
too, that this King was the Disposer of all Kingdoms; that he could depose
Kings, and set others up in their steads; but now, alas! the new Doctors have
so traduced this most useful Doctrine, that it is become hateful and invidious
to the very Catholic Princes themselves, and they are fain, in some Kingdoms,
to deny they ever taught any such thing: And because the Majesty of this King
depends only on the Opinion of his Sanctity, they have wisely contrived, that
it should pass by Election, for fear this Royal Blood should degenerate, and
that this Throne may ever be filled with a person free from the defects of
Youth, and to the end he might be more intent upon the Good of the Church, than
the enriching his Family. For this last reason they have denied Marriage to all
the Members of this Society (the Priests and Clergy) that their Family-concerns
might not divert them, (or Wife and Children make them subject to the Wills of
their Princes.) The multitude and variety of their Religious Orders is very
great, that there might be many in every place, to take care of their Affairs,
and spread their Nets, and bait their Hooks to catch the Estates and Goods of
the Laity. Nor has any Temporal Prince in the whole World so great and profound
a Respect and Obedience paid to him by all his Subjects, as this Ecclesiastic
Monarch; and although there are many furious Emulations between his Subjects,
yet the Pope wisely takes such care to The reason of inventing the Jesuits
Order.
moderate and govern them, that they never bring any Damage or Disturbance to
his Kingdom. Thus all the old Orders look very discontentedly on the new
company of the Jesuits, because it has much abated the Esteem they enjoyed
before; for after this wanton Age would no longer be bridled by the simple
ignorant Sanctity of the Monks, that holy Society was invented, to the great
good of the Church, which at first with great Art supported this falling
Fabric, by undertaking the Instruction of Youth, Confession of Penitents, and
a cunning Scrutiny into the Secrets of all men. So that many think all that Job
has said of the Leviathan, may, in a mystic sense, be very aptly applied to
this Priestly Empire: No doubt can reasonably be made however, that the
Religion is the very best of all others which heaps most Riches and Honors on
all its Votaries, and is furnished with the best means of shearing the Sheep to
the very Skin, and at the same time keeping them as quiet, and more obedient
than those that have all their Wool left on them to keep them warm. I think by
this time I have sufficiently proved, that they have hitherto managed the
Disputes between the Catholics and the new Teachers very ignorantly; for these
Catholics have ranged their Antagonists amongst the Heretics, and raised
brutish Cries against them in all places, that they ought to be extirpated by
Fire and Sword, by which they have made all sincere and hearty reconciliation
desperate and impossible. This has again forced the Heretics to take the
utmost care for their own safety and security; and when they had once possessed
the Laity with a Suspicion of the Priests Sanctity, it was a very easy step,
by showing them the Priests Wealth would be their reward, to draw them on their
side, and engage them to be their Defenders: But if at first their Brains had
lain right, there might have been means found out to have sweetened the Minds of
the Laity, before they embraced that side; and that small Saxon Monk (Luther)
might more easily have been won to a reconciliation with the Pope, by
presenting him with a good fat Benefice, than by all the Thunders of the
Vatican, the force of which, by the distance of the place, and the coldness of
the German Air, was so much abated, that by that time it reached the Monk, the
noise, the heat, and the terror of it was wholly lost. And on the other side we
cannot enough admire the folly of the modern Protestant Doctors, that they
should, without blushing, persuade those of the Church of Rome to leave their
present state, and renounce all their vast Wealth, and to come over to them,
that they may there be reduced into the mean condition of the vulgar people,
and work hard for a Living, or starve: For they have some reason for what they
say, when they offer the Lay People more Liberty, and the Princes the Spoils of
the Priests. Yet to give the Roman Catholics their due; after the Terror of
the first Defection, and the Heat of the first Reformers was abated, they
recollected the Remains of their broken Forces with all the Industry and Care
that was possible; and they have ever since managed their affairs with more
order and subtilty than the Reformed have theirs; for, to the best of my
remembrance, in this present Century none of our Roman Catholic Princes have
become Protestants, but some of theirs have returned into the Bosom of our
Church; [Christina Queen An Addition.
of Sweden, the House of Newburg now Elector Palatine, and James II. late King
of Great Britain.] This Gentleman was going on, when the Pope's Nuncio put an
end to his Discourse, by saying, Sir, you have sufficiently showed us what
Skill you have in Church affairs, and were you to preach these things in the
public, you would seldom want Auditors and Approvers, though I think the
Protestants would not approve of them. Then looking upon me, he said, It was
not convenient to have thus on a sudden admitted this Lay-Gent. to the
knowledge of a Secret which many thousands make it their business to conceal
from the most cunning and accomplished Men the World has.

9. These things were once discoursed Some Considerations on the excessive
Revenues of the Church.
with this liberty I have represented them, in the presence of the Pope's
Nuncio, who seemed to approve the Candor of this old Minister of State, and
gave me such encouragement and insight into things, that from thence forward I
became less scrupulous to converse freely with men of the contrary persuasion,
whose Hearts are more open than those of our own party are. Not long after, I
met with a man who was well acquainted with the German Affairs, and seemed not
very averse to the Protestant Religion, (which I speak by way of Apology for
what I am going to relate, that you may not think I do approve of all he said)
and giving him by chance an account of what I had heard in the fore-recited
Conference, he began a little higher, and added, That in a well constituted
Government there ought to be some men set apart, for the celebration of the
Holy Offices of Religion, who ought to have no other Employment, and yet should
be competently maintained. That it was also fit, that Churches should be built
on the public charge, whose external beauty and magnificence might create in
the Minds of Men an awful regard to Religion, for the kindling the Devotion of
the Common People. But then I think no wise man will deny, that those men who
are no way necessary to the Service of God nor employed in his Worship, ought
not to be called or thought Churchmen, or of the Clergy, and that what was
employed in the maintaining such men, has nothing of Sanctity in it. But in
Germany the Clergy were so vastly enriched by the liberality of the old
Emperors, the Princes, and the Common People, that one half, if not more, of
the Lands of that Nation was in their hands, which was never heard of in any
other; and an innumerable shole of lazy useless men made it their business to
live upon and devour this vast Wealth; which was neither agreeable to the Rules
of the Christian Religion, nor of sound Policy. The Holy Scriptures do indeed
command as to provide decently and liberally for the Clergy, and that we should
not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn; but then they never
give that name to those who have no share in the Ministry of the Church: Nor do
they any where exempt the Persons of the Clergy, or their Revenues, from the
Jurisdiction of the Civil Magistrate, or disable them to attemperate the same
in such manner as may be consistent with the Public Good. And your The Author
pretends to be a Venetian.
Venetian Republic understands none better, that the Revenues and Riches of
the Church are not to be excessively increased to the damage of the State, and
she has accordingly wisely put a stop to that leak, the Pope and Court of Rome
opposing her in this Design in vain, and without any success. In truth, she saw
her self wasted by this means, and as it were brought into a Consumption,
whilst her Riches and Lands were engrossed by a sort of men who acknowledge no
Authority but that of an Head without their State, and pretended at the same
time they were exempted by the Divine Laws from contributing to the public
Burdens. As to the number of Bishops, Germany has no reason to complain,
except that, considering the extent of the Nation, they are too few to
discharge their Office as they ought, if they were otherwise well disposed to
do it: But to what purpose serves the vast Revenues belonging to these few
Sees? You will perhaps say they are Princes of the Empire, as well as Bishops,
and take their share in the Care of the State with the other Princes: Why then
let them abstain from the Sacred Title of Bishops, because that holy Office is
inconsistent with the vast burden of secular business, which is necessarily
attending on the Office of a Secular Prince; let them lay by the first, and
stick wholly to the last Title; for I think the Christian Religion would suffer
no detriment if they did not celebrate one or two Masses in a year, attended
with a vast number of their Guards and Retinue in rich Garbs, and with great
pomp, as if they designed nothing by it but to reproach the Poverty and mean
Circumstances of the first settlers of the Christian Religion. So let the
Bishop of Mentz (if he will) possess his great Revenues, to enable him to
sustain the Dignity and Charge of his Office of Chancellor of Germany; but then
there is no apparent cause can be given why he should have a Bishop's See
assigned to him, when the other Princes of the Empire, who have as great zeal
for the welfare of their Country as he, have been contented to take none but
Temporal Titles. Now what shall I say of the Canons of the Cathedral Churches,
which are the Blocks they hew into Bishops? They perform none of the Sacred
Offices; and this they are not ashamed to own to all the World, by calling
themselves Irregular Canous, and they too, to spare their own precious Lungs,
fill their Churches with Noises, made by their mercenary Curates; and such of
them as are not employed in Secular Affairs, are mere useless Burdens of the
Earth, serving their Bellies and their Lusts. Now as to those that are wholly
employed in Worldly Concerns, why are they called Holy men? Why are they
maintained by the Revenues of the Church? And what shall I say of the excessive
Riches of the Monasteries, and of the wonderful swarms of shaven Crowns that
hover about them? It is certainly necessary, that there should be Colleges for
the sitting your Youth for the Service of the Church and State; and I should be
well pleased to suffer some few men to spend all their days in them too, in
profound Contemplation, for which only Nature has fitted them; and besides, if
they were brought on the stage, the world would lose the benefit of those
advantages it might reap from their Studies; so that, as to these men, the
State would have no great reason to complain, because at one time or other they
would recompense the Charges of maintaining them with good Interest: yet then
both these sorts of men are most happy, when they have sober and competent
Provisions made for them; overgreat ones load them with fat, which stifles and
obstructs both their Vigor and Industry. But then there does not seem to be
any good Reason that can possibly be given by the Wit of Man, why the Public
should be at the charge of fatting up a vast number of lubbarly lazy fellows,
who have betaken themselves to their ugly Cowles out of pure desperation, and
are good for nothing but to fill the Church with senseless noises, or Prayers
repeated with such cold and unconcerned affections, that they are fain to keep
the account of them by their Beads. The only pretense worth the regarding, that
is made for the excessive Riches of the Church, is, That the illustrious and
noble Families of Germany have a means to provide for their younger Children,
who being promoted to Ecclesiastical Benefices, are kept from being a Burden
to their own Families, by which means Estates are kept from being crumbled into
small Particles, by dividing and subdividing them in every Descent, and the
Riches and Splendour of Families is upholden, nay, sometimes increased; the
younger Brother, who must otherwise have struggled with Want and Penury at
home, being advanced to considerable and rich Dignities in the Church. And I
confess it was a good Fetch and a crafty Policy in the Church of Rome, thus to
chain the noblest Families to her Interest, and purchase their Favor. But
then, though it is worth our care to consider how we may preserve the Families
of our Nobility and Gentry; yet in all probability, they that first gave these
Lands to the Church never dreamt of any such thing, and it is most certain this
has nothing of Religion in it. And as to these younger Children, if they are
men of spirit and courage, they have other means enough to raise their
Fortunes, and improve their Estates and Reputations at home or abroad, in times
of Peace or War: But then, if they are useful to no body in neither of these,
it were fit to make them understand they cannot reasonably expect their Sloth
should be rewarded with an Entertainment at the Charge of the Public, in the
same manner the Athenians did their most deserving Citizens. If they will still
insist, that at least, by this means, the overgreat number of the Nobility is
kept from becoming contemptible by their poverty; I reply, That if they are men
of truly noble Endowments, their multitude can bring no dishonor or disesteem
to their Order, or to the State, because Virtue can never want a Station and a
suitable Reward: But then, if they fear they should fill the World with a
degenerate Posterity worse than themselves. I think this is true, and they
ought to be kept from Marriage, that they may not stock the World with useless
Drones: But then others, that are not in Holy Orders, abstain from the use of
Women: But if they will not do that, I think the good old men, who gave these
Lands to the Church, out of a belief, that whilst they lessened the
Inheritances of their Children, they promoted the Glory of God, and the
Salvation of their Souls, are now miserably abused in their Graves, to have
them now consigned only to the maintenance of a parcel of public Stallions.

10. This being however the truth of The Protestant Princes fairly vindicated.
the case, I for my part think the Protestant Princes will be able to give a
very good and rational account to God and all wise men, why they have taken
that care they have to employ the Revenues of the Church, which lay within
their Dominions, and so was properly under their Jurisdictions, to the
education of Youth in Piety and good Arts, and to the maintenance of such
Ministers as were truly and in good earnest employed in the Service of God, and
what was overplus, to the Service of the State; whereas before the whole was
spent in Luxury and Sloth. And if the Emperor and the rest of the Catholic
Princes had taken the same care in their States, they had disburthened Germany
of a number of ill Humors, which now oppress it. Nor could the Pope have
resented it without showing himself openly more a Friend to the Vices of the
Times than is consistent with his Honor. Nor was there any necessity that they
should have ever the more changed their Faith in other particulars, though they
had retrenched the number of their Clergy, and reduced their Revenues to a
narrower Scantling, for the public good of their States; for their Christian
Ancestors finding Poverty and Piety united in their days, long before the
Privileges of the Sea of Rome were thought of, agreed with the Church of Rome
in matters of Faith. The greatest difficulty, as some thought, lay in the
Bishoprics, which are still extant, because it was not for the Interest of
Germany that those large Dominions should be added to the Emperor or any of the
other Princes. But then this is owing only to the ill constitution of the
German State, which is subject to very great Commotions on the least change.
Let then those Bishoprics continue, and enjoy their large Revenues and
Territories; only in the mean time let these Bishops remember that they are
German Princes, and that they owe their Dominions to the Liberality of the
Germans, and therefore ought to love their Country more than the Pope: And let
them put an end to their longing desires after those Bishoprics they have
lost, and never more think of regaining them, for fear in the attempt they
should also lose what is left them; and however, it becomes them not to embroil
their native Country in any more destructive Wars and Quarrels. In truth, in
the last Age it would not have been so difficult to have brought the
Bishoprics of Germany into a better state than how they are, if either the
Archbishop of Cologne had not miscarried in his design; or if more of the
German Bishops had conspired with him in the same intention: For after the
Reverence of the Sea of Rome was sunk to so low an ebb, it would not have been
difficult to have turned the Bishoprics into Hereditary Principalities, and to
have assigned the other Revenues to the Chapters or Prebends; or if this had
not pleased them, these Principalities might have still passed from one to
another by Election. Nor are the Protestants of such small and contemptible
Parts or Understandings, as that they could not have employed these Revenues to
the same uses the Roman Catholics do, if they had thought fit to have so
continued them. It had been more also for the Peace of Germany to have had the
whole Nation embraced the Protestant Religion, than it was to have a part
continue in the old, to distract the People by a diversity in their Faith. And
could any man drive out of the Empire those lazy Drones the Monks, and the
cunning Companions of the Society of the Jesuits, Germany would thereby be
delivered from a Set of dangerous Spies; and the Revenues they wastefully
devour, would be sufficient to maintain an Army that would defend Germany
against both the Eastern and WesternTurk.

When I had heard this Discourse out, I was in an horrible fright for the Roman
Catholic Religion in Germany, but that I considered it was understood in vain
by private men, who could indeed please themselves with specious Counsels, and
assume great Courages under the Covert of their private Walls: But then, as
long as those that were born to command and govern others were for the most
part beholden to their Destinies, for giving them more Wealth than Wisdom, I
thought again their Ignorance of what was their true Interest, and for their
good, would still secure it. This, Sir, is what I have in my Travels observed,
concerning the Empire of Germany, and having thought fit to set it down in
writing, I persuade my self, that if I miss of Praise and Applause, yet at
least the Candor and Sincerity of my Relations will deserve pardon.

FINIS.

