The Present STATE OF THE VAUDOIS, Drawn out of Three LETTERS. I. One from Mr.
Cox, Their Majesty's Envoy in Suitzerland. II. The second from Monsieur de
Loches, their Colonel. III. The last from Monsieur Arnaud Minister of the
Vaudois.

I. Part of a Letter of the Honorable Thomas Coxe Esquire, His Majesty's
Extraordinary Envoy into Suitzerland concerning the Vaudois, Dated at Berne the
25th of October, Old Style, 1690.
AS for our little Army of Vaudois, Piemontois, and French Refugiez, consisting
of about 3000 fighting Men under Colonel des Loches, and his two Lieutenant
Colonels, Julien and Mallet; notwithstanding that, they have been hitherto
divided into three small bodies, at Suze, Lucerne and Brigueras, they have
behaved themselves well upon all occasions offered, and particularly at
Lucerne, where they killed 7 or 800 French, with the loss of 25 or 30 only on
their side, and but four or five Piemontois of their small number, and took two
Colors from them which I sent to the King by the Messenger that carried the
Treaty, as the First Fruits of their Courage in those Parts. Their
Encouragement and Subsistence is of vast importance to the good Cause and the
Protestant Religion, both there and in all these parts of the World; besides
the inexpressible consequence it is of, as a back Door, and indeed the only
safe and certain Inlet into France. Oh what glorious things might be done in
all Europe, and particularly in this, for its Freedom and Deliverance, and for
the Honor of the Protestant Religion, if the Parliament would without delay in
this extraordinary Conjuncture of Affairs, assist the King so vigorously and
plentifully, as to enable Him to finish Honorably and Successfully those noble
and important Concerns that lie before Him, both at Home and Abroad, and to the
completing of which, God has called him in so wonderful a manner!

We are in great straits what to do about the distressed Vaudois Families, (I
mean the Women, Old Men, and Children among them, for the Men that can bear
Arms are in the Valleys) that are come into these parts before their time, in
impatient hopes of returning into their old Habitations. They came without
Order, there being nothing r^^^y for them; yet in the Valleys where all (...)
Houses are burnt and destroyed, and no possibility of sowing Corn this year,
great Numbers of them are like to starve and perish for want of Bread, all the
Collections of all sorts for them in these Parts, being totally at an end. It
would be a most generous, Christian, and seasonable Assistance, if we could get
another very speedy, though small Collection, from England and Holland, without
which, I see no way to avoid their perishing. Monsieur Arnaud is come to see
his Family at Neu Chastel, and returns speedily into the Valleys. He spent two
or three days with me here. The whole History of the Subsistence, Deliverance
and Victories of these Protestants in the Valleys, is a continued Miracle, and
would make a good Protestant of a professed Atheist, if he were not arrived to
the last and fatal degree of Obduration. I have persuaded and finally
determined him, as he assures me, to begin speedily, and to finish a second
History of the Vaudois, and of all the Miracles that have attended their whole
late State and Concerns; which I desire him may be much more circumstantiated
and particular, than that of Monsieur Ledger, his Nephew, who is settled a
Professor at Geneva, and was employed there in the late Collection of England
and Holland for the Vaudois. I desired Monsieur Arnaud to consult for some
Papers, etc. and I hear he is now at Geneva for that purpose.

II. Part of a Letter of Monsieur de Loches, Colonel of the Vaudois.
A Fortnight ago I had notice given me, that the Enemy, whose Army which was
Encamped near Carmagnole, had caused their first Line to March, with six pieces
of Cannon, and that the rest followed them close on purpose to exterminate
those of the Religion, and totally to ruin them in these Valleys, and that
Monsieur Catinat and other Generals of the French Army had publicly made known
this their Design. I do not in the least doubt of this Intelligence, for our
Troops daily Intercepting their Convoys, and being a continual plague to the
Garrison of Pignerol, it was likely they would do their utmost to be rid of
them. I writ to His Royal Highness about it, and to some others at Turin, who
knew very well how few Men I had with me, without Money, or Provision; most of
them without Clothes, Shoos or Stockings, and several of them Sick: His Royal
Highness did me the Honor to Answer me by three Couriers one after another,
That it was true he had been Informed the Enemy had such a Design, but that the
condition his Army was in would not permit him to oppose it; and therefore I
should do well to leave the Valleys, and so gain the Hills toward Cony, 15 or
20 Leagues from hence.

I must confess that in this occasion I visibly found that God by his
Providence did watch for our Preservation. For notwithstanding the evident
dangers I was exposed to, instead of Flying, as I was advised, he so
strengthened me, that I resolved to stand the Enemy. Accordingly I did send a
Detachment of a 130 to the Town of Barges, three Leagues from this place; where
on the third instant, being Attackt, they Fought so well Retreating, that they
killed many of the Enemy, and following the Orders which I had given them, they
retired to a Village called Bibiane, that is half a League from hence. There
they were Joined by another Detachment of 90 Men, which I had posted in that
place. The next day at 11 in the morning they were Attackt by 8 Squadrons of
Horse and Dragoons, and as many Batalions of Foot, the best Troops of all the
French Army, Commanded by the Marquess de Feuquieres Lieutenant General. Our
Men made their Discharge at them, but when they were very near, got out of the
Village, and Disputed the Ground with so much courage, that they stopped the
Enemy in every Post that did any wise favor their Retreat, killing several
Officers and Soldiers; which when I heard, I Detached a Captain with 50 Men to
back them, and being Informed that they gave ground, I sent two several times
Lieutenants with 20 Men to Faciliate their Retreat: But their obstinacy hindered
them from executing my Orders, and being got within Cannon shot of this Town,
they gained the Hills of Roura. Then the whole Body of the Enemy fell upon
Lucerne, all the Inhabitants whereof are Papists, and which being Dismantell'd,
lies open on all sides. By the help of God I stopped the Enemy for 3 hours,
hindered them from passing over a stone Bridge, and forced them to wade through
the River, where they lost several Officers and Soldiers; but being overpowered
by their number, I Retired to a Hill that commanded this Town; from thence I
sent Orders to the Vaudois, who keep the Post of the Valleys of St. Germain,
St. Bartholomew, and St. John, to Join with all speed. The Enemy Detached their
Vanguard, which entered the Town a quarter of an hour before Night, burnt some
Houses, killed 8 or 10 Women, some old sick Men, and little Children who could
not get away, having made no greater stay than was necessary for their Troops
to March off. Monsieure de Feuquieres made a show as if he would have Encamped
near the Town, by making a great number of Fires there; but soon after he
caused his Men to March toward Pignerol without Drum or Trumpet, and without
committing any other act of Hostility upon the Lands of the Protestants, being
favored by a thick Fog, and making use but of two Lights; but when they had
got half a League off, they lighted above a thousand, and begun to beat their
Drums. This hasty March broke all the Measures I had taken to fall upon his
Rear the next day, and to pursue the Sieur de Feuquieres in the same manner as
we had done when we came into the Valleys. I have lost in all these Attacks, a
Sergeant and three Soldiers, and some Wounded; and the Sieur de Feuquieres, to
hide his loss, Ordered his Dead to be Buried in the way, so that we met with
Graves at every step. I am come back into Lucerne, and thank God with all my
Heart that he has permitted us, with a handful of Men, to baffle the most cruel
Design that ever was Formed against these Valleys.

III. Part of a Letter written to a Gentleman of Note by Monsieur Arnaud,
Minister of the Vaudois, who in Autumn last year, brought the first of them
back into the Valleys of Piemont, from whence they had been totally expelled,
and who was there with them in continual service against an Army of 13000
French; the Vaudois having no other Captain to command them in all their
Engagements, till Midsummer last.
MAy I beg of you, Sir, to continue your charitable Offices in the behalf of
these poor and distressed Vaudois, whereof the greatest part is already in
Piemont, and the remainder of them in Geneva and Suitzerland, among the
Grizons, and at Wirtemberg. As for my own particular, I cannot but praise God
for the health, which by his Blessing I have enjoyed, having not had the least
Indisposition, notwithstanding the inconceivable Fatigues I have suffered, with
my 367 brave Soldiers and good Christians: I praise him also for his Divine
Assistance, which has enabled us to resist the Devil and 13000 Men, both from
France and Piemont, without any Commander, Money, Supplies, Intelligence,
Habitations, and without Bread: But God who Confounds the strongest things by
the weakest Instruments he makes use of, has brought our Affairs to the pass
wherein they are now. Pray Sir give our Friends to understand that our Valleys
may open to them the surest way to mortify the common Enemy. I am Informed by
Letters, That he has taken Suze by Composition. There is a Mystery in it. Our
Men have Surpised and Taken Chateau Daufin. I suppose they will stop there,
the season of the Year being too far spent.

We are about Publishing the History of the Miracles, which God has wrought in
behalf of his Children, that all the World may know there is a God in Heaven,
to raise up his to Witness when the time marked out by his Providence is come. I
Implore his Heavenly Blessing for the Preservation of our King, etc.

From Lucerne the 5th of November. 1690.
The History of the Wars in Ireland to this Time, in 2 Parts, by the Honorable
Ri^^ard Cox, Esquire Published by Command.

London, Printed for Joseph Watts, at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1691.


