The PRESENTIMENTS Of the Grand-Juries for the City of Westminster and County of
MiddX., Jan. 1682.
Civitas, Burgus and Villa Westm' in Com' Midd'.
Ad Generalem Quarterialem Sessionem Pacis Dom' Regis tent' apud Westm' pro
libertat' Decani and Capitali Ecclesiae Collegiate beati Petri Westm' Civit'
Burghi and Ville Westm' in Com' Midd' and Sancti Martini le grand London, die
Lune (scilicet) octavo die Januarii, anno Regni Domini Caroli secundi Dei
gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensor', etc.
34.
THis Court having (amongst other material things) given in charge to the
Grand Jury then sworn the due Prosecution of all persons dissenting from the
Government of the Church: received the Presentiments of the said Grand Jury,
under their hands, written and subscribed as follows:

Ad Session' Pacis 8. Januarii, 1682.
WE present, That all Popish, and Other Recusants, ought to be prosecuted
according to Law; and that all Seditious Conventicles, Assemblies and Meetings
ought to be suppressed, as dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom, His Majesty's
Royal Authority, and the Protestant Religion as by Law Established; And that
Mr. Stephen Lobb, and Mr. John Humphreys, of the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, and Mr. (...) Alsop, of the Parish of St. Margarets, and all other
persons who Preach or Teach at the aforesaid Conventicles or Meetings, ought to
be prosecuted as Seditious persons, and such who (living in manifest contempt
of His Majesty's Government and Laws) do pervert and entice the hearts and
minds of His Majesty's good people from their duties to God and the King.

(And thereupon this Court did immediately order Indictments against the
particular persons in the Presentment named, and many more Eminent Papists and
Protestant Dissenters within this Liberty; which being found by the Grand Jury
aforementioned, the Court have caused Proclamation to be made thereupon, to render
themselves, or stand Convicted.)

We having at this time before us a certain Pamphlet, Entitled, A Defense of
the Charter, and Municipal Rights of the City of London; written by Tho. Hunt.
and printed by Rich. Baldwin: we do present the same as a Dangerous and
Seditious Libel against the King and Government; and that the Author and
Printer of the same ought to be punished according to Law.

Per Cur' Hardesy. Will. Bridgeman, Ni. Baxter, N. Arnold, John Cook, James
Supple, Giles Champneys, Spencer Hickman, Will. Grove, Will. Stevens, Jos.
Talcoate, J. Leegir, Ralph Sayer, Hugh Squire, Will. Francklyn. W. Stone, and
Tho. Sutton.


The PRESENTMENT of the Grand Jury for the County of Middlesex.
To the Right Worshipful Charles Lee Knt. and the rest of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, sitting at Hicks's-hall in
the said County.
WE the Grand Jury summoned and sworn for this present Sessions of the Peace,
do humbly present, That it is our opinion, that all Papists and Conventicles or
Meetings whatsoever, on pretense of Religion, contrary to the Act of
Uniformity, are absolutely against the known wholesome Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, and tend to the Subverting the Monarchy, and Religion established in
Church and State, the hazard of His Majesty's most Sacred Person, and the Ruin
and Overthrow of His Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects; And that such
Schism is promoted by the pretenders to Religion, either out of Pride.
Covetousness, or to occasion or promote a Rebellion, or which can be named
worse, in a good and settled Government, to compass their wicked Design; And
that those that are Promoters of such Schism, are or were either Rebels,
Atheists, Papists, Democraticks, Enthusiasts, and are at present the Pest of
the Nation.

And we do humbly take notice, and applaud the Wisdom of that House of Commons,
who on the 25th* of February in the 15th. year of His Majesty's Reign that now
is, where it was Resolved nemine contradicente, That the humble Thanks of that
House should be presented to His Majesty, for His Resolution to maintain the
Act of Uniformity. And in the next Vote, Resolved, That it be presented to the
King's Majesty, as the humble advice of that House, That no Indulgence be
granted to the Dissenters from the Act of Uniformity.

Which humble advice the said House of Commons humbly presented to His Majesty;
with their reasons, which we take to be undeniable, considering that the same
was the principal occasion of the late Rebellion, and the Inconvencies that did
attend the same; and also how near the Phanaticks came to a second Rebellion,
since the Discovery of the Popish-Plot.

We also humbly present, That all those that are any ways concerned in the
Government, that do not their utmost endeavors to suppress such Papists, or
Conventicles and Unlawful Assemblies, are Enemies to His Majesty, and the
Established Government in Church and State.

And we do render our hearty thanks to those Gentlemen that sit on this Bench,
that have effectually put the Laws in execution against the Papists, and other
the pretended Protestant Dissenters; and do esteem their measures as the only
way to render Peace and Happiness to His Majesty, His Royal Successors, and, to
His and Their Loyal and Obedient Subjects.

And whereas there are several persons that have been bred and educated
according to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and profess themselves of
the Church; but in their Lives and Conversations, by their Swearing,
Debauchery, and open profaneness, are become Scandals to their Religion; and
that even in time of Divine Service they do frequent Taverns and other public
Houses, even to the Scandal of our Religion.

We do therefore humbly present, That due enquiry may be made after such
persons, and that they may be presented according to Law, that the Debauchery
of such Vicious persons be not accounted a Scandal to our Religion; and also,
that there may be a more strict Observance of the Lord's Day.

Upon this humble Presentation of our sense in the premises, we pray that
effectual care be taken for the suppressing of all Papists and Conventicles and
Unlawful Meetings whatsoever; as also, any open Profaneness. It is ordered by
this Court, That this Presentment be forthwith Printed and Published.

Per Cur' ADDERLEY.

London Printed for W. Cudeman in the New-Exchange, and sold, by W. Davis in
Amen-Corner, 1682.


