The PRESENTMENT of the Grand Jury for the Town and Borough of Southwark in the
County of Surrey, and diverse other adjacent Places in the same County, at the
General Sessions of the Peace holden for the said Town and Borough, etc. at the
Bridghouse-Hall within the said Borough, on Friday the 27th. of June, in the
Six and Thirtieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second by
the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc.
THere having been lately detected a Horrid Conspiracy, against the Lives of
the King and the Duke of York, the established Government of Church and State,
and the Liberties of the English Nation: We do Present the said Conspiracy to
be still manifestly carried on; as appears by the Practices of the Republican,
and Fanatical Faction: And likewise, by the Declarations of some of the
Conspirators themselves at the place of Execution: Holloway, particularly,
delivering himself in his Confession and Narrative, in these very words, There
would be no want of Men, if it (speaking of the Insurrection) were once begun.
And afterward, If we should name every one that we thought would be concerned,
I believe we might name three parts of London. Giving therein to understand,
that they expected as well to be seconded by those that were only Well-willers
to the Cause, as by others that were Actually engaged in the Malice of the
Design.

We do therefore Present, as our Opinion, that all those, who either by Open
favor, or Connivence, Directly or Indirectly, by Word, Counsel, or Action,
give Countenance, or Encouragement, to any Seditious or Schismatical Disturbers
of the Public Peace, are, and ought to be comprised within the number of the
aforesaid Well-willers to the interest of that Cause and Party.

And we do the rather Present, and humbly Recommend this to consideration; in
regard of the many Frauds, and Artifices, that are commonly made use of for the
Inveigling of the credulous Multitude, seducing the Ignorant; corrupting the
Vain, and improving all occasions and ill humors, toward the dishonor both of
the King and of the Church, and the embroiling of the Government.

And whereas it has been the constant Method of these Turbulent Spirits, as
well in printed Libels, and written News-Letters, as in their ordinary
Discourses, to Revile and Slander the King, and the Church; to Calumniate his
Majesty's Ministers of State and Justice, and all Loyal Subjects, that out of a
sense of Conscience, and Duty, have either Acted, spoken, or written, in
Defense of the Government, Ecclesiastical and Civil; and for the undeceiving of
his Majesty's Liege People: By means whereof, they have endeavored, as much as
in them lay, not only to blast the Memory of all honest men, but even to
stigmatize Virtue and Loyalty it self.

In contemplation of these Outrages against Humanity, Duty, good Manners, and
common Justice; We do Present, as our further Opinion, the necessity of fixing
some public Mark of Infamy, upon all scandalous and seditious, printed Books,
Pamphlets and Papers, of the Quality abovementioned, to prevent the
transmitting of so many Honorable Names, with Infamy, to Posterity.

We do likewise Present, that Factious Coffee-men, Victuallers, and
Ale-house-Keepers in this Borough, have greatly contributed to our late
Divisions; and that diverse of them do still continue to make their Houses the
Receptacles of Disloyal and ill-affected Persons in suspicious numbers:
Notwithstanding their entire dependence upon his Majesty's Grace and Bounty,
for the Livelihood of Themselves, and their Families.

In which regard, we Present it needful, that some effectual course be taken
with them, either for their suppression, or their better behavior for the
future.

Jonadab Ballam. Edward Collingwood. John Gerard. Henry Durnford. Benjamin
Chapman. Robert Sparks. William Duke. Francis Walker. Martin Gray, sen. George
Bickers. John Hall. John Cross. Charly Stanton. William Greening. Richard
Snart. William Smith. William Wornham.


Villa and Burgus de Southwark necnon diverse. Paroch. and loci infra Com. Surr.
Ad General. Quarterial. Session. pacis Dom. Regis tent. pro Villa and Burgo de
Southwark, ac in and per tot. Parochias S. Olavi, S. Thomae, S. Salvat. S.
Georgii, ac in Kentstreet, Blackmanstreet in Paroch. de Newington in Com. Surr.
apud le Bridghouse infra Villam and Burg. praedict. in Com. praedict. die
Veneris scil. vicesimo septimo die Junii, Anno Regni Reg. Caroli Secund. nunc
Angliae, etc. tricesimo sexto.
It is ordered by this Court that the Presentment of the Grand Inquest, now
here delivered and openly read, be forthwith Printed by Benjamin Took.

Wagstaffe.


