THE Present State OF CHRISTENDOM Considered, In Nine DIALOGUES BETWEEN I. The
Present Pope Alexander the VIII. and Lewis the XIV. II. The Great Duke of
Tuscany, and the Duke of Savoy. III. King James the Second, and the Marescal de
la Feuillade. IV. The Duke of Lorrain, and the Duke of Schomberg. V. The Duke
of Lorrain, and the Elector Palatine. VI. Louis the XIV. and the Marquis de
Louvois. VII. The Advoyer of Berne, and the Chief Syndic of Geneva. VIII.
Cardinal Ottoboni, and the Duke de Chaulnes. IX. The young Prince Abafti, and
Count Teckely.
Done out of French.

London, Printed for R. Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. 1691.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
I Must acquaint the Reader that the following Dialogues, having met with so
Universal an Approbation beyond Sea, and so few of the French Copies being come
over into England, I thought it would not be amiss, if I endeavored at leisure
hours to Translate, and so to communicate that Book to the World, which gave me
so much Diversion and Entertainment in the Reading.

The Design of these Dialogues is principally to offer Incense to our Heroic
William the Third, who has with so happy an Augury begun to deliver Europe out
of her Chains, and to check the Pride of that Ambitious Monarch, whose Vanity
and Injustice has thrown him upon no less a Design than of subjugating all the
Western World. In every Dialogue almost he takes occasion to expose the
Intrigues of the French, the Illegality of their Acquisitions, their Rapines
and Violences, which were scarcely practiced amongst the Goths and Vandals, but
I am sure were never carried to that height and refinedness as we see them in
Modern France. He advises the Allies all along to neglect no Opportunities, to
fall into no different Parties or Factions, to espouse the Common Quarrel of
the Empire cordially and vigorously, to procure the same Common Interest, and
not by entertaining any contemptible thoughts of their Enemy, or by thinking
him weaker than really he is, to slacken their Endeavors, and lessen their
Preparations against him.

I only foresee one Objection to the Book, and that is, because the Author,
whenever his Argument carries him into the Territories of Satyr, his Efforts
that way are too feeble and ineffectual. In England it is only good, thorough
paced, substantial Scandal that pleases us; we don't love to do things by
halves; and if we must write Satyr, it is expected we make our Thrusts home, and
push freely. On the contrary, the French rally always with a great deal of
Decorum, they are too intent upon the Punity of their Language, to have any
great regard to the justness of their thoughts, and they forbear to speak
severe bitter things, lest it spoil the evenness of their Style, as some Women
in the World refuse to oblige their Gallants for no other reason, than for fear
it should russle or tumble their Clothes. And now whether what we have been
speaking of is an effect of French Civility, or French Weakness, I leave it to
the determination of the Reader.

DIALOGUES BETWEEN Several Great Men UPON THE Present Affairs.
DIALOGUE I.
Alexander the VIII. and Lewis the XIV. Alexander. I Am overjoyed to see you,
my dear Son. Since you have quitted Versailles to come to Rome, I make no
Question but that you are now inclined to grant me, what you have for so long a
time refused both Me and my Predecessor: And that being so, you may be assured
on my part, that I shall be ready to expedite those Bulls which you have all
along so impatiently desired.


Lewis. To be free with you, most Holy Father, I am not come hither at this
time to negotiate. Had that been my design, I should not have made such a long
Journey; besid^^ that the high Rank which I claim in the World, would have
obliged me to demand of you the meeting of me half way. You are not ignorant,
that when Leo the X. and Francis the I. desired an Interview, how the Pope met
him at Bologna. I believe you to be as good as Leo the X. but I believe my self
withal to be full as good a Man as Francis the I.


Alexand. You speak in a strange Dialect to me. What is then your design? Have
you committed any Mortal Sin, and so are come in Pilgrimage to visit the
Churches of Rome, in order to obtain Absolution?


Lewis. Nothing less than that. Bigottry is the least Fault I have, though some
will have me guilty of it. I see you cannot divine my Intentions; and therefore
give me leave briefly to unfold them to your Holiness. The part which Princes
are to act upon the Stage of this World, has always very much perplexed me: For
that same thing which ye call Policy, engages them never to show themselves
what they are; their Words are never the faithful Interpreters of their
Thoughts. They talk and act all their Life time in Cipher, as I may so say; and
he is counted the most politic and cunning, that can best unlock the Cipher of
other Princes, and who has a Cipher of his own, which others can never find out
the way to unfold. I must acknowledge that I have often been mightily pleased
with my self with an Imagination, that I could get incognito into the Court of
any Prince, though as great as my self; that it would not be impossible for me
to oblige him to tell me the very bottom of his heart, as I have a design to do
the same for him; and in regard this pleasure is so great in it self, and has
withal the Charm of being a Novelty, I am apt to think that I shall taste a
Felicity, more perfect, than any I have hitherto enjoyed. I have made choice of
your Court, as believing that, next to my self, there is not a greater Prince
than you in Europe: and for that Dissimulation is much deeper, and more at Rome
than Versailles, it must be in my Opinion an extraordinary pleasure, to hear a
Pope discover his Mind sincerely, unfold his Sentiments clearly, and call every
thing ingenuously by its own name.


Alexand. Your Design is very surprising; and I can scarce imagine that you
your self should conceive such a thing. How! for a Pope to utter his mind
plainly, and which is more, for a Venetian Pope too! What a Prodigy would that
be! Assure your self, my dear Son, that this is the greatest Design that ever
you set on foot; and to make a Judgment of it by the Rules of good Policy, it
will be an easier Task for you to subdue all the Princes of Europe, and to set
the Imperial Crown upon the Dauphin's Head, then to oblige a Pope to tell ye
his mind freely and sincerely, and by that means to despoil himself of the
Character of the Pontificate, to put on that of Humanity.


Lewis. The Design is great, I must acknowledge; but I have been told a hundred
times, that there is nothing impossible to me; and I have some Inclination to
believe it. Besides, you well know, that since the death of the Cardinals
Richlieu and Mazarine, my Court has been no less impenetrable than yours. And
therefore since that in despite of all Politics, I am resolved to open my mind
freely to you, why cannot you resolve to deal with me after the same manner? I
am apt to think by your last words, that you are half won already. What say ye,
Holy Father, am I deceived in my Conjecture or no?


Alexand. You may assure your self, I am altogether gained. For as you have
ordered your business, how can any man refuse you? But upon Condition, if you
please, that you shall not say a word to the Cardinals. For I make no doubt,
but that if they should know that I were able to lay aside but for a moment
that profound Dissimulation, which is the Proprium quarto modo, the Property in
the fourth degree of a Sovereign Pontiff, they would degrade me, and put
another in my room. For my part, I will not say a word about this intreague to
your Prime Minister, for fear you should have some small Reprimand: for how
submissive soever he may carry himself to you, I pretty well know, that you
have given him leave to rebuke you sometimes, when you act against your own
real Interests.


Lewis. I accept your Conditions. And to begin, let us lay aside, I beseech
you, the Titles of Holy Father, and Eldest Son of the Church, which were
invented only to amuse the Vulgar, and to impose upon Fools. My Name is Lewis
of Bourbon, and yours Peter Ottoboni. This is sufficient for us at present,
there needs no more Ceremony between us. Now then, since you have begun to talk
to me of the Bulls which I demanded of you some years since, you must give me
leave to tell you, that I have bought dear enough in all Conscience a few
sheets of Parchment, only with a woollen Twist, and about half a pound of Lead
to them.


Alexand. And what would you have more? Do you reckon nothing for the Matter,
and the Writing? You have a great many words to your Bargain.


Lewis. The writing indeed is something. But when the Secretary of the Briefs
is well paid, one would think that should suffice,


Alexand. Do you reckon nothing for the Installations which those Bulls give to
your Bishops, without which all their Functions would be looked upon as so many
Sacriledges?


Lewis. This looks very fair at first sight; but at the bottom it signifies
nothing. You know that those Bulls are not always necessary. Formerly they were
little regarded, and 'twere not a straw matter whether they were minded now, or
no.


Alexand. This nothing scares me. I must confess they are not very necessary;
but the Bishops are not of the same Opinion, and that is sufficient for me.


Lewis. The Bishops of my Kingdom are no more too accounted Gulls than you or
I. This was good in former Ages, when their Ignorance was so very gross, that
there were some Prelates that could not write their Names: now Knowledge is not
so scarce. And I Will hold you a wager, there is not a Bishop in my Kingdom, who
does not very well understand, that if Bulls are desired of you, it is only out
of formality. And therefore believe me for your own good, never be so shie in
granting them, exchange your Parchment for my Louydores while the time is, for
fear least at length they grow weary of your Refusals. You have done enough to
save the Honor of the Holy See, and it may prove dangerous to push on your
Severity too far.


Alexand. If the Bishops fail, I have one string more to my Bow, the People
are for me; and the People are the greater number. The Bishops may tell them,
that they value not the Bulls that come from Rome, but they will never believe a
Tittle they say: nor will they ever look upon them as lawful Pastors, that are
not provided of such a Letter of Credence.


Lewis. The People are on your side, I do not deny it; but is it impossible to
open their Eyes, and make them apprehensive that there is no necessity at this
day for what was formerly so little regarded?


Alexand. Is it because the People understand any thing? Certainly you do not
mean as you say. It is apparent that you have not been very familiar with that
many headed Beast, and that you have only formed an Idea of Mankind by what you
have observed in your Ministers and Favorites. Believe me, Lewis, if the
People should once begin to reason, neither you nor I should be what we are.
They would understand their Rights and Privileges, and assume them into their
own hands, and we should be reduced within a narrow Compass; but by good luck
for us both, the Definition of Animal Rationale was never made for the People.
They never make use of Reason, and we take the Advantage of it.


Lewis. Do not you deceive your self: My People are not the People you talk of:
I dare be bold to say, that I could bring the most Brutish of all my Subjects
to a Rational Examination of Things.


Alexand. I defy you for that. But suppose it was true; have a care you do not
teach them to reason to my prejudice, least it should cost you more than you
are aware of. The Consequence that would be drawn from thence against me, is
this, that I should have no Authority over them; and that what I assume to my
self is altogether usurped; and then that which they would say against you,
would be this, That all the Authority which you arrogate to your self is
Arbitrary and Illegal. I refer you to the Sighs of France, where you are set
out in your Colors.


Lewis. Very good! The Author of that Pamphlet raves; he pretends that my Crown
is Elective.


Alexand If he raves in that part, he does not rave quite through his Book; and
therefore it is well for you that the People are such Beasts; and for me too, to
speak my mind freely. But should the People fail me, I have still another
support. So many Convents as you have in France, are as good as so many
speaking Trumpets continually bestowing out Bulls, Bulls. They have there
almost as much Interest as my self; so that if it go ill there with my Affairs,
it can never go well with theirs.


Lewis. I must confess, that your greatest Strength lies there, as that there
also lies my greatest Weakness. Those sort of People are more your Subjects
than mine; and as it is from you that they have their main support, so it is
from them that you derive all your Authority. But what Reason have you to think
that the Monks will cry out so zealously for Bulls. Those sort of Cattle, you
know, have nothing to do with them. On the other side, they are glad that there
is such a way to mortify the Bishops Pride. For, as you well know, they have
no kindness for them; and if there were no Bishops in the World, they would not
care a farthing.


Alexand. What you say is very true; but it concludes nothing to my prejudice.
If I say the Monks desire Bulls, it is not that they are glad for the
satisfaction which the Bishops receives in that point. A man could not be said
to know them, who had such an Opinion of them. I must tell you, that you cannot
despise my Bulls, and openly testify your dislike, without contemning my
Authority; and this is that which the Monks would oppose to the utmost of their
power. Now as you know they are Masters of the People, and so long as they
shall tell the People, that there is nothing to be done without my Lead and my
Parchment, it would be a Point too delicate to be removed out of their Minds.


Lewis. I understand you. There is something in it indeed. Bat this is not the
most considerable thing: So that if there were nothing more, I would be your
Bondslave, if e're my Ministers should have Orders to press so hard upon this
Article.


Alexand. Pray, Sir, explain your meaning to me; under a Promise not to take
any Advantage of it, but after I depart from hence, to go and drink two or
three good Draughts of Lethe water, to make me forget all that we shall say
together.


Lewis. I am resolved upon a perfect Reconciliation with you, for fear my
Enemies should take Advantage of our Quarrels, and inveagle you to take their
part; and therefore it is necessary for some time to put an end to this business
of Bulls. After I have well fastened you to my Interests, it will be no
difficult thing for me to oblige the Venetian to a particular Peace with the
Turk, either by making them sensible of their real Interests, or by your credit
in the Senate. Moreover, to incline them more powerfully thereto, I can prevail
with the Grand Master of Maltha, who is my Creature, to call home his Galleys
which are in the Venetian Service, under pretense that he has occasion for them
to defend himself against the Turk, who has a designed revenge upon him, for
all the Losses he has received in the Morea.


Alexand. Is that all?


Lewis. I am also in further hopes, that having made a League with you, you
will remit no more Money to Vienna, nor to Poland, to carry on the War against
the Turk; and that you will no longer give the King of Spain leave to levy
Subsidies upon the Ecclesiastics of his Kingdom. And I desire that you by your
Emissaries, will make all the Catholic Princes of Christendom sensible, That
this is a War for Religion; and that if they will not unite with me against the
Heretics, yet they might so order their Business, that while they make a
semblance of continuing the War against me, they may throw all the Burden upon
the Protestants Shoulders. By this means they will insensibly be undermined;
and when they shall be at a Bay, 'twill be no difficult thing to ruin them
quite.


Alexand. This is most excellently contrived: but I do not find that this will
be altogether for my profit, as good a Catholic as you are. For I have no less
reason to be afraid of you, then of the most formidable among the Heretics;
and I know your Humor so well, that I am no less jealous of your Authority,
then of the Power of William the Third.


Lewis. To tell you my mind plainly, I have no less a design to bring down your
Grandeur, then that of others. And though I make less noise than Philip the
Fourth, one of my Predecessors, yet my Intentions are as bad as his. It Is
without contradiction, that if I prosper your turn will come; nor will I suffer
St. Peter's Successor to continue that Authority which he has so long usurped
over all the Potentates of Europe. But alas! I fear 'twill never be in my power
to execute these Illustrious Designs. I grow old, Death will surprise me; Face
of Affairs will Change, and perhaps one Night will overturn the Structure which
I have been rearing these fifty years. However, I shall leave good Directions
with my Successor, if he know how to follow them.


Alexand. I wish that all your Designs may prove Abortive for my own Repose and
the Good of the Holy Church. But what do you intend to do with the Duke of
Savoy? Soft and fair, Sir -- Do you believe that all other Princes of Italy, as
well as my self, will ever suffer you to despoil him of his Territories? Do you
think we do not visibly perceive it, that if we let you go on and prosper, you
will not stop in so fair a way; but that after you have swallowed the Duke of
Savoy, you will also endeavor to devour the Dukes of Mantua, Modena, and
Tuscany, and so all the rest.


Lewis. And would you think me too blame in so doing?


Alexand. Perhaps not so much: But let it be as it will, no more shall we be to
blame neither if we oppose your Projects.


Lewis. You would do much more prudently to go halves with me: You take one end
of Italy, and I the other. All your Predecessors have had an aching Tooth for
the Kingdom of Naples, and mine of the Duchy of Millain, two Kingdoms that lie
incomparably much better for Us than for the King of Spain. Do you begin at one
end, and I Will begin at the other; and let us never stop till we meet in the
middle.


Alexand. Find out some other Merchant, Lewis of Bourbon, find out some other
Merchant. I have but two days to live, and you would have me undertake a War to
ruin my self; and when I am gone, what will it signify to me, whether the
Kingdom of Naples be joined to St. Peter's Patrimony, or no? Shall my Nephews
or I be a whit the farter for it? Is it not better for me to get them a good
Settlement in the World? And are not they dearer to me then St. Peter's Chair?


Lewis. And what shall hinder you then from giving the Kingdom of Naples to
your Nephew Ottoboni, after you have once made your self Master of it? There Is
never a Prince in Italy, I dare answer for them, that would not have more
satisfaction to see that Kingdom in the Hands of a Person, whom they have no
reason to dread, then in the Hands of the King of Spain, who they know has for
a long while designed to bring the two Ends of Italy together, which he now
possesses, by making himself Master of the middle. Besides, I would have you
consider, how easy a thing it is to put this Project in Execution. As for my
self, I will take care to employ my Brother of Spain in Catalonia and Flanders;
and if he sends Six thousand men to defend that which he possesses in Italy,
it is as much as he will be able to do. To be short, I here promise you, that as
soon as I have on my side dispatched the Business which I intend to perform
with all the Expedition imaginable, I will assist you with my own Troops, if
you should have any occasion to make use of them.


Alexand. But hold a little; What plausible pretense shall we conjure up, to
color this Attempt upon the Spaniard.


Lewis. Very good. And did you ever hear of an Ambitious Prince that was
unfurnished of Pretenses? Come, you shall see me here on the sudden offer you a
Hundred, rather than fail. In the first place, you may if you please, renew the
Rights of the old Roman Emperors, whom you have succeeded, and to whom, as
every Body knows, the Kingdom of Naples formerly belonged. Or if you have no
mind to go so far, you may then order your Nuncio to pick some quarrel or other
with the Viceroy, upon the Score of Ecclesiastical Immunites, and so revive
those Differences afresh that were so unluckily laid asleep. But if you don't
think it proper to urge that expedient, why then while the King of Spain is
alive, take into your hands the Rights which the Holy See pretends to have to
that Kingdom after his decease. You know that all the Popes have asserted that
the Kingdom of Naples ought to return to St. Peter's Demain, whenever the
Heirs-Male of Spain chance to fail. You likewise know that the Spaniards are
not at all ignorant of these Pretensions; and as they are sensible of the
Justice of them, it may be they will employ all their Efforts to Sacrifice all
such Persons in that Kingdom, whom they suspect to be devoted to the Papal
Interest.


Alexan. Lord, how fertile you are in Expedients! But I don't demand of you how
I shall be able to justify my self as to this particular, I mean, for usurping
those Rights during the King of Spain's Life, which are allowed to be of no
efficacy till after his death. For methinks you intend to say, that the
indisposition of that Prince, has out of a Principle of just precaution,
obliged me to seize those Rights beforehand, for fear least you should pretend
to them your self, in the Name of the Dauphin, the presumptive Heir of the
Crown of Spain, in case that King should die on the sudden; but withal, that I
am to restore this Kingdom back again to its true Owner, if the King of Spain
should, contrary to the Expectation of the whole World, chance to leave an Heir
behind him.


Lewis. Right to a hair. I could not have explained my own Thoughts clearer, I
can assure you.


Alexand. But under favor, methinks you speak now against your own proper
Interests? For pray who has told you, That if the Holy See has once taken
possession of the Kingdom of Naples, you will be able to wrest it easily out of
their hands? Don't you know, it is commonly said of us Ecclesiastics, That we
are like the Lyon's Den in the Fable, every thing enters there, but nothing
comes out? Besides, is it not a most infallible truth, that if ever the States
of Spain come to acknowledge the Dauphin your Son, that you will have as just a
Title to Naples as to Madrid? And therefore how will it advantage me, I beseech
you, to take it out of the hands of the Catholic King, if I must afterward
restore it to you.


Lewis. To say the truth, I have spoken a little against my self. But if you
remember, I told you at first, that I was not come hither to negotiate with
you, but only to discover to you the Sentiments of my heart, upon promise that
you would not draw any Advantage from any thing which might be said. And now I
would have you consider, that if the King of Spain ever comes to be missing,
you know my meaning, I cannot be every where. It Is very probable, that while I
am reducing of Spain, you will have done your business in Naples. And thus,
either sooner or later, no matter whether, I shall certainly come to be
re-possessed of all my Rights. Nevertheless, take my word for it, there may
happen an infinite number of Accidents in the Interim, that may wholly change
the Face of Affairs: It Is ever good to hold what one can, and to speak my mind
freely, if I were in your case, I would immediately seize Naples, and
afterward dispute that Game with me.


Alexand. I am of your Opinion: But there is one thing, I confess, which does
somewhat perplex me. It Is not necessary to inform you, since all the World
already knows it, that I love my Nephews ten times more than I do the Church:
and not to conceal any thing from you, If I should ever chance to make a
Conquest, it should not be with a design to enlarge St. Peter's Patrimony. That
honest Apostle has no occasion for such kind of Services; but it is not so with
my Nephews, and therefore they should be the only Persons who should reap the
benefit of what we have been talking about. Now I am mightily afraid that this
same business would but sound ill in the Ears of the World, and that the
Princes of Italy would not be well pleased to see the Kingdom of Naples
possessed by a Race of Upstarts: for, not to mince the matter with you, my
Predecessors were never descended from Jupiter's Thigh, and the Family of the
Ottoboni was not well known in the World, before I brought it out of its
primitive Obscurity. Besides, I fear that after my Death, the same Fate would
attend my Nephews, which formerly happened to the famous Caesar Borgia. I have
read somewhere in Machiavel, (for I turn over that Author oftener than my
Breviary) that Alexander the Sixth having settled a considerable Principality
upon his Natural Son Caesar Borgia, who was styled Duke of Valentia, no sooner
was that Pope dead, but he was immediately turned out of all that he had by
Julius the Second, who thought it convenient to revenge himself of those
Injuries which he formerly received from him, when he was Cardinal under the
Title of Sancti Petro ad Vincula.


Lewis. It Is not at all difficult to answer every thing you have offered, if
you will but give your Attention for a while. I don't in the least blame you
for the tenderness which you express for your Nephews, for I would willingly
know why any man is made a Pope, if it were not to raise the Fortune of his
Relations and Friends? In my Opinion, few People would think it worth the while
for a man to employ all his life, in order to arrive to the Pontificate at last
in a feeble decrepit Age, to sacrifice his Repose and Pleasures to gain him the
Reputation of Sanctity, to pass his Days and Nights in the management of long
tedious Intreagues, and to consume the vigor of his Youth in the mortifying
Fatigues of refined Policy, if he were to suffer all this purely for the good
of Holy Church, and must leave his Family behind him in their old obscurity and
misery. Such a Consideration as this never entered into the heart of an Italian;
the Church is already rich enough, and what serves a Pope for, but to make his
best Market of her Spoils. As for what relates to the Italian Princes, let them
not give you any occasion of fear: Do but give a Comedy to one, a Mistress and
a set of B -- to another; suffer the third to fill his Coffers peaceably, and
take my word for it, you will have no reason to torment your self upon that score.
It Is true, your Family is none of the most Illustrious, but what of that? Is it
the only Family in the World that raised it self from a mean Condition to a
higher Dignity? Pray tell me what were the Sforza's at first, who were Dukes of
Millain, or the Medici, who have possessed themselves of the Sovereignty of
Florence. And then, as for what concerns the Example of Caesar Borgia, who lost
immediately after his Father's Death, all that he had acquired during his Life;
let me tell you, it is no good Consequence. There happens an ill-favored
Accident to day, which perhaps may never arrive any more. Caesar Borgio was
sick to the last Extremity, when Alexander the Sixth died: He was not prepared
for that sudden Blow; and when he found himself better, 'twas then too late,
the Opportunity was slipped. But very certain it is, that if he had not been so
unluckily indisposed at that time, he had not only preserved what he had gotten
in his Father's Life, but had also extended the bounds of that Estate which he
gained by his Prudence and incomparable Dexterity.


Alexand. All this is not without a great appearance of truth. I will consider
of it. In the mean time I must leave you by your self to dispatch a little
business. If you have any Advantage over the Spaniard, you need not question
put I Will make good use of the favorable moment, and endeavor to chase him out
of the Kingdom of Naples, provided at the same time, that I find you are in a
Condition to turn him out of the Duchy of Millain.


Lewis. I am ravished to find you inspired with such good Resolutions. But
before you go, let me request you to expedite those Bulls which I have demanded
of you, with all the haste imaginable. I will on my side take care to oblige my
Bishops to dress up some odd fantastic Expedient or other to give satisfaction
to your pretended Authority, without doing any injury at the same time* either
to my own Rights, or to theirs.


DIALOGUE II.
Between the Great Duke of Tuscany, and the Duke of Savoy. Duke of Tuscany.
WEll, I told you before, that in my Judgment you had done much better to have
complied with the King of France's desires, then to come to trouble all Italy
by your Opiniatrete, and to consume us here with unprofitable Expenses, which
it is impossible for us to sustain.


Duke of Savoy. How! Could you ever imagine it to be my Interest to put Turin
and Verceil into the hands of the French?


D. of Tuscany. Look you there! What a mighty disadvantage it would have been
for you to have had your two best places guarded by the Troops of France? You
would rather have profited by it exceedingly, since those Garrisons were to be
paid at the Charges of Lewis the Fourteenth, and must of Course have spent
their Money in your Country.


D. of Savoy. This is the true Language of a Prince who is only passionate to
have his Coffers full, but is not the Inclination of one who has a greater
regard to his Glory than to his Interest. Perhaps you are of Opinion too, that
I must lend my Troops to act against the Millanese.


D. of Tuscany. Very well! As if that had been the Design of his most Christian
Majesty. Don't you see that that Prince had no Resolution to make War in Italy?
He knew very well that the Spaniards armed with no other design, but only to
support you, and that as soon as ever they had seen you reconciled to him, they
would have changed their Battery; and as for himself, he would have turned his
Arms elsewhere.


D. of Savoy. I am willing to believe what you have said, though it is to be
feared he would have made his Advantage of that Occasion, and finding himself
stronger than the Spaniard, would have attempted the Conquest of the Millanese.
But to come closer to you? Do you think it fit, that a Prince who is a
Sovereign born, should quit the most important Places of his Dominion, and
receive a Stranger into his Capital City, to whose Laws he must be obliged to
submit himself, and to whose Rapines he must abandon his whole Country?


D. of Tuscany. The truth is, that Condition is somewhat mortifying; but you
should have considered withal, that you had secured the Peace of Italy by that
piece of Conduct. The Duke of Mantua would have continued to go to Balls, and
Comedies, according to his laudable Custom. The Princes of -- and of -- would
have continued to solace themselves in the Pleasures of Love. The Republic of
Venice had pursued their Conquests without Interruption; and as for my own
particular, I had not been obliged to bleed my self, as I may so say, to
maintain the War which is ready to pour its Fury upon us. For, in fine, if
France is powerful enough to chase you out of your Estate, it is not to be
supposed, that she will suffer the Millanese to enjoy their Repose long, to
whom she has a quarrel for declaring themselves in your favor. Who knows but
the Fire will spread further yet? and if that happen, shall we not be mightily
beholding to you for forcing us to take up Arms to defend our respective
Estates, and to drive out the Enemy from thence, who if he continue to make his
Advances as he has begun, will sooner or later enslave us all.


D. of Savoy. By your reckoning, I perceive I ought to have been the Ass in the
Fable, who was to be sacrificed for the good of the Common Cause. But though I
don't altogether agree with you upon this Point, yet I am very willing to be
sacrificed for the Public Benefit, since I lie the nearest to the Enemy; yet I
desire withal, that this Sacrifice may be done in such a manner, that it may
tend to some Advantage. Now this is never likely to happen, until you will
cordially assist, and put me in a Capacity to support the Tempest of the War,
which is just falling down upon me. If I had delivered up my strong Places and
Troops, as you know who demanded of me, pray inform me what Advantage had you
drawn from thence? Had you not been exactly in the very same pain as you are at
present; and though you say, that it was not his most Christian Majesty's
Design to push this Point any further, who told you that he was possessed with no
such Ambition? especially since he knew very well, that as for your own part,
you had rather resign your self, and all your Grandeur, to your dearly beloved
Ease, than help to support the Burden of War, let it be never so just and
necessary. It was therefore much better done, in my Opinion, that I have pulled
off his Masque, and that I have once in my Life put my self in a Condition to
be delivered from this Servitude, and not be everlastingly tormented between
Slavery and Liberty. If it is my good Fortune to be uppermost, I shall have the
Honor of chasing the Common Enemy out of Italy; and if I fall in the Attempt,
you must expect to meet with the same Fate, and that you will not be in a much
worse Condition, than if I had managed my self, as France would have had me.


D. of Tuscany. Be it so then, since you will have it so: and push on your Point,
for I will not oppose you any more.


D. of Savoy. That is not enough; You must assist me, since you see I have not
a sufficient Power to resist the Puissance of France: And I have reason to
apprehend the greatest part of their Forces will fall upon me, since it is from
the side of Dauphine, and Provence that they fear the most.


D. of Tuscany. I acknowledge that the other Princes of Italy should assist
you, and I promise you that I will solicit them my self on your behalf;
though, to confess the truth, I don't see any great probability of succeeding.
The Venetians are altogether taken up in their War against the Turk. The Pope
has enough to do to satisfy the rapacious devouring humor of his Nephews, who
at this present moment are at Daggers drawing one with another, none of them
being content with the Portion that has been made them. The Duke of Modena has
neither the will to succor you, since in his heart he is firmly devoted to the
French Interest; nor the Power, since all he can do is but just sufficient to
sustain that Rank which he holds in the World. The Duke of Mantua is so far
from assisting his Neighbors, that he is upon the point to sell his Capital
City, all that Money which he had for the Surrender of Casal being spent a long
while ago. The Republic of Genoa wishes no better to you, than to France; she
could be content with all her heart that you would both ruin one another; but
she will never be persuaded to supply you with any thing. In short, I must
needs tell you, that there is never a Potentate in Italy, that has either the
Power, or the Inclination to assist you.


D. of Savoy. I could make a shift to play my Game well enough without the Aid
of any of those Princes you have mentioned to me, provided you would but
heartily assist me. I don't demand any Troops of you, for I know you are not
able to furnish me with a great number; nor indeed have I any great Concern for
that matter. Germany and Switzerland abound with Soldiers, who desire nothing
more than to enter into my Service: but the misery on it is, I want Money, and
there is never a Person in the World that is in a better Condition to relieve me
that way than your self.


D. of Tuscany. What! that I have Money! Lord, who was it told you that I had
any,


D. of Savoy. It Is the public Report, that makes you pass for the richest
Prince, in ready Cash, that is in Europe.


D. of Tuscany. I profess it is all a mere Calumny; and I wonder in my heart
where you had it first. God knows I have enough to defray the Expenses of my
own Court, although they are but very inconsiderable; and then the Cardinal de
Medecis there has beggared me to all intents and purposes, to appear at Rome in
a Figure conformable to his Condition.


D. of Savoy. Nay, you have a great deal of reason, that I must needs own. It Is
true, the Expenses of your Court are but very ordinary; but still that is an
effect rather of your great Frugality, then of the want of your Ability. And as
for the Damage which the Cardinal de Medecis did you, when he was elevated to
the Purple, alas that is not as yet advanced to a Million; and what is that, I
pray, to those prodigious Sums of Money which you have horded up in your
Coffers.


D. of Tuscany. Once more I tell you, they are all mere Calumnies. Why
certainly I ought to know my own Strength better then any one else. I don't
know where I can take up one single Farthing to assist you; and if you reckoned
upon that, when you first declared against France, I must desire you to
unreckon it again, since you reckoned without your Host. For to deal plainly
with you, your Troops must dine somewhat of the latest, if they are to dine
with the Money which I shall give them.


D. of Savoy. Is it for certain then, that I am to expect no manner of Relief
from the part of Italy?


D. of Tuscany. Nothing can be more certain; and if you would follow my Advice,
you would endeavor to get your self reconciled to France, though it were at the
Expense of losing one part of your Principality.


D. of Savoy. Very good Counsel this, I profess: and which I am certain you
would never have followed your self, had you been in my place, and for my own
part I never design to be directed by it. Well then, if the Princes of Italy
fail me, I will make my Recourse to those of Germany, who will be sure to take
the Exigence of my Affairs into their Consideration. Holland already stretches
forth both her Arms toward me. The King of England, who is always ready to
declare himself in favor of the Oppressed, espouses my part: and our Posterity
shall know that the Protestants generously came from the remotest Quarters of
Europe to settle the Peace of Italy, nay, to defend the Pope, and Rome it self,
from the Oppression of the French, at the same time when the Italians gave
themselves over to a dishonorable Effeminacy and Ease. Their Succors, it may
be, will come somewhat late, but then they are sure and certain; since the
Protestants, who are of a different Principle from our Italians, held
themselves obliged to keep their word; and when they give, it is their peculiar
Glory to give more than they promised.


D. of Tuscany, Well, do you look after that. We ought to lay hold of that
which makes for our Advantage, let it come from what Quarter it will: And if
the Hugonots have offered you their Assistance, I advise you to accept of it.


D. of Savoy. Nay, you may be sure I will follow your Advice as to to that
purpose.


DIALOGUE III.
King James the Second. The Marshall de la Feuillade. La Feuillade. I Have
often told you, that if you would but have been advised by me, your Affairs had
been in a better Condition: Nay, I dare engage that by this time you had been
resettled in your Throne.


James II. Very right; and what would you have done I pray you in such unhappy
entangling Circumstances; Take my word for it, that man is like to be very
sorrily advised that Consults you for an Oracle: and amongst all the surprising
Revolutions that happen in the World, it is the greatest methinks to see the
Duke de la Feuillade turned a Minister of State.


La Feuillade. Say you so? Well Sir, you may use your pleasure, but in my
Opinion, Laughter is not very suitable for your Party, and raillery looks at
best but disagreeable from you, considering how the Case stands with you;
unless you intend to claim your benefit of the Proverb, and then indeed you may
laugh on to the end of the Chapter. You tell me no News, in acquainting me that
I am not a man for Counsel. Pish, I was never disgusted at it in mylife; I was
never cut out for a Minister of State. But to quit this digression, certain it
is, that if my words had been believed, you had to this moment continued on
your Throne.


James II. Well, and what was the Advice you proposed at that time, for which
you value your self so mightily now?


La Feuillade. Why, in short, 'twas this; That you might rest assured that all
the great Preparations for War, which were making in Holland, were only
designed against your self; and the Case being so, that it was your best way to
hang up Father Petre, with some half a score or a dozen other Jesuits out of
the way, as the true Authors of all those Miscarriages which made so lamentable
a noise amongst the People. You might have furnished your self with more of the
Tribe at any other Opportunity or Place; for Heaven be praised, we have no
reason to complain for want of that sort of Merchandise.


James II. And what Effects do you think such a violent Action would have
produced?


La Feuillade. What Effects? Why, ten or a dozen Jesuits hanged up were
honestly worth, between Turk and Jew, twenty thousand men. Your People, whom it
seems you had a Design at that time to Cajole with a few Sugar-plums, would
have been better persuaded of the sincerity of your heart by such a Sacrifice,
than by ten thousand other Acts of Royal Indulgence. Besides, I dare pawn my
Soul for it, the Prince of Orange had died for fear, least you should have
supplanted him in the Affections even of his own Party.


James II. And were not the other Favors which I scattered at that time,
enough to convince any Subjects in the World, that my Intentions were real, and
that I was become a new man? You remember without question, how I vacated and
ruined in the space of one week all that I had been doing for the Advancement
of the Catholic Cause in three years before. Now, was it possible for me then
to do any thing more to satisfy the Nation?


La Feuillade. Why, this is your peculiar Talent. You always do either too
little, or too much. All those solemn Revocations of your former proceedings
served only to acquaint the World that you were a Prince, who had a great deal
of Fear in your Constitution, but very little Steadiness and Bravery. Your
People, who were aware of your blind side, resolved that since you began to
fear, they would make you afraid to some purpose, and this, as I take it, was
the first step you made toward the Precipice. For notwithstanding all you did,
it was not sufficient to make the World believe that you had altogether thrown
aside your Design; though it must be confessed, that for a time you had changed
your Conduct. It was no hard matter to perceive that you only gave way to the
Necessities of the present Juncture, and that as soon as ever the Tempest was
blown over your Head, you would reassume your first Resolutions. But now the
hanging up of a dozen Jesuits, and Father Petre in the first place, would have
passed for a plain palpable demonstration of your thorough Amendment, even to
the most disaffected. Nay, I am verily persuaded, that not a man in your three
Kingdoms, and I think we may comprehend the Catholics in the reckoning, but
would have thought you had turned your Coat, and effectually reconciled your
self to the Protestant Party.


James II. But all this while the Pope would never have forgiven me for it?


La Feuillade. And why not? Since in doing of this, you only followed the
Example of a Son of one of his Predecessors. You see I am now speaking of the
famous Borgio, who having made use of Remiro d'Orco, a cruel and active Man, to
exercise a thousand Cruelties in Romaigne, which he had lately conquered, in
order to establish his Authority the better; and fearing that so inhumane a
Conduct would render him odious to the People, resolved with himself to make a
Sacrifice of this Remiro, and so having dispatched the Villain, he exposed the
pieces of his mangled Body in the Marketplace of Cesene, with a bloody Knife
by his side, to show the People that the Cruelties which had been committed,
did not proceed from him, but his Minister. Would you know what was the
Consequence of this Affair? The People were surprised at it, and all their
Discontents cured in a moment. A pretty Example this for James the Second to
follow, if he had but consulted Matchiavel.


James II. I begin to apprehend that you are in the right: But if the Pope had
said nothing to the matter, yet the Jesuits would not have done the same. I am
afraid they would not have failed to Regale me with a Dose of Poison a
l'Italienne.


La Feuillade. Pshaw, pshaw, what a surmise is here? The Society of the
Jesuits would have advised you to the same Expedient, if you had but consulted
them. They are a sort of men that are too zealously devoted to their own proper
Interests, not to see, that as the Tide ran then, it was for their Advantage to
Sacrifice ten or a dozen of their Members for the good of the whole Society. I
dare engage for them, they would have voluntarily furnished you with a greater
number for the Peace Offering, if your Occasions had required it, but with this
Salvo, to have made Saints of them after their Death, and so to have increased
the Company of their Red-letter'd Lunaries in the Martyrology.


James II. But what would his most Christian Majesty have said? what would all
the Catholics of Europe have said, or those Subjects of mine who are of that
Religion?


La Feuillade. Why, not a syllable; but have kept the Secret to themselves, and
approved of your Conduct with all their Hearts.


James II. Be it so then. But what had become of the Prince of Wales?


La Feuillade. The Prince of Wales! that is a good Jest In Faith. I wonder in my
heart how you came to trump that Card upon me. The Death of these Jesuits has
been as good as so many Letters of Legitimation for him, and there had not been
a single man in all your Kingdom, who would not have believed that you were his
true Father, since you had made those worthy Gentlemen dye, to whom we are
obliged for his Birth. But if after all, your Subjects had continued still to
murmur upon that Occasion, why then if you would have been ruled by me, you
should have dropped the Royal Infant, and utterly disowned him: For a Person of
your Experience need not be told, that you could never fail of having such a
Prince of Wales as that was at any time.


James II. Ha! what is this you have said? One would conclude from your words,
that you doubt whether the Prince of Wales is my own proper Son, or no?


La Feuillade. To confess the truth, I make a question of it, and I think not
without reason on my side. All the Mysteries of his Birth are evident Proofs of
his being an Imposture; and I wonder in my heart how such mighty Politicians as
you had about you, could be guilty of such unpardonable Solecisms in the
management of that Affair.


James II. The little precaution that was used in the case, is in my Opinion an
undeniable Argument for the truth of his Birth: for if a man had designed to
palm an Infant upon the World, it is to be supposed he would have been better
precaution'd.


La Feuillade. That Argument would not be amiss, if you had not known before
hand that most of the People doubted of your Queens being with Child. But since
you are well enough acquainted with the disposition of your Subjects, if there
had been no juggle in the case, you ought to have used all imaginable care to
have cured them of their Jealousy, especially in a Business of this great
Importance. This Conduct was observed by the Emperor Henry the Sixth upon a
like Occasion; and all Princes who have any regard to their Interests ought to
follow it. The Empress Constance, the Wife of Henry the Sixth, who was Surnamed
the Severe, became big with Child when she was about fifty years old. The
Emperor, to remove that Suspicion which might probably have been entertained,
and withal to satisfy the World that he designed to put no Imposture upon
them, ordered her lying in to be in the open Field, under the Tents, near
Palerme, and this in the presence of all the People. The Empress in the midst
of so Jovial an Assembly, on the Twenty sixth of December. in the Year 1196. was
delivered of a Prince, whose Name was Frederick, who was afterward elected
Emperor. You were not ignorant of this remarkable Story. You could not but be
sensible of the Suspicions of your own People, and therefore you ought to have
observed the very same Conduct, if you had not suffered your self to be engaged
in a Cheat. But latebat anguit in herba.


James II. I know all you have told me, and was very well informed of the
Suspicions of my People, but however, I was not willing to follow the Example
of Henry the Sixth. But my Design was to chalk out a way to Glory, which was
altogether new and surprising. Although the Prince of Wales was my own Son, yet
I would not condescend to remove those Suspicions which my Subjects had
entertained about him, because, relying upon my own power, I pleased my self
with the imagination, that all the World believed I had Credit and Authority
enough over my Subjects, to give them a Successor, such as I pleased, and they
not dare to disbelieve or mutter against it. Perhaps I had not taken up these
Measures, if they had not been possessed with this unmannerly Suspicion. And
now you have the true cause of all the Mystery (as you call it) which appeared
at that Birth.


La Feuillade. If what you say be true, I can only conclude you are an
unfortunate Person, for I dare swear no body will believe you as to this point.
Few Persons, I am sure, would hazard the wearing of a Crown after this manner;
and we have all the reason in the World to entertain but a very ordinary
Opinion of your Prudence, if you made no better use of it. It Is certain, that
this reason was invented after the business was over; and for my own part, I
should be loath to dive any further into this Secret, since I find you are not
willing to make a Confident of me. As I am a Subject of the most Christian
King, and your most humble Servant, and so forth, I am willing to believe that
the Prince of Wales is your Son: But as I am a rational Creature, I hope you will
allow me the liberty to think as I please; for to deal freely with you, I
cannot possibly bring my self over to believe a Syllable of this matter,
without passing at the same time the severest Judgment in the World of your
Discretion.


James II. Why then believe as you please, for it shall never trouble me. But
since your hand is in at giving Advice, I would willingly know what you would
advise me to do at present.


La Feuillade. In troth, Sir, you put me now to a very difficult point. Your
Affairs are too disordered and perplexed, that in my Opinion the most refined
Politicians upon Earth, are not able to find out a Remedy for them.


James II. They are not so much disordered as you imagine; or if they were, it
is not a Sin to doubt of the Puissence of your King? Don't you know that
nothing is impossible for him to do? And that my Cause lying in his Hands,
cannot fail of Success first or last.


La Feuillade. Pray, Sir, did you ever read Moluri in your life?


James II. Yes, I have read him. But what relation has that to our present
Subject?


La Feuillade. Methinks now one finds two Characters in that Poet, that
represent the King of France and James the Second to the life: One of them
always take true Measures; the other never fails by his imprudence to ruin all
the Designs that were contrived in favor of him. And now it is no difficult
matter to make an Application.


James II. The Application is very pretty, and worthy of the Duke de la
Feuillade. That is to say in plain English, the King of France is the prudent
Mascarille, and I the dull Lelie, the Sir Martin Mar-all.


La Feuillade. We find the very same Characters amongst all Conditions; and if
we charge the Names of the Persons in Moliere, the rest will not unsuitably
agree to your self.


James II. In what particulars do you find that I have ruined the Designs which
his most Christian Majesty has set on foot, either to maintain me in my Throne,
or help me to re-ascend it since my Abdication.


Le Feuillade. Not to descend to particulars in every thing. The great
confidence you placed in your never to be forgotten Army, made ^ou refuse those
Troops which the King of France would have sent over into England to your
Assistance, a little before the Prince of Orange landed with his Army. 'Twas
contrary to his Advice that you were prevailed upon to revoke whatever you had
done in favor of the Catholic Religion, and by that means gave your Enemies
an occasion to discover your Weakness. You discovered such public Testimonies
of your fear, when the Prince of Orange was in your Kingdom, that you imprinted
that Passion in the heart of all your Subjects. If you had taken the pains to
have commanded in Person at the Siege of Londonderry, that place had certainly
been carried by Assault, and your Enemies had not found it so easy a matter to
land in Ireland. If instead of beholding the Battle at a distance, you had
hazarded your Person at the Passage of the Boine, as well as your Adversary did
his, it is ten to one but you had rendered the Success of that Battle doubtful.
In a word, Sir, give me leave to tell you, a Kingdom deserves to have one
hazard something for its sake; and I can assure you, that if you keep at that
distance from Blows, as you have hitherto done, you are like to continue a
dispossessed King, though you live as long as a Patriarch. Our Monarch does very
well to employ all his Efforts to reestablish you, but all his Endeavors will
be to no purpose, if you push them on no better than you have hitherto done;
nay, your own Subjects, who are faithfully devoted to your Service, will
infallibly forbear to appear any more in your quarrel.


James II. It were no hard matter to answer all your Reproaches, if I would but
give my self the trouble to do it. But I find all my Reasons will be incapable
of persuading you. The unfortunate always meet with this Entertainment, and the
World is more accustomed to judge of Enterprises by their Success, then by the
Reasons a man had to undertake them. I shall content my self to make only one
Reflection, which comes first into my Head, and that I believe will serve to
justify me. I am sensible I have all manner of Obligations to his most
Christian Majesty, because he is the only Person who has assisted me, at the
same time when all the other Catholic Princes of Europe diverted themselves at
the expense of my Misfortunes; and the Pope himself, who was in Honor bound to
espouse my quarrel, could not endure to hear any thing offered on my behalf.
Nevertheless, I think I have reason to complain a little of the choice which
was made of the Count de Lauzun, to Command the Troops which were sent over to
me. It Is to him, possibly, that I may owe the Miscarriage of the War in
Ireland, through the Mistakes which were committed by him. Not, that he has any
want of Courage, which I own he has signalized upon several Occasions, but I
charge them with want of Experience. To give him his due, he is a very good
Soldier, but a bad General.


La Feuillade. Nay, never disquiet your self for that matter, for Losers are
never permitted to be Choosers, you were obliged to take him who was offered to
you. Now, all our French Generals had conceived such an invincible Prejudice to
your Person ever since your retreat out of England, that not a man of them
would go to serve under your Orders, for fear of hazarding his Reputation.


James II. I must needs own my self then to be a very unhappy man. But cannot
your mighty King cause himself to be obeyed if he pleases; or is there any of
his Generals that dare refuse him, if he orders them to cross the Sea?


La Feuillade. Not a man, Sir* But the King is of so good a disposition, that
he only will be obeyed freely and without constraint, and never gives a Command
to any Person, until he knows before hand, that it will be agreeable to him who
ought to accept it.


James II. Is it possible then, that among so many celebrated Generals which
the King has in his Service, there should not be found so much as one who had
Generosity enough, and Affection for the Catholic Religion, to come and
Command the Army of a Prince, who had rendered himself unfortunate, only by the
immoderate Zeal which he had for the Church?


La Feuillade. No, I believe there is not a man would do it. And as for my self,
who am talking to you now, for all I am Discarded and without Employment, I
would rather choose to pass away my time idely in Paris, than go hazard my
Reputation by Commanding under your Orders.


James II. Heaven be praised you have not much to hazard; for I must tell you,
with the same freedom as you have talked to me all this while, that this
Reputation, for which you pretend to be so much concerned, is not so well
established in the World as to deserve all this Trouble and Caution.


La Feuillade. It Is not such as you, Sir, that have the disposal of my
Reputation. Strangers are not usually acquainted with what passes in our
Kingdom, and therefore I am not in the least surprised, to see that you are not
informed of my Character, and who I am.


James II. That would but be so much the worse for you; since I, who am but a
Stranger here, and not over well instructed in the Affairs of France, yet know
very well how little you are esteemed here, and what an inconsiderable Figure
you make. Come, come, to let you see I am not so unacquainted with your Person,
as you may believe, The only Action for which you have made your self known to
the World, was your erecting a Statue to the King yonder in the place des
Victoires.


La Feuillade. That Action, without dispute, was one of the prettiest, noblest,
most ingenious things I ever did in my life. I was always of Opinion, that the
principal Duty of a Subject, is to advance, as far as in him lies, the Glory of
his Sovereign.


James II. I agree with you in that point. But then a man ought at the very
same time to endeavor to advance his own; for when nothing else comes of such
an Undertaking but Scandal and Shame, it is not so much for the Subject's
advantage. Now you cannot possibly be ignorant to what abundance of Railery
this false Step has exposed you; and you have certainly read those two Gascon
Verses that were one night affixed in your Honor very near the King's Statue.
What does d' Auvusson mean in a Blanket to toss us?
'Cause he has raised to the King such a mighty Colossus?
You have likewse seen, without question, that Hexastick which was composed in
praise of you, upon occasion of the same Statue.

While other Commanders in Battle and War
To gather fresh Wreaths for our Monarch prepare,
While they purchase him Fame at the expense of their blood,
To bleed in the Pocket Feuillade thinks it good.
One Statue he thinks, of his own wise erection,
Will atone for his sins, and be still his protection.

La Feuillade. Upon my word, Sir, I did not believe you had known so many
particulars that concern my Story: and it may be, I had not discoursed to you
with so much freedom, had I thought you had been acquainted with these matters;
was it not Lauzun, I pray, who informed you of all these pretty passages? It
must certainly be so; but I mightily admire at the goodness of your memory.
Surely you must have a great deal of leisure time in Ireland, to learn all
these foolish Stories there. Well, well, whatever Calumnies we have given the
World occasion to asperse us with, yet I think we have no reason to fall a
reproaching one another. I am a Marshall of France without Reputation, and you
are a King of England without a Crown. Now pray tell me, who is the most
unfortunate of us two?


DIALOGUE IV.
The Duke of Lorrain, and the Duke of Schomberg. Lorrain. HA! Am I not
deceived? Is it you that I behold, and is the King of France so happy as to
lose in so short a time two of his most considerable Enemies?


Schomberg. You are not mistaken, I am the very same. To acquaint you then with
somewhat of my History, you must understand that I commanded the King of
England's Army, till such time as he came to head them himself. I was at the
joining of the two Armies, I was engaged in the fight, I assisted to set every
thing in the most advantageous posture, when out of a fear to ravish any part
of the Glory out of that Monarch's hands, to whom it is entirely due, I quitted
my Post to come to the Shades below, and particularly to inform you, for your
comfort, that King William III. is still alive, who alone is in a Capacity to
reduce the common Enemy, that has hitherto disturbed the Peace of all Europe,
and whose restless Ambition has thrown him on no less a Design then making all
the World wear his Fetters.


Lorrain. I agree with you in all the Elogies which you bestow upon so great a
Prince. It Is the greatest satisfaction imaginable for me to understand that he
is still alive; but for all that I cannot forbear the testifying my Resentment
upon the occasion of your Death. Without pretending to diminish the least part
of his Glory, I dare presume to say, that you were no inconsiderable help to
him: and I am very well persuaded, that he is not altogether insensible of your
loss.


Schomberg. It Is indeed very true, that several of the Dead, who arrived here
after me, have assured me, that he was pleased to honor me with a few Tears;
but I am willing to attribute them rather to the kindness he had for me, than
to the loss he has sustained by my Death.


Lorrain. I perceive you are but newly arrived to these Quarters, because you
still retain some of the Customs of the other World. I ought therefore to
inform you, that here below we are altogether insensible to the praises which
are given us, and that as we never receive any Elogies but what are real and
due, so they that receive them, don't make it a matter of Ceremony to put them
off, or disown them. This method you are to use with me, and all the
illustrious Dead with whom you are to converse hereafter.


Schomberg. I am willing to submit to this Law, since it was not designed for
me alone, but, as you tell me, obliges all of us equally. Pursuant to this
Order you ought to assure me, that although our Deaths is very advantageous to
the King of France, since it has delivered him from two Enemies that were not
to be despised, yet it ought to be confessed that the Advantage is equal.


Lorrain. I don't altogether assent to what you have said. You had without
comparison more Experience than my self, and whatsoever Advance I made in the
management of the late War, yet I must own that I had the glory to go to your
School, and there to be acquainted with abundance of things that were unknown
to me before.


Lorrain. It Is true, I had somewhat more Experience then you; but you were in
the flower of your Age, your years did not hinder you from the pursuit of
Action and you were still learning more and more every day. On the other hand,
it was high time for me to consider of a Retreat, and the weaknesses of my Age
would not permit me to execute all those Designs which I had formed before.


Lorrain. I don't know which of us two hated France the most. As for my self, I
must own, that as I believed I had all the just Occasions in the World to hate
her, so I never failed to show it, as Opportunity served.


Schomberg. It Is no wonder that your Aversion to her was so great, since you
sucked it in with your Milk. If you will pardon the Expression, and received it by
way of Inheritance from your Ancestors. Besides, she barbarously despoiled you
of your Paternal Inheritance, and that was too gross and insupportable an
Injury to be ever forgotten. But now to come to my own Case, none of my Family
had the least Reason to complain of the most Christian King, and till the last
Persecution, I had all manner of Obligations to thank Lewis the Fourteenth. If
I served him faithfully and honestly, he took care to recompense all my
Services. My Religion at last compelled him to enjoin my Retirement, and I
presently obeyed him. Notwithstanding all this I have entertained no particular
hatred for the Person of the King, for which I shall ever preserve a great
esteem and respect. As I was left at liberty to dispose of my self so I
believed it was lawful for me to engage in another Service. The King put me out
of a Capacity of serving him any longer, but though this Conduct appeared
somewhat rude and severe, yet it never prevailed upon me so far, as to
extinguish the memory of all my former Obligations. I was very glad that the
late Conjuncture did not carry me to make War directly against him, and if I
had been obliged to have done it, by the duty of my Charge, I had done it, I
confess, but not without some little regret, and some particular concern.


Lorrain. Behold a generous temper of mind, and which is to be paralleled but
by very few Examples in the World. However, give me leave to use the freedom
with you, as to tell you, that there was a particular Circumstance in your
Case, which may abundantly justify your Aversion. The King of France never
obliged me in all his life, and never received any manner of Service from me,
so I never expected any kind usage at his hands: But as for your self, you have
all the reason in the World to imagine, that since you had done so much for
him, he would never repay you with so black an Ingratitude. You have declared
that you were not influenced by any Passion of hatred; on the other hand, I
freely own that it mingled it self in all my Actions, and therefore upon that
Consideration I will agree with you, that the King of France had a more
formidable Enemy in me than in your self. And yet at the same time, I can never
prevail with my self to own that my Death was more advantageous to him than
yours. Since his Majesty of Great Britain set himself at the head of his own
Troops, he knew not where to find a General in whom they reposed so much
confidence, as in your self. The Army could not believe you were capable of
taking any false Measures; they assured themselves you forsaw all the
Contingencies of War, and therefore they slept with as much Security in their
Camp, as if they had been in the best fortified place of Europe. They were
sensible that you never went upon uncertainties, that you never hazarded the
main Chance, or left things at random to the decision of Fortune, and this made
them march under your Orders to the Battle as to an assured Victory. You must
needs own, after all, that the French, who have a considerable number in the
English Army, and many of whom served under you formerly in France; you must
needs own, I say, that the French regarded you as a Common Father, that they
were so well accustomed to your Orders, that they understood you at half a
word, and that they had a certain kind of Emulation amongst them, which should
execute your Commands with the greatest readiness and vigor. I am afraid that
though King William the Third has placed himself at the head of them, they will
never have a General who was more agreeable to them, and whom they obeyed with
greater pleasure and submission. In fine, though they use to say that the Dead
never afflict themselves with the Affairs of the other World, yet I cannot
forbear to be sensibly concerned at seeing you here, considering what a loss
the Allies have sustained in you.


Schomberg. I am willing to confess that I was not altogether unuseful to the
Allies, but then there is a vast difference in this Case between you and me.
Experience has sufficiently demonstrated to the World, that the loss is not
equal. I am informed by several of the Dead who are lately arrived here, that
my Death did not hinder the King from gaining the Battle, that he rendered
himself Master of Dublin afterward, and of the better part of Ireland; so true
it is that such a Person as my self might be spared well enough. But now to
come to you, one cannot compare the last years Compaign with this, without
seeing sensibly how necessary your presence was to the Allies. You took Mentz,
where there were posted near Ten thousand of the Enemy, and afterward marched
to the City of Bonne, which could not avoid Surrendering herself to you. But
since your death, the Germans have done nothing at all, and I am told that the
last Campagn has past without taking the least spot of Ground. And do you think
now that Matters had gone at this rate, if you had not been dead?


Lorrain. Can, what you say, be possibly true? You are ill informed without
question, and it must certainly be some Frenchified Ghost or other, who has
acquainted you with this piece of News.


Schomberg. Nay, what I have told you is true to a syllable. That was visibly
the state of the German Affairs when I left the World; and the few dead Germans
we see arrive here, are a sufficient Argument to prove the truth of it.


Lorrain. To say the truth, I was somewhat surprised to see them drop so one
after another. What, thought I with my self, if they had given Battle upon the
Banks of the Rhine, or if they had been employed in the Siege of any place, it
were impossible but we should behold whole droves of them tumbling down every
day. And yet all this while, we could see but a view sad sorry Souls, the Lord
knows, come down to us, poor Vermin that dyed of Diseases in their Beds, to
inform us of what passed in the Campagn, and what other remarkable Occurrences
happened in the World.


Schomberg. You reasoned justly enough. Ever since we had no more of the Duke
of Lorrain's Assistance, the Emperor has made no further Advances, and this
may serve to prove how necessary you were to him. Besides the general Interest
of the Empire, which principally moved you to embarque in that Affair, you had
likewise a particular Interest of your own to pursue, and that so powerfully
influenced to make use of all Opportunities against the Common Enemy. You hated
all slow phlegmatic Deliberations, or if they were taken, you gave your self
no Repose till they were put in Execution. All the World obeyed your Orders
with joy. The prosperity of your Arms gave occasion of Envy but to a small
number of disaffected Men, over whom you triumphed at last in the Emperor's
Council. He knew you went readily to work, and that you had no Temptation upon
you to protract his Affairs by a dilatory Conduct, so he was accustomed to
follow your Advice, and to submit himself to what you judged expedient.


Lorrain. But what has become all this while of the D. of Bavaria? Who, in an
Age not so far advanced as mine was, has all the Experience and Prudence that
is necessary to Command the Imperial Forces.


Schomberg. It Is indeed very true, that the Duke of Bavaria is a gallant
Prince, that he is the Honor, no less than the Support of the Empire, and that
if his Advice had been always exactly followed, the Emperor's Affairs had not
been in so declining a Condition. But the consideration of his being so young,
has been the Reason why his Counsels have not been always hearkened unto, and
why several of the Princes of the Empire have refused to serve under him There
have been abundance of Disputes upon this Subject in the Emperor's Council,
and if some Persons in the World might have had their Wills, he had never
received the Command of the Imperial Army.


Lorrain. Give me leave to tell you, That all this Mischief did not come only
from that quarter. I have often represented to the Emperor, that it was high
time to conclude a Peace with the Turk, and if my Advice had been followed, it
had been ratified these three years ago. It unfortunately happened, that the
Emperor's Interest at that Juncture seemed to be linked with my own, so every
body believed that what I spoke was out out of a regard to my own particular
Advantage, and this was sufficient to make my Counsel be laid aside. I would
have fain given them to understand, that it was not material to the Question,
Whether that Peace would be for my own Advantage, or no, for I was willing to
agree with them in that point; but whether the Interest of the whole Empire and
Emperor did not require them to make a Peace, and that was the thing I
labored to make appear. But 'twas to no purpose; they believed I only spoke
for my self, and rejected every thing that seemed favorable to my Designs, and
so they gave their Opinion for continuing the War. At the same time, I desired
them to inform me what Advantage the Emperor would draw from thence. Suppose
(says I) he chases the Turk even to the Walls of Constantinople; what will he
be a farthing the better to make himself Master of a desolate uninhabited
Country? When at the same he has another Enemy at his Back, who, if he please,
may Ravage the whole Empire, and ruin the better part of Germany.


Schomberg. The Original of all this Mischief proceeds from their having too
despicable an opinion of his most Christian Majesty. I have often said at the
beginning of the War, that they would be deceived every Man of them in this
particular. I have served in France all my life time, I have almost passed
through every degree of Military Preferment, and at last I had the Honor of
Commanding in Chief. I know very well now the Army is composed, and I dare
pretend to maintain, that there is a necessity not only for all the Forces of
the Empire, but of all the Allies into the bargain, to reduce her into moderate
bounds. She alone has as great an Army as all the Allies together, and an Army
that have showed upon all Occasions, that there is not a better in Europe. They
are paid to the utmost exactness, and though their pay is not so very great,
yet the regularity of it atones for the default. They are obliged to observe
the Military Discipline to the highest Severity, and whosoever violates the
Laws, is punished without any Mercy. The Generals and Officers who Command
them, are Men of Courage, Experience, and Honor, and above all, they have an
unconceivable Affection and Duty for their Sovereign. The King very exactly
recompenses all those who have deserved well of him, and punishes without
distinction those that fail in their Duty. One may say at the same time, that
he does not weigh a Man Faults and Services in the same Scale; for although you
have perfectly acquitted your self in your Duty all your Life before, yet all
this is accounted for nothing, if you have been guilty of one notorious
Transgression. People believe that the King of France is in want of Money, but I
could wish with all my Soul that the Allies lay under no greater Exigences.
Whatever he spends does not depart out of his own Kingdom, his Money only
passes out of his Hands to his Subjects, and from them Circulates into his own
Exchequer. In short, as a Man may say, that the Council of France is properly
composed of the King and Monsieur de Louvois, so it is the most secret Council
in Europe, as well as the readiest.


Lorrain. I agree to every thing you say, but am very glad that none of the
Dead besides my self hears you. Upon my word they would take you for a Spy and
Creature of France, and bring you before one of the Judges here in Hell, or at
least raise the Mob against you.


Schomberg. I know very well that there are abundance of People in the World
that wont allow you to speak a syllable of the Puissance of the French King,
and what is very surprising, although they feel every day evident proofs of it,
yet they would oblige a man to shut his eyes, that he may perceive nothing.
These are the Men that turn the most disadvantageous things to their own
advantage and will pretend that the Battle of Fleurt, and the Naval Engagement
were mighty Blessings to the Allies. According to their reckoning France is a
very desolate place, void of Men and Money, and knows not to what Saint to make
her Applications under the present extremity: After all, I would willingly know
what is the intent of all this Discourse, and what they would be at. I could
wish with all my heart that things were as they give out; and if the publishing
of them only would render them true, no man should employ his Talent louder
against France than my self. But all this idle stuff does not signify a
farthing, all our Discourses don't alter the nature of things, and ten thousand
words are not capable of diminishing the Armies of Lewis the Fourteenth. I am
willing to believe that there are some Persons in the World that speak
immoderate things of the Power of that Prince, but then the number of them is
so inconsiderable, in respect of the other Party, that they don't deserve a
formal Confutation. For my own part, if it were necessary for me to take one
side or other, I would rather chose to be of the former than the latter. Every
one knows that nothing is so dangerous as to despise an Enemy, on the other
hand, it is but reasonable to form the most advantageous Idea of him. This will
oblige us to neglect no opportunity of using our utmost efforts against him,
and to take the truest and justest measures in order to reduce him. I am very
well persuaded, that it had been better for the Princes of Europe if they had
used their greatest efforts, and if some others, who pretend to pass for
Allies, had been of this Opinion. One ought not to be accounted a Pensioner of
France for speaking after this rate; and it is the most horrid Injustice in the
World to draw so ill a Consequence from it.


Lorrain. It Is indeed very true what you have said. I will only add, that if it
should ever happen that France should come by the best on it, those Gentleman
ought not hastily to judge the worst of those Men who were of another opinion.
There are two sorts of Men in the World: One is full of fire and heat, their
Blood boils perpetually within them, and they are apt to imagine that every
thing is for their advantage. The other is of a cold and fearful temperament,
Faith and Hope have nothing to do in their Constitution, I mean as to their
best Offices, for they always believe and fear the worst. It Is therefore but a
piece of Justice to attribute those great Idea's which some perhaps have
entertained about the Puissance of the French, rather to this Spirit of Fear,
and Coldness of Temperature, than to any desire to see the Enemy triumph, and
the Allies be vanquished. But, my dear Duke, it is not Reason which guides most
People in the World, they are prejudiced by their Passions, they are divided
into several parties; and few, very few are so happy as to behold things with
disinteressed eyes, and with a clear and distinct view. When there appears an
unknown Man in Company, who reasons upon the present Affairs, we don't amuse
our selves so far, as to examine his Reasons, to see whether they are good or
bad; that discussion would be too troublesome, and few Persons would think it
worth their while. We only content our selves with considering, whether what
this unknown Person has said, agrees with our Inclinations, or no; If it does,
he has Reason on his side, and cannot deceive us; but if it happen otherwise,
he is a Pensioner and a Spy without any further trouble. And now to conclude,
it is very well that none of the Dead understands us, for perhaps we might meet
with a great deal of vexation upon that score.


Schomberg. But cannot we be so happy then as to meet with some of the
unprejudiced Dead, who are convinced of the truth of what we have said?


Lorrain. Upon my word, it would be a very great trouble to find one of that
Character. You must know, that Men carry along with them the very same Passions
which they entertained in the other World, into these Territories, and as every
one has engaged himself more or less in one party or another, so it is a
difficult matter to distinguish them and make them quit their beloved
Sentiments.


Schomberg. Well then, since it is so, let us even be silent, for I perceive we
are in the Enemies Country.


DIALOGUE V.
The Duke of Lorrain, and the Elector Palatine. Lorrain. WHat, another yet?
Sure it is a Clymaterick Year for the Enemies of France: I am just now come from
the Ghost of the Duke of Schomberg, and I fancy I perceive that of the Elector
Palatine.


Elector. Nay, you are not deceived. It Is the very same. But I think it is not
necessary to run to the influence of the Stars to give a Reason for either of
our deaths. I am Threescore and five years old; the Duke of Schomberg was
older, and besides that at the Head of an Army. There was no occasion for the
Stars to be concerned in our Destiny, or to hasten our Death at this Age. It Is
nothing but what is very natural; and if Lewis the Fourteenth is obliged to any
thing upon that score, it is rather to the number of our Years, than to the
Influences of the Planets.


Lorrain. It Is very true what you say. It is no difficult matter to perceive
that only Nature is concerned in these Events, but still Nature is too simple
and obvious a thing for some Men: They love Mysteries dearly in every thing, as
well as in Religion; and I dare engage, that though there was nothing but what
was merely natural in my death, that some People have not failed to assign it
to a Secret Cause.


Elector. You need not question it. In short, you died of Poison. France took
care to give it you by corrupting some of your Domestics, or else by
dispatching a Jesuit to do you that kindness, for the World says, you had no
over great esteem for that Society.


Lorrain. Well, but did not those who assisted at my Death, attested that I
died of a Squinancy?


Elector. Yes: But People answered again, that 'twas a Report industriously
spread to hinder that Secret, and disguise the true Cause of your Death. Others
said, that there was store of all sorts of Poison in the place where you were,
that it is the nature of some Poison to suffocate those Persons that take it;
and that 'twas with a Dose of the latter sort that you were Regaled.


Lorrain. Alas! 'twas the former. I ought to be believed upon my word, I really
died of a Squinancy; and as for the latter, I leave it to the decision of those
worthy Gentlemen, the Physicians. They are too ingenious a sort of Men to be
mistaken in so palpable a matter; and methinks I hear them very gravely
maintain, that the Occasion of my Death was for taking some Suffocativum
toxicum.


Elector. Nay, let them look to what they say. We shall not dye the less for
all that; but nothing grieves me so much, as that France is like to be a Gainer
by our Deaths.


Lorrain. Likely enough. One may say that you and I were the two great Wheels,
upon which the whole Affairs of Germany turned, and especially all those
measures that were formed against the Crown of France. It was your Province to
concert Matters, as it was mine to put them in execution. You know his most
Christian Majesty in the Manifesto which he published at the last Siege of
Philipsburg, did not fail to acquaint the World, that you had incessantly
solicited all the Princes of Europe to associate against him. However, I am in
good hopes, that the loss of you is not irreparable, and that his Electoral
Highness, your Son, as he has inherited your Estate, has also inherited the
Hatred which you had so justly entertained against Lewis the Fourteenth, and
the Authority which you had so deservedly acquired in the Imperial Court.


Elector. As for his hatred, I have nothing more to say to it, but that I
suppose he has enough for his occasion: But as for the Authority of which you
spoke, I am afraid whether he is so fortunate as to possess it. The quality of
being the Empresses Father gave me a certain Authority, which that of a Brother
does not invest one with. Besides, I had been for a long while acquainted with
the Imperial Court, I perfectly knew all the Intreagues and Methods of it: On
the other hand, the Electoral Prince, my Son, is but a Novice there, and
consequently is not in a capacity of taking the justest measures against the
Enemy of my Family.


Lorrain. You have however this to comfort you, that after all, you lived long
enough to see an honorable Provision made for your Family, though it was so
numerous. It Is about a year ago, since you were in danger of quitting this
World; but as if Death it self had a mind to favor you, it gave you leisure
enough to marry one of your Daughters to the Prince of Parma, another to the
Prince of Poland, and to secure the Crown of Portugal to your House, by
obtaining the Infanta for his Electoral Highness your Son.


Elector. For as much as I see, you have been but very ill informed.


Lorrain. What say you then? Is it not true? These three Marriages I thought
were as good as concluded before I left the other World.


Elector. The first is consummated, the second is pretty well advanced, but the
third is clearly broke off.


Lorrain. Why, you mightily surprise me now. From whence I pray proceeded this
sudden Change? Did not the Grand Master of the Teutonick Order conduct the
Queen, your Daughter, into Spain, and was he not to touch at Lisbon, in his way
home, to conclude the Marriage of the Electoral Prince with the Infanta, and
carry her along with him into Germany?


Elector. All this is very true. The Grand Master effectually dispatched his
Business in Spain, and was just come to the Frontiers of Portugal, when an
unexpected Message he received upon the way obliged him to return back. They
made a Report be raised that the occasion of it was, because the Grandees of
Portugal were not as yet resolved to assent to this Business, but indeed there
was another Mystery in the Case.


Lorrain. For God's sake deliver me of my pain, and tell me what it was?


Elector. We were informed that the King of France had appeared in the Market
before us, and played his Cards so well with the King of Portugal, as to obtain
the Infanta for the Dauphin his Son


Lorrain. And is the Infanta then married to the Dauphin?


Elector. No, No. At the same time when she was ordered to prepare for her
Passage into France, there happened a strange unlooked for Accident, that broke
off the March.


Lorrain. See what Rubs and Disappointments now and then happen in the World. A
man would be apt to conclude that this Princess is destined never to be
married. But pray tell me, what sort of Accident this was.


Elector. Why, upon the upshot of the matter, they found that the Infanta had
never been consulted, and that she had disposed of her heart elsewhere.


Lorrain. I fancy you are in a humor of Raillery. For does not all the World
know that the Daughters of Princes are but so many Politic Victims, which they
use to Sacrifice to the Public Good, without ever consulting their
Inclinations in private; and though we don't so much take advice of their
Hearts, as of a certain thing which is Christened by the Name of Raison d'Etat,
when we dispose of them by way of Marriage. Let the Infanta give her heart to
whom she pleases, provided she will allow the use of her Body to the Spouse whom
the King her Father has provided for her.


Elector. But what will you say, if she disposed of her Body, at the same time
when she gave away her Heart, or if a Clandestine Marriage put a stop to the
procedure. I dare not positively affirm that the Case was so with her. But
however it was, the Marriage with the Dauphin was broke off; the Infanta is at
present in a Convent, and one of the Grandees of the Court lost his life under
a pretense for being concerned in a certain Intrigue. As for the Electoral
Prince, my Son, he is in the same Condition he was in, when you left the other
World.


Lorrain. The Adventures of this Princess are very singular, and I question
whether we can furnish our selves with any thing so surprising, either in
History or Romance. She was first of all to have been married to the Duke of
Savoy, but he had no great Inclinations for her, and all his Subjects opposed
it. Many years after this a Match was proposed between her and the Duke of
Tuscanies Son, but the great Duke took care to set some Invincible Obstacles in
the way. Then they thought of giving her to the Prince Palatine, but the King
of Portugal deceived him. After all, that Monarch promised her to the Dauphin
of France, and then she her self stepped in and opposed it. She gave her self to
a Grandee of Portugal, and that cost the poor Lover his life; for I perceived
very well that that was your meaning, when you first made mention of a Grandee
of that Court. After so many Disappointments and unlucky Chances there was no
other way left than to make a Retreat. But how comes it about that the Prince
of Poland's Marriage with the Princess your Daughter has been so long
protracted, for I thought I left it just upon the point of being concluded.


Elector. The King of Poland, who saw how ardently the Emperor desired that
Alliance, has been the only Remora in the Business.


Lorrain. Now, I always thought that the Match was no less for his Interest
than his Imperial Majesty's. By this means he could promise himself to secure
the Crown to his Son; and what could he desire more?


Elector. Why in truth the King of Poland believed, that it was better to have
something that was real and positive, than to feed himself with Chimera's and
Uncertainties. He considered that I was old, that after my Death the Scene of
Affairs might be altered, and that the Affection which the Emperor expressed for
the Match, might hereafter happen to be changed. When it was no longer
supported by my Authority with him: that as his Imperial Majesty had a numerous
Family, so it was not impossible, but that he might be prevailed upon one time
or another to prefer one of his own Children, before the Prince of Poland, who
would only be his Brother in Law.


Lorrain. What could the King of Poland demand besides?


Elector. He pretended that they ought to give him Moldavia and Malachia, whose
Princes you know abandoned the Turks to become Tributaries to the Emperor. You
are not ignorant how he has had an aching Tooth for those two Provinces this
long while ago, and he believed this was a favorable Opportunity to obtain the
Possession of them.


Lorrain. And did the Emperor then agree to this Demand?


Elector. No, No, he was far from liking the Proposal. Those two Provinces, you
know, formerly made a part of the Kingdom of Hungary, they are very
advantageously situated near it, so that nothing but mere Constraint could
ever make the Emperor part with them to Poland, now he had them in his hands.


Lorrain. So then the Marriage of the Princess of Newburgh, which every one
concluded was as good as over, by this means is broke off to all Intents and
Purposes.


Elector. Why there you are mistaken; The Grand Seigneur has made up the
Breach; and thanks to his Endeavors, the Match, of which we have been
discoursing, was happily concluded after all these Difficulties.


Lorrain. The Grand Siegneur, did you say, made up the Breach? That is a
Mystery, I confess, which I cannot decipher. Pray explain the meaning of this
Riddle to me.


Elector. You know there is such a man in the World as Teckely Prince of
Transylvania. The Grand Seigneur lent him an Army to enter that Province; a
considerable Body of Tartars joined him. The Hospadars of Walachia and Moldavia
seeing him so well supported, have reassumed their Ancient Engagements, and
turned Tail upon the Emperor. His Imperial Majesty seeing himself utterly
abandoned by them, and not in a Condition to keep them any longer in his hands,
made no difficulty, they say, to resign them to Poland, with this Proviso, that
the two Provinces may make this Cession void, when they judge it expedient.


Lorrain. Behold a strange and surprising Revolution! I did not at all question
the ill Inclinations of the Hospodars, but I thought they were not capable to
put them in execution, but that making a Virtue of Necessity, they would submit
to the Emperor's Yoke, since they could not otherwise avoid it. Why surely the
Turks and Tartars have been very well employed by the Polish Forces, to be able
to make themselves Masters of Transylvania so soon.


Elector. You mean that they have not been at all employed there. And now when
any one would believe that these new Engagements, into which the King of Poland
has entered, would oblige him to use his utmost Efforts to repel the Common
Enemy, is it not Matter of the greatest Admiration, to find him not only
negligent as to the adjusting his Affairs against the next Campaign, but also
to act less (if it were possible) than he has done for some years last past?
Some People imagine that all this proceeds from want of Ability; but others
believe he has very good reason to make use of this Conduct.


Lorrain. Methinks I am acquainted with some of them. This Prince without
question is more apprehensive of the ill Neighborhood of the Emperor, than
that of the Hospodars. Those you know are not in a Capacity to ravish the Crown
from the Prince his Son, but whatever precautions he may use on the Emperor's
side, he is not assured for all that they will succeed. It will be ten times
easier for him to justify his Pretenses against these little Princes, and if
Moldavia and Walachia were once more in the Hands of his Imperial Majesty, he
would run the hazard of losing them for ever. Upon this score he is willing to
give the Hospodars an opportunity to shake off their new Yoke, which their
Necessities obliged them to receive. As soon as that is once done, I don't
question but he will put his Army in a better posture.


Elector. You are much in the right. A new comer to these lower Regions
informed me, that his Troops are marched to a rendezvous, and that the Tartars
being advertised of these Motions, returned back to Budziak. In the mean time
the Blow is struck, and the Turks have regained almost every thing they had a
mind to.


Lorrain. To say the truth, I am desperately afraid that Fortune has ceased to
persecute the Infidels, and if I had been believed, we had not tarried for the
reverse of our good luck, to accommodate Matters with them. Whatever Sentiments
some Flatterers may have prepossessed the Emperor with, I am sure he will find
it a difficult Task to maintain the War at the same time against two such
formidable Powers as the King of France, and the Great Turk. If he divides his
Forces equally, he will be constrained to act only on the Defensive part; and
if he employs the better part of his Men on one side, he will be in danger of
losing as much that way, as he will gain the other.


Elector. Experience does but too well justify the truth of what you say. The
whole Campaign was spent in defending our selves against the French upon the
Rhine, and the Turks in Servia. Yet still it had been some comfort for us, if
we had managed our Game as well as the Enemy has done; but to our shame be it
spoken, we have done nothing at all, even when the Advantage lay on our side.
The Dauphin ordered his Affairs so well, as to make his Troops subsist one part
of the Summer in the Enemies Country; and we have a great deal of reason to
believe that the Infidels will recover Nissa, Widin, and perhaps Belgrade it
self before the end of the Campaign, without reckoning at the same time the
progress of Teckely's Arms in Transylvania.


Lorrain. We ought to hope however that better Measures will be taken against
next Summer. Well, let us leave this Care to the Living. As for us that are
Dead, the Affairs of the other World don't concern us; let what will happen
there, we shall neither be the better, nor worse.


DIALOGUE VI.
Louis the Fourteenth. Le Marquis de Louvois. Louis. TO say the truth, I am
well enough satisfied with this Summers Campaign, and if James the Second had
seconded me, I should reckon this Year amongst the most fortunate Years of my
whole Life. In effect, what could I desire more, being attacked, as I was, on
all sides, almost by all the Powers of Europe, and assisted by none of any
regard, than to preserve my Conquests? It would be too great a Presumption to
aspire after new Victories under so many Disadvantages.


M. de Louvois. It Is indeed very true, that your Success has even surpassed our
Expectation. You remember, Sir, without question, that we reckoned upon the
loss of Philipsburg and Montroyal, and that your Majesty was of Opinion, we
should come off very well, if we were only forced to quit those two places.


Louis. I remember it full well; but then we never reckoned upon the loss of
Ireland, and yet you know that Kingdom is as good as gone. And now I am not
fully satisfied, whether it had not been better for our Affairs to have lost
Philipsburg and Montroyal to the Enemy, provided we could have kept Ireland in
our hands still. It Is evident, that as long as the Prince of Orange had that
Bone to pick, he could never think of passing the Sea. On the contrary, we must
expect to see him next Summer in Flanders, at the Head of a very considerable
Army, and I protest to you, I have too good an Opinion of him, to imagine that
he will lose any time, in only observing the Posture of my Troops.


M* de Louvois. Nay, Sir, what you say is but too true; and I begin to perceive
one mighty Fault we have committed, and which is, I am afaid, irreparable. The
too good Opinion we had of the King of England has ruined all. We believed we
could not provide the Army in Ireland with a better General, and that is the
reason, why we were content to send the Count de Lauzun along with him. If the
Business were to be done again, and you had ordered one of your experienced
Generals to cross the Seas, I much question whether the Prince of Orange had
found it so easy a matter to reduce that Island.


Louis. That would not have been sufficient. For in the first place, we must
have sent for all the Irish Forces, and returned French Troops in the room of
them. We must have given Orders for our Men to work perpetually in the
fortifying all those places which they had judged proper to preserve, and
especially the Seaport Towns. I own they had time enough to have done all
this, and then they had been in a Condition to dispute every foot of Earth, and
to have protracted the War much longer. As for the Irish, they might have been
employed either in Garrisons, or else in Catalonia, in the room of those Troops
that were drawn from thence, where their Courage and Bravery (if they had any)
were not in fear of being the worse for using.


M. de Louvois. I agree to all that your Majesty has said. But surely, Sir, you
have not forgot, how 'twas feared we should utterly forfeit the Affection of
the English, if we put our selves absolutely in the possession of Ireland; and
you know we expected no inconsiderable things at that time from what our
Friends were able to perform in England.


Louis. There was, I confess, a grand mistake in the management of that Affair.
But it is too late to repent of it now. I find I have nothing to trust to but my
Sword, and if I were to begin again, I would have sent some Fifty thousand Men
into England, to maintain the King there upon his Throne, and preserve that
Crown for him, which he has lost only by reposing too great a Confidence in his
Subjects. But now that Opportunity is lost, and we have not so much spare time
upon our Hands as to spend it in any impertinent Complaints for what is passed;
rather let us make provision for what may happen hereafter. Therefore let me
know, what is to be done under the present Exigences, to dissipate that Tempest
that so secretly threatens to visit me by the beginning of the next Spring.


M. de Louvois. The first thing you ought to think of in my Opinion, is to set
on foot as numerous an Army, as is possible for you, to resist that mighty
Torrent of Enemies which is ready to descend upon you. If you see it absolutely
impossible to maintain the War any longer in Ireland, I would advise you to
draw back, not only the French Forces as soon as you can, but also as many of
the Irish as are willing to continue in your Service. You may find Employment
enough for them in Italy and Catalonia.


Louis. The Irish, you know, are the worst Soldiers in the World; Employ them
in what part of the World you will, they are the same Men still; Cowardice and
Ignorance are all their Ingredients. I question whether Men that are so
hardened and confirmed in running away, will ever do me any good.


M. de Louvois. Why then, Sir, as you was saying before, you may employ them in
such places, where there is no probability of any great Action. Besides, it is
not utterly impossible, but that a little experience in the World may correct
the awkwardness of their Constitution. Two Compagnes may perhaps inspire them
with another Spirit. Your Majesty has formerly entertained some of that Country
in your Armies, and they were not unserviceable to you. But to quit this
Digression the principal thing we are to mind, is to make choice of our most
vigorous and most disciplined Troops against the Prince of Orange; for he is
the most formidable Enemy we have to deal with. At the same time you may amuse
the rest of the Allies any other side your Majesty pleases.


Louis. You are in the right. But the question I would be resolved in, is,
Which way the Prince will turn his Arms after the Reduction of Ireland, that I
may oppose him in time with the most considerable part of my Forces. You know
that generally speaking we are never acquainted with his Designs, till it is
too late to prevent them; and in what an embarras do you think I shall be, if
at the same time when I attend his coming in Flanders with a considerable Army,
he makes a Descent upon any of my Provinces. He must of course be Master there,
since there will be no body almost in a Capacity to repel him.


M. de Louvois. Without doubt, Sir, such a Case would be perplexing enough. But
however if you will permit me to form my own Conjecture, I don't see there is any
great probability that the Prince of Orange designs to make any such Descent,
till he has rendered himself absolute Master at Sea. He is too prudent and
well-advised to expose his Person in a strange Country, without securing a
Retreat to himself, in case he should meet with ill Success. Now, before he can
be Master of the Seas, it is necessary for him to gain a Naval Victory, and then
indeed he may have leisure and security enough to make a Descent. But then if
such a Misfortune should happen to us, we shall have warning enough in all
Conscience to withdraw our Forces out of Flanders to hinder the Enemies
landing. Therefore it is my Opinion, that it will be the best way to set as
numerous a Fleet out to Sea, as you equipt the last Campagn, with Orders to
mind the Safety of the Kingdom, and not to hazard any thing by way of
Engagement, unless they are as good as secured before hand of the Victory. This
is the only way, as I imagine, to obviate the Misfortune of an Invasion.


Louis. There Is some comfort in what you say, but it is not sufficient to cure
all my Apprehensions. I have a vast extent of Land to guard, so that when my
Fleet is busy in one place, that of my Enemies will have Opportunity enough to
make a Descent in another. Besides, I am afraid of the Discontents of my
People, and especially of the new Converts, who, without dispute, will join the
Enemy as soon as ever he Lands.


M. de Louvois. Now in my Opinion, this last Fear or Jealousy of yours is but
ill grounded: The number of Malcontents is not so great as you imagine, and it
will be no easy matter for those Persons who are so affected, to execute their
wicked Designs. As for what concerns the large Extent of your Coasts, suppose
the Extent were never so large, yet for all that a Descent is not so easily
made. Let but your Fleet watch the motion of the Enemies Fleet, and pursue them
whether they go, and I dare engage you will go near to ruin their Designs.


Louis. Let us put the Case then, The Prince of Orange does not intend to make
a Descent upon us, but that Flanders will be the Scene of his greatest Efforts,
by what means shall I be able to resist the Forces and Valor of that Prince?


M. de Louvois. You have so many fortified places on that side, than you may
very well allow to Sacrifice two or three of them, in order to save the rest.
In the mean time to render every Siege more difficult, you must take care to
prevent the Enemy, you must enter the Field in the beginning of the Spring; you
must demolish all those Places, and ravage all that Country, where you imagine
the Enemy will come to Encamp. In fine, 'twill be your best Policy, to act all
the remainder of the Year only on the Defensive part.


Louis. I own I have fortified Places enough. But there is one which a Man
cannot fail to make himself Master of as soon as he opens his Campagn, leaving
the other Towns behind him. I know very well, my Enemies have no design to
meddle with any Sieges, but where it is necessary so to do, in order for them to
enter the heart of my Kingdom; and therefore there is a great deal of
probability, that unless I oppose them there, they will immediately besiege
that place I was speaking off. Now what Remedies shall we apply in this Case?


M. de Louvois. I perceive it is Philipville you mean. But the place, as I take
it, is strong enough, and in all appearance, if it is furnished with a
sufficient Garrison, and every thing necessary for a Siege, the Enemies, let
them be never so furious, will find Entertainment enough there for the whole
Compagn. Therefore if they sit down before the Siege of it, it must be our
business to endeavor to raise it. We will leave in Germany but just as many
Troops as will be necessary to divert the Imperialists, and so having united
our Forces, we shall be in a better Capacity to relieve the place.


Louis. I have very often found my account in these different Marches and
Countermarches, which I have ordered my Armies to make. By this means I have
deceived the Enemy, and in some manner have supplied and made out the small
numbers of my men. But then you will grant me, that these Movements weary my
Forces exceedingly, and that if this hard Service were to continue any time, it
would be altogether insupportable.


M. de Louvois. It Is a long while ago since I have been sensible of this
Inconvenience, but it is impossible to avoid it. All that we can do, is to make
the Soldier amends in his Winter Quarters, where he shall not be obliged to
undergo any Fatigues, but may have full liberty to enjoy that repose, which was
denied him in the Summer. The Burghers will suffer any thing, and reason good,
since you preserve them in their Lives and Properties from the Invasion of the
Enemy. There are other ways besides to recompense these extraordinary Services
of the Soldiers, as by taking care to provide them all Necessaries at a
reasonable rate as long as they are encamped, and this will encourage them to
pass by the severity of the other duty. As for the Cavalry, by means of these
Magazines, and the great exactness with which the Camp is managed, there will
be no occasion for them to forage at any Distance, and so the trouble which is
spared them on this side, is supplied by the Fatigues they suffer by making
different Movements.


Louis. Although the Remedies you have mentioned will not be able to avert all
those Mischiefs that my Enemies have designed me, yet I perceive they will serve
to alleviate them, and that is all we can propose to our selves. So I will
trouble you no more for what concerns Flanders, and the Designs of the Prince
of Orange. But what think you of the Germans?


M. de Louvois. I can only tell you, that if a Peace had been concluded with
the Turk, and the Princes that compose that great Body, would understand their
own Interest, you would have more reason to be apprehensive of them, than the
Prince of Orange. But it is very happy for us, that it is impossible for so
great a number of Heads, that pursue so many different Interests, ever to agree
as they should. I say, that pursue so many different Interests: for to do them
justice, if one does not see that exact harmony in their Councels, which ought
to reign there, it is not so much an effect of the ill humor of the Princes
that compose those Assemblies, as of the nature of the things themselves, as I
could easily make it appear. There are some ingenious Politicians who have been
pleased to maintain, that it is a perfect Miracle how Germany could subsist as
long as it has done, under that feeble unactive sort of Government, to which it
is subjected. Let it be how it will, one may presume to say, that the Germans
want nothing, but to be reunited under one General, and if that should ever
happen, why then Good night to the French Monarchy. They are without
contradiction the bravest Soldiers in Europe, and their Cavalry is
incomparably Good. Their Country is abundantly stocked with Men and Horses, and
both the one and the other are a great deal more indefatigable than the Men and
Horses of your Kingdom.


Louis. It Is indeed very true. But I have one great Advantage over them, that
their slowness renders all their other good Qualities unserviceable.


M. de Louvois. I confess they are somewhat slow; but one ought not to
attribute that slowness so much to the temperature of their Bodies, as to the
principal Inconvenience I remarked in their Constitution, that is to say, the
great number of Sovereign Princes under whom they live: For as an excellent
Author has very well observed, Where there is a necessity for several Heads, and
several Hands to execute a Design, Affairs move but very slowly, and there is
more time spent to agree upon the manner of acting, than in the execution it
self. What I have said, may be proved from hence, viz. that the Hollanders are
not so slow as the Germans, although they are in a manner of the same
Constitution, and the reason is, because they are all united under one general
Governor that hastens their Resolutions. But to come back to what I have
discoursed of so largely, as their slowness is an incurable Distemper, so it is
an extraordinary step to you to facilitate your Designs upon them. You may very
easily hinder a Peace with the Turk, by assisting Teckely under Hand, and by
furnishing the Grand Seigneur with skilful Engineers for Sieges. This in all
probability will gain him some advantageous Success upon the Imperialists, and
consequently will take off the disgust of the War.


Louis. But all this will scarce hinder the Germans from entering in upon us by
the way of Burgundy. That I confess makes me somewhat uneasy.


M. de Louvois. I wonder they never did all this while, and I cannot attribute
it to any thing else, but to an Excess of Prudence, that will not permit them
to run any hazard, before they are assured of Success. I dare engage that your
Majesty would not have taken these measures, you would have adventured to trust
Fortune with the matter, you would have forced the Passes, and then pacified
the Swiss Cantons with some colorable Excuses, after they had been forced.


Louis. Nay, I am not at this time of day to learn my Trade: In matters of War
I am not unacquainted with the least Intrigue. It Is not for Warriers to be
guilty of any Formalities, and a Prince at the Head of an Army, is not obliged
to have the Map always in his Hand, to take care that he never sets foot in the
Ground of his Allies. But don't you think these Methods will disoblige the
Switzers, and if that should happen, what would you advise me to do?


M. de Louvois. Not to lose any precious time, but immediately to seize on the
Forest Towns, for fear your Enemies should prevent you. You will avoid by this
means two great Misfortunes that seem to threaten you, I mean, the entrance of
the Germans by the way of Burgundy, and the Declaration of the Switzers. For
it is not to be presumed they will dare to abandon your Party, when they see
themselves environed on every side by your Forces.


Louis. It now remains for you to tell me how we shall order our Affairs in
Italy?


M. de Louvois. There is no pressing Occasion for that. You have pretty
handsomely beaten the Duke of Savoy this Campagn, and therefore need not fear
any great Disturbance from that Quarter. Let him first regain those Places you
have taken from him, and then 'twill be time enough to consider what we have to
do.


DIALOGUE VII.
The Advoyer of Berne. The Chief Syndic of Geneva. Advoyer. You Will allow me, I
hope, that Humane Prudence is not far sighted, and that the discreetest Men in
the World may be sometimes deceived. It Is not so very long, since you looked
upon your selves as a ruined People, when the King of France, at the
solicitation of the Bishop and Canons of Annecy, would have taken your Tithes
from you. You continued to work with all the diligence imaginable upon your
Fortifications. You implored our Assistance, and you gave out that you expected
the French Army every minute before your Walls. But after all, there was
nothing done: Whether some unexpected Accidents happened, that altered the
Designs of Lewis the Fourteenth; or whether he had no mind to Attack you at
that time, you were soon delivered of your Fear. And now when the War is
kindled so very near you, between the Duke of Savoy and that Monarch, you
believe you are in a very secure Condition, when at the same time you are in
more dangerous Circumstances than ever. What say you now, Sir, after such a
notorious Example, ought we to lay any great stress upon Humane Prudence?


Sindic. I agree to the Maxims you have established: but I don't at all see the
Justice of your Application. It Is true, we lay under some Apprehensions
formerly, and perhaps we had no very good Grounds for them: And now, I confess,
we divert our selves with the Quarrels between the Court of Savoy and France,
and if it concerned no Body but us, we should not fail on our sides to pour Oil
on the fire. But as small an inclination as we have for that Duke, yet we
countenance his Party under hand. One of our Captains is in his Service with a
whole Company; we have privately listed as many Refugees, nay of our own
Subjects too, as were willing to be employed in the Valleys. But we are not
afraid, that this will bring us into any Praemunire, since we don't do it
above-board, and the World knows nothing of the matter. It Is indeed very
certain, that since the French has come up to our very Gates, and have
possessed themselves of Chablais, we have been somewhat cautious of the main
Chance; but upon the whole, we are satisfied that we have no Occasions of fear,
since the Resident of France has assured us of his Master's good Intentions, as
also Monsieur de Saint Rut, who Commands the Troops of the most Christian King.


Advoyer. And do you depend upon the Protestations of that Crown?


Sindic. To confess the truth, if we had nothing but that to trust to, we
should have no great Reason to think our selves Secure. But there is so little
likelihood, that the King designs to disturb us, that it would argue no great
store of Discretion, to torment our selves upon that score.


Advoyer. Come, come, let me tell you, there is not so great a likelihood as you
imagine.


Sindic. Let me desire you, Sir, not to give your self any trouble, to affright
me. I am well enough prepared on my side, and I know full well, that your
Canton always loves to represent our Danger greater than it is, in order to
oblige us to throw our selves into your Arms, and so to despoil us of the
quality of Sovereigns, that we may become your Vassals. But the example of
Lausanne ought to make us somewhat careful; we shall scarce be persuaded to be
governed by a Bailiff, as that little Republic has done; or if we were capable
of the same Imprudence, we should, like them, have leisure enough to repent.
All the harm that can arrive to us from what has lately happend in Savoy, is to
eat less Capons, to live in a narrower compass, and that is no great difficulty.


Advoyer. Nay, nay, now your Passion carries you beyond your Reason. I know
well enough you can never pardon the Canton of Berne for endeavoring to
enslave you, and I am not insensible that you transmit this Aversion from
Father to Son by way of Inheritance. Your hatred is so inveterate, that I
believe you have many amongst you, who had rather be in subjection to the King
of France, then depend upon the Council of Berne; but this is not the Business
I come to treat about. If you would be pleased to afford me your Attention, I
don't question to make it appear, that you are not in such secure
Circumstances, as you may imagine.


Sindic. I will listen to you very patiently.


Advoyer. My Fears are founded upon two Reasons. The first is, that it seems
almost impossible to me, but we must of necessity break with France before the
Conclusion of the War. That Crown, wholly puffed up with the Advantages they
have lately had over their Enemies, begins to speak in a louder voice, then he
has hitherto used. She openly complains of the Evangelick Cantons, and will not
allow them the liberty of a free People, to act as they judge expedient. In
fine, she sees they are not devoted to their Interest, that they are not
influenced by her Counsels, and that they are not Friends to depend upon. If to
lend four thousand Men to his Majesty of Great Britain, at the same time when
we refuse the French to make up any new Recruits amongst us; if to give liberty
to those that are so inclined, to pass through our Territories to Piedmont; if
to allow Conveniences to those Refugees, who are in the Valleys, to pour
themselves into the Dauphine, when they see occasion; if to prohibit their own
Troops, who are in pay, to serve in any other places, but what were actually
possessed by the King in 1663. are not infallible Evidences that we are no
Allies of France, but that we seek every Occasion to declare against them, why
then I am mistaken in my Measures, and you may rally me upon that score as long
as you please.


Sindic. I agree to every thing you say, but however this is so far from giving
us any just Reasons to be apprehensive of Danger, that on the contrary, it
confirms our Security. For in fine, after you have once declared, you will be
obliged to support us, and there is no appearance to believe, that the King of
France, who has so many powerful Enemies to deal with, will come to besiege a
City, which will cost him a great deal of time, and abundance of Men. And now,
if you please, let me hear your second Reason.


Advoyer. Come, come, we are in no such great haste. I shall come to my second
Reason soon enough; in the mean time let us spend a little more consideration
upon the first. It Is indeed very certain, that when everwe come to declare, you
will not run any Risque: for besides, that we shall take care to be on our
Guard, the first thing we shall do, is to send Thirty thousand men into your
Territories, as well to defend you, as to keep the Frontiers. But perhaps this
may never happen.


Sindic. Let me desire you to explain your self.


Advoyer* The Cantons, you may be sure, will never declare first, but content
themselves to favor the Party of the Allies under hand. The King, who will
soon be sensible that an open War will be of less Disadvantage to him, than all
his secret Practices* will take other Measures. He will no longer keep any
Correspondence with us, and Geneva and Basle will run the hazard of falling
into his Hands, before we are aware.


Sindic. I understand you very well, and to say the truth, what you say seems
probable enough. But then there is a vast difference between the Case of Basle
and Geneva; That, you know, is a City without any matter of Defense, and you
may batter down their Walls with rotten Apples. But Geneva is at present in a
Condition of defending it self, and besides we shall give you time enough to
come to our Assistance.


Advoyer. I would advise you not to flatter your self, dear Friend of mine;
Geneva is not in a better case than Basle. It Is true you have Fortifications,
but they don't signify much, your City is easily Commanded from several
Places. I would only desire three Bombs to reduce all your Houses into Ashes,
and make your Burghers cry Pecavi. Besides, you may consider, if you please,
that a Siege is not so easy to be raised, and that if you were once invested,
and the French well entrenched in their Camp, it would be a difficult matter
for our Militia to oblige them to decamp. Now Savoy being possessed, as it is,
by the King of France, nothing can hinder you from being invested, even before
you dream of any such thing.


Sindic. I begin to apprehend that your Suspicions and Fears are not ill
grounded, and that the Affairs of Savoy, which we looked upon to make for our
Security, may, for all we know, carry a very doleful Consequence.


Advoyer. You will be the more effectually convinced, if you will carefully
listen to my second reason. Have you never heard it said, That the Turk never
Attacks the Christian Princes, where they are in Arms one against another,
fearing lest he might oblige them to agree, and turn their Forces against him?
Perhaps something like this may befall your Republic, and that without falling
upon either Lewis the Fourteenth, or the Duke of Savoy, these two Princes may
come to agree at your Expense and Sorrow. You need not be informed, that both
of them have a great longing to enjoy your City, and particularly the Duke, who
looks upon you as no other than a pack of rebellious graceless Subjects, who
have withdrawn your selves from your Allegiance. Now may it not so fall out,
that the King, to gratify that Prince, may sometime or other deliver you into
his hands? I fancy now I have said nothing, but what is agreeable to reason.


Sindic. Such a thing might happen, I confess, if 'twere the King's Interest to
make the Duke of Savoy great; but you know it is his Interest to keep him as low
as may be, and the Case being so, he will never permit him to make himself
Master of so considerable a place as Geneva.


Advoyer. What you say seems probable enough at first sight. But if you will
compare the Advantage which his most Christian Majesty may draw from a Peace
with the Duke to the Advantage which will arrive to him, by suffering Geneva to
fall into the Duke's hands, it is not to be set in the Balance: he will gain
infinitely more by that means, than be a loser. Afterward, you know some
occasion or other may present it self to make him retake that which he has
given: But as you rightly observe, that would be no great Comfort to you, it
would only make you change the manner of your Slavery, and not be restored to
your former liberty.


Sindic. I apprehend your Reason very well, and begin to perceive that they
carry a great deal of Evidence and Strength with them. It seems at present,
that I ought to fear your Rupture with France, which I desired so earnestly a
little while ago. In short, it would be a very powerful Temptation to the Duke
of Savoy, considering his present Circumstances, if the King should offer to
restore all he has taken from him, and join both their Forces against Geneva
and the Suisses, upon Condition to deliver that Place to him, and a certain
part of the Valleys, which formerly belonged to him. But let me conjure you to
tell me, how you will order your Affairs, as to prevent all those Evils, that
threaten both you, and the rest of us.


Advoyer. We depend very much upon the Duke of Savoy, who has solemnly promised
and sworn that nothing shall be capable of making him to depart from the
Interest of the Allies, though it be at the Expense of the last drop of his
Blood, and the loss of his Territories. At the same time, not to mince matters,
we are under some Perplexities. It Is true, we want no Men, but then we want
both Money and good Captains; and what is a greater Mortification to us, we
don't know where to supply our selves with either. We have indeed Provisions
enough before hand to serve us for two or three Months, and that is all; but as
for Generals, we have none, and yet, you know, our Troops cannot well be
supported without them.


Sindic. Why then recall your Troops out of France, they are well enough
furnished with experienced Soldiers and Generals.


Advoyer. Pray don't talk of that matter. I cannot think of it without being
sensibly afflicted. Can you inform me what would happen, in Case we should
judge it expedient to recall them? The better part of them, finding themselves
better in France than they would be at home amongst us, would refuse to obey
our Summons; and judge you what a terrible Mortification it would be to us, to
see they are rather the Subjects of the most Christian King, than ours.
Besides, it is not to be doubted, but that the King would keep them as Prisoners
of War, but especially all such as should entertain any Designs of coming home,
and those to be sure would be the smallest number.


Sindic. To be plain with you, both of us are at present under very unpleasant
circumstances, and those People that condemn the Suisses for not declaring,
speak indeed for their own Interest, but don't sufficiently consider what they
say.


Advoyer. You are in the right; and I believe, a more politic refined People
than we pretend to be, would find themselves embarrassed enough in Conscience
under our Circumstances.


DIALOGUE VIII.
Cardinal Ottoboni. The Duke de Chaulnes. Cardinal. HIS Holiness has told me a
hundred times, that the fear he has of quitting the World before he sees a
general Peace concluded amongst the Christian Princes, will certainly hasten
his Death; and I can assure you, you have no better way to make your Court to
him, than by persuading the King your Master to Sacrifice all his particular
Interests for the good of Christendom.


Duke. The King will be ready to make a Peace at any time, but then he ought
not to be affronted; he will never endure that. They are mightily mistaken in
their reckoning, that believe the prodigious number of his Enemies, whom he has
upon his hands, can make him lose an Ace of his Resolution and Courage. It Is on
the other hand apparent, he understands his own Strength a great deal better
than ever he did; and the Case being so, he is not a Prince that you can
suppose guilty of making a false step.


Cardinal. Let him never demand a Peace, say I, but till he pleases: yet let
him not at the same time reject the mediation of those Princes, who are not
engaged in the War, and who declare their Inclinations to procure it.


Duke. The King, my Master, has never refused to listen to such a Proposal. But
it is worth your while to observe, that the Enemies, who have declared War
against him, are of two sorts. One is composed of Catholics, the other of
Protestants. Now the best way to procure a Peace, is to divide these two
Interests, and to oblige the Catholics to agree with France, and unite
themselves in a strict League with her, in order to reduce or destroy all the
Heretic Princes.


Cardinal. That Consideration of yours is not amiss: and I dare engage that
this Holiness never examined your Advice well enough to conceive that that was
the bottom of your Design. You may believe, that no body desires the
Suppression of Heresy more passionately than my self, and if it would cost me
the better half of my Blood to put it in Execution, I would part with it very
freely: But, Sir, you must give me leave to tell you, that this Design is no
sooner conceived, but a man may see it is impossible to effect it, at least as
the World goes now: and therefore that is the reason I abandon it.


Duke. Why do you say it is impossible? In my Opinion now nothing appears more
feasible. The more Interests you have to manage, the more difficult you will find
it to conclude a Treaty, and I dare say, it is a harder matter to conclude a
Peace amongst all the Christian Princes, than a particular Peace with the
Catholic Princes.


Cardinal. What you say is true in the general; but there are abundance of
particular Occasions, where it is an easier matter to adjust several Interests,
than to accommodate a few. The first and principal Obstacle to the Design you
have proposed, is this; I question whether the Protestant Princes, who are wise
and politic enough, did not take some secret Measures that are unknown to us,
at the time when they made a League against France, in case they should ever
happen to be deserted and abandoned by the Catholic Princes.


Duke. For my part, I don't know, what Measures they could take; but it appears
to me, they are not able to think of one Expedient that can prevent this
Inconvenience. In short, we don't see that so much as one of the Catholic
Princes, has surrendered any strong Place to the Protestants, by way of Security
for what they promised; and I am inclined to believe, they have given no other
Assurance but their bare Word.


Cardinal. Supposing what you say were true, yet still 'twill be a difficult
matter to break the Union. The Emperor, who is Head of the Catholic Princes,
is too religious an Observer of his Word, ever to be induced to violate it; and
you know, he has solemnly promised not to make a Peace, until they are
comprehended in it.


Duke. He has engaged his word, you say, and what of all that? As if such
feeble Obligations did not always give way to the Interest, or as if Interest
were not able to surmount all other Considerations. Come, come, you may take my
word for it, if ever the Emperor finds his Account in a particular separate
Peace, he will make no Conscience of leaving the Protestant Princes in the lurch.


Cardinal. You discourse now like a Minister of France, and I am not at all
obliged to believe you. But not to engage in any impertinent Disputes, that
will never come to an end; I will content my self to offer you one only Reason,
which to me seems unanswerable, why it is impossible to disengage the Catholic
Princes from the Protestants, in order to make a particular Peace with the
first. And it is this, That if you except the Interests of the Prince of Orange,
the other Princes of that Religion have nothing in a manner to adjust with
France, and so it would be no hard matter to incline them to a Peace. On the
contrary, the Catholic Princes have the justest Pretensions in the World
against the King your Master, and such too, that he will find it a very severe
Mortification to satisfy. The Hollanders only demand Liberty of Commerce; the
Brandenburgh desires nothing but the Security of his Duchy of Cleve. The
Princes of Luneburgh and Hesse have scarce any other Motive to the War, but the
common Interest of the Empire: It Is the same Case with the Elector of Saxony
and the rest of the Protestant Princes. But then as for the Catholic Princes,
the Emperor demands the Restitution of Philipsburg, Brisgau, and almost all
Alsatia. The King of Spain puts in for the Duchy of Luxemburgh, for all the
late Acquisitions in Flanders, for the Franche-Comte, Perignan, and several
other considerable places besides. The Princes of Lorrain demand to be restored
to their Dukedom; the Elector Palatine to have satisfaction made him for all
the Damages he has sustained in the War, which, you know, will amount to an
infinite Sum. The three Ecclesiastic Electors pretend the very same thing. The
Duke of Savoy demands to have Casal demolished, and Pignerol restored to him,
besides all that has been taken from him of late* Thus, you see, it is a far
easier thing for the most Christian King to make a particular Peace with the
Protestant Princes, than with the Catholic.


Duke. I own, that if all these Princes, whom you have mentioned, continued
firm to their Resolutions, there is no such thing as a Peace to be expected. The
King my Master, is not in the humor to restore so easily all that he has taken
from his Enemies; and I don't see at present how they will be able to regain
them by force. But, Sir, now we are between our selves, do you think that these
Pretensions are just? You know, without question, that the most celebrated
Lawyers have always placed the right of Conquest amongst lawful Rights: whence
it follows, that a man is not constantly obliged to restore that, which he has
conquered by way of force, but may still keep it in his hands, if he so
pleases, and justly enough. Therefore I don't see by what right they would have
the King refund what he has taken,


Cardinal. What you say is certainly true, provided the Conquests you make were
done during the Course of a lawful War. But now these persons pretend, that
Lewis the Fourteenth did unjustly declare War against his Neighbors, only to
have a better opportunity of plundering them.


Duke. That is the chief Question indeed: but it is such a difficult perplexed
Question, that it will require a great deal of trouble to decide it. I am not a
fit man to engage in the Controversy, but this I will say, One invincible
Argument to me, that part of the King's Conquests were made in the Course of a
lawful War, is because they were totally yielded up to him in subsequent
Treaties. Nevertheless, to secure the Repose of Christendom, the most Christian
King would do well to resolve to make some kind of Satisfaction to the
Catholic Princes; and if you will be pleased to give me the hearing, I will tell
you in a few words, what I think upon this Subject.


Cardinal. I shall listen to you with a great deal of satisfaction.


Duke. To begin then where you left off. I don't believe the King will ever be
prevailed upon to comply with the Duke of Savoy's Pretensions. It Is a long
while ago since he has had Pignerol in possession; and besides, that is a place
of too great Consequence to be given away. As for Casal, you know it has cost
him a world of Money, it is true his Money may be repaid him, but I question
whether he will be brought to take it, since he has more occasion for that
Fortress, than for Money. Thus all that can be done in the matter, comes to
this, the Duke perhaps may be re-instated in the possession of all those
places, that have been taken from him since the beginning of the War.


Cardinal. But cannot the King be at least persuaded to give him that small
satisfaction, as to let Geneva fall into his Hands. His Holiness earnestly
desires such a thing, you know.


Duke. I am not acquainted with his Majesty's Pleasure upon that Article: But
to tell you what I think, the King is so mightily displeased with the Dukes
late behavior, that I doubt whether he will give him that satisfaction.
However if it is possible to make him amends with something else of equal
Importance, I believe it may succeed at last, provided it will give no great
Offense to the Suiss Cantons. And now in my Op^n^on, this is all that can be
done to content the Duke of Savoy. As for the Dukes of Lorrain, it is to no
purpose to think of them, for nothing but absolute Force will oblige the King
to make a Restitution of that Dukedom. Besides that, their Country lies so
conveniently for France, the former Dukes of Lorrain have given such just
re-iterated Provocations to the most Christian Kings, that they would fill a
large Volume. Now who questions but that little Princes are obliged to pay all
manner of Respect to great Princes who are their Neighbors, and that we may
lawfully dispossess them of their Territories, when for want of a due
submission they offer to insult over us, and pretend to stand upon even ground.


Cardinal. The Dukes of Lorrain are Sovereigns born, and were always looked
upon as Independent Princes. They were at liberty to make Alliances with whom
they pleased. And it is very unjustly done of the Kings of France to quarrel
with these Dukes for preferring the Emperor's Interests before theirs.


Duke. They are not only content to unite themselves with the Enemies of
France, but always endeavored to raise Civil Wars in that Kingdom, by
supporting and countenancing all the Malcontents. But let this pass when they
did nothing else but take the House of Austria's part against France, that was
sufficient to justify the Conduct of the most Christian Kings as to this
respect. It Is not for one of your petty Princes to engage himself in any Party,
unless he is constrained to do it through Violence, and when he ceases to
observe an exact Neutrality, it is not without Justice that he is punished by
him, whom he abandons.


Cardinal. I am not fully convinced of the Righteousness of these Maxims. But,
in a word, is there no way in the World to satisfy these young Princes?


Duke. There was formerly a Proposal made to make them amends in Money, on this
Condition, that they would for ever renounce all manner of Pretensions to the
Dukedom of Lorrain. I don't know whether the King is in the Humor now to
gratify them that way. But however, there is no great harm in proposing it.


Cardinal. Well then, let us now come to the King of Spain's Case, if you
please.


Duke. As for what relates to the Franche-Comte, it is a Spot of Ground so far
separated from the other Provinces of Spain, and stands so prettily for the
convenience of France, that I believe the King my Master will never be content
to part with it. The same may be said concerning the Duchy of Luxemburgh,
which we coveted so long a time. It Is an Estate of so great an Importance, as
well for guarding our Frontiers, as opening a Passage into Germany, that
nothing but Force can get it out of our Hands. As for what concerns the
Low Countries, may be better accommodated, and in order to settle a lasting
Peace, we may well enough consent to the demolishing of some places that
chiefly incommode the Spaniards.


Cardinal. But what will you do with the Electors?


Duke. The Elector of Bavaria ought not to demand any Satisfaction, since he
has not been injured. As for the Elector Palatine, perhaps the King, to comfort
him under his Disgraces, may release all the Pretensions of Madam to her
Father's and Brother's Estate.


Cardinal. I must needs own, this is a pretty way of making a man amends. You
have ruined his whole Country, demolished his Episcopal Palace, dismantled his
Fortifications, burnt his Towns, turned his whole Estate into one continued
Desert. And now, to make him a Recompense for all this, you ^ery generously
offer to relinquish those Rights that were under dispute, and perhaps were none
of the best grounded in all the World.


Duke. For my part, I don't believe the King will do any more for him. As for
the Ecclesiastical Electors, all they can lawfully pretend to, is to have their
Estates restored them in the Condition they are in. And yet a great deal may be
said with regard to the Electorate of Cologne, which, as we pretend, does of
right belong to the Cardinal de Furstemberg: But, it may be, in favor of the
Duke of Bavaria, the King will pass over that Difficulty well enough.


Cardinal* It now remains for us to discourse of the Emperor's Interests.


Duke. The Emperor has no reason to complain as to his own particular. This
War has innovated nothing with respect to him, unless you have a mind to trump
Philipsburgh upon us: and yet that place does not of right belong to him, but
to the Bishop of Spire. Nevertheless, I believe, that one may still prevail
with the King so far, as to have this place restored to its lawful Prince, and
have Friburg demolished. As for the rest, you are not to imagine, that the King
for the sake of making a Peace, will ever consent to surrender up those places
that were given him in former Treaties


Cardinal. Is it possible then, that these are all the Advances the King of
France is willing to make, in Case the Catholic Princes are resolved to make a
separate Peace with him, and not comprehend the Protestants in it?


Duke. What I have said, is only out of my own Head, and I am not certain
whether the King would approve of it, or no. Our great Monarch is strong enough
to give a great deal of Disturbance to his Enemies; and nothing will sooner
oblige him to conclude a Peace, than that he believes, it will be far more
necessary and advantageous for them, than for himself.


Cardinal. Upon my word, if that be all, you need not give your self the
trouble to enter into any Negotiation. The Catholic Princes, that are leagued
together, have too certain a prospect of advancing their own respective
Interests, to content themselves with such pitiful Overtures


Duke. I see you make no reckoning of the Advantage they will receive by uniting
themselves with the King, to exterminate the Protestant Princes, and divide the
Spoil between them.


Cardinal. One must be a very insensible person indeed* to be cajoled with
stupid Rhetoric. The Protestant Princes are at present the right Arm of the
Emperor to defend him against the Encroachments of your King: How then can he
be persuaded to sacrifice them? I wish you would inform me what the House of
Austria were able to do without the Assistance of the Prince of Orange, the
Hollanders, the Electors, and other Protestant Princes? Don't they sustain the
greatest part of the Burden of the War; and since, with all these Forces, she
finds it difficult enough to resist your King, what would she do, I pray, if
she were deprived of all these Supports.


Duke. But if the Heretics were once destroyed, the House of Austria would
enrich herself with their Spoils, and all their Forces would become hers.


Cardinal. That would not be amiss, I own, if she were to reap all the benefit,
but would not your King, do you think, come in for his share of the Spoils? Is
it not very certain, that being the strongest by much, he would reserve the
Lion's Portion for himself? And so then, when the House of Austria would
fortify her self on one side, your King would do the same on the other; in
such manner that this new acquired Power would be ten times worse balanced,
than it is at present. After all, when every thing comes to be considered, it is
the Emperor's Interest not to suffer the Protestants to be run down, at least
under the present Exigences. If that House should find it self in process of
time as powerful as it has formerly been, why then she may think of Extirpating
Heresy. But then it is to be feared, the Heretics also would change sides, and
that in order to keep the Scales even, they would make their Applications to
France. Therefore you must never think of separating the Catholic Princes from
the Protestants, with whom they have made so strict a Confederacy. But now to
procure a general Peace, what expedient can you find out to adjust the Affairs
of England?


Duke. This is without dispute the most difficult Point of all* and I don't see
how we could at the same time satisfy the King my Master, and the Allies, upon
this Article, if a particular Peace with the Catholic Princes were proposed.


Cardinal. You say right, it is indeed very perplexed, and is more embarrassing
of it self than all the Pretensions of the other Princes, the Allies. It Is not
to be supposed, that the Prince of Orange has a mind to descend from the
Throne, to which he was so deservedly elevated. He must either perish in the
Post where he is, or maintain it still. There is no middle way. The Church, and
Catholic Princes would be covered with everlasting shame, should they abandon
a King who sacrificed himself for their common Liberty. How then can this
matter be accommodated? I only see one way, and that is, to oblige the King of
England to Abdicate his Crown voluntarily. He has a Prince of Wales still to
manage his Interests after him.


Duke. I can assure you, the King will never abandon his Allie, and if a Peace
is not to be obtained without sacrificing that unfortunate Prince, he will by
no means agree to it. He has too great a respect for his own Honor, to make so
inglorious and so base a Compliance.


Cardinal. You had better say for his Interest; for all the World knows, he
never was guilty of Idolatry toward the former. I can only add, That it is not
along of him that the King of England was not established in his Throne; but
one cannot condemn in the same Breath the Levity of a Nation, that had not
courage enough to support their lawful Prince, and the Cowardice of a Prince,
who durst not show himself before his Enemies.


Duke* All these Reasons will not content Louis le Grand, and all these
Obstacles are not capable of diminishing his Courage. The more the pain, the
greater is the glory.
Heroic Souls despise the Paths of Ease;
And dangers only whet the edge of Virtue.
Moliere, l'Etourdi. I dare pretend to Prophecy, that you will see the next
Campagn greater Efforts used to re-establish the King of England, than hitherto
you have seen. If the Prince of Orange does not make a vigorous Opposition, we
shall send toward the beginning of the Spring, either into England or Ireland,
Thirty thousand of our best Men, to be commanded by a Marshal of France, or
some other General, who has more Authority and Experience than the Count de
Lauzun.


Cardinal. Nay, if it be so, it is to no purpose to think of settling a Peace in
Europe. Things are not yet ripe enough, nor are Men's spirits so weary of the
War, as to desire rest so soon.


Duke. I am clearly of your Opinion.


DIALOGUE IX.
The young Prince Abafti. Count Teckely. Abafti. IS it then true, that after
all the Obligations you had to the Prince my Father, you could be so horribly
ungrateful, as to enter those Territories, which he left me, with your Army, to
the end that you may render your self Master of them, to my Prejudice? Surely
you have not forgot how serviceable he was to you at the beginning of the War,
when you declared against the Emperor of Germany. You had as free a Command of
his Troops, as if they had been your own; and perhaps if he had not espoused
your Quarrel, you would not be in a Condition at this present, to seize that
Principality which of right belongs to me.


Teckely. You are much mistaken, young Prince, in talking so hotly with me, and
I would Answer you after your own manner, if I did not consider, that it is not
so much you that Discourses, as the Germans in you, upon whom you have made
your self so slavish a Dependant. You need not refresh my memory with the good
Offices your Father has done me, and though the end did not Answer the
beginning, since at last he closed with my Enemies, and joined his Forces with
theirs, yet I shall ever preserve the remembrance of his mighty Obligations,
because I am willing to attribute his last Failures rather to the violence of
the Germans, and mere necessity, then his own Inclination. If I have entered
Transylvania in Arms, it is not so much against you, as the Emperor, for he is
the true Master of that Province, you are only a poor Titular Prince. Besides,
you know the Grand Seigneur my Master, and the Emperor of Germany, have all
along had great Disputes, which of them it was who had the right to nominate a
Prince to the Transilvanians, and 'twas to the former that the Prince your
Father owed his Elevation. He caused him to be elected* notwithstanding all the
Intrigues and Cavelling of the Emperor and the Germans. He likewise has made
me to be advanced to this Dignity, and you cannot dispute the Right of my
Election, without calling into question that Prince's Title, to whom you owe
your Birth.


Abafti. That Consequence of yours is none of the justest. I own the Grand
Seigneur employed his credit to get my Father Elected Prince of Transylvania,
but at the same time he never pretended to constrain the States to make that
Choice. They had an entire Liberty of Voting as they pleased, and it was only
the Plurality of Voices that Advanced him to that Dignity. But as to your own
Case, the Grand Seigneur has not so much as consulted the Transylvanians, and
it is his Authority alone that has established all your Right.


Teckely. I own the States never elected me, but the reason is, because they
had no permission so to do, but were obliged to submit to the severe Laws and
Impositions of their Conquerours. However the Event has shown, that if they had
been left to their own Freedom, they would have chose no other Sovereign than
my self.


Abafti. That, I confess, I am ignorant of; and, it may be, you will find it no
easy matter to prove.


Teckely. I perceive then you are unacquainted with what happened at the Attack
of General Heusler's Army: and that, being only a Titular Prince as you are,
they take no great care to instruct you in your own Affairs. You are to
understand, that as soon as we came to blows, the Militia of Transylvania
killed your Father's great Minister, who commanded them in chief, that they
betook themselves to their heels without striking a blow, and abandoned the
Germans to the Fury of my Troops, who almost cut them all to pieces. After all
this, I leave you to judge, whether I had not reason to say, that if the
Transylvanians have not elected me for their Prince, it only proceeded from
their not being at Liberty to do it.


Abafti. What you have told me surprises me extremely, and I am not able to
divine the Reason. The People, I am sure, had no occasion to complain of the
Prince my Father, since he always governed them with extraordinary prudence and
dexterity. I need not recount to you the several Artifices he made use of, to
deliver them from the slavery that threatened them. He entertained the Emperor,
during those three years the War continued, with the fairest promises in the
World, and underhand neglected no Measures or Expedients, in order to avoid the
falling under his power. At last, when it was necessary for him to submit to
this Violence, he expressed so much sorrow, that it was evident he was more
concerned at the Calamities of his People, than his own particular Misfortunes.
Certain I am, that the weight of these Troubles hastened his death. And now
would any Man in the World believe that the Transylvanians could prove such
ungrateful Wretches, as to prefer a Stranger before the Son of that Prince, to
whom they have such numerous Obligations?


Teckely. I think it is no wonder at all, if the People forget the Respect they
owe to the memory of Prince Abafti, for you are not to expect Gratitude amongst
the Mobb. They seldom reflect on what is good and past. It Is only the present
Scene of Affairs they considered.


Abafti. But pray tell me, what greater Advantages could they propose to
themselves under your Government, than they could expect to find under mine?


Teckely. To say the truth, they don't so much consider the Merits of the
Prince himself, as of the hand that advanced him. They have ten times a greater
Aversion to the Emperor, than the Grand Seigneur, and that is the reason why
they will be always inclined to favor the Prince that is recommended to them
by the latter. If the Emperor had made choice of me, and the Grand Seigneur
had supported your Pretensions, I don't question but they would have shown you
the same favor they now express for me.


Abafti. But why do they love the Grand Seignior better than the Emperor?


Teckely. Because the first never troubles himself with their Religion, whereas
they fear all the ill usage in the World from the second.


FINIS.
Books printed for, and are to be sold by R. Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in
Warwick Lane.
THe History of the Negotiation between the Duke of Savoy, and the Protestant
Cantons of Switzerland.

An Historical Account of the most Remarkable Transactions betwixt the Duke of
Savoy and the French King: Contained in several Letters passed betwixt them
before the Rupture.

A true Relation of the Cruelties and Barbarities of the French upon the
English Prisoners of War. Being a Journal of their Travels from Dinan in
Britany, to Thoulon in Province; and back again.

An Address given in to the late K. James, by the Titular Archbishop of Dublin;
from the General Meeting of the Romish Bishops and Clergy of Ireland, held in
May last, by that King's Order.

A Pastoral Dialogue concerning Priestcraft. A Poem written by Mr. Tate.

The Folly of Priestcraft. A New Comedy.

The Royal Flight, or, The Conquest of Ireland. A New Comedy.

An Epistle to the two Universities; Together with a Prediction concerning the
French. Translated out of Callimachus, who is by St. Paul said to be a Prophet,
and that his Testimony is true, 1 Titus 1.11, 12, 13.

An Examination of the Case of the Suspended Bishops, in Answer to the Apology
for them.

The Fate of France; A Discourse, wherein, after having answered the groundless
Exceptions that are made against the lawful Conduct of the English, in securing
themselves from Popish Tyranny, etc. It is showed, That by the happy Revolution
in England, all the Designs of the French King for the Universal Monarchy are
disappointed; and the Rational Grounds to believe his Downfall near.


