CHRIST'S REVVARD OF A CHRISTIANS WATCH and WARD. OR A Sermon preached at the
Burial of Mr. JOHN BERRY of Thorverton, in the County of Devon; Aug. 23. 1654.
By JOHN PRESTON Minister of the Gospel there. Upon these words of our Savior,

LUKE 12. 37. Blessed are those servants, whom the Lord, when he comes, shall
find watching. LONDON, Printed by W. Bentley, for F. Eaglesfield at the
Marygold in S. Paul's Churchyard. Anno Dom. 1655.

To the Worshipful THOMAS BROWN Esquire, Alderman of LONDON, Grace and Truth
by JESUS CHRIST.
SIR,
IT may be said of your famous City, as sometimes of Tire. She is the Crowning
City, whose Merchants are Princes: whose Traffiquers are the honorable of the
Earth, Isa. 23. 8. But what became of Tire, that noble and ennobling City? her
Crown was laid in the dust, and her Honorable in the streets. And why? They
were haughty and knew not the Lord, neither regarded they the God of Jacob.
They did not know; in their affairs they eyed not the Crown of Righteousness,
neither were Traffiquers with Heaven, therefore they perished from off the
Earth.

Your City, as a stately Princess, wears a goodly rich Crowns on her head,
Crowns her Merchants and inhabitants with wealth and honor; and you confess
that it is not for your Righteousness that the Lord has spared you, but that
It is of the Lords mercies, that ye are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. Lam. 3. 22. I will not accuse you for Pride and haughtiness, for
trampling under foot the glory of England, the Preaching of the Gosple of
Righteousness, nor for Blasphemy, Heresy, Apostasy, Oppression, self-love,
and self-seeking, serving your selves upon Christ and upon his Gosple, for I
have often heard you, upon your public fasting-daies and days of humiliation,
to accuse and condemn your selves for these and the like City sins, only I
grieve to see these Rebels and Traitors against God to get a Reprieve, and I
heartily wish that the day of their Execution were come: for, the putting of
these to death will be your life. For the Prophet Micah tells you how you shall
be still renowned, the Crowned and the Crowning City. To do justly, to love
mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God, Micah 6. 8. You must meet
God every day upon the Royal Exchange. Here you must barter Nature for Grace,
Error for Truth, your own Righteousness for Christ; (and who will not part with
dross for Gold, Pibbles for Pearls, Rags for Robes? you must put off (says the
blessed Apostle) concerning the former conversation, the Old Man, corrupt
through the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind: and
put on the New Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true
holiness. Ephesians. 5. 22, 23, 24. Your main case must be for your religious
Factorage, and to keep up your noble Trade with Heaven. Your Merchandise must
be for them that dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable
clothing. Isa. 23. 18. Let Prayer continually go forth with your laden
vessels, and the Spirit of God will Pilot ye. Then shall ye have good Markets
indeed: and Oh, the rich returns that will flow in unto you! Blessed are the
Merchants, that walk and talk with God daily upon the Exchange. When God and
the Soul are Partners, Oh, the sweetness and fullness of that Communion and
intercourse!

See how our Savior loves such a soul as is busied in heavenly negotiations,
when he likens the Kingdom of Heaven to such a Merchant, who seeking goodly
Pearls, when he had found one Pearl of great Price, he went and sold all that
he had and bought it. Matthew. 13. 45, etc. The true Christian is this Merchant;
a Merchant adventurer, he ventures riches, honors, pleasures; life and all, he
trades for Pearls, that is, he seeks (with labor, cost, and danger) for
heavenly knowledge, the Pearl of great Price, or the peerless Pearl is Christ
Jesus. A Pearl is bred of a caelestial humor or dew in shell-fishes: Christ by
heavenly Influence was formed in the womb of the Virgin. Emanuel, God with us,
or God-man is this Pearl. The value and worth of this Pearl no Arithmetician
can sum up, it is infinite, of wonderful virtue, most precious, A Pearl that
makes Pearls, it makes vile sinners to be Pearls and costly Jewels, Malac. 3.
17. and turns every evil thing into Good for us, Romans 8. 28. as the
Philosophers stone turns every thing it touches into Gold. This Pearl, Christ
Jesus with all his gifts, graces, virtues, merits, and Priveledges is derived
to us by the means of his ordinances. These are the Cabinets and Caskets of
this Pearl. God offers Christ in his word, he is willing to barter with us.
Come buy. Isa. 55. 1. I Counsel thee to buy. Rev. 3. 18. In it God desires us
to be good to our own souls, to receive the soul-saving, soul-enriching Pearl,
thus offered (as these Texts, 2 Cor. 5. 20. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Luke 13. 34. do
testify.)

As there the Merchant went and sold all, so does the true Christian sell all.
That is first, he parts with the estimation of all in comparison of Christ.
Secondly, he has a heart prepared actually to part with all, if he cannot
enjoy it and Christ too. Thirdly, and especially, he parts with his sins all,
not reserving a Zoar or a Rimmon, not keeping any one beloved lust or forbidden
pleasure. Yea, Fourthly, he parts with his Affections, with all their Branches
and Objects, if they will not stand with Christ. Whatsoever comes into
competition with Christ, whether honors, riches, pleasures, yea his own life,
he declineth it, and loses all for Christ's sake. And the gain of this
Merchandise, no tongue is able to express.

Thus do wise Merchants traffic whilst they live here on earth, a Country
that is not theirs, venting their Commodities and transmitting all they can
into Heaven, their own Country, against their Arrival and Receipt there, with
joyful acclamations of Saints and Angels, and most rich and most honorable
dwelling with their blessed Redeemer, soul-solacing, and hearts-satisfying
friends, in perfect joy, complete comfort, and fullness of all good things for
evermore.

The Lord remove and take out of the way, whatsoever lets you in this
blessed Merchandise, which is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the
gain thereof than fine Gold, Prove. 3. 14. Let your Merchandise be HOLINESS TO
THE LORD Isa. 23. 18. here: so in the ballancing of your Account at the last
day, you shall be clear out of debt with your heavenly Creditor, and receive a
full and final discharge, together with a full remuneration of eternal
happiness to you, and all careful Accomptants with him, wayters and Preparers
for him.

Which negotiation and traffiquing with Heaven (O sedulous and rich Merchant)
is set forth under many other Notions in Scripture. Amongst which is that of
Watching for the Masters coming. What it is; How this watch is to be set and
kept, Motives to it, and the Reward of it, is as laid forth in the ensuing
Sermon, in which your obsequious friend (being dead) yet speaks.

Many be the Epistles, (which whilst he lived) he wrote to you by my hand.
Accept I beseech you of my appearing his Amanuenlis once more. And keep this by
you. First, as a Remembrance of him that honored you, and was faithful and
diligent to serve you in your employments in our Country. And Second, as a
Funeral Ribband for your soul to wear, which may daily mind you of your mortal
condition, and stir you up to get such necessaries and preparatives to go
hence, that when) you shall be no more seen on earth, you may enjoy the
beatifical vision of our Lord Jesus in Heaven. So prays;

Sir* your Worships Servant in our great Master, John Preston.

A SERMON, preached at the BVRIAL OF Mr. JOHN BERRY. August 23. 1654.
Luke 12. ^7. Blessed are those Servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall
find watching.
HEre Christ compares himself to a man lately married, solacing himself,
preparing a place for his Spouse, leaving a servant at home to wait for his
return. Christ has married his Church to himself, is gone into heaven to
solace himself, after his sufferings (for he ^ught his Church with his blood)
In the mean time we are to ^atch for the coming of our Lord. Blessed are those
servants, whom ^^e Lord when he comes shall find watching.

Where you have 1. The Master. 2. the Servants. 3. their Works. 1. Here is our
Relation. Servants. 2. our Condition, a waiting a ^^tching Condition. 3. The
encouragement. Blessed are those Ser^^nts, etc.

1. Our Relation, Servants.
Doct. Our greatest Title of hononr in this life, is to be Gods Servants; his
servants are Kings. To serve him is to reign, that is, over lusts, over sin.
His service is perfect freedom; He is greater than Alexander the great that
subdueth his passions and corruptions. And has made us Kings, Revel. 1. 6.
(us) his servants, not only in adopting us to be the Heirs of his Kingdom, but
also (through the power of the Holy Ghost) has made us Conquerours over sin,
death, Hell, Satan, and all our enemies, as it is written, in all these we are
more than Conquerours, Romans 8. 37. and he will Crown all his Members with glory
and honor.

Use. 1. Account it so, and make great account of, and glory we in this Title.
And indeed this is all our glory, our joy and rejoicing, that the Lord has
vouchsafed to call us forth to serve him, to wear his Badg and Livery. And it
is a rich and beneficial service, we serve a Lord that has the Scepter of
Heaven and Earth, that will reward to a cup of cold water. A poor man begged a
penny of Alexander, he gave the poor man a City; what will our munificent, most
magnificent Lord do if we ask in faith. He will give us a Kingdom, a glorious
Kingdom, a Kingdom of glory that cannot be shaken. Ask of me, and I will give
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth
for thy possession, Psalm. 2. 8. said God to his Son; Ask of me in my Sons name
(says the same God to his servant whosoever he be) and I will give the Heaven
for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the boundless Inheritance
(which is above) for thy possession; so that Gods servants may say every one of
them, I am a Citizen of no mean City. I am a King of no mean Kingdom. I am a
servant of the great God of heaven. He will not set us to gather stubble as
Pharaoh, to work of our selves, but he will enable us to work; where we fail,
he will pardon; and when we do his works by his own help, he will reward, Crown
his own works in us; and when our enemies oppress* he will take our parts.

Use. 2. Do we our duty as servants, else the Lord will not own us. When David
was contriving to build a Temple to the Lord, then it is, Go tell my servent
David; but when out of Gods work, numbering the people, then only Go tell
David. So when the people of Israel did well, then, Go tell my people, but when
they committed Idolatry, Go tell thy people, Exodus 32. 7. The Lord will not own
us, if we be away from his work and service. But is it for nothing that God so
highly honors his people? Seems it a small thing (says David) to be King
Saul's Son in law? So (say I) seems it to you a small thing to be the King of
Saul's Sons by grace, to be his Servants? Nay, dignity calls for duty, this
honor looks for service and Gods servants must be watching, which is the 2.
part.

The second part of the Text is the condition.

[Watching]

Doct. It is the office of every Christian, constantly to watch and wait for
the Lords coming. All wakers are not watchers. There is a natural waking, and
there is a spiritual waking, and so there is of watching. Waking natural is
when the obstructions of the spirits being dissolved, the spirits return into
the senses (for sleep is the binding up of the senses) when upon the
discessation of vapors (that stopped the senses before) there is a return of
the spirit into the senses; which may be done by some call, some motion, some
stirring up of the body: or by some great shining light.

In a spiritual sense. Worldly thoughts, and fleshly thoughts, as foggy
vapors, do obstruct the workings of Gods spirit, and cause the soul to sleep
in sin. God calls by his word, stirs up good motions of his spirit, sends a
proclamation by his messengers, scatters, a light, either the light, the
delightsome light of his mercies, or the startling terrifying light of his
judgments, or the light of divine truth, and awakens these sleepers. And this
waking is a preparative to waching, as watching is a I reparation for the
Masters Advent.

Watching natural: is when upon waking we have our senses exercised, and are
intent and carefully look about us to prevent some mischief or inconvenience,
which careless security would let in upon us.

Spiritual watching (of which in the Text) is when upon our waking, our souls
are exercised, the faculties and powers bent and intent in the work which God
has set us to do, when we do quicken, actuate and raise up our graces,
avoiding of evil, preparing for God, to prevent that hurt and damage which a
sleepy State brings upon men: Here it is spoken of the vigils of the soul, yet
the body may so far be taken in, as it is an Instrument of the soul in the
action.

In the Primitive times they had their vigils, because of present persecution,
or when they had some great business in hand, to seek the Lord for direction or
for preparation to the Sacrament. In process of time it fell into superstition,
and the Papists rise up to their blind devotions at certain hours of the
night, which they call canonical hours. But how are we fallen from the zeal and
piety of the primitive times? -- O quantum mutatus ab illo -- Pectore. O where
is the heart, and life, and spirit, the vivacity, the constancy and continuance
in the service of God? Satan's watch and play is more used than our Saviors
watch and pray? But to the doctrine.

It is the office of every Christian to keep a constant and continual watch
over his soul.

Reas. 1. Because we are in danger of sin, and in danger by sin. In danger of
sin, besides many other sins; of that deadness and drowsiness and heaviness of
spirit which hangs upon the best. In danger by sin, more than I can express,
offending of God, the good Angels, giving advantage to Satan, exposing our
selves to his darts, grieve the good spirit of God, and put a sting into all
other troubles, yea, sin makes the Blessings of God to be no blessings,
birdlimes, or clips the wings of our prayers, hinders us from praising God for
his blessings. Sin is the continual makebate between God and us, it separates
all good from us, it withdraws our good God from us. It cankers our gold,
blasts our good, embitters our comforts. It is cunning and will steal into our
hears, unless we keep a Guard and set a diligent watch.

What is it but the powerful command of sin (which like the Devil in the man
possessed) casts us sometimes into the fire, where we burn and boil with lust;
sometimes into the water, where either we swim with vain delights; or are
drowned with the drunken pleasures of this flattering world? sometimes it blows
us up into the air, with a giddy desire to hunt and hawk after the honors and
preferments of the world, and anon throws us down grovelling on the ground,
nailing our affections to this earth with the covetous desires of worldly
goods. Sin lies daily and hourly at our doors, at our beds, at our boards, in
solitariness, in company, in the house, in the field, watching to surprise us,
therefore we ought constantly to keep our watch, because of the danger.

Reas. 2. Because the life of man is a Pilgrimage, and we travel through our
enemies Country. This is Satan's Empire, we had need to watch, when we are in
the midst of our enemies, and a traitor, a bosom-enemy within us. Alas our
precious Jewel is in a frail pitcher, therefore keep thy heart with all
diligence, Prove. 4. 23. In the 2 Kings 20. 39. A disguised Prophet cries to the
King, and said. Thy servant went out into the midst of the Battle, and behold a
man turned a side, and brought a man unto me, and said keep this man: if by any
means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or else you shall pay
a Talent of Silver: to our purpose, thus. As thou came into the midst of the
Army, the militant Church, God gave thee a soul to make thee a man, with this
charge, Keep this soul safe, if it be missing when I come, about the business
of the world, or sin, or Satan, look to it, thy soul goes for it, and thou
have in all the world but one soul, if unprepared and unappointed, the Lord
will cashier it, and cast it into hell, whence thou shall not come forth till
thou have paid the utmost farthing. It will be in vain for thee to say as the
man of his prisoner verse. 40. As thy servant was busy here and there, he was
gone: Lord I had much to do in the world, many businesses, much to look after,
etc. So my soul was missing when thou calledst. The Lord will say as the King
to the delinquent there, So shall thy judgment be, thy self have decided it.

Reas. 3. We are Runners in a race. The price set before us is eternal Glory.
According as the price is above all other: so in our running we should be more
quick, more yarr and circumspect.

Reas. 4. We are in a Warfare, and soldiers can never promise to themselves
security without a strong and diligent watch; it is certain, the General of the
enemies horse never sleeps, Satan is always waking and watching to take
advantage, and Simon dormis tu? Christian soldier sleep thou? The poor
Disciples slept when their Lord was in an Agony, but Judas slept not: Ah! our
husbandmen slept, and the envious one has sowed Tares. Christ's Disciples have
left Christ alone to his own cause, saying, as sometimes the Israelites, To
your own tents. Now look to thine own house, O Son of David.

Reas. 5. We are Stewards, and must shortly give an account, how we have
improved our talents. The estate of an Account is a watchful estate. Our
account will be strict, our thoughts words and works shall be weighed in the
impartial scales of the Judge of heaven and earth, and if they be found
thoughts of the Flesh, words of the world, and works of the Devil, we shall be
sent away from the presence of God. With a Go ye cursed etc. Hell will be our
Prison, eternity our shackles, fire and brimstone our Torment, the breath of
the Lord like a River of brimstone will kindle it.

Reas. 6. The daughter of Improvidence, notably set forth, Luke 12. 45, 46. If
the servant say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to
beat the menservants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be be drunken.
The Lord of that servant will come in a day he looks not for him, and at an
hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
portion with unbelievers. Swift destruction is at the heels of promisers to
themselves Peace and Safety. Yea, then is the time of pouring down divine
vengeance, when men are dissolved to a secure negligence. When they shall say
Peace and Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.

Lastly, we are perpetually under Observation; 1 Conscience is an Observer of
us. 2 Satan observes what we speak or do, that he may accuse us to God and
witness against us. 3 God observes us, his eyes behold, his eyelids try the
children of men, Psalm. 11. 4. he knows our thoughts, he writes it down in his
book, and the faults can never be blotted out without Repentance. If Conscience
fail (as for a time she may) and lie asleep at the door of our heart, and
neither bark or bite) she will awake at last and tear thee. Assure thy self,
God will not fail to set thy sins in order before thee, if now thou do not
examine and set them in order before thy face, judge and condemn them. The case
being such, we had need to keep a perpetual Watch and Ward over our souls.

These Reasons are so many Motives to this necessary duty of a Christian
watchfulness. I shall now give you a few Directions For, and In Watching.

First, Labor to have waking Considerations. Consideration is a help to
Watchfulness. 1 Know and believe that there is a God that eyeth thee, an enemy
that observes thee, and a Conscience that will do his office first or last,
that Death is coming, and Judgment draws nigh.

2. Consider the end of this coming into the world, and living here. What do
thou here Eliah? O baptized Christian, what do thou sullying thy self amongst
the fleshpots of Egypt, lading thy self with thick clay, how long? Hab. 2. 6.
how long, O ye sons of men will ye turn my glory into shame, how long will ye
love vanity and seek after leasing, Psalm. 4. 2. How long will ye be busied
like Ants about a molehill, carrying and recarrying in and out a little
worldly trash, when you think to finish your earthly Fabric, death (as a wild
Beast) with one dash of his foot spoils all, and disperseth it and you. The
time past may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we
walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, Revellings, banquetings, and
abominable Idolatries. 1 Pet. 4. 3. It is enough, I, too too much, that you
have revelled out the third of your life to waste, hitherto; Oh spend and end
the little remnant of time wholly and holy in Gods service, working out your
salvation with fear and trembling. Were your Heaven-born souls given you to
stop to this earths drudgery? Your eagle minds to resort to the carrion of this
world? was your golden time given you to gather dross? your noble affections to
run in the dirty channels of this world? Rather was not your chief end to
glorify God and enjoy him? How suitable have been your Actions to this chief
end? have they been for your good and the salvation of your souls? consider
this seriously.

3. Have this waking consideration. Is not God present? Does not he observe all
my ways and count all my steps? if I have walked with vanity, or if my foot
has hasted to deceit Job. 31. 4. 5. will not God find it out? says Joseph,
how can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God, in whose presence I
am, Genesis 39. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole Earth, to
show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him 2
Cor. 16. 9. He neither slumbereth nor sleeps, His eyes see into the dark
thoughts of our heart, all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with
whom we have to do Heb. 4. 13. This should make us watch over our secret sins.
What if thou had no body to accuse thee? Thou have a conscience, and a God
that sees thee. When thou art in secret, think thou art in the presence of God,
who is a judge. S. Paul was kept in a watchful condition upon this
consideration. Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men. 2 Cor. 5. 11.
It will be a terrible day. And when Solomon would startle young men, he minds
them of the day of Judgment. But know that for all these things thou must come
to judgment, Eccles. 11. 9.

4. The fearful condition to be found in an estare wherein we are not fit to
dye. Take heed of promising thy self pleasure, or jollity tomorrow; It may be
the day that God will strike thee. Annanias and Saphira were stricken suddenly;
and he who has stricken thy neighbor (as many now are smitten by death
suddenly) what if he smite thee? It may befall thee when thou go about
sinful and unwarrantable courses (take heed) it may be the time when God calls
for thy soul. Add hereunto that our l^fe is short and uncertain, and that which
at any time may, why not now? And if we wait all our days, and every hour, it
will not be long, and it is for eternity. Eternity depends upon this moment of
time.

5. Labor for such inward dispositions as may dispose us to watchfullness. Two
affections, when they are raised, will much help us, Fear and Love. 1. Fear.
When Jacob was afraid of his Brother Esau, he spent the night before in prayer.
Blessed is the man that fears always, Prove. 28. 14. Blessed is the man that
stands constantly in aw of God, and is afraid to offend him at any time. So
Prove. 23. 17. Be thou in the fear of God all the day long. What fear is that?
of Jealousy and Reverence. There is great use of this fear, It is the souls
best Scout-master, and will give report to the soul of her enemies Approches.
Fear stirs up care, care rowseth duty, and performance of duty keeps us from
surprizal. It is the Athiesm of the times to stand in aw of nothing: but he who
has the fear of Jealousy and Reverence is fit for all things.

2. Love, It is a sweet affection, and keeps the soul watchful over any thing
that may displease the person whom we love. It is also full of Invention to
give content to the person loved, we never sin till the soul is betrayed and
drawn away from these two, Fear and Love: and we have the soul never in better
tune than when thus qualified. These are Royal supports of a Christians Arms.
His Field is sincerity, charged with the deeds of Piety, shall be accomplished
with a Crest of Glory. The supporters are Fear and Love, with this Motto, My
soul watches.

Wind up the strings of your affections every day, else they will be down, wind
them up with waking considerations, else they will down to these present
things. Find out what sin thou art naturally prone to. Be wise and foresee.
Know your selves both in good and evil, wherein thou art prone to be overtaken,
or overcome, and what has done thee good and use it again. No creature will be
taken in a snare, if he see it, and the Medicine that cured the sick one, he
will use it again.

Take all advantages to do good, slip no opportunity, no Sabbath, no Sermon,
for why, thou see some alive and well to day are dead to morrow. When we have
advantages to any thing, study to improve them and turn them to Gods glory.
This is a special exercise of watching. It will grieve you one day, when you
shall see, that at such a time, ye lost such an opportunity, and at such a
time, omitted such a duty. Consider this is your seed-time. If ye sow to the
flesh, ye shall of the flesh reap corruption, but he that sows to the Spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. 6. 8. will ye have a harvest of
Glory and no seed-time of graces. Every company you keep, make them better, or
your self better by them: gain some spiritual increase by them, or they by you.
Labor to know how to judge every thing in its due worth, and so as it deserves
affect it, least you put good for evil, and evil for good.

To know God in his greatness, Christ in his goodness, virtue in its dignity,
sin in its dangers, death in its certainty, yet times uncertainty, will be a
means to stir thee up to watchfullness. Let the joys of Heaven ravish thee,
the Torments of hell scare thee, the sound of the last trumpet ( Arise ye dead
and come to judgment) sound and resound always in thine ears.

Mors tua, Mors Christi, fraus Munda Gloria coeli
Et dolor Inferni, sunt meditanda tibi
Thy death and Christ's, Earths Fraud, Heavens habitation
And Pains of Hell, let be thy meditation.
Labor to find out what hinders from doing good, whether too much business
and pudder about the things of this world (as if we were born to live here
everlastingly.) The Scripture sets Bounds and limits to us: as 1 Cor. 7. 31.
use this world as not abusing it, not doting upon these passable and perishable
things, as our Savior Luke 21. 34. Warn us to take heed that we be not
overcharged, as not with surfeiting and drunkenness, so not with the cares of
this life. There is an overcharging of the soul with cares, as the body with
meats or drinks. As the glutton and drunkard are unweildy to work: so cares eat
up the power of the soul, so that they loose many opportunities to do good and
to receive good. Cares choke the word. But more particularly.

First in the Morning, begin to wake with God, and give thy soul a
Mornings-draught steept in the Meditation of God his mercy and preservation,
before the World or the Flesh thrust in. Bethink of all that may befall thee
that day, of all the dangers, of all the troubles, what Armor to encounter,
surely ye have need to buckle on your Armor with Patience, to go up and down
(amongst men, shall I say?) hissing Serpents of envy, poisonous Adders of
maliciousness, and fiery flying Scorpions of slandering their neighbors, and
we must fight (as S. Paul) with Beasts after the manner of men: You cannot go
safe amongst these malevolent spirits without your coat of Male, girded on
about you by prayer. Where the enemy once entered, barracado up that passage
more stronngly as soldiers do, where the enemy has broken in, or the wall is
weak. Take Provisions for thy journey or undertakings, that ye may be able to
encounter whatsoever Accidents befall you. Let God have the first fruits of the
day, the firstlings of your hearts. Begin the day with prayers, and it will
sweeten all your actions of the day with comfort, and all occurrences thus: I
commended my self to God in prayer, and have set upon the day with this
Resolution, to do nothing that may offend God or a good conscience, regarding
no Iniquity in my heart but to pass the day in the works of my calling under
the shadow of the Almighty, etc.

Afterward, in the day let us do nothing wherein we conceive God ^ill not
protect us, that we cannot pray to God for a Blessing upon it. If men would do
so, what would become of their lying, swearing, and forswearing cheating,
couzning, and underminings? drinkings, lasciviousness and vanities for why? can
they pray to God for a Blessing upon these courses? In the daytime, carry a
heavenly mind in earthly business. No Occurrent fa^ls out, no Object is
presented, but a gracious heart will draw out something of it for religious
use. A good Christian is an Excellent Chimist, and extracts heavenly things,
and things for heavenly uses out of earthly minerals and materials. The present
Harvest puts him in mind of the day of Judgment, and the Reapers, of the
Angels. When he plows the ground he thinks upon the fallow ground of his heart
how it needs turning and ripping up; when he weaves, or sees the Weavers
shuttle, he meditates upon the shortness of man's life, now at this end, but
presently at an end, etc. Thus he reasons with himself, God has set me in this
place for a little time, and here I must work in this inferior calling, and I
must serve God with contentment in it.

As for recreation make it not a vocation, you will quickly err in the use of
lawful things, if ye be not watchful. Prosperity is a slippery Mountain, if
you walk not warily, you will slip and slide, and glide into the forgetfullness
of God, of your selves, of your duty, which is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that fall into it. Take heed (says God) when
thou art in that good land that flows with milk and honey, that thou forget
not, etc. Job knew that for to get full of all was the way to be forgetful,
and therefore when his children were banqueting he was sacrificing.

If Athwarts and crosses of the world come, look upon the hand that orders all;
wherein thou art prone to be overtaken, take especial care to prevent, and be
watchful there. And because every man cannot use Privacy well, be watchful
over thy self alone, use the ^ime of Aloneness, in Meditation of him that All
One is, though he ^e Three. Let thy sequestration-time, be thy holy
meditation-time, ^athan is busy still; he will be too cunning for thee, and
make thy ^eart his shop, if thou suffer it empty, and fill it not with good
^houghts.

Let thy company be such as to whom thou may do good, or from whom thou
may receive good. Good company strengthens ^ne another, as stones in an Arch.
Such company as thou keep, ^^ch thou art, or such thou will be shortly, or
such thou will be ^ccounted to be.

When it comes to night, reflect upon the occasions and passages ^f the day: go
over all, where thou have offended, crave pardon, ^here thou have done well,
bless the Lord. If thou have done good to none, nor made thy self better, thou
may cry out, heu! diem perdidi. Alas! I have lost a day. Suffer not thy body
to rest, before thy conscience be assured of peace and reconciliation with God
through Jesus Christ. Dangerous to go to bed with a guilty conscience, what do
we know whither we shall live till the morning?

If we could account Religion a serious thing, as it is, we would not hear
these things as strange Doctrines, but we would think of them seriously, and
practice them affectionately.

Renew your Resolutions for the time to come, for we have all broken our vows
and covenants with God. Observe all advantages for praying to, and praising of
God, speaking of his goodness to others with thy mouth, and let thy life speak
thereof louder, let God have all the Honor of his Assistance of thee, and
blessing thy Labors.

Above all, Remember the Sabbath, do the work of the Lord only upon the Lords
day. If thou mingle thy worldly business with his service, thou spoylest all;
such mixings mar all. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send
forth a stinking savor Eccles. 10. 1. So distracted thoughts, worldly
mindedness, and earthly talk and business upon the Lords day, will cause all
thy prayers and services to stink in the nostrils of God. And if thou steal
away of his time, to use it about thine own occasions, thou art a Thief also to
thy self, and to thine own profit. For therefore God commanded thee to keep the
Sabbath that he might bless thee, that by thy holy observation of the day, and
careful performance of the duties of the day, he might convay over to thee his
blessings, for such a servant he blesses, and he shall be blessed, which is
the third and last part.

The Encouragement.
Blessed is that servant, etc.

Doct. Blessing attends and goes along with watching. If thou will be blessed?
then watch for the Lords coming. Blessed are these servants, etc.

Those that keep their souls in a watchful frame are blessed. And it is truth.
The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Use. What a Motive is here to give our souls to watching. In Blessedness all
good things whatsoever, meet as in a center. It is a confluence and concurrence
of all good whatsoever, either honest, profitable or pleasant. And this
Blessedness shall meet the watchful soul in death, and embrace it. The
watching Christian, his life is blessed, his death is blessed: blessed by
grace, blessed by glory; blessed in body, blessed in soul. Blessed soul that
immediately enjoyes blessedness in the Kingdom of Heaven where God is all in
all to his elect 1 Cor. 15. 28. where is eternal life and perfect glory.
Eternal, life, which is that Fellowship with God, whereby God himself is
through the Lamb Christ, Life unto the elect. For in the Kingdom of Heaven, the
elect shall not need meat, drink, sleep, air, heat. cold, physic, apparel, or
light of Sun or Moon, but in place of all these, shall they have Gods spirit,
by which immediately they shall be quickened for ever. Revel. 21. 3. 23.

And perfect glory, which is that wonderful Excellency of the Saints, whereby
they shall be in a far better estate than heart can wish. For first, they shall
everlastingly behold the face of God, which is the Glory and Majesty of God,
Rev. 22. 4. Secondly they shall be most like to Christ, to wit; just, holy,
incorruptible, glorious; honorable, excellent, beautiful, strong, mighty and
nimble 1 John 3. 2. Phil. 3. 21. Thirdly they shall inherit the Kingdom of
Heaven 1 Pet. 1. 4. Matthew. 25. 34. whence proceeds Eternal joy, and the perfect
service of God immediately. Eternal joy, had Peace with safety, safety with
security, security with Eternity. The joys above are for Matter, spiritual,
for substance, real, for use universal, for continuance, Eternal, Psalm. 16. 11.
Psalm. 36. 8. There the King is Verity, the Law Charity, the Peace Felicity, and
the Life Eternity.

The service of God consists only in Praise and Thansgiving Rev. 21. 3. and
Rev. 5. 12, 13. and 11. 17. see the Texts. The manner of performing this
service, is to worship God by God immediate^y. In Heaven there shall neither be
Temple, Ceremony, nor Sacrament, but all these wants shall God himself supply
together with ^he Lamb that is, Christ, Rev. 21. 21. I say no Temple therein,
for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it. The service shall
be daily and without Intermission, Rev. 7. 15. They are in the ^resence of the
Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple.

Use. The consideration hereof, should stir up us to a constant ^atch and ward
over our souls. If immediate communion with God through Jesus Christ, which is
the life eternal; if to have whatsoever heart can wish, and infinitely beyond
that, which is perfect glory, where we shall for ever behold and admire the
face of God, be like our blessed Savior, and inherit the Kingdom of glory with
the priveledges thereof in eternal joy, where our exercise shall be singing and
praising God. In a word if we would be Blessed, if Blessedness (which contains
all these and more) may prevail to move us (or else what can) to the duty of
watchfulness: then be we stirred up to be in a frame of soul fit to meet
Christ, have all the graces of the soul in exercise; this is to watch. Look
about you, the Phylistines be upon you. Every day is clipping your life, and
taking away part of it, what should we now do, but fit our selves for Christ,
seeing he is coming to us, and we are going to him by death? You would be fit
at the hour of death. That which will be good then, is good now, and the work
which of necessity, must be done, or we are everlastingly undone, let us first
go about it, and make an end of that once. The worst of men, when death comes
will wish he had watched, done these and these good things, abstained from
these and these evil things? I exhort you to nothing, but that which is fit for
you to make you fit for Christ. When your Faith and Hope, and Love have their
right Object, and all the graces of the soul are in exercise, then you watch,
and Blessed are those Servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find
watching. So much for the Text.

My Auditors are of three sorts, either Morners of our deceased Brother, or
Rejoycers at his death, or men indifferent, neither affected with grief or joy
at all at his sudden fall, a word to each of these.

First, for you Mourners; Wise lamenting the death of her careful Husband;
Children bemoaning the death of their careful Father; Laborers and servants
Mourning for the loss of a work-contriving; labour-rewarding Master; Friends
for the lack of their discreet, advising Friend. To you I say no more but this,
look up to your Husband, Father, Friend, Lord and Master in Heaven. It is the
Lord has done it, as it is mavelous, so let it be well pleasing in your
eyes. His will is done, subject your wills to his; We are the Clay, he is the
Potter, Psalm. 64. 8. shall not the Potter do with his clay as he pleases Romans
9. 21. We read Exodus 15. that the waters of Marah were so bitter, that the
people could not drink of them, then Moses, at Gods commandment, cast into them
a tree, and the waters were made sweet. In the bitterness of soul upon the
death of our Brother, God shows you a tree that will turn your bitter Waters of
affliction into sweetness. This tree is Christ, Take up this blessed tree in
your hands by Faith (who willingly presents himself unto you in this your
Agony) cast him into your bitter waters, or cast your self upon him; hide your
self in the boughs and branches of this blessed Tree, till the Lords
indignation be past. For, his anger endures but a moment, in his favor is
life. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30.
5. you will faint, unless you believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the
Land of the Living, Psalm. 27. 13.

To the second sort, that rejoice because now death has shut him up in his
Cave, the spirit of God directly meets with you, Prove. 24. 17, 18. Rejoice not
when thine enemy falls, and let not thy heart be glad when he stumbleth. Let
the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him upon
thee. Why should thou run from thine own watch to fault find his now? Death
found him not from his calling all the day; at Midnight, when he pierced him
at the heart, do thou know his Vigils, his Preparations, his Meditations what
they were? If death had come to thee that same hour, at the second watch,
should he have found thee better prepaed than he was? what art thou that
judge another man's servant, he stands or falls to his own Master. He has
past his day, thine is to come, If the Lord find thee in thy swearing,
sabbath-breaking, coveting, wandering out of his ways, not guiding thy life by
his Law unprepared, unappointed, thy doom is set down Luke 12. 45. to verse. 48.
see the place.

If there be a third sort of Hearers, Indifferent men, without affection of the
one side or other, nor caring whether he had lived or dyed, neither partake
with the Mourners here, nor with such as are well pleased at his death; are
nothing toutcht or smitten with this stroke: Besides that they proclaim
stupidity, do they not walk contrary to the command, weep with them that weep.
Be of the same affection one toward another, Romans 12. 15, 16. And show
themselves Athiestical? It is the Athiesm of these times to be without dread or
fear. When God gives one of his houshold-servants a blow, the rest should fear.
This use should every one of us make of it. If God had so smitten me, in what
case had I been? how had it been with my poor soul? surely I was not prepared
as I ought, ought not I to accept of this acceptable time, this day of
salvation, and to act and exercise my self in all these duties that tend to
salvation (that is) to watch? Blessed are those servants, etc. When our Savior
said to his Disciples, One of you shall betray me; Every one of them
(suspicious of himself) questioned him again, Master is it I? so whilst I say
one of you (Beloved) shall be the next that shall dye, it behooves every one of
you to question with himself. Is it I? Is it I? what if it should be I? am I
prepared to meet the Lord? is my soul in a watchful frame and posture? do I
perform my sentinel-charge till I be relieved? do I wait all the days of mine
appointed time until my chang come? Job. 14. 14. the same shall be blessed.
For Blessed are these servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find
watching. Amen.

FINIS.

