A DISCOURSE For the Vindicating of Christianity FROM THE Charge of Imposture.
OFFERED, By Way of LETTER, To the Consideration of the DEISTS of the Present
Age.

By Humphrey Prideaux, D. D. And Archdeacon of Suffolk.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for W. Rogers, at the Sun, over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street, 1697.

A LETTER TO THE DEISTS, etc.
Gentlemen,
IF I am not mistaken, the Reason you give for your Renouncing that Religion ye
were baptized into, and is the Religion of the Country in which ye were born,
is, That the Gospel of Jesus Christ is an Imposture: An Assertion that I
tremble to repeat. But whether that Gospel be right, or ye are in the right
that deny it, will appear from the Consideration of the Nature of an Imposture
and from the Life of that most infamous Impostor (whom we, as well as you,
acknowledge to be such) which I have before given you the exact Picture of. And
if you can find any one lineament of it, any one line of all its filthy
features in the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ, I durst say (so sure I am of the
contrary) that for the sake hereof I will give you all you contend for, and
yield you up the whole Cause. And therefore, that we may thoroughly examine the
Matter, I will lay down, in the first place, What an Imposture is; 2dly. What
are the inseparable Marks and Characters of it; And, 3dly. That none of these
Marks can belong to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And when I have done this, I
hope I shall convince all such of you, who have not totally abandoned your
selves to your Infidelity, That the Gospel of Jesus Christ is that sacred Truth
of God, which you are all bound to believe.

An Imposture, taking the word in the full latitude of its signification, may
denote any lie or cheat, whereby one Man imposes upon another. But it is most
frequently used to express such cheats as are imposed on us by those who come
with false Characters of themselves, pretending to be what they are not, in
order to delude and deceive. And when this character, which is thus falsely
assumed, is no less than a pretended Embassy from Heaven, and under the credit
of it a New Religion is delivered to the World as coming from God, which is
nothing else but a Forgery, invented by the first Propagators of it, to impose
a cheat upon mankind, it amounts to be an Imposture in that sense, in which you
would have the Gospel of Jesus Christ to be such. And in this sense it is to be
understood in the Controversy between us; so that the whole Question which we
are to examine into, is, Whether the Christian Religion be a Truth really given
unto us by divine Revelation from God our Creator, or else a mere humane
invention, contrived by the first Propagators of it, to impose a cheat upon
mankind. And when I have fully disproved the latter part of this Question, that
the Christian Religion cannot be such an invention, contrived to cheat and
impose upon us, that will sufficiently prove the former, that it must be that
divine Truth, which all we that are Christians firmly believe it to be.

That it is possible such a cheat may be imposed upon Men, cannot be denied. It
is sufficiently proved in the foregoing History, which is a very full instance
of it; and I have laid it before you for this very purpose, that you may
therein see clearly delineated and displayed in all its proper colors the
whole nature of the thing, which you charge our holy Religion with. All that I
contend for, is, That if Christianity be such an Imposture as we all
acknowledge the Religion of Mahomet to be, it must be just such another thing
as that is, with all the same Marks, Characters, and Properties of an Imposture
belonging thereto; and that if none of those Marks, Characters, or Properties
can be discovered in it, it must be a clear eviction of the whole charge, and
manifestly prove, That our holy Religion cannot be that thing, which you would
have it to be. For our only way of knowing things, is by their Marks and
Properties; and it is by them only that we can discover what the nature of them
is. It is only by the Marks and Properties of a Man, that we know a Man from
another living Creature, for we cannot see the Essences of things. And so it
must be only by the Marks and Properties of an Imposture, that we can know an
Imposture from that which is a real truth, when attested unto us. And as where
we find none of the Marks and Properties of a Man, we assuredly know that
cannot be a Man, how much soever any one may tell us that it is: So where we
find none of the Marks and Properties of an Imposture, we may assuredly know
that cannot be an Imposture, how much soever you, or any other like you, may
assert it so to be.

Now the Marks and Characters which I look on to be inseparable from every such
Imposture, are these following: 1. That it must always have for its end some
carnal interest. 2. That it can have none but wicked Men for the Authors of it.
3. That both these must necessarily appear in the very contexture of the
Imposture it self. 4. That it can never be so framed, but that it must contain
some palpable falsities, which will discover the falsity of all the rest. 5.
That wherever it is first propagated, it must be done by craft and fraud. 6.
That when entrusted with many conspirators, it can never be long concealed:
And, 7. That it can never be established, unless backed with force and
violence. That all these must belong to every Imposture, and all particularly
did so to Mahometism; and that none of them can be charged upon Christianity,
is what I shall now proceed to show you of each of them in their order.

SECT. I.
I. That every Imposture must have for its end some carnal interest, is a thing
so plain and evident, that I suppose it will not need much proof. For to impose
a cheat upon mankind, and in a matter of that great importance, as all that
have any Religion hold that to be, is a thing of that difficulty to compass,
and of that danger to attempt, that it cannot be conceived, why any one should
put himself upon such a design, that does not propose some very valuable
advantage to himself in the success. To cheat one Man is not always so easy a
matter, or is it without its mischiefs and inconveniences in the discovery. But
to enterprise a cheat upon all mankind, and in a thing of that importance, as
the introducing of a New Religion, and the abolishing of the Old one (to which
so many both by custom and education will be always zealously affected, be it
what it will) must be an undertaking of the greatest difficulty and hazard
imaginable. For whoever engages himself in such a plot of Imposture, must
unavoidably meet with many strong oppositions to struggle with in the
management of it, which will continually put his thoughts upon the rack to find
out devices to surmount them, and his body to incessant pains and labor to
bring them into Execution; and for the effecting hereof, he must have some
confidents to assist him, some to help forward the design, whom he must trust
with the secret of it; and the more he has of such, the more he hazards all to
a discovery. And all this while his mind will be filled with anxious cares, and
his thoughts distracted with many uneasy and affrighting apprehensions (as is
usual with Men on wicked designs) about the success, and every failure will
expose him to that terrible revenge from those he attempts to declude, as such
a villainy whenever detected, most justly deserves. This was Mahomet's case all
the while he was propagating his Imposture at Mecca, and so it must be of every
other such Impostor also. And when a man puts himself upon all this, the nature
of the thing manifestly leads us to conclude, he must propose something to
himself hereby which may make him amends for all in the result. For when so
much is put to hazard, men do not use to do it for nothing. There must always
be some great interest in the bottom of such a design, something that the
undertaker values at a more than ordinary rate to make him engage in so
exceeding difficult and dangerous an enterprise. For wherever the venture is
great, it must be taken for granted there is an end proposed, which in the
estimation of the venturer is equivalent thereto. What it was that put Mahomet
on his Imposture the foregoing History of his life sufficiently shows, it was
his ambition and his lust. To have the sovereignty over his Country, to gratify
his ambition, and as many women as he pleased to satiate his lust was what he
aimed at, and to gain himself a party for the compassing of this was the grand
design of that new Religion which he invented, and the whole end and reason of
his imposing it on those he deluded thereinto. And whoever pursues the like
method must certainly have some such end in it, it being totally incredible
that any one should take upon him the trouble, fatigue and danger of carrying
on such a cheat only for cheating sake. But here we challenge all the enemies
of that holy Religion which we profess, to find out any thing like this in the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, any thing that savours of worldly interest either in
him the first Founder of our Faith, or in any of his holy Apostles, who were
the first Propagators of it. Vaninus, one of the most zealous Champions of
Impiety that ever appeared against the Christian Cause (for he died a Martyr
for it) has attempted this: but after the most accurate and diligent search
which so keen an Adversary could make, he was forced to give up the Point; and
plainly acknowledge, that in the whole series of the History and actions of our
Savior, he could not find any thing that he could charge with secular interest
or design to blast him or his Religion with. And if you will renew the same
attempt, though you extend the inquiry much farther, even to his Apostles, and
all the rest of his Disciples, who first preached this holy Religion to the
World, and take in to your assistance all the enemies of it; after the
strictest scrutiny that you can make, you will never have any better success
herein.

For had our Savior's design been to seduce the People for his own interest,
he must have taken the same course, that other Seducers do. He must have
flattered them in their humors, and formed his doctrines to their fancies;
courted those that were in greatest authority and esteem with them, and made it
his business mostly to preach against and decry those who were least in their
favor, and studied and practiced all other such arts of popularity, whereby he
might best insinuate into their good liking, and gain that interest with them,
as might be sufficient to serve his purpose and obtain the end proposed. These
were the methods whereby Mahomet first propagated his Imposture, and these are
they which all others must take, whose purpose it is to deceive the People. But
our Savior in every particular acted contrary hereto, which sufficiently
proves that he had no such design to compass. For he freely preached against
whatever he found blameable in the people, spared not their most beloved
errors, or framed his doctrines to indulge them in any one evil practice how
predominant so ever amongst them, and was so far from courting those in the
greatest authority and esteem with them, that he was most sharp and bitter
against them above all others, whom they most idolized, I mean the Scribes and
Pharisees; For he on all occasions detected their Hypocrisies, and laid open
their evil practices, and in the severest manner rebuked and condemned them for
their iniquity therein, even to the preferring and justifying before them the
wicked Publicans, who for their exactions and oppressions upon the people in
their gathering the public Taxes were held among them the most hated of men
and the worst of sinners. And therefore, though his Miracles often drew their
admiration and their applause on the one hand, his doctrines and his preachings
as fast alienated them from him on the other; so that those very same Men, who,
for the sake of the former, followed him often in multitudes, and were ready to
acknowledge him to be the Messiah, were as violently set against him at other
times for the sake of the latter, and at last crucified him on the account
thereof. And is it possible to conceive, that he, who took all those courses so
contrary to the humor of the people, without regarding how much they tended to
exasperate them against him, should have any interest or design of his own to
serve himself of them?

When our Savior took upon him to be the Messiah that was promised, had he
done it only as an Impostor to promote a secular interest and design of his
own, he would certainly have assumed that character according to those Notions
in which the Jews expected him. For in this case the expectation of the people
must have been the grand motive to the Imposture, and their looking for such a
Messiah to come the main inducing reason of his putting himself thereon, and
therefore to be sure, had he been an Impostor, he would have offered himself to
them no otherwise than just such a Messiah, as their notions of him would have
him to be; and there are two special reasons which in this case would have
determined him hereto. 1. Because those notions offered to him the highest
secular interest, that could be attained unto: And, 2. Because the suiting of
his pretensions exactly according to them, would have been the readiest and
most likely way for him to carry the interest, whatever it was, which you may
suppose him to have aimed at.

And, first, the notions which the Jews had of the Messiah, offered him the
highest secular interest that could be attained unto; and therefore to be sure,
when he took upon him to be that Messiah, had he done it only as an Impostor
for a secular interest, he would have laid hold of that interest offered, and
under the character which he assumed most certainly have claimed all that,
which according to those notions the Messiah was to have. For this was nothing
less than a most glorious secular Kingdom, the expectations of the Jews being
then concerning this matter the same as they have ever since continued amongst
them; that the Messiah The Messiah shall come and restore the Kingdom of the
House of David to the ancient state of its former Dominion, and shall rebuild
the Temple, and gather together the dispersed of Israel; and then shall be
re-established all the Legal Rites and Constitutions as in former times: and
Sacrifices shall be offered, and the Sabbatical Years and Jubile's observed
according to every Precept delivered in the Law. Maimonides in Yad Hachazekah
in Tract. de Regibus and Bellis eorum, cap. 11.. 1.
was to be a Secular Prince, who was to deliver them from their enemies, and
restore the Kingdom of David at Jerusalem, and there reign in great glory and
splendor over the whole House of Israel. And what greater or more desirable
interest can this World afford, than such a state of advancement? And what is
there that is more valued and esteemed in the opinion of all mankind, than the
attainment thereof? And at that time when our Savior first appeared on his
Mission, there was the most favorable juncture, that could offer it self, for
his setting up for all this: For then the People of the Jews being fallen under
the Yoke of the Roman Government, and also grown very impatient under it,
entertained a general expectation of the speedy Coming of the Messiah, under
that character of a Temporal Prince, which they had conceited of him, to
deliver them from this bondage, and by conquering those who subjected them
thereto, again restore the Kingdom of Israel. And these hopes had then taken
that possession of their minds, and they were all so full of them, that every
one stood in a manner ready and prepared to join with him, whosoever should
take upon him to be the person, as sufficiently appears not only from Mark
15. v. 43. Luke 2. v. 38. etc. 24. v. 31. Acts 1. v. 6. From all which places
compared together, it appears, that there was among the Jews, in the time of
our Savior, a general expectation of the speedy Coming of the Messiah, and
that their notion was of a temporal deliverance and a temporal restoration of
the Kingdom of Israel to be effected by him. And this expectation was it which
made the multitude so ready to join themselves to Theudas, and after to Judas
of Galilee, of whom mention is made Acts 5. v. 36, 37. and after that to an
Egyptian Jew, Acts 21. v. 38. on their pretending to be the persons, from whom
this deliverance was expected.
the Scriptures, but also from the History which Josephus not only makes
mention of Theudas, and Judas of Galilee, and the Egyptian, of whom we have an
account in Scripture, Antiq. lib. 20. c. 2. etc. 6. but also of several others
who on the same pretenses found the multitude ready to join themselves unto
them. Antiq. lib. 20. c. 6. and 7. and de Bello Judaico lib. 7. c. 31. As did
also Barchosbas in the reign of Adrian the Roman Emperor. And what Maimonides
delivers of the doctrine of the Jews concerning this matter, might give any man
an handle to offer at it. For, says he, the Messiah is not to be known by
Signs or Wonders (for he is to work none) but only by conquest. And therefore
his Words are. If there arises a King of the House of David, who is studious
of the Law, and diligent in observing the precepts of it, as was David his
father; that is, not only of the Law, which is written, but of the Oral also,
and inclines all Israel to walk therein, and repairs the breaches, and fights
the battles of the Lord, this person may be presumed to be the Messiah. But if
he prospers in what he undertakes, and subdues all the neighboring Nations
round about him, and re-builds the sanctuary in its former place, and gathers
together the dispersed of Israel, then he is for certain the Messiah.
Maimonides in Yad Hachazekah Tract. de Regibus and Bellis eorum, c. 11.. 4.
Josephus wrote of those times. And therefore had our Savior, by taking upon
him to be the Messiah, aimed only as an Impostor at a Secular interest, What
reason can be given, why he should not with the name of the Messiah, have also
claimed this grand interest of a Kingdom, which according to the opinion of all
those, who expected a Messiah, belonged thereto? or why he should not in so
favorable a juncture, as was then offered for it, have possessed himself
thereof? But he was so far from doing either of these, that he waved both, and
not only omitted this opportunity of possessing himself of this Kingdom, but
also renounced and disclaimed the whole thereof. For instead of laying any
pretense to it, he set himself to confute those very notions which gave it unto
him, and to convince the People that they were mistaken in them, and thereby
overthrew all that which offered unto him the highest Secular interest which
the Men of this world use to aim at. And not only so, but advanced in the stead
of those Errors, such Doctrines concerning the Messiah, as were not only
without all manner of worldly interest in them, but all levelled directly
opposite thereto. For he taught them, that the Kingdom of the Messiah was not a
Temporal, but a Spiritual Kingdom; that he was not to be a Judge and a Ruler
over them in the Secular affairs of this World and the pomp and glory thereof,
but to govern and direct their hearts within by the power of his holy Spirit,
in order to conform them to that Law of Righteousness, which might fit them to
reign with him in the Kingdom of everlasting Glory hereafter. And therefore
when the Jews being convinced by his wonderful Works that he was the Messiah,
would have taken him by force and made him their King, he withdrew from among
them to disappoint the design. And when interrogated by Pilate, he told him his
Kingdom was not of this World. And had he aimed at any such thing, he would
never have taught such Doctrines of himself, which so directly overthrew all
that which gave him the most favorable advantage of attaining thereto. Had he
offered at more of this World's interest than the Notions of the Jews invested
him with (if it were possible more could be had than those gave their Messiah;)
or if he had joined thereto, the enjoyment of carnal pleasure as Mahomet did,
there might then have been some ground of charging him of differing from those
Notions for the serving of his own interest; but when the change was on the
quite contrary hand, and instead of being that reigning and glorious Messiah,
amidst the highest pomp and splendor of this World, as the Jews would have had
him to be, he declared himself only for such a Kingdom, as had nothing of this
World in it, and whose greatest perfection lay in its greatest opposition
thereto; he that will say that there was any thing of this World in his thus
stripping himself of all the pomp and glory of it, or that there could be any
design of interest for himself, where all manner of self-interest is thus
renounced, must reconcile contradictions, and make the nature of one extreme to
consist in the other, which is most directly opposite thereto. Had he, when he
took upon him to be the Messiah, done it only for a worldly interest, this
great interest of reigning, so obviously offered it self unto him under that
character, that it cannot be conceived how he should ever have avoided it. The
power, and glory, and riches of a Kingdom, are too great baits of allurement to
the worldly-minded Man, ever to be refused by such an one, after he had assumed
that character, which in the generally-received Notion of it, invested him with
them. Or can it be imagined, since these are the only things which could make
that character at all desirable to an Impostor, why any Man should run the
great hazard and trouble of being such in the assuming of it, but for the sake
of them? All those false Christ's, who have been real Impostors, and have in
several Ages started up to delude the World with this pretense have ever with
the name of the Messiah, claimed also this Kingdom, which the Jews ascribed
thereto; and that in every such scene of deceit, which has opened in the
World, has always appeared to have been the bait, which allured those wretches
to act that part therein. And had our Savior been such an one as they, he must
certainly have taken the same course. For to do otherwise, would have been to
do the wickedness without the temptation, and to run the hazard without that
which was to reward the success. But he having been so far herefrom, that he
did not only renounce this Kingdom, but all manner of other worldly interest
whatever; this plainly shows he could have no design upon this World by that
Mission which he undertook, or had any other reason for his entering on it as
the Messiah, but that he was really that person, whom God by his holy Prophets
had so often promised, and at length, in fullness of time, accordingly sent to
bring life and salvation unto us.

2. Had our Savior, when he took upon him to be the Messiah, done it only as
an Impostor for a Secular interest, he would have assumed that character
according to those notions in which the Jews expected him, because this would
have been the readiest and most likely way for him to carry that interest,
whatever you may suppose it to be. For the eager expectations of that People
being then for such a reigning Messiah, as they had drawn a Picture of in their
own fancies, his only way to have gotten them to own and receive him for the
Messiah, was for him exactly to have humored them herein, and proposed himself
to them just such an one as they would have had him to be. And had his intent
been only to seduce them under that character, in order to serve himself of
them for a Secular interest, this method is that which is so obviously
necessary in such a case, that it could not have been avoided. For to do
otherwise, would evidently have been to put the matter in a most certain method
totally to miscarry, and make the whole design impracticable. To come to them
as their Messiah, under a character totally differing from that in which they
expected him, would be sufficient to make them, for that very reason, never to
receive him. Although humility and the debasing of a Man's self, may in other
cases be a means to court Popularity, and procure the favor of the People, it
could never have served in this; nor would our Savior's taking upon him the
Character of the Messiah, so vastly lower as to this World, than the general
opinion then gave it unto him, have been of any stead to him in order thereto;
but quite the contrary. For the Jews had then framed their notions of the
Messiah they expected, for their own sakes rather than his; suitable to those
worldly interests they were most in love with, and those notions went current
through the whole Nation, as the true and exact description of him, by which he
was to be known at his coming: And therefore for any one to propose himself to
them, as the Messiah, under a character totally disagreeing herefrom, would
have been the readiest way for him to be told, that he was not therefore the
Man; and this, instead of being a means to seduce them to him, become such a
reason for their rejecting him, as no art of Imposture would ever have been
able to master. And this indeed proved the main cause, that notwithstanding our
Savior's Miracles, the Jews, who daily saw them, were still hardened in their
aversion against him; and it continues with them to this day the grand
stumbling block of Infidelity, which they cannot get over. For they looked for
a Messiah, that was to subdue their Enemies, and deliver them from the slavery
of the Romans, and by the establishment of a Temporal Kingdom over them advance
the state of their Nation to the highest prosperity, and their Law to the
highest perfection of observance, which both were capable of. But he proposed
himself unto them as a Messiah, which had nothing to do with this World, or any
of the interests of it; and instead of the Temporal Kingdom they expected,
claimed only a Spiritual; and instead of the outward Rites and Ceremonies of
the Mosaical Law which were all fulfilled and done away in him, taught them
only to worship God in spirit and in truth. And what could more displease and
alienate from him, Men so eager upon this World, and the glory and riches of
it, than thus instead of conquest over enemies, extent of power, and a most
flourishing state of prosperity, which they dreamt of, to preach to them of
Mortification, Repentance, Self-denial, and those other Christian Virtues, in
the increase of which the true prosperity of Christ's Kingdom only consists;
and instead of their Temple, and the outward pomp and splendor of the worship
there performed, which they so much valued themselves upon, and so zealously
affected, thus to propose to them the Worshipping of God without all this, only
in that Spiritual manner, which under the numerous Rites of the Mosaical Law
they had not been accustomed to have any great regard unto? For this was to
baulk them of the hopes they most delighted in, and put a baffle upon them in
those eager expectations and most earnest desires which their hearts had long
dwelt upon. And how ill they were able to brook this, will appear by this
instance in the Gospel Joh. c. 6.
, That those very same Men who, on the seeing of his Miracles, were so firmly
convinced of his being the Messiah, that they would forthwith have taken him by
force, and declared him their King, the next day after, on his preaching to
them of spiritual things, and offering thereby to withdraw their minds from the
perishable things of this World, to fix them on those which endure to
everlasting life, murmured against him, and would no more endure him. For their
hearts were after a Messiah, that should found them a Temporal Kingdom, and
make them great and glorious, and powerful therein; and to set up a Spiritual
Kingdom instead hereof, was not only to deprive himself of the grandeur of the
other, but them also of the portion which they expected therein. And no one
certainly that intended a worldly interest by such an undertaking, would ever
have projected it in such a method as this, which was so totally inconsistent
with it. For this would be to renounce in the very act the end which he
proposed, and make the attainment of it impracticable by the very means whereby
he pursued it; It would be to wave the highest interest in this World to pursue
after another, which no one can imagine what, and thereby totally alienate
those from him, by whom alone he could hope in such a design as this to attain
any at all. And therefore had a worldly end and a worldly interest been all
that our Savior aimed at in his taking upon him to be the Messiah, whom the
Jews expected, he would never so much contrary to that interest, and so much
contrary to that most obvious means of carrying on such a design, have assumed
that character in a manner so much differing from that, under which they
expected him; Or could he by such a method of procedure ever have made any
thing of the attempt among them, had he not on his side the power of God, as
well as his Mission, to make him successful therein?

Had his business only been to deceive the People for the advancing of some
secular interest of his own, he would never have attempted it in so unlikely a
way of succeeding, as that of abolishing the Mosaical Law, to which the whole
nation of the Jews were then so zealously addicted, that they could not bear
the least word, which might seem to derogate either from the excellency, which
they conceived of it, or that opinion which they then had, and still retain,
that it was to be immutably observed by them to the end of the World. The case
of Mahomet with his Men of Mecca was quite otherwise, he found no such zeal in
them for their old Religion to struggle with, they themselves were then grown
so weary of it, that the generality of them had in a manner totally exchanged
it for no Religion at all at that time Mahomet first began to propagate his
Imposture among them, they having then for the most part given themselves up to
the opinions of the Zendikees, who in the same manner as the Epicureans among
the Greeks and too many nowadays among us, acknowledged the Being of a God,
but denying his Providence, the immortality of the soul, and a future state,
did at the same time deny all manner of necessity of paying any worship unto
him. And no wonder then if such Men, who placed their All in this World, were
easily brought over to a Sect, whose chief aim was at worldly prosperity and
worldly pleasure in the Religion which they professed. This Mahomet was well
enough aware of before he started his new Religion among them, and it seems to
have been the greatest encouragement which emboldned him to venture on that
attempt. However since they still retained the outward form of their Religion
after they had deserted the substance of it, he found even from hence that
opposition to his design, that to make it go down, he was forced to retain all
those Rites and Ceremonies in his new Religion, which they had been before used
to in their old; and in order hereto he chose to make some dangerous
alterations in his first establishments, as particularly in that of the Kebla
rather than ruffle his Arabians by abolishing what he found them through long
usage and custom any way affected to. For his business being to deceive the
people, his care was to offer at nothing, which might be difficult to go down
with them, and so must it be of every other deceiver who takes upon him to act
the like part. But in every particular it was quite otherwise with our Savior,
and those whom he first preached his Gospel unto. For the Jews having undergone
several terrible scourges from the hand of God for the neglect of that Law
which he had given them, were from their former too much disregard of it then
grown into the contrary extreme of being with exceeding superstition and
bigottry too much devoted to it. They then looked on it with the same
veneration, as they still do, to be an immutable Law never to be altered, That
the Messiah himself on his coming should not make the least change therein, but
that the glory of his Kingdom should chiefly consist in the perfection of its
observance, and the exact performance of the worship it prescribed, and for any
one to advance any doctrine contrary hereto was reckoned no less than Act: 6.
v. 13.
Blasphemy among them. And therefore had our Savior only consulted flesh and
blood in the Mission which he undertook, had he had no other design therein
than a Secular interest and a worldly end, he would never have opposed himself
against the violent current of such predominant opinions, as he found then
reigning among them, whom he first preached his Gospel unto, or ever durst have
offered at the abolition of that Law, which they were so violently bigoted
unto. Had he come to deceive them as a Seducer, the very nature of the thing
must necessarily have directed him to a quite contrary method; that is, to
sooth and collogue with them whom he came to impose upon; to have contradicted
no opinion they were violent for, or opposed any doctrine which they were
zealously affected to, but to have studied their humors, and learnt their
notions, and so framed and suited all his doctrines according thereto, as might
best take to draw them over to the end designed. To have done otherwise would
have been to set Priest and People against him, as an enemy to their Religion,
and a Blasphemer of their Law. And, as our Savior found it so in the result,
so it must have been obvious to any one in his case to have forseen it from the
beginning. And therefore since notwithstanding this he took this method so
contrary to the whole end and design of one that intends a cheat upon the
people, and without having any regard to that zeal with which the Jews were
then so violently bigoted to their Law, or that rage of resentment, which they
were ready to express against whatsoever in the least should derogate from it,
did boldly preach unto them such Doctrines, as totally disannulled it, this
manifestly proves he could have no interest of his own to serve upon them in
this undertaking, or that he had any other reason for his entering on it, but
that he was sent of God so to do.

The grand and fundamental doctrine of the Religion, which Jesus Christ left
his Church, was that of his death and passion whereby he made atonement for our
sins and delivered us from the punishment which was due unto us for them. By
this means only he proposed to save us, that is from Sin, the Devil, and
eternal Death, and by this conflict only did he undertake to subdue these our
enemies for us, and on that conquest to found us a Kingdom, which should make
us holy and righteous here, and for ever blessed with him in glory hereafter.
This was the whole end and purpose of our Savior's Mission; this he frequently
foretold to his Disciples, and on this was founded the whole Religion which he
taught them. And can any one say he could have a design of Secular interest for
himself in such a Religion as this, which could have no being, but by his dying
for it, or any reason for its establishment among men till he had laid down his
life for the completing of it? To say there was any thing of worldly interest
in this would be to charge it on his cross, and place it in that bitter and
ignominious death which he underwent thereon. Men sometimes put their lives to
great hazard for the interests of this World, but for a Man purposely to design
death for such an end and part with this World in such a manner as Christ did
for the sake of any thing that this world has, is a thing which was never yet
heard of, and is in it self so contrary to the most obvious dictates both of
reason and nature, that no one can be so absurd as to imagine it possible for
any man so to do.

But that which I know you will say in this case is, That it was not Christ
himself, but his Disciples after his death, that made this a part of his
Religion; That he intended no such thing in the undertaking he entered on, that
it should end in his death, and be completed by his Crucifixion; but that this
happening unto him, those who kept up his Party, and propagated his Religion
after him, foisted this thereinto, to salve the ignominy of his Death, and
serve themselves of it, for the better carrying on of their designs thereby.
And if so, then the Imposture must be shifted from him to his Disciples; and in
this case the same inquiry must still be made, What advantage could they
propose to themselves herefrom? For if Christ's having no self-design or
worldly-interest in the Religion which he taught be of any force to acquit him
of being guilty of Imposture therein (as it must with every Man of unprejudiced
reason,) it must also be of force to acquit them of the same charge who
propagated it after him. And what worldly interest is it which they could
possibly have in this matter? If you say Empire, how improbable is it, that a
few poor Fishermen without any manner of foundation either of poor riches or
interest with others, for the carrying on of such a design, should ever frame
in their thoughts the least imagination tending thereto, especially at that
time when the Roman Empire being in its utmost height and vigor had the major
part of the then known World united under its command to crush the greatest
attempts of this nature, which might be made against it? If riches and honor
be alleged as their end, I must desire you to tell me, how this could be a
means to gain them? or whether any one of them ever attained to either thereby?
If we examine into the accounts, which we have of their lives and actions we
shall find them journeying about the world from place to place in great poverty
and under all the difficulties and pressures of it to discharge that
Apostleship which was committed unto them, and in every place where they came
to be loaded with contempt, oppression and persecution for the sake of that
Religion which they taught. Had riches and honor been the end proposed for all
this, certainly after having experienced by the ill success how improper means
they had taken in order thereto, some of them would have desisted from the
enterprise, and no longer have pursued a design, which could not answer its
end. But you cannot bring us an instance of any one of them that did this. No,
they still went on in the work, which they had undertaken, and without being
wearied by the poverty they labored under, or in the least discouraged by that
contempt scorn and persecution, which they everywhere met with, all constantly
persevered to preach that Gospel, which they had received, even to their lives
end; and not only so, but most of them laid down their lives for the sake
therefore, which they would never have done, if they had not for that Ministry
a much higher reason, than all the honor and riches of this world could ever
amount unto. All that can be said of any worldly interest for them in their
preaching up that Religion which they propagated is, That they were thereby
made Heads of the Party which they drew over thereto. But alas, what advantage
could this be unto them to be thus made Heads of a contemned, oppressed and
persecuted Party of Men, who were everywhere sought out for bonds,
imprisonments and death. To head such a Party what is it, but to expose a Man's
self to the greater danger, and set himself up to receive the first strokes of
every persecution, which was levelled against it? For in this case, those who
head the Party are most sought after, and the ringleaders of it are ever made
the first and the most signal examples of every severity, which is designed for
its oppression. And this was all that the Apostles got by heading that Party,
which they converted to the Christian Religion; and what of worldly interest
could be found therein? If the heading of a Party be of any advantage to a Man,
it must be then only when it brings him honor, or power, or riches, or some
other worldly enjoyment. But to head such a Party, as the first Christians
were, could bring neither of these therewith; but on the contrary, poverty,
contempt, oppressions, and persecutions were all the fruits, as to this world,
which the Apostles of our Savior reaped thereby. And certainly on these terms,
to head a Party, could never have been the reason to make them enter on that
undertaking; or if it had, they could never under such discouragements have
long continued therein.

SECT. II.
II. And thus far having examined the first mark of Imposture, and I hope
sufficiently shown it cannot belong to that holy Religion which we profess. I
shall now proceed to the second; that is, that it must always have wicked men
for the Authors of it. For thus to impose upon mankind a false Religion is the
worst of cheats, and the highest injustice which can be done either to God or
Man: to God, because it robs him of the worship of his Creatures, either by
diverting it to a false object, or by directing it to him in such a false way,
as cannot be accepted of before him; And to Man, because it deprives him of his
God, by putting him upon such a false Religion as must necessarily alienate
both his mercy and his favor from him. And to do this, is such a consummate
piece of iniquity, that it is impossible any one can arrive thereto without
having first corrupted himself to a great degree in all things else. For such
an one must have cast off all fear of God, as well as all regard of Man, before
he could ever offer at so great a Wickedness against both. And when a Man is
come to this, to be sure he will stick at nothing, whereby his lusts may be
gratified, or any carnal interest served which he sets his heart upon, but will
make the corruptions of his mind appear in all the actions of his life, and be
thoroughly wicked in every thing where his own interest, or his own designs do
not put a restraint upon him. And that Mahomet was such an one, the History of
his Life, which I have laid before you, sufficiently shows. But whoever yet
charged All that the bitterest enemies of Christianity have ever objected
against our Savior, save a fabulous story of his Birth, amounts to no more
than this, That he was a Magician, which was an invention, framed only to salve
his working of Miracles (which they could not deny) in such a manner as to make
them give no reputation or authority to the doctrines which he taught.
Jesus Christ, or his holy Apostles with any thing like this? not Celsus, not
Porphyry, not Julian or any other of the Heathens, or the Jews who were the
bitterest enemies of Christianity and the greatest opposers of it. And to be
sure could they have found any such accusation against any of them, they would
never have spared to have made the utmost use of it they could for the blasting
of that Religion, which they taught. For it is a popular Argument, which would
have served their purpose among the people more than any other they could have
offered unto them. And we see with what success the various Sects among us
serve themselves of it every day, no argument being more prevalent amongst the
unthinking Multitude for the beating down the reputation of any profession of
Religion, than the ripping up of the faults of those that teach it. To examine
into all the Labyrinths and abstruse Speculations of reason and argument, which
may be brought for or against any Religion, is an operose business, which all
have not capacities for, and few care to attend to. But of Good and Evil every
Man is judge, and where they find the Teachers of any Religion to be wicked and
naught, it is an inference which they are all apt too precipitately to run
into, that the Religion must be naught also, and without any further examining
into it condemn it so to be. And I find there is nothing, which you your selves
are more greedy to lay hold of for an argument against our holy Christian
Religion, than the faults which you observe in some of our Ministers, whose
business it is to promote it. And therefore if the faults of the present
teachers of Christianity be apt thus to afford so popular and prevalent an
argument against it, how much more would the faults of the first founders and
propagaters of it have done so, had there been any such to object against them?
And had there been any such, so keen and searching Adversaries, would never
have suffered the discovery to have escaped them, or ever failed to have
objected it for the serving of their turn to the utmost they were able; and it
can be owing to nothing, but their most unblameable innocence, that they have
been secured herefrom. To say that they could not have that knowledge of their
lives and actions, as was sufficient for them to discern their faults, and
observe their miscarriages, will not solve the matter. Though Mahomet acted his
Imposture so many hundred miles within the remoter parts of Arabia, among a
people, who by vast deserts were in a manner cut off from the converse of the
rest of mankind, where very few or none of any other nation ever came to spy
out his actions or observe his doings, and where he had none else to be
witnesses of them, but those only who all embraced his forgery, and became
zealously addicted to it; yet all this could not serve to conceal his faults,
or hide his monstrous wickednesses from being observed and recorded against
him. The foregoing History gives you a large Catalogue of them, and they are
vouched by the authority of some of the most authentic writers of his own
Sect. But Christianity had not its birth in such an obscure hole, nor did the
first Founder of it, or those who propagated it after him, make their first
appearance among such rude and illiterate Barbarians, as that Impostor did: but
on one of the openest stages in the world, at Jerusalem, and in the Land of
Judea, and not in an age, when as formerly that Nation separated it self from
all others, and had no converse with any but themselves; but when they had
scattered themselves abroad and mingled with all other Nations, and also were
forced to admit all other Nations to mingle with them by being made a Province
of the Roman Empire, which brought not only Soldiers and Merchants of other
Nations among them, but also opened the gate to all others, as they should
think fit, to come and reside among them: And the Temple at Jerusalem being
that, where all of the Jewish Religion worshipped; this constantly brought
thither from all Nations those who professed it, which made a very great resort
thither from all Parts of the World, especially at their three great Festivals.
And therefore just after our Savior's sufferings at the time of Pentecost next
following, we are told that there were then at Jerusalem Acts 2. v. 9, 10, 11.
Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers of Mesopotamia, Cappadocia,
Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, Libya, and Cyrene, with the Strangers
of Rome, Cretes, and Arabians. So that to be sure nothing could be hid or
concealed, which was done on so open a stage of the World, and in the sight of
so many Nations as were then present upon it; nor is it possible if those who
then first delivered the Christian Religion to the World, had been such wicked
persons, as Mahomet was, and all other Impostors must be, it could ever have
escaped their observation. And if it had at Jerusalem, there were other
occasions enough given for a fuller discovery afterward. For the holy Apostles
after our Savior's death, did not confine themselves to Jerusalem and the Land
of Judoea only, but dispersed themselves throughout the whole Earth, and at
Rome, at Athens, and in many other celebrated Cities appeared openly, teaching
the Religion which they had received, and forming Churches of those whom they
had converted thereto, and thereby exposing their Lives and Actions publicly
to the view of the whole World, made all Mankind in a manner witnesses of what
they did. And Christianity was not such an acceptable thing to the World, as to
move the Men of it to be so candid and good-natured to the first Authors of it,
as to conceal their faults and hide their wickednesses, had there been any such
in them. No, it was that which was against the lusts and pleasures, and the
other evil courses of this World, more, than any other Religion, which was ever
taught therein; and this put the World as much against it, and all that adhered
thereto; and therefore we find them to be a Party of Men not only everywhere
spoken against, but also everywhere hated, opposed, and persecuted to the
utmost. And when so general an Odium was risen against them, and both Jews and
Gentiles conspired together therein, to be sure there were not wanting
abundance that made it their business to pry into their actions, and examine
their practices with all that spite, unfairness, and ill interpretation of
things, as is usual in such cases. And could they by all this search, inquiry
and strict observation, have found any thing to charge upon Christ or his
Apostles, which might cast a blot upon the Religion which they taught, to be
sure we should have heard enough of it. For those, who propagated their Odium
against this holy Religion to the next succeeding Ages, to that excessive
degree, in which the Primitive Christians experienced it in those terrible
Persecutions which they underwent for three hundred years together, would
certainly have propagated therewith all the Accusations they were able against
those who were the first Founders and Teachers of it. And, to be sure, when The
main things which Celsus and Julian objected in their books against the
Christian Religion are preserved in the Answers which Orig^n wrote to the
former, and St. Cyril of Alexandria to the latter, but the books themselves are
perished, as are also those of Porphyry written by him in fifteen Tomes on the
same Argument; for they being full of virulent Blasphemies, Theodosius the
Emperor by a Law caused them everywhere to be burnt, and destroyed; but a
great many remains and fragments of them are still preserved in the Works of
Eusebius, and something of him also in St. Hierom in Praefatione ad lib. 1.
Comment. in Epist. ad Galatas. Celsus lived in the second, Porphyry in the
third, and Julian in the fourth Century after Christ.
Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian, and other bitter Opposers of Christianity, as
well Jews as Heathens, took Pen in hand to write against it, we should have
been told enough of it. But nothing of this appearing in any of their Writings,
or any of the least memorial of it being to be found in any Record whatsoever
against them; this manifestly proves that they are even in the judgment of
their bitterest Enemies totally free of this charge, and consequently being
just and righteous persons, (and of Christ and St. James one of his Apostles
His words of our Savior are, that he was a wise man (a title not given in
those days but to such as were also good) and that he was a worker of Miracles,
and a teacher of Truth, lib. 18. c. 4. And of James he has these words. These
things (i. e. the destruction of Jerusalem, and the calamities that attended
it) fell by way of just vengeance upon the Jews for James the Just, who was the
Brother of Jesus called Christ, because the Jews had murdered him, being a most
righteous Man. It must be acknowledged that this passage is not now extant in
Josephus, but it is quoted by Eusebius in the Second Book of his Ecclesiastical
History, c. 23. and also by Origin in his Second Book against Celsus, which
would never have been done by them, had it not been extant in the Copies of his
Works which were then in use, however it came to be omitted since. For to have
falsely alleged such a testimony to the enemies of Christianity, especially to
one so acute and sharp as Celsus was, would have given them too great an
advantage against it. But what is still extant in Josephus, amounts to the same
thing; for speaking of his being put to death by Ananias the High Priest,
Antiq. lib. 20. c. 8. he says, That all good men were offended at it; which
sufficiently expresses him to be a good man also. For why else should they be
so concerned for him?
Josephus, though a Jew, particularly attests, that they were so) they could
never be guilty of so great a wickedness both against God and Man, as to have
imposed a cheat upon us in that Religion, which they delivered unto us.

SECT. III.
III. And if they had been such wicked persons, as thus to have imposed upon us
a false Religion for their own interest, both their wickedness and the interest
which they drove at, must necessarily have appeared in the very contexture of
the Religion it self, and the Books of the New Testament; in which it is
contained, would have as evidently proved both these against them, as the
Alcoran does against Mahomet? every Chapter of which yields us manifest
proofs both of the wicked affections of the Man, and the self ends which he
drove at for the gratifying of them.

For, first, when a Man proposes an end of self-interest, and invents a new
Religion, and writes a new Law on purpose for the obtaining of it, it is
impossible, but that this End must appear in the Means, and the Imposture,
which was invented of purpose to promote it, must discover what it is. For in
this case the new Religion and the new Law must be calculated for this End, and
be all formed and contrived in order thereto, otherwise it can have no
efficiency for the obtaining of it, nor at all answer the purpose of the
inventor for the compassing of what he proposed; and if it be thus calculated,
ordered and contrived for such an End, that End cannot but be seen and
discovered in those Means. For the End and Means prove each other; that is, as
the nature of the End proposed shows us what Means must be made use of for the
obtaining of it, so do the nature of the Means which we use, discover what is
the End which they drive at. And as far as the Means have a tendency to the
End, so much must they have of that End in them; and it is not possible for him
that uses the one, long to conceal the other. And therefore nothing is more
obvious and common among us than by the courses which a man takes to discern
the end which he would have. As Mahomet invented his new Religion to promote
his own ends, so the Alcoran in which it is contained sufficiently proves it,
there being scarce a leaf in that Book which does not lay down some
particulars, which tend to the gratifying either of the ambition or the lust of
that Monster who contrived it. And had the first Founder of our holy Christian
Religion, or they who were the first propagators of it any such end therein,
the Books of the New Testament, in which it is written, would have as palpably
shown it. But here we challenge all the enemies of our Faith to use their
utmost skill to make any such discovery in them. They have already gone through
the strict scrutiny of many ages, as well as of all manner of adversaries, and
none have ever yet been able to tax them herewith. For instead of being
calculated for the interest of this World their whole design is to withdraw our
hearts from it, and fix them upon the interest of that which is to come. And
therefore the doctrines which they inculcate are those of mortification,
repentance and self-denial, which speak not unto us of fighting, bloodshed, and
conquest, as the Alcoran does, for the advancing of a temporal Kingdom, but
that recouncing all the pomps, and vanities, and lusts of this present World,
we live soberly, righteously, and godly in the presence of him that made us,
and instead of pursuing after the perishable things of this life, we set our
hearts only on those Heavenly riches, which will make us great, and glorious
and blessed for ever hereafter. For as the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
World, so neither do those Books, in which are written the Laws of this
Kingdom, savor any thing thereof. The Mammon of this World, and the
Righteousness which they prescribe us, are declared in them to be totally
inconsistent. The Old Testament indeed, as being under the Dispensation of
carnal Ordinances, which were the shadows only of those things after to come
under the Gospel, treated with Men suitably thereto. And therefore we find much
of this World both by way of promise as well as threat to be proposed therein.
But it is quite otherwise with the New: For in that Revelation being given to
the perfecting of righteousness, all things were advanced thereby from Earth to
Heaven and from flesh to spirit. And therefore as the whole end of it is to
make men spiritual, so are we directed thereby to look only to spiritual and
heavenly Blessings for the reward hereof. Had our Savior proposed victory, or
riches, or carnal pleasures to his followers, as Mahomet did, then indeed his
Law would have sufficiently savored of this World to make Men suspect, that he
aimed at nothing else thereby. But he was so far herefrom that instead of this
the whole tenor of his doctrine runs the quite contrary way, we Being told of
nothing else through the whole New Testament, but of tribulations, afflictions,
and persecutions, which shall attend all such as to this World who faithfully
set their hearts to become his Disciples, and the experience of all ages since
has sufficiently verified the prediction. And indeed the very Religion, which
he has taught us, is of that holiness, that according to the course of this
wicked World it naturally leads us thereinto. And how then can it be said, that
any thing of worldly interest can be contained either in this Religion, or
those holy Books in which it is written?

I cannot deny, that there are some Men so crafty and cunning in pursuing their
interest, that it shall not easily be discerned in the Means what it is which
they drive at for their End. But how great a compass soever such may fetch
about to the point which they aim at, or in what by and secret paths soever
they make forward toward it, yet if the Means, which they make use of, have
any tendency thither, they can never be so totally blended, but there will
always appear in them enough of the End to make the discovery to any accurate
observer, and at length when the plot grows ripe for Execution, and the
designer begins to offer at the putting himself in possession of what he
proposed (as all such designers must at last) the whole scene must then be laid
open, and every one will be able to see thereinto. And therefore if you will
have it that the Holy Apostles and Evangelists, who were the first penners of
the New Testament, were such cunning and crafty men, as to be able thus
artfully to conceal their designs in those Books, which you suppose they wrote
of purpose to promote them (which cannot reasonably be imagined of men of their
education and condition in the World, they being all, except St. Paul and St.
Luke of the meanest occupations among the people, and totally unlearned) yet if
they contrived those Books with any tendency toward those designs (and it
cannot be conceived how otherwise they could help forward to the obtaining of
them) it is impossible, they could thus have passed thorough so many ages, and
all the strict examinations of Heathens, Jews, Atheists, and all other
Adversaries, who have so strenuously endeavored to overthrow their authority,
and no discovery be made hereof. For supposing at first under the mask of
renouncing the world they might a while conceal their designs for the interest
of it (which is the utmost you can say in this case,) yet this could not last
long: For if this were all they designed by teaching that holy Religion, and
writing those Books in which it is contained, sometime or other they must have
put those designs in execution, otherwise they would have been in vain laid;
sometime or other they must have endeavored by them to obtain what they aimed
at, otherwise the whole projection of them would have been to no purpose; and
if they ever did so (as to be sure they would, had this been their end) then,
as it happens in all other stratagems of the like nature, with how much
artifice soever they might conceal what they intended in the contrivance, all
at last must have come out in the execution, and when they began to put them
selves in possession of the end they aimed at, or at least made any offer
toward it, the whole cheat must then have been unmasked, and every one would
have been able to see into the depth thereof. But when did our Savior, or any
of his holy Apostles by virtue of any of those doctrines delivered down unto us
in the Books of the New Testament, ever put themselves in possession of any
such worldly interest? or when did they ever make the least offer in order
thereto? Have any of the ancient enemies of our holy Religion (and it had
bitter ones enough from the very beginning) ever recorded any such against
them? or have any other ever since from any good authority, or any authority at
all, ever been able to tax them herewith? or is it possible their names could
have remained untainted of this charge amidst so many Adversaries, who have now
for near Seventeen hundred years stood up in every age to oppose that holy
Religion which they have delivered unto us? had they in the least been guilty
hereof? Nay, has it been as much as ever said of them, that they practiced, as
to this world, any otherwise than they taught, or ever dealt with the interests
of it in any other manner, than totally to renounce them? or had they at all
any other portion in this life, than that of persecution, affliction, and
tribulation as it is foretold in those holy Books that they should? And what
then can be a greater madness, than to suppose that men should lay such a deep
design, as that of inventing a new Religion, and undergo all that vast trouble
and danger, which they did, to impose it on the world for the sake of a worldly
interest, and yet never put themselves in possession of that interest, or ever
make the least offer toward it?

If you say that the whole end of the Religion was only to gain the party, and
that the steps to the interest were to be made afterward, I still go on to
ask, who can tell us, after the party was gained, of any such steps that were
ever made, or of any the least offer tending thereto? Were not the first
Christians for many ages after the first founding of our faith, what ^hey ought
still to be, men that used this world as if they used it not, who lived in
(...) without being of it, and did truly, what ^hey vowed in their Baptism,
renounce all ^he Pomps, and Vanities, and Lusts thereof, ^aithfully to observe
that holy Law which ^hey had received? And in this they per^ever'd so steadily,
that even their very enemies admired ^he righteousness of their ^^ves, and
Plinii Epist. lib. 10. Ep. 97 -- Hanc fuisse summam vel culpae suae vel
erroris, quod essent soliti stato die ante Lucem convenire, carmenque Christo
quasi De dicere secum invicem, seque Sacramento non in scelus aliquod
obstringere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem
fallerent, ne depositum appellati abnegarent. In like manner they were also
vindicated by Serenius Granianus, Proconsul of Asia, in his Epistle to the
Emperor Adrian Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 4. c. 8, and 9. By Antoninus Pius
in his Epistle to the Commons of Asia. Justin Martyr Apol. 2. and even by the
Heathen Oracles themselves. Eusebius. in vita Constantini, lib. 2. c. 50, and 51.
bore witness ^hereto, and the cruellest ^ersecutors could never ^eat them
therefrom, but ^hey still went on in the ^bservance of their holy ^eligion
without having any other design therein, ^han to practice that righ^eousness
which it taught, and for three hundred years together stood firm thereto
against also those terrible storms of persecution which were rise^ against
them, till at length by the hol^ness of their lives, and the constancy (...)
their sufferings, they made a conquest ove^ their very persecutors, and brought
ove^ the World unto them. And are not ou^ Principles still the same, and also,
thank be to God, notwithstanding the Corrupt^ons of the present age, the
practice to^ of many thousands still among us, wh^ I doubt not will be as ready
to underg^ the same sufferings, those primitive Christ^ans did, when ever God
shall try them for that holy Religion which they profess, (...) they now are to
observe the righteousn^^ thereof. But supposing this had been (...) otherwise,
and the Mammon of this Wor^ and not the Righteousness of God we^^ really the
end for which our Religion w^^ designed, yet to renounce the World (...) gain a
Party, and afterward make u^^ of this Party to gain the World, is a pr^ject so
unfeasible, that the former part (...) it must necessarily have overthrown t^^
latter, whenever it had been attempt^^ For when men had been drawn over to
(...) party under the specious pretense of ^^nouncing the World, and been
instruct^^ and firmly fixed in this principle, to ma^^ those very same men
afterward to ser^^ their turn for the gaining of a worldly interest would be
to make their doctrine and their practice so monstrously interfere, as must
necessarily have broken all into pieces, and destroyed the whole design.
Certainly, had they any such design, they would never have thus possessed their
Disciples with such principles against it by the Religion which they taught
them; and in that they did so, I think nothing can be a more evident
Demonstration, that they could never intend any such end thereby. Mahomet knew
well enough, this was not a way to carry what he designed, and therefore openly
owned in his Religion, what he aimed at thereby, and made his Law to speak for
that Empire and Lust, which he desired to enjoy, and so when he had made his
Religion to obtain, he gained by virtue thereof the whole which he projected by
it, and became possessed of the Empire of all Arabia for the gratifying of his
Ambition, and as many Women as he pleased for the satisfying of his Lust, which
were the two Ends he drove at in the whole Imposture. And had Jesus Christ and
his Apostles had any such design in the Religion which they taught, they must
in the same manner they made their Religion speak for it, or else it could
never have served their purpose for the obtaining of it. And if their Religion
had ever offered at any such thing, it must necessarily have appeared in the
Books in which it is written.

And 2dly. if they had been so wicked, as thus to impose upon the World a false
Religion for the promoting of their own interest, as that interest must have
appeared in the contexture of the Religion it self, and in those Books in which
it is written, so also must their wickedness. For Words and Writings being the
outward expressions of our inward conceptions, there is that connection between
them, that although the former may often disguise the latter they can never so
totally conceal them, but every accurate observer may still be able through the
one to penetrate into the other, and by what a man utters, whether in speech or
writing, see what he is at the bottom, do what he can to prevent it. There are
indeed some that can act the Hypocrite so cunningly, as to dissemble the
greatest wickedness under words, writings and actions too that speak the quite
contrary. But this always is such a force upon their inclinations, and so
violent a bar upon their inward passions and desires, that nature will
frequently break through in spite of all art, and even speak out the truth
amidst the highest pretenses to the contrary. And there is no Hypocrite, how
cunningly soever he may act his part, but must this way very often betray
himself. For wickedness being always uppermost in such a Man's thoughts, and
ever pressing forward to break forth into expression, it will frequently have
its vent in what that Man speaks, and in what he writes, do what he can to the
contrary; the care caution and cunning of no Man in this case being sufficient
totally to prevent it. Furthermore, there is no Man thus wicked, that can have
that knowledge of Righteousness, as thoroughly to act it under the Mask with
that exactness, as he who is truly righteous, lives and speaks it in reality.
His want of experience in the practice must in this case lead him into a great
many mistakes and blunders in the imitation. And this is a thing which
generally happens to all that act a part, but never more than in matters of
Religion, in which are many Particulars so peculiar to the Righteous, as none
are able to reach them, but those only who are really such. And supposing there
were any that could, yet there will ever be that difference between what is
natural and what is artificial, and between that which is true, real and
sincere, and that which is false, counterfeit and hypocritical, that nothing is
more easy than for any one, that will attend it, to discern the one from the
other. And therefore were Jesus Christ and his Apostles such persons as this
charge of Imposture must suppose them to be, it is impossible, but that the
Doctrines which they taught, and the Books which they wrote, must make the
discovery; and the New Testament would, as a standing Record against them in
this case, afford a multitude of instances to convict them hereof. That the
Alcoran does so as to Mahomet, nothing is more evident; a strain of Rapine
Bloodshed and Lust running thorough the whole Book, which plainly proves the
Author of it to be altogether such a Man, as the charge of Imposture must
necessarily suppose him to be. And were the first Founder of our holy Religion,
or the Writers of those Books, in which its Doctrines are contained, such Men
as he, both their Doctrines and their Books would as evidently prove it against
them. But here I must again challenge you, and all other the Adversaries of our
holy Religion, to show us any one particular in it, that can give the least
foundation to such a charge, any one word in all the Books of the New
Testament, that can afford the least umbrage or pretense thereto. Let what is
written in them be tried by that which is the Touchstone of all Religions, I
mean that Religion of Nature and Reason, which God has written in the hearts
of every one of us from the first Creation; and if it varies from it in any one
particular, if it prescribes any one thing, which may in the minutest
circumstance thereof be contrary to its Righteousness; I will then acknowledge
this to be an argument against us, strong enough to overthrow the whole Cause,
and make all things else that can be said for it, totally ineffectual to its
support. But it is so far from having any such flaw therein, that it is the
perfectest Law of Righteousness, which was ever yet given unto Mankind, and
both in commanding of Good, as well as in forbidding of Evil, vastly exceeds
all others that went before it, and prescribes much more to our practice in
both, than the wisest and highest Moralist was ever able without it to reach in
speculation. For,

1st. As to the forbidding of Evil, it is so far from indulging, or in the
least allowing us in any practice that savours hereof, that it is the only Law
which is so perfectly broad in the prohibition, as adequately to reach
whatsoever may be Evil in the practice, and without any exception, omission, or
defect, absolutely, fully, and thoroughly forbids unto us, whatsoever may have
but the least taint of corruption therein; and therefore it not only restrains
all the Overt-acts of iniquity, but also every imagination of the heart within,
which in the least tends thereto, and in its Precepts prohibits us not only the
doing, or speaking of Evil, but also the harboring or receiving into our Minds
the least thought or desire thereafter, whereby it so effectually provides
against all manner of iniquity, that it plucks it up out of every one of us by
the very roots, and so makes the Man pure, and clean, and holy altogether
without allowing the least savor of Evil to be remaining in him; and every one
of us would be thoroughly such, could we be but as perfect in our Obedience to
this Law, as it is perfectly given unto us. And,

2dly. As to the commanding of Good its prescriptions are, That we employ our
Time, our Powers, and all other Talents entrusted with us to the best we are
able, both to give Glory unto God, and also to show Charity unto Men; and this
last not only to our Friends, Relations, and Benefactors, but in general to all
Mankind, even to our Enemies, and those who despightfully use us and persecute
us; and hereby it advances us to that highth of perfection in all holiness and
goodness, as to render us like the Angels of Light in our Service unto God, and
like God himself in our Charity to Man. For it directs us in the same manner as
the Angels to worship and serve our God to the utmost ability of out nature,
and in the same manner as God to make our goodness to Men extend unto all
without exception or reserve, as far as they are capable of receiving it from
us.

And can any Man think it possible that a Religion, which so thoroughly and
fully forbids all Evil, and in so high and perfect a manner prescribes us all
Good, could ever be the product of a wicked mind? The fruit is too good to
proceed from so corrupt a root, and the effect vastly above the efficiency of
such a cause ever to produce it. For can it possibly be imagined, that a wicked
Man could either have inclination to do so much for the promoting of that
Righteousness, which all his passions and desires so violently run counter
unto, or if he would, that such an one could ever be so well acquainted with
all the ways thereof, as so exactly to prescribe them? If it be so difficult
for such an one to conceal his inclinations in his expressions; if it be so
hard for him, when he vents himself into Words or Writings, not to let loose
something in them of what he really is (as I have already shown) how can any
copy be drawn from such a Mind, but what must in some feature or other resemble
the Original, or any thing at all proceed from thence, but what must carry with
it some savor of the iniquity thereof? Set but such a one to write a Letter,
and he will scarce be able to do it without putting so much of his passions and
his temper into it, as that we may read from thence what he is, as every Man's
experience may tell him, that corresponds with such; and how much more then may
we be assured will he lay himself open, when he has the large scope of a Book
to express himself in, and especially when that book is of such a nature, as
gives him the fullest occasion, and the most inviting opportunity so to do? And
what book can be more such, than that which is to propose a new Law to Mankind?
In the writing of such a book, if ever, certainly the wicked Man will show
himself, and in the same manner, as Mahomet did; conform his Laws to his own
inclinations, and prescribe such rules of living to others, as may best
justify him in those which he himself follows. And although he should not
intend any such thing, though he should not design so to do (and it is hard to
imagine of such a Man, that he should not,) yet at least the prevailing bent of
his passions, and the corruption of his judgment which always follows
therefrom, must necessarily lead him thereinto, it being, morally speaking,
altogether impossible, but that the wicked Man must appear in what the wicked
Man does, and the deeds, words, and writings which proceed from such an one,
must in some measure savor of what he is. And therefore if there be nothing in
the Law of our holy Religion (as I hope I have fully shown, that there is not)
which can make the least discovery of any such thing, nothing that can afford
the least pretense for such a charge against it, where so large a scope is
given for it; this sufficiently proves, that neither the first Founder of the
Christian Religion, nor those who first wrote it in the Books of the New
Testament, in which we now have it, could possibly be wicked Men and
consequently not such Impostors as you would have them to be.

But here I know it will be objected, that there is no necessity, that all
Impostors should be as wicked as Mahomet; and therefore though Jesus Christ and
his Apostles were no such wicked Persons, yet however they may be still
Impostors for all that. For, first, it has happened that very just and good Men
have had recourse to Imposture to bring to pass and establish their most
commendable designs, as we have an instance in Minos King of Crete and another
in Numa King of Rome, both which, to give the greater authority to their Laws,
pretended to have had them by divine Revelation. And, secondly, you will say,
it is possible, a Man may be an Impostor by Enthusiasm, and mistake, and falsely
impose things for divine Revelation, not out of a wicked design to deceive
others, but that he is really deceived herein himself. And if in these two
Cases a Man that is not wicked may be an Impostor, you will urge, That though
Jesus Christ and his Apostles were not wicked Men; yet this will not prove them
not to have been Impostors, because it is possible, that in one of these two
Cases they might have been such.

In order to the clearing of the first of these Objections, I desire you would
consider these Three following Particulars.

1. That in every Religion there are these two Parts to be observed, very
distinct from each other. 1. The Religion it self; And, 2. The Means whereby it
is promoted, and propagated among Men.

2. When the Imposture is only in the former of these two, and a true Religion;
or at least one, that is really believed to be such, is promoted by means of
Imposture; that is, by feigning a divine Revelation, where there is none, or by
counterfeiting Miracles, or by any other such means tending to deceive Men
thereinto; this amounts to no higher than a pious fraud, which out of an
over-hot and inconsiderate zeal some Men have made use of for the promoting of
the best Ends. And such Men, for the sake of such Ends, may still be
denominated good and righteous in the main, how much soever they may have been
out in making use of such means to promote them.

3. When the Imposture is in the End, as well as in the Means; and not only the
Revelation pretended, but also the Religion it self is all false, counterfeit,
and feigned; this amounts to such an Imposture, as is totally wicked without
any mixture of good therein. In the former Case, where the Imposture is only in
the Means, there is a good End designed, and therefore something still from
whence the person using it may be denominated Good; but where the Imposture is
in both, it is Wickedness all over, without any thing at all in it to exempt
him from being perfectly wicked, that makes use thereof.

Which Particulars being premised, my Answer to the Objection is as follows.

1. I do acknowledge it to be related by Plato in Minoe and in primo Dialogo de
Legibus. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, lib. 1. Strabo, lib. 16. Valerius Maximus,
lib. 1. c. 2.
Authors of good credit, that Minos King of Crete, when he first framed the
Laws of his Country; to give them the greater authority, used to retire into a
Cave on Mount Dicta, and from thence to bring them forth to his Cretans, as if
they had been there delivered to him by Jupiter: And that Numa, when he founded
the Laws of Rome Plutarchus in vita Numae and Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, lib. 1.
, practiced the same art pretending to have received them from the Nymph
Egeria, that so he might procure them to be received by the Romans with the
greater veneration. And by this device they both obtained there End in bringing
very rude and barbarous People to submit to those good Orders and Rules which
they prescribed for their living civilly, peaceably, and justly together. But
this, although it were a fraud in the Means, yet as far as it related only to a
political End, belongs to another matter, and does not at all fall within that
argument of Religion, which we are now treating of.

2. As to the Laws of Numa, I acknowledge that they reached not only Matters of
State, but those of Religion also, and that the whole method of the old Roman
Religion was regulated and stated by them; but that Numa founded any new
Religion, is what I utterly deny. For Numa left no other Religion behind him in
Rome at his death, than that very same Heathenism, which he found there at his
first coming thither to be King. For the City having been then but newly
founded, and the People made up of a Collection of the refuse and scum of
diverse Nations there gathered together, they were as much out of order in
matters of Religion, as in those belonging to the Civil Government, and all
that Numa did, when he came to reign over them, was to make Laws to regulate
both; and therefore, as he founded several wholesome Constitutions for the
orderly governing of the State, so also did he for the regular worshipping of
the Gods then acknowledged among them, without making any essential alteration
in the Religion before practiced by them. For had he done so, then the Religion
of the Romans must have differed from the Religion of the other Cities of
Italy, which we find it did not. For they communicated with each other in their
Worship, as they did also with the Greeks. And in truth the old Roman Religion
was no other, than the Greek Heathenism, the same which was practiced in
Greece, and in all those Countries which were planted with Colonies from
thence, as almost all Italy was at that time. And therefore the Romans, as well
as the rest of the Cities of Italy, looked on Delphos as a principal place of
their worship with the same veneration that the Greeks did, and had frequent
recourse thither on Religious accounts, as the Roman Histories on many
occasions acquaint us. And this Religion Numa, while he lived among his
Sabines, being accurately versed in, and also a diligent practicer of it, on
his coming to Rome, and finding the Romans all out of order in that little
which they had of it (for during the Reign of Romulus, they minded little else
but fighting, and therefore had not leisure, or perchance any great regard, for
this matter) he not only instructed them more fully in it according as it was
received in the Neighboring Nations, but also framed several rules and
constitutions for their more regular and orderly practice of it, which did no
more make the old Heathenism of the Romans to be a new Religion, than the body
of Canons given us by King James the First, for the more orderly regulating of
our Worship and Discipline, makes our Religion a new Christianity. Only Numa,
the better to make his Constitutions to obtain among those barbarous people for
whom he made them, pretended to have been instructed in them by a divine
Person, and in this he practiced a pious fraud, but was by no means guilty of
such an Imposture as we are now treating of. For he taught them no new
Religion, but only the very same Greek Heathenism, which he had received with
the rest of the People of Italy from their forefathers, and really believed to
be that very true Religion, whereby God was to be served, and therefore
notwithstanding the deceit he made use of, he might from the end, which he
proposed and which he really effected thereby to the civilizing of a very
barbarous sort of people, be still reckoned a just and good Man; and to give
him his due, he really was one of the most excellent Personages of that age in
which he lived, and first sowed among the Romans the seeds of that virtue, with
which they so eminently signalized themselves for so many Ages after. But,

3. Jesus Christ and his Apostles took on them not only to be Messengers sent
of God, but also to teach a new Religion to the World; and therefore, if they
were Impostors, they must be so in the largest and fullest sense, both in
respect of the Religion it self, as well as the means whereby they promoted it.
And in this case there could be nothing to excuse them from being altogether as
wicked as I have alleged. Where the Religion is true, or really believed so to
be, there is a pious intention in the end, which may speak some goodness in him
that uses fraud to promote it; and such a goodness, as greatly exceeds the
obliquity of the fault which he committed about it; and therefore, although he
cannot on the account of the Good be excused from the Evil (for it is always a
scandal to Religion to be promoted by Falsehood,) yet still he must be reckoned
more commendable from the one, than faulty from the other; and in this case
there will still be room enough left from the goodness of the End designed, and
the Piety of the intention, to denominate the Man good and righteous in the
main, notwithstanding the fault committed in using such means to bring it to
effect. But where the Religion is all Forgery and Falsehood, as well as the
means of promoting it deceit and fraud, the Imposture then becomes so totally
and perfectly wicked without the least mixture of good therein, as must
necessarily denominate the Authors and first Propagators of it to be perfectly
wicked also.

If you say, that such a perfect Imposture as this can have any good End, for
the sake whereof the Authors of it may be freed from that charge of Wickedness
which I lay upon them, that good End must be either the honor of God, or the
benefit of Men. But how can God be more dishonored, than by a false Religion?
or how can Men be more mischiev'd than by having the practice of it imposed on
them, whereby they must thus constantly dishonor, and consequently offend and
lose the favor of him that made them? An Imposture in this case has that
aggravation from the object it is about, as well as from the perfection of
iniquity which is in the act, that supposing it could be made productive of any
good End, that good would be so vastly overbalanced by the Wickedness of the
Means that it would be of no weight in comparison thereof, or at all avail to
the rendering of those, that shall make use of it, less wicked than I have
said. But when a Man can thus far proceed in Wickedness toward God, as to be
the Author of constant dishonor unto him in a false Worship; and toward Men,
as to ensnare them into all that mischief, which must be consequential hereto;
it must necessarily imply such a thorough disregard of both, as every good
intention in respect of either must be inconsistent with. And therefore, if it
be possible that such a wicked Imposture can ever be made the Means to a good
End, it is scarce to be conceived, how they who are so wicked, as to be the
Authors of it, could ever intend any such good thereby.

But further, If the Authors of such an Imposture, as we are now treating of,
can be less wicked, than I have said, on the account of any good, which you
pretend they may design thereby, I desire to know, among what sort of Men you
will place them, while you thus plead their excuse. For they must be one of
these three; that is, either Atheists, Deists, or Believers of an instituted
Religion.

1. If you say they are Atheists, that word alone contains enough to prove them
perfectly wicked, whatever can be said to the contrary. It is indeed agreeable
enough to the Principes of this sort of Men, that such an Imposture, as we are
treating of, may laudably be made use of to a good End. For they hold, that all
Religion is nothing else but a device of Politicians to keep the World in awe.
But if the Atheist be the deviser, what intention of Good can the device carry
therewith? None certainly toward God, since he utterly denies his Being; or
can it in this case have any toward Men, since by denying him, for whose sake
it is that we are to do good to others, he casts off therewith all the reason
and obligation, which he has, abstractive of his own interest, of doing any
such at all. All the good therefore that such an one can aim at, must totally
center in himself to advance his own enjoyments and gratify his own lusts in
all those things which his corrupt affections carry him after; and to enjoy
these without restraint of Laws or fear of punishment being that alone, which
is the real and true cause that makes any Man deny that supreme and infinitely
good and just Being, whom all things else prove; whoever is an Atheist, must be
perfectly wicked before he can be such; and what is there which can, while in
that impiety, ever give him a better character afterward?

2. If you say they are Deists, such as you profess your selves to be, your
main Principle is against all instituted Religion whatever, as if God were
dishonored, and Man injured by every thing of this nature practiced among us;
and can you then think, that any who are thus persuaded, can without being
first corrupted to a great degree of Impiety, as well as Hypocrisy, ever
become themselves so contrary to their own Sentiments, on any pretense
whatsoever, the Authors and Teachers of such a Religion among us?

3. But if you place them among those who are Believers of an instituted
Religion, they must abolish that which they believe to be true, before they can
introduce that by Imposture which they know to be false. And this must be the
case of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, if they were such Impostors as you hold
them to be. For they were educated and brought up in the Jewish Religion, which
they believed to be from God, and the whole Tenor of the Religion which they
taught supposes it so to be; and that it was the only true way whereby God was
to be worshipped by them, till they delivered their new Revelations, which
totally abolished this Religion, and established the Christian in its stead;
and therefore if those Revelations were not true and real, as they pretended
they were, but all forged and counterfeited by them, as you say, they must
abolish a Religion, which they believed to be true, to make way for that, which
they knew to be false, and thereby become wilfully and knowingly, according to
their own belief, the Authors of leading Men from saving Truths, into damning
Errors, to the utter destruction of their Souls for ever; and also of
depriving God of that acceptable Worship, whereby he was truly honored
according to his own appointment, to introduce in its stead a false
superstition of their own devising, which must be constant dishonor unto him
as long as practiced among us. And if Jesus Christ and his Apostles were such
Impostors, as all this imports; and such they must be, if they were Impostors
at all; they must be guilty of that impiety toward God, as well as that
injustice toward Men herein, as must necessarily suppose them the wickedest of
Men before they could arrive hereto; and therefore if they were not such wicked
Men, this abundantly demonstrates, they could not be such Impostors, as you
charge them to be.

As to the second Objection, That a Man may be an Impostour through Enthusiasm
and Mistake, and falsely impose things for divine Revelations, not out of a
wicked design to deceive others, but that he is herein really deceived himself;
and that therefore there is no necessity, that all Impostors should be such
wicked persons, as I have alleged; my Answer hereto is,

1. I do acknowledge that Enthusiasm has carried Men into very strange
conceits and extravagancies upon the foundation of a Religion already
established, as we have instances enough hereof in the Anabaptists of Germany,
the Quakers here with us, the They were a sort of Mohammedan Enthusiasts in the
East, who followed the Light within them in the same manner as the Quakers with
us, and therefore were called Batenists from the Arabic word Baten, intus. And
on this Principle did all the Villainies imaginable, pretending an impulse
thereto from this Light within them.
Batenists among the Mahometans, and in some of the Recluses of the Church of
Rome. But that Enthusiasm could ever go so far, as to fancy a divine
Revelation for the establishing of a new Religion, and upon such a fancy
propagate that Religion in the World, as if it came from God, is that which I
cannot believe; and there is no instance, that I know of, that can be given
hereof. But,

2dly. Allowing it possible, this Objection then, as applied to the case in
hand, must suppose Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, to have been deceived by
Enthusiasm into the Religion which they taught; and that therefore, although
they were by no means such wicked Men, as a wilful Imposture must suppose them
to be, yet still they might be Impostors by mistake; and being by Enthusiasm so
far deluded, as to think that to come to them from God by divine Revelation,
which had no other birth, but from their own wild fancies, might preach it to
Men as such, not out of a wicked design to deceive, but that they were really
herein deceived themselves. But is it possible for any Man to conceive, that so
grave, so serious, and so wisely a framed Religion as Christianity is, could
ever be the spawn of Enthusiasm? Whatsoever is the product of that, uses ever
to be like the Parent, wild and extravagant in all its parts, often disagreeing
with all manner of Reason, and often as much with it self. But Christianity is
in all its parts as rational as it is good, giving us the justest Notions of
God, the best Precepts of our duty toward Him, and the exactest Rules of
living honestly and righteously with each other, and has a thorough conformity
to it self in every particular of it; on which account it has been approved
and admired for the excellency of its composure, and the wisdom of its
constitutions, even by the best and wisest of those who never submitted
thereto; and therefore always carries with it Marks and Evidences enough in the
very Nature of it, sufficiently to prove it vastly above the power of such a
Cause ever to produce it.

3. The Founder and first Teachers of Christianity gave such evidences for the
truth thereof, as Enthusiasm could never produce. For can Enthusiasm raise the
dead to life again, cure all manner of diseases, and work such other Miracles,
as Christ and his Apostles did? Had they by Enthusiasm been mistaken in the
Doctrines which they taught, certainly God would never have wrought such
wonderful Works by their hands, as give testimony thereto.

4. Several of the principal Articles of our Faith depend upon such matters of
fact, as allow no Room for Enthusiasm to take place in them; as that of the
Resurrection of our Savior from the dead, his Ascension into Heavem, and the
descent of the Holy Ghost in the gift of Tongues. For in such things as these,
which Men see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and feel with their
hands (as one of the Apostles did the very Wounds of our Savior after his
Resurrection) no Enthusiasm can ever lead Men into a mistake. For can it
possibly be said that it was only by Enthusiasm that five hundred Men together
saw Christ after he was risen again from the dead? or that it was by Enthusiasm
that his Apostles saw him ascend up into Heaven from Mount Olivet in the
presence of them all at noonday? or that it was only by Enthusiasm, that the
same Apostles on the day of Pentecost received the gift of Tongues by the
descent of the Holy Ghost upon them, so as to be able to converse with all the
several Nations then at Jerusalem in their own Languages, without ever having
learned any thing of them? To say that Men could any way be mistaken in such
things as these, will be to deny the certainty of sense, and overthrow the
foundations of all manner of knowledge whatever. It must therefore be said as
to these particulars, as it must also of all the Miracles of our Savior, which
give Testimony to the Doctrines which he taught, That his Apostles, who
testified them unto the World, and upon the credit of them built up that
Religion which they delivered unto us, did either see them really done as they
relate, or they did not see them. If they did see them, no Enthusiasm could
ever make them be mistaken therein; and if they did not, they must be
altogether as bad Impostors, as Mahomet himself in testifying them unto us; and
what but as great Wickedness as his could ever induce them so to do?

SECT. IV.
IV. The next Mark of an Imposture is, That it must unavoidably contain in it
several palpable falsities, whereby may be made appear the falsity of all the
rest. For whoever invents a Lie, can never do it so cunningly and knowingly,
but still there will be some flaw or other left in it, which will expose it to
a discovery; and no Man who frames an invention, can ever secure it herefrom
without two qualifications, which no Man can have; and they are, 1st. A
thorough knowledge of all manner of Truths; And, 2dly. Such an exact memory, as
can bring them all present to his Mind, whenever there shall be an occasion.
For to make the Lie pass without contradiction, he must make it put on a
seeming agreement with all other Truths whatever. And how can any one do this
without knowing all Truths, and having them also all ready and present in his
mind to consider them in order thereto? And since no Man is sufficient for
this, no Man is sufficient so to frame a Lie, but he will always put something
or other into it, which will palpably prove it to be so. For if there be but
any one known Truth in the whole scheme of Nature with which it interferes,
this must make the discovery; and there is no Man that forgeth an Imposture,
but makes himself liable this way to be convicted of it. This is the method
whereby we distinguish supposititious Authors from those which are genuine, and
fabulous Writers from true Historians. For there is always something in such,
which disagrees from known Truths to make the discovery, some flaw always left
in spite of the utmost care and foresight of the Forgerer, that betrays the
cheat. Thus Annius's Imposture of his Berosus, Manetho and Megasthenes became
detected, and so also we know the Tuscan Antiquities of Inghiramius to be a
cheat of the like nature. And by the same rule is it that we receive Sallust,
Tacitus and Suetonius for true Historians, and reject others as Writers of
Fables, and of no authority with us: And if we examine the Alcoran of Mahomet
by the same method, nothing can be more plainly convicted of Falsity and
Imposture, than that must be by it. For although in that Book he allows both
the Old and the New Testament to be of divine authority, yet in a multitude of
instances he differs from both: I mean not in matters of Law and Religion, for
here his design is to differ; but in matters of fact and history, which if once
true, must evermore be the same. They have a fetch indeed to bring him off, by
saying that the Jews, and the Christians corrupted those holy Books, and
therefore where he relates things otherwise than they do, he does there restore
Truth, and not vary from it. But certainly this will not hold, where, by a very
gross blunder, he makes the Virgin Alcoran, c. 3. where observe, that through
all that Chapter in every place, where the French, and out of that the English
Translation of the Alcoran has Joachim, in the Original Arabic it is Amran,
and from thence this Chapter in the Original is called Surato'l Amran, i. e.
the Chapter of Amran. But in both these Translations it is called the Chapter
of Joachim. For Mahomet mistaking the Virgin Mary to be the same with Miriam,
the Sister of Moses, makes Amran to be her Father. But Ryer, the French
Translator very imprudently taking upon him to correct the Impostor's blunder,
puts Joachim in the place of Amran, and thereby gives us a false Version, where
it is very material in order to the exposing of that Imposture to know the
true. And the English Translator follows him herein.
Mary the Mother of our Savior, to be the same with Miriam, the Sister of
Moses. For this would be to put the Gospel so close upon the heels of the Law,
as to allow no time for the taking place of this latter, before it would have
been totally abolished by the former. But which most discovers his Imposture,
are the monstrous Mistakes, which he makes in the Moral part thereof. For he
allows Fornication, and justifies Adultery by his Law, and makes War, Rapine
and Slaughter to be the main part of the Religion which he taught; which being
contrary to the Nature of God, from whom he says he received it, and contrary
to that Law of unalterable and eternal Truth, which he has written in the
hearts of all of us from the beginning; the obvious Principles of every Man's
reason convict him of falsehood herein, and thereby manifestly prove all the
rest to be nothing else, but an abominable Impiety of his own invention. And
were the Religion of Jesus Christ, as delivered to us in the New Testament, an
Imposture like this, it must have the same flaws therein, that is, many
falsities in matter of fact, and more in doctrine, and all his Prophecies would
be without Truth in the Original, or Verification in the Event. And when you
can make out any one of these particulars against it, then we will be ready to
say the same thereof that you do, That all is Cheat and Imposture, and no
credit or faith is any longer to be given thereto.

And 1st. as to the matters of fact contained in the History of the New
Testament whoever yet convicted any one of them of falsehood? or whoever as
much as endeavored it in the age when the Books were first written, when the
falsehood might have been best proved, had there been any such in them, and the
doing hereof would have so much served the designs of those bitter enemies of
the Christian Cause, who from the first did the utmost they could to suppress
it? What Relations of matters of fact pass uncontradicted and uncontrolled in
the Age in which they were transacted, and among those who thought themselves
greatly concerned to have them believed false, this must be taken for an
undeniable argument of their truth. And this Argument the History of the New
Testament has on its side in its fullest strength. For the Books were written
and published in the very age in which the things related in them were done,
yet no one then ever contradicted or convicted of falsehood any one passage in
them, though Christianity had from the very beginning the Professors of all
other Religions in most bitter enmity against it, who would have been most
ready and glad so to do, could they have found but the least pretense for it.
And had any of those Relations been false, there were then means enough
undeniably to have convicted them of it. For those things, which are related of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles in the History of the New Testament, are not
there said to have been done in Corners where none where present to contradict
them, but upon the open Stage of the World, and many of them in the sight of
thousands; and therefore had they not been really done, or done otherwise than
related, there could not have wanted witnesses enough to make proof hereof. And
most certainly those who so bitterly opposed Christianity from the first would
have found them out, and made use of their Testimonies to the utmost for the
overthrowing of the Cause they so violently opposed, and had they done so to be
sure we should have had those testimonies in the mouths of all its enemies ever
since. For they would have yielded them the strongest and the most prevailing
argument they could possibly have urged against it. The false pretenses of
(...) Impostors have been detected by (...) who lived in their times, and the
true History is given of them instead of the false ones which they gave of
themselves. And had Jesus Christ and his Apostles been like Impostors, and the
things related of them in the Books of the New Testament false and forged, it
is not possible to conceive, especially in the circumstances abovementioned,
how they could have escaped the like discovery; but certainly in this case,
amidst so many witnesses, who could have proved the falsehood, and so many
enemies who were eager to detect it, all must have come out, and every false
Narrative would have been shown to be such, and the true one given in its
stead, and we should have heard enough hereof from the adversaries of our holy
Religion through every age since. And that this was not done, when there was
such bitter opposition against the Christian Religion from the first
propagating of it, and it would have been so strong an argument against it, can
be assigned to no other cause, but that the things related were so evidently
and manifestly true, as not to afford the least pretense for the contradicting
of them. But this is not all we have to say in the case. For it has not only
happened that none of those matters of fact have ever been contradicted, or
proved false by any of the first enemies of Christianity, who were best able to
have done so, had there been that Imposture in them which you allege; but on
the contrary many of them have been allowed true, and attested by them. For two
of the most surprising particulars related in the Gospels are confirmed by the
Testimony of Heathen Writers, I mean the murder of the Innocents by Herod at
Bethlehem, and the wonderful Eclipse of the Sun, which happened at the death of
our Savior, contrary to the nature of a Solar Eclipse, when the Moon was in
the Full. Saturnal, lib. 2. c. 4.
Macrobius tells us of the former and Vide Chronicon Eusebii, and Origenis
contra Celsum librum secundum, and Tract. ad Matthaeum 35.
Phlegon Trallianus of the latter. And that which is the most important part of
all, and bears the greatest Testimony to the truth of the whole was allowed and
acknowledged on all hands both by Jews and Heathens even in their bitterest
opposition against the Christian Cause, I mean the account which is given in
those sacred Books of the Miracles of our Savior. For both of them have
yielded to the truth hereof; only the Jews say, that he wrought them by virtue
of the Tetragrammaton, or the sacred Name Jehovah, stolen by him out of the
Temple (which the ridiculousness of the Fable they relate concerning it
sufficiently confutes) and the Heathens by Magic Art. And therefore
Philostratus and Hierocles finding no other way to overthrow the authority,
which those Miracles gave his Religion, confronted against him the History of
Apollonius Tyanoeus, whom they pretend by the same Art of Magic to have done as
wonderful things, and by this means endeavored at least to invalidate those
miraculous Works of his, which they could not deny. And,

2dly. As to the Prophecies of our Savior, the truth of their event in every
particular proves the truth of him that predicted them. For, did he not come
from God, how could he have this wonderful Knowledge, as thus to foretell
things to come? Were he not of the Secrets of the Almighty, how could he so
certainly have fore-shown, what in aftertimes he would bring to pass? If it
were only by guess that he did so, how possibly could all things so exactly
fall out in the event, that nothing should in the least happen otherwise than
as he predicted, especially since as to most of them it cannot be as much as
said, that there was any place for humane sagacity, or the least probable
conjecture to help him to any foresight therein? For how improbable was it
that the Religion which he taught should, against the bent of the whole World,
have made so great and speedy progress therein, as he foretold that it should?
or that such instruments, as he employed in this work, a company of poor,
ignorant, and contemptible Fishermen, should ever have been able to have
effected it? without the extraordinary Providence of God overruling the
hearts, as well as the power of Men; a thing in the ordinary course of humane
affairs, so unlikely to succeed, could never have been brought to pass; or
could our Savior have any manner of ground from the nature of the thing, so
much as to guess at so strange an event, and therefore could never have so
punctually foretold it; but that being sent of God to begin this work, he
foreknew all that he would do for the perfecting of it. And the same is to be
said of what he further predicted of this holy Religion as to its continuance
among us to the end of the World, of the calling of the Gentiles thereinto, and
the rejecting of the Jews, of the great calamities which should attend that
people (as accordingly they have through all Ages since) and particularly of
that great and terrible calamity, which was to fall upon them in the
destruction of Jerusalem, and accordingly happened about forty years after; which
he so exactly foretold, not only as to the time (for he said it should be
before that Matt. c. 24. v. 34:
generation should pass away) but also as to all other the most considerable
circumstances of it, that nothing can be a more exact and perfect Comment on
the 24th. Chapter of St. Matthew, and those other passages in the Gospels,
where this dismal destruction is foretold, than that History of Josephus,
which gives us an account how it was brought to pass. And that part of the
Prophecy, which relates to the final destruction of the Temple, foretelling,
that one stone should not be left upon another, has been so exactly verified,
that notwithstanding several attempts, which have been made for the re-edifying
of it, it could never be effected; no, not as far as the laying of one stone
upon another in order thereto, even to this day. And when Julian the Apostate,
out of design to confront this Prophecy, and give the lie thereto, employed
both the Power and the Treasure of the Roman Empire for the rebuilding of it,
Heaven it self interposed in an extraordinary manner to make good what he had
predicted to be the established purpose of the Almighty, which nothing was able
to alter, and by a miraculous Fire destroyed the Work as fast as it was built,
and at length forced the Undertakers totally to desist therefrom. For the truth
whereof, I will not referr you to the Testimony of Socrates Scholasticus,
Sozomen, Chrysostom, or any other of the Christian Writers, who relate it, but
to one whom you cannot suspect of serving the interest of the Christian Cause
herein, he being as much an Adversary thereto as any of you; I mean Ammianus
Marcellinus, who was an Heathen Writer, and then served under Julian in his
Wars in the East, at the same time when this happened. His Words concerning it (
lib. 23. c. 1.) are as follows -- Ambitiosum quondam apud Hierosolymam
Templum, quod post multa and interneciva certamina, obsidente Vespasiano
posteaque Tito, oegre est expugnatum, instaurare sumtibus excogitabat
immodicis, negotiumque maturandum Alypio dederat Antiochensi, qui olim
Britannos curaverat pro Proefectis. Cum itaque rei idem fortiter instaret
Alypius, juvaretque Provincioe Rector, metuendi globi flammarum prope
fundamenta crebris assultibus erumpentes fecere locum, exustis aliquoties
operantibus, inaccessum, hocque modo Elemento destinatius repellente cessavit
inceptum: i. e. Julian having a design to re-build with extraordinary expense
the Temple of Jerusalem, formerly a very stately Structure (which, first
Vespasian, and after Titus, laying siege thereto, was, after many bloody
Conflicts, at length, with difficulty, taken and destroyed) committed the care
of the business to Alypius the Antiochian, who formerly had been Proprefect of
Britanny, to be with all speed expedited by him. But while Alypius was
diligently pressing on the Work, and the Governor of the Province helping him
therein, dreadful Balls of Fire breaking forth from the Foundations of the
Building, did by their frequent Eruptions make the Place unaccessible, the
Workmen being several times destroyed by the Fire, as they went to their
Labor; and by this means the Element still persisting as of purpose to
obstruct it, the Work ceased. And it has never since been again attempted,
even to this day, nor is there now left the least remainder of its Ruins, to
show so much as the Place where this Temple once stood? or have those who
Travel thither, any other Mark whereby to find it out, but the Mohammedan
Mosque, erected on the same Plat by Omar, the second Successor of Mahomet; and
which has now continued for above a thousand years to pollute with the worst
of Superstitions, that sacred Ground on which it was formerly built. Had our
Savior been an Impostor, and foretold all these things without any knowledge
of the Counsels of him who was to bring them to pass, something certainly must
have happened in the event of so many particulars, as would have given the Lie to
his Predictions, and you the opportunity of convicting him thereof by plain
matters of fact falling out contrary to them. And although this could not have
been done at first, but possibly such Prophecies as these might have imposed
for a while on the credulity of many; yet we that have passed the time of their
completion, could never be deceived thereby; but by the Event must plainly
know, Whether what he foretold be true or false, and from thence have enough to
make a judgment also of the truth of him that predicted them. And therefore had
our Savior, like Mahomet, invented his Religion to deceive the World; if he
intended it should have continued, he must have taken the same course that
Mahomet did, and never ventured at any Prophecy at all, that he might not be
confuted by the Event, and so lose his whole design. If you answer, That our
Savior foretold future Events after the same manner, as the Pharisees said he
wrought his Miracles; that is, by the Prince of the Devils, you ascribe that
knowledge to the wicked one which is above his reach to attain unto. The
Oracles, which he gave in the Heathen Temples, only prove him able to cheat
Mankind with dubious and dark Answers, but never clearly to inform them of the
future Purposes of the Almighty. And indeed, how ever can it be imagined, that
such an accursed one, as he that is cast off at the greatest distance from God
(who alone governs all the Works of his Creation, and by the Wisdom of his
Providence orders every Event that attends them) should ever be so privy to his
Counsels, as to be able to foreknow any thing that he determines concerning
them; unless it be, where he himself is employed as an Executioner of his
Justice to bring it to pass. But all our Savior's Predictions were clear and
full, foretelling things to come, in the same manner as Historians relate them
when past, without ambiguity in the words, or perplexity in the matter, or the
least room left for evasion of deceit in them, and were all as exactly
fulfilled in their appointed time; and we have the continuance of his Gospel,
the spreading of it through all the Nations of the Earth, the rejection of the
Jews, the calamities of those people in a continued Exile, and the total
destruction of their Temple, standing Evidences hereof, even to this day. And
how could all this have ever happened so exactly, according to his Word, but that
he was that holy and blessed One, who had the Counsels of the Almighty
communicated unto him, and was sent by Him on purpose to declare unto us as
many of them, as were necessary for us to know, in order to the attaining of
everlasting life. And,

3dly. As to the Doctrinal part of his Religion; what can be more worthy of
God, than the notions which he gives us of him, and the worship which he
directs us to render upon him? and what more worthy of us and perfecting of our
nature than that Law for the conduct of our lives which he has delivered unto
us? and what can be more holy, pure, and perfect than the Precepts thereof?
Here the sublimity and vast extent of the matter give scope large enough for
the wisest of Men to bewilder and lose themselves in error and mistake, and
yet convince us but of any one such in the whole extent of our Religion, and
that alone shall be sufficient to prove the Imposture, you would charge it
with, and I will yield you all you would have for the sake thereof. But it is
so far herefrom, that I durst make you your selves the judges, whether it
delivers any thing else unto us of the nature and excellencies of God, but what
the reason of every man (although barely that alone through that cloud of
ignorance and error which the Fall has overspread us with, could never
clearly make the discovery) must now, when thus discovered, ever justify and
admire? whether it prescribes us any one particular relating to his worship,
but what is most agreeable to those his excellencies? and whether the Precepts
and Laws therein laid down unto us for the governing of our lives and
conversations be any other, than what do all correspond so exactly with every
thing which the rational dictates of our nature direct us to, that they take
them all in without omission or defect, and improve them to the utmost with
error or mistake in the least circumstance that belongs unto them? If you say,
that all this might be attained to by humane wisdom and study; I answer,
supposing it could, yet looking on our Savior barely as a Man, and his holy
Apostles without any other assistance, than that of their own natural
endowments, how possibly could they reach so high? To do this requires that
vast compass of knowledge in all the things of Nature, Law, and Morality, as it
is not possible to conceive Men of their education and low employments in the
World could ever have arrived unto. If you examine what other Men have done by
humane wisdom and study only, you will find those of the most elevated Genius
and sublimest Understanding could never with their utmost industry and search
attain unto what you suppose herein, or that the highest knowledge of Men could
ever reach that perfection in any of the particulars abovementioned, in which
the Gospel of Jesus Christ delivers them unto us. For what blunders and
absurdities do the wisest of the Philosophers lay down concerning the Deity?
what errors and follies have they taught and practiced concerning his worship?
and what mistakes have those, who exalted Morality to the highest pitch among
Men, made therein? Plato in his Commonwealth allowed the common use of Women.
Aristotle asserts it to be natural and just for the Greeks to make War upon the
Barbarians for no other reason but that they are so, and both he and Tully
place Revenge among their virtues. And whoever had vaster capacities for humane
knowledge, or ever went higher by the abilities of natural reason and
understanding only in the search thereof, than those Men? Yet still being no
more than Men, they could not avoid putting something of the infirmities of Man
even into that, wherein they made appear their highest perfections, error,
mistake and ignorance being so natural unto all of us, that neither the
greatest, the wisest, nor the best among us can be totally free therefrom. And
therefore had Christ and his Apostles no other help in the Doctrines which they
taught, but that which is humane, they must also in like manner have put that
which is humane thereinto, and the infirmities, mistakes, and errors that
attend humane nature would have appeared in all that they delivered unto us.
But the doctrines, which they taught, and the Books in which they delivered
them unto us being so totally free from all such errors and mistakes, as I
have already shown that they are, this directs us to look higher than Man for
the Founder of this Holy Religion, and the Original Author of those Books in
which it is contained, and necessarily prove, that only he who is infinite in
knowledge and infinite in all other perfections could thus give us a Law so
exactly like himself, thoroughly perfect in the whole, and infallibly true in
every particular thereof.

SECT. V.
V. Another Mark of Imposture is, That wherever it is first propagated, it
must be done by craft and fraud; and this is natural to all manner of cheats.
For the end of such being to deceive, craft and fraud are the means whereby it
is to be effected. In this case a Lie must be made to go for a Truth, and an
appearance for a reality; and to compass this a great deal of Art must be made
use of, both to dress up the Cheat, that it may appear to be what it pretends,
and also to cast such a mist before the eyes of Men, that they may not see it
to be otherwise, and that especially where the cheat is an Imposture in
Religion. For whoever comes with a new Religion to be proposed to the World,
must find all men so far prejudiced and pre-possessed against it, as they are
affected to the old one they have before professed, and therefore when Men are
educated, or any otherwise fixed and settled in a Religion (and all mankind are
in some or other) they are not apt easily to forego it, but it must be
something more than ordinary that must bring them over to another contrary
thereto. When the new Religion really comes from God (as the Jewish Religion
first, and after the Christian did) it brings its Credentials with it, the
power of Miracles to make way for its reception. For when Men find the
Omnipotency of God working with it, they have from thence sufficient evidence
given them from whom it comes, and there is need of no other means to induce
them to believe, but that the Religion, which God does in such a manner own and
attest, must be from him. But where there is no such power accompanying the new
Religion to gain credit thereto, the defect hereof must be made up by somewhat
else to draw over the people to its belief, and this is that which must put all
Impostors upon craft and fraud in order to the compassing of their ends. But
that Jesus Christ and his Apostles made use of no such craft or fraud to induce
Men into the belief of that holy Religion, which they taught, and consequently
could be no such Impostors, will be best made appear by going over all those
ways of craft and fraud, which Mahomet served himself of, and, by showing you
that none of them can possibly be said to have been practiced by any of them.
For Mahomet being one of the craftiest cheats that ever set up to impose a
false Religion on mankind, and the only person that ever carried on his wicked
design with success, you may be sure he left no Art or Device unpractised,
which could possibly be made use of with any advantage for the compassing of
it. And therefore by proving unto you that none of those methods of craft and
fraud, which were made use of for the first propagating of Mahometism, were
ever practiced in the first preaching of Christianity, I shall sufficiently
prove that no craft or fraud at all which is anyway practicable on such
occasions, can ever be charged thereupon. For,

1. Mahomet made use of all manner of insinuation both with rich and poor for
the gaining of their affection, thereby to gain them to his Imposture also. But
our Savior Christ, and his Apostles did quite the contrary, freely convincing
all Men of their sins without having regard to any thing else but the faithful
discharge of the Mission on which they were sent; which instead of reconciling
men to their persons, provoked the World against them, and they sufficiently
experienced it from the ill usage which they found therein.

2. Mahomet, the easier to draw over the Arabians to his Party, indulged them
by his Law in all those passions and corrupt affections, which he found them
strongly addicted to, especially those of Lust and War, which those Barbarians
above all the Nations of the Earth were by their natural inclinations most
violently carried after, and therefore he allows them a plurality of wives, and
a free use of their female slaves for the satisfying of their Lust, and makes
it a main part of his Religion for them to fight against, plunder, and destroy
all that would not be of it. But Jesus Christ and his Apostles allowed no such
practices, but strictly prohibited all manner of sin, how much soever in
reputation among men, even to the forbidding of many things till then allowed
and held lawful among those who where called God's own people, and therefore
instead of seeking the favor of Men by indulging them in their lusts and
sinful practices, they laid a much stricter restraint upon them than was ever
done before.

3dly. Mahomet, to please his Arabians, retained in the Religion which he
taught them, most of those Rites and Ceremonies which they had been accustomed
to under that which he abolished, and also the Temple of Mecca, in which they
were chiefly performed. But Jesus Christ without having any regard to the
pleasing of Men, abolished both the Temple and the Law, which the Jews were so
bigoted unto, and also the total worshipping of God by Sacrifices, without
being at all influenced to the contrary by that extravagant fondness, which he
knew the whole World had then for them.

4. Mahomet, when he found any of his new Laws not so well to serve his return,
craftily shifted the scene, and brought them about to his purpose by such
alterations, as would best suit therewith; and therefore when his making his
Kebla toward Jerusalem did not so well please his Countrymen, he turned it
about again toward Mecca, and ordered all his Pilgrimages thither, as in the
time of their Idolatry. And the like changes he made in many other particulars
according as he found his interest required. And this is that which every
Impostor must do. For interest being the end, which all such aim at, it is
impossible that they can so well lay their designs in order to it, but that
emerging changes in the one will frequently require changes in the other also.
But Jesus Christ never made the least alteration in any of the doctrines or
precepts which he delivered, but what he first taught both he and his Disciples
immutably persisted in without at all regarding how violently all the interests
of the World ran counter against them herein. And what can be a more certain
evidence that none such was the bottom which they were built upon.

5. Mahomet under pain of death forbad all manner of Disputes about his
Religion, and nothing could be a wiser course to prevent its follies and
absurdities from being detected and exposed. For they being such as could never
stand the trial of a rational Examination, they must all have soon been
exploded, had every man been allowed the free use of his reason to inquire into
them. But Christ and his Apostles direct the quite contrary course. For our
Savior bids the Jews search the Scriptures for the trial of those truths which
he taught them, ( John 5. v. 39.) And the Noble Beroeans are commended, that
they did so, before they would receive those doctrines of the Christian
Religion, which were preached unto them, Acts 17. v. 11. And St. Paul gives us
this general rule, first to prove or try all things, and then to hold fast that
only which we find to be good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 21. It is only error and
falsehood that desires to shelter it self in the dark, and dares not expose it
self to an open view and trial. But Truth being always certain of its own
stability, makes use of no art to support it self, but dares venture it self
abroad on its own foundation only, and boldly offers it self to every Man's
search; and the more it is sifted and examined into, the more bright and
refulgent will it always appear. And since Christianity from the first ever
took this course, (as it still does wherever purely professed) and instead of
prohibiting Disputes about it, invites all Men to search and examine thereinto;
this sufficiently argues, how certain the first Teachers of it were of its
Truth, and that no cheat or Imposture could ever be intended thereby.

6. Mahomet made choice of a People first to propagate his Imposture among, who
were of all Men most fitted to receive it; and that on two accounts: 1. Because
of the indifferency which they were then grown to as to any Religion at all;
And, 2. Because of the great ignorance they were in of all manner of Learning
at that time, when he first vented his Forgeries among them, there being then
but only one Man among all the Inhabitants of Mecca that could either write or
read. For who are more fit to be imposed on, than the ignorant? and who can be
more easy to receive a new Religion, than those who are not prepossessed with
any other to prejudice them against it? The Papists, who, next Mahomet, have
the greatest claim to Imposture, as to those errors which they teach, very
well understand how such a Cause is to be served by both these Particulars; and
therefore make it their business, as much as they can, to keep their own People
in ignorance, and pervert all those they call Heretics to Atheism and
Infidelity, that so having no Religion at all, they may be the better prepared
again to receive theirs. And that there are so many Atheists now among us, it
is too well known, how much it is owing to this their Hellish artifice against
us. But all was quite contrary as to those whom Christ and his Apostles first
preached our holy Religion unto. Our Savior did not choose such ignorant Times
to come among us in, or a People so indifferent in Religion, first to manifest
himself unto. For the Jews were so far from being weary of that Religion, which
they had so long professed, when he first appeared in his Mission among them,
that they were then grown into the contrary extreme; a very extravagant
bigottry and superstition concerning it; so that nothing was more difficult,
than to withdraw them from it; nor could any thing be more offensive to them,
than an offer tending thereto; and so it continues with them, even to this day.
And the case was not much otherwise as to all the rest of Mankind; the Gentiles
being then grown almost as tenacious of their Idolatry, as the Jews of their
Law; and Learning was in that Age among both at the highest pitch, that ever it
was in the World; and consequently, Men were never less disposed, than at that
time, to receive a new Religion, or ever better able to defend their old. And
therefore had Christianity been an Imposture, it could never have escaped in
such an Age as that a full detection, or ever have been able to have born up
against it; such inquisitive Heads and piercing Wits, as were then in the
World, would have sifted it to the bottom, dived into its deepest Secrets, and
unravelled and laid open the whole Plot, and the prejudiced World would
immediately have crushed it to pieces thereon, so that it should never more
have appeared among Mankind. But the truth of our holy Religion was such, that
it boldly offered it self to this trial; and it seems to have chosen such an
Age as this, first to come into the World of purpose to undergo it, that so it
might be the better justified there by. And justified by it it was; for
although it were opposed by the utmost Violence of the prejudiced World, they
could get no ground of it; though it were thoroughly examined and diligently
searched into by the acutest and subtilest Wits of those Ages in which it first
appeared, they could never discover any fraud, or make out the least flaw
therein; but in spite of both it triumphed by its own naked Truth only over
all manner of opposition, and by God's Mercy continues still so to do, even to
this day. That a cheat and a fraud in a thing of this nature should be imposed
on Men totally ignorant and illiterate, or that such as they, when void of all
manner of Religion, (as the Men of Mecca for the most part were when Mahomet
began his Imposture among them) should be easy to embrace a new one, is no
hard matter to conceive; but that an Imposture should be received, and obtain
such prevalency over Men in so learned and discerning an Age, as that wherein
Christianity first appeared in the World, or that they who where then so
zealously addicted to the Religion, they had been educated in, whether Jews or
Gentiles should ever have been induced to forsake it for a new one, founded
only on a cheat and fraud, is what morally speaking, we may very well reckon
impossible.

7. Mahomet offered at no Prophecies, that he might not run the hazard of being
confuted by the Event. But Jesus Christ delivered many clear and plain
Prophecies, several of which respected that very Age in which he lived, and
were all in their proper time as plainly verified by the completion of them.

8. Mahomet offered at no Miracles in public, although continually called upon
and provoked to it by his opposers. For not being able to work any true ones or
would not hazard himself to a discovery by those which were Counterfeit. And
therefore all those things which he would have go for Miracles; that is, his
Converse with the Angel Gabriel, his Journey to Heaven, and the Armies of
Angels that helped him in his Battles, are only related by him as things acted
behind the Curtain, of which there was no other witness but himself alone, and
consequently there could be no witness on the other side ever to contradict
them. But Jesus Christ and his Apostles having the real power of working
Miracles did them openly in the sight of thousands, where all manner of
opportunity was given to every spectator to examine into them, and try whether
they were true or no; and therefore had there been any cheat or fraud in them,
it is not possible to conceive how they should have escaped a discovery. And
yet no such discovery could ever be made, which was so convincing an argument
of their truth and reality, that even the bitterest enemies of our holy
Religion from the first yielded in this particular, and both Jews and Heathens
allowed all those miraculous Works, which are related of our Savior and his
Apostles in the Books of the New Testament to have been really and truly
wrought by them, as has been afore-observed. And indeed the evidence was too
manifest to be denied, since those very blind that received their sight, those
dumb that were enabled to speak, those deaf that were restored to their
hearing, those lame that were made to walk, and those dead that were raised
again to life, lived many years after to be as standing Monuments of the truth
of those things, which no one could contradict. And therefore the Opposers of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ have all along rather chosen to invalidate the
authority of those Miracles, than deny the truth and reality of them.

For they allowing the matters of fact object that there are other Powers lower
than the divine, that are able to bring them to pass; and therefore, although
those Works were wrought, they do not yet prove either the persons or the
doctrines which they taught to come from God, and consequently can give no such
evidence, as that which we insist upon from them for the truth of that Religion
which we profess; That others by Magic Art have done the same things; That the
Scriptures themselves tell us so of Jannes, and Jambres, and Simon Magus; and
profane Writers of Apollonius Tyanoeus, Apuleius, and others; that both Moses
and Jesus Christ knew this very well, and therefore forewarned their Disciples
against it, telling them that false Prophets should arise, who should show
signs and wonders to deceive, if possible, the very Elect; and that they should
take care not to hearken to them. And therefore, say they, if signs and wonders
can be wrought by false Prophets, how can they be evidences for the true? Or
how can we at all rely upon them for the verifying of any doctrine which they
deliver unto us? Or if those Miracles, which were wrought by them who are sent
of God, be only true Miracles, and all others false ones, how shall we
distinguish the one from the other, so as by them to discern, whether the
doctrines be of God or no?

But these Difficulties will be easily removed, and the Miracles of our Savior
and his Apostles, as they are allowed to be truly wrought by them, so also will
they as truly prove the Doctrines which they taught to come from God, if you
will but consider these following Particulars.

1. Miracles are works done, which are strange and amazing to us, as being
brought to pass out of the ordinary road, and in a manner which we cannot
comprehend; and these are of two sorts: 1. Such as exceed only the Power of Man
to effect them; and these we call signs or wonders; And, 2. Such as exceed the
Power of any created Being whatsoever; and these only are properly Miracles.

2. Wherever such Miracles are wrought, as are of this last sort, God alone
must be the Author of them; and therefore, wherever such are found, they
manifestly prove the Power of God cooperating with the Persons, at whose word
they are done; and with whomsoever it does thus cooperate, it necessarily
demonstrates their Mission from him, and puts such an Authentic Seal to the
Truth of the Doctrines which they teach, as cannot be denied.

3. Wherever a creating Power is necessary to the effect produced, or the
stated Laws of Nature are altered, there it is certain none but God himself can
be the Author of the Work done. For he alone is able to create; and he having
created all things according to his infinite Wisdom, and given to each their
proper Essence and Operations, he allows none but himself to alter the Natures
of them, or change that Course which he has put them into.

4. But within the Laws and Powers of Nature, there are abundance of things,
which exceed the Power of Man to effect, and therefore seem as Miracles to us,
which may be produced by other created Beings, and these are evil spirits as
well as good.

5. To the producing of these effects, evil spirits as well as good are enabled
two manner of Ways: 1. By their greater Knowledge of the Powers of Nature; And,
2. By the greater Agency which they have to apply them to effect. For,

6. There are a multitude of things in Nature, that those Spirits know the
Nature of, which we do not. For their Abilities of knowing are vastly above
ours, as not working by the dull Tools of Earth and Clay as we do, and their
Experience exceedingly greater, as having known the Works of God from the
beginning, and by long Observation pried deep into the Secrets of them. If a
Chemist or a Mathematician, by his Skill in the Powers of Nature, can do many
things, which to the ignorant and unlearned shall seem as Miracles, (as we
often find) how much more can those knowing Spirits do so, whose Knowledge of
the Powers of Nature is vastly more above all ours put together, than the
highest and perfectest of ours is above that of the most ignorant that lives
among us. But,

7. As those Spirits have a vastly greater Knowledge of the Powers of Nature
than we can have, so also have they a vastly greater Power to apply them to
effect. For they are of a much greater agility in their motion, of a much finer
substance to penetrate into things, and actuate them into operation; and also
of a much stronger agency or power to work than we have, and which, no doubt,
they are endowed more or less with, according to the different orders and
degrees in which God has created them; and by both these together, that is,
their greater Knowledge of natural Causes, and their greater Power to apply
them to effect, can they do a great many things within Nature's limits, which
exceed all the Powers of Men to effect, and seem as miraculous and wonderful
unto us, when ever brought to pass.

8. Good Spirits never work those Miracles, but in subserviency to the divine
Will, as they are necessary for the effecting of those things which God has
ordained by their Ministry to bring to pass. And to them those Miracles
mentioned in Scripture, which exceed not the Power of such created Beings, may
be referred as the immediate Authors of them; it not being likely that God
would interpose his immediate Power, excepting only in such cases, as where
there was need of it. For why should the Lord himself put his hand to that
work, which may as well be discharged by the Ministry of his Servants?

9. Evil Spirits having in a great measure the same Knowledge of Natural Causes
as the good, and the like Power to bring them to effect can also work the like
wonders, and by God are often permitted so to do, both for the trial of Men,
and also for other good Causes, which to him of his infinite Wisdom seem
fitting; and we have a plain instance of it in the Case of Job.

10. Evil Spirits have not only this Power of working the like Wonders, which
Good Spirits do, but also another, which Good Spirits will never make use of;
that is, by juggle, delusion, and deceit to imitate those true and proper
Miracles, which none but God himself can really effect. And thus by the
delusion of the Devil was a cheat put upon Saul in the raising of Samuel to him
from the dead. For really, to raise Samuel from the dead, none but God could,
and therefore that appearance, which Saul saw, was no more than a false
appearance, contrived by the Devil to put a cheat and delusion upon him. And of
this same sort may we reckon the Miracles which Jannes and Jambres wrought in
imitation of Moses. For to turn a Rod into a Serpent and Water into Blood, or
to cause Frogs to come up upon the Land (in which three Particulars they did
the same thing by their enchantments, that Moses did by the hand of God) are
Works, which, if really done, require the creating Power to bring them to
effect, which none but God has; and therefore in this case the Devil acted for
them, not by his effecting, but only by his deluding Power. And such Miracles
the Scripture calls (...); i. e. Lying or false Miracles, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
which are not really wrought, but only made so to appear by the juggle and
delusion of Satan.

11. Those cheats and delusions of the Devil, whereby he imitates the true and
real Miracles of God, which he cannot work, are only in transient Effects, like
those of Jugglers upon a Stage, never in such as are lasting and permanent. And
where the Effect is totally transient, God's Works are often so far above the
Devil's Imitation, that even in these there will be still a multitude of
Particulars, wherein he can have no power, as much as by juggle or delusion, to
do any thing like unto them.

12. Whatsoever signs or wonders are wrought by Magicians or false Prophets,
must be referred to one of these two Heads; that is, that they are either the
Devil's Works, or the Devil's Delusions: and the Scriptures, which tell us of
Magicians and false Prophets working such signs and wonders, do in many places
referr them hereto.

13. Those signs or wonders which are really wrought by the Devil and his Evil
Spirits, are to be distinguished from those which are wrought by the Power of
Angels or Good Spirits, by these following Marks: 1. That Angels or Good
Spirits never work those Wonders, but in subserviency to the Will of God, for
the promoting of Truth and Righteousness; but the Devil and his Evil Spirits
only for the promoting of Error and Wickedness. 2. Angels or Good Spirits
never cooperate in the production of those Wonders with any Prophet or
Teacher, but such only as being sent of God, are good and righteous Persons;
but the Devil and his Evil Spirits only with such, as not being sent of God,
are Evil like themselves. 3. Angels or Good Spirits never exert their Power to
work these Wonders, but in things serious and grave, whereby either the Good of
Men or the Honor of God is promoted; but the Devil and his Evil Spirits do it
mostly in things mischievous both to God's Honor and Man's Good, or else in
such trivial and foolish matters, as are beneath God or his holy Angels to be
concerned in. And by the same Marks also may we distinguish God's Miracles from
the Devils Juggles, and those wonderful Works which the Hand of the Almighty
really effects from those false Appearances, which the Devil makes in
imitation of them to put a cheat and a delusion upon us. Which Particulars
being premised, the Answer to the foregoing Objections will be as follows.

1. We do acknowledge that abundance of very wonderful Works may be effected
by Powers lower than the divine, and that not only by Good Spirits, but also by
Evil.

2. That therefore such Works alone are never sufficient proof of a divine
Mission, unless corroborated by such concurring circumstances, as prove them
not to be from Evil Spirits, but only from Good.

3. That wherever such wonderful Works are done at the word of a wicked Man,
or to a wicked purpose, ( i. e. either to influence to a wicked practice, or to
give credit to some false doctrine) or else in such mean and trivial cases as
are beneath the Majesty of God, or his Ministering Spirits to be concerned in,
there we may be sure that he that does those Works, how much soever he may
pretend to a divine Mission, is only a false Prophet; and that it is not by the
Power of God or his Good Spirits, but only by the Power of the Devil and his
Wicked Spirits that they are wrought; and against those Wonders is it, and the
Workers of them, that Moses warns the Jews, and Jesus Christ his Disciples,
that they should be aware of them.

4. Where they, who work those Wonders, are holy and righteous Men, and do not
teach any Doctrine contrary to the certain Dictates of Natural Religion, or the
Revelations of God before given unto us, and the Wonders which they work are in
such serious and grave Matters, as are not unworthy of God, or his Ministering
Spirits to be concerned in, there we have no reason to suspect Satan's Power in
the effecting of them; and therefore such Works may, although not of themselves
alone, yet with these concurring circumstances be sufficient proof of the truth
of any Doctrine which they give testimony unto. For although they cannot be
proved to be immediately from God, because produceable by inferior Beings, yet
with these circumstances accompanying them, they must at least appear to be the
Works of his Ministering Spirits, who can bear testimony to nothing, but what is
from God, whose Will they are in all things subservient unto.

5. As such Works, which the Devil and his Evil Spirits can do, are not of
self-sufficient proof to a divine Mission, so neither are such which he can by
juggle or delusion imitate, because Men may be deceived by the one as well as
the other; and therefore the same concurring circumstances are necessary to
these also, and by the same Marks are they to be tried, whether they be of God,
or no.

6. But where the Works are such, as no created Being can either really
produce, or by juggle or delusion imitate, there those Works do of themselves
alone prove a divine Mission, and give an authentic Seal of undeniable Truth
to every Doctrine thus revealed unto us.

7. Although therefore it should be allowed, that some of the Miracles, which
Christ and his Apostles wrought, might be produceable by Powers lower than the
divine; yet since they who did them were most holy and righteous Persons, and
did not teach any Doctrine, contrary either to the Dictates of Natural
Religion, or the Revelations of God before given unto Men; and the Miracles
themselves were not in such mean and trivial cases, as are related of
Apollonius Tyanoeus, and others like him; with these circumstances they
sufficiently appear to be, if not immediately from the hand of God, yet at
least from his Ministering Spirits, and their Works; since all done in
subserviency to the divine Will, do as thoroughly prove a divine Mission,
wherever they evidently appear to be theirs, as those of God himself. That
Christ and his Apostles were most holy and righteous Persons, and taught no
Doctrine, which was in the least contrary to the Dictates of Natural Religion,
has been before shown; and how far their Miracles were from being in mean and
trivial matters, the Works themselves make evident: And it is as certain, that
no Doctrine of theirs ever contradicted in the least any divine Revelation
afore-given unto Men. For Jesus Christ and his Apostles everywhere allow both
the Law and the Prophets to be from God. Had they taught any thing which would
have charged a falsehood on either, they must then indeed have been said to
contradict divine Revelations afore-given, and would thereby have fallen under
that character and mark of false Prophets, which I have above laid down; but
they were so far from this, that the Law and the Prophets were the groundwork,
which they founded all their Doctrines upon. For the Law contained in Types and
Shadows and the Prophets in their Prophecies and dark Sayings, whatever the
Gospel has in substance and reality since clearly delivered unto us, and laid
down all that in the first Rudiments, which Christ and his Apostles afterward
built up into perfection in that holy Religion, which they have given unto us.
And therefore, although the Gospel has abolished the Law, it was not by
contradicting or condemning it, but by perfecting and fulfilling it in that
manner, as all the Prophets fore-showed that it should.

8. But the Miracles of Jesus Christ and his Apostles were most of them
undeniably such, as could not be produced but by the immediate hand of God
himself, as necessarily requiring the creating Power to effect them; and also
of that permanency, as allowed no room for juggle or delusion to take place in
them. For what other Power but that of the Almighty could raise a Man, who had
been four days dead, again to life? Or what other hand, but that of the Creator
himself, could make him see, who had been without the natural organs of Sight
from his very birth? Or what but the same Power, which first formed Man of the
dust of the Earth, could restore him in so many instances, as our Savior and
his Apostles did, to health and perfection, when the very Parts and Vessels
necessary thereto were thoroughly perished; and in so miraculous a manner, with
a word of their mouth, bring back total privations again to their former
habits? Or what craft of Satan can reach as much as to an imitation of such
wonderful Works as these, which left behind them for many years after, effects
of lasting permanency in the persons cured, not only to be Monuments of the
things done, but also undeniable evidences of the truth and reality of them? It
would be too long to go over all the Miracles of this nature, which Christ and
his holy Apostles did for the confirmation of those holy Truths which they
taught. These already mentioned are sufficient to show, that some of their
Miracles at least were such, as are above the Powers of all created Beings
either to effect or imitate; and therefore these certainly must be allowed to
be from God alone without possibility of Imposture deceit, or delusion in them;
and in that they are so, they must necessarily prove the Mission of them, at
whose word they were done, to be from him also, and consequently become a
witness to the truth of every Doctrine delivered by them, as firm, certain, and
infallible, as the Veracity of God himself, which can never err or deceive for
ever. And so much of the fifth Mark of Imposture.

SECT. VI.
VI. No Imposture, when entrusted with many Conspirators, can be long
concealed. For what Plot or Conspiracy have we ever known or heard of, which
has been thus managed, and has not had some false Brother or other to
discover it? especially if there be any great Wickedness intended by it, or any
great Danger attending the execution of it (as mostly is in such designs.) For
then if the thing it self does not work the Conscience into an abhorrence, the
fear of the Consequence may at least deterr from it; and it seldom fails but
one of these two, in all such cases, drives some or other into a discovery; and
in this Age of Plots we have instances enough hereof. And what Plot can be more
wicked than to impose a false Religion upon Mankind? and what can be more
dangerous than to attempt it? What has been already said, sufficiently proves
both these Particulars; and therefore if the first planting of Christianity
were such a Plot; certainly one of these two, that is, either the Wickedness,
or the Danger, would have wrought some or other into a discovery of it. For
they were not a few that were admitted thereinto. They were at least 1 Cor.
15.6.
five hundred that were in that, which you must call the greatest secret of it;
I mean the Resurrection of our Savior from the dead: For that is the main
Article of our holy Christian Religion; the truth of which proves all the rest,
and without which all the rest must have fallen to the ground, and our whole
Faith become 1 Cor. 15.17.
vain. And therefore had but any one of these five hundred, who are asserted to
have been the Witnesses of it, discovered the thing to have been only a
Conspiracy of Imposture between them, this discovery must have laid open the
whole design, and put a total end thereto. And were not the thing certainly
true, which they attested, it is scarce to be conceived, but that some or other
of them must have done so. Among the twelve Apostles, one was found a Traitor
to his Master; and how much more then may we expect that there should have been
one such among five hundred? and especially in a case where all ought to have
been so; that is, to discover a Plot against the Souls of all Mankind, and
deliver the World from being imposed on thereby. Among so many it scarce
happens, but some or other prove false to the best Cause; and how hard is it
then to conceive, that in such a number none should be found to betray the
worst? And can we call it any other than the worst, if it be such an Imposture,
as you would have it to be? Were Christianity really such, and this Doctrine of
the Resurrection of our Savior totally the Forgery of those who attested it,
so many as five hundred could never have all kept the Secret; or if they should
out of love to their own invention, or any self ends which they might have
therein, be inclined so to do; yet punishment, pain, and torture, use to extort
the most hidden devices, and make the most obstinate offenders, the closest
designers, and the most reserved plotters of mischief to come to a Confession.
And what punishments, what pains, what tortures did those first Witnesses of
this main and fundamental Article of our Faith go through for the sake of that
Testimony which they did bear thereto? and yet did any one of them ever flinch
from it? did any one of them ever retract, what he had attested concerning it?
Prove but this, and then you will say something to make out the Charge, which
you lay against it. But they were so far here-from, that they all persisted in
it to the last; and not only so, but were every one of them ready to shed their
blood for a witness to the truth of what they asserted, and a great many of
them actually did so, and all the terrors, threats, and tortures of the
Persecutours were not able to deterr them herefrom. And what greater evidence
then can there be given to any truth in the World, which depends upon matter of
fact, than that which Christianity has from the Testimony of those Men, in so
great a number and such a manner bearing witness thereto?

SECT. VII.
VII. The last Mark of an Imposture is, That it can never be established
without force and violence. For if it has wicked Men for its Authors, worldly
Interest for its End, Falsity and Error for its Doctrines, and receives its
Rise from the craft and fraud of its first Promoters, as I have already shown,
the search of the inquisitive will soon find it out, and Mankind will not long
bear the Imposture, unless they be overruled by Violence, and have all
Objections against it silenced with the Sword at their Throats. This was the
Method which Mahomet took to establish that false Religion, which he invented.
For he prosecuted with War all that would not submit thereto, and made it no
less than Death for any to gainsay it, or as much as raise the least dispute
against any of the Doctrines of it. And without his doing this, the reason of
all Mankind must have appeared against it, and it could never have stood. And
the Romanists have learnt from him to take the same course, as to those
Doctrines of Imposture which they have super-added to the Christian Religion.
For they declare all those to be Heretics, and prosecute them with Sword,
Fire, and Faggot, that refuse to receive them; and thus by the Power of their
Dragoons and their Inquisitions they have established, and still keep up those
gross errors in their Church, which neither Reason nor Religion can ever
support, and the same must be done as to all other falsities imposed on mankind
before they can have any firm footing among them. For it is only force and
violence, that can cram such things down men's throats, which their reason and
their judgment must ever renounce. The unthinking multitude may for a while be
carried away by the craft of the Impostor and by the arts of Hypocrisy and
Delusion be made easy to swallow any forgery that shall be offered unto them,
but when the heat of the first zeal is over, and the matter comes to be
examined into by reason, and coolly scanned through by the inquisitive,
Imposture cannot stand the Test, but mu^^ soon be laid open, blasted and
exploded thereon. And therefore unless it be accompanied with force to suppress
this inquiry and has power on its side to compel Men to acquiesce therein,
how much soever it may delude Men at first, it can never obtain any lasting
establishment among them. And this has been the case of all the Impostors
which have ever yet appeared in the World without this power to back them, and
how great progress soever any of them may have made in the first heat, they
have all at length been detected, and exploded, and sunk to nothing for want of
this support on their side to keep them up. For nothing but truth can of it
self alone stand the Test of ages upon its own bottom only. Falsehood and
error are too weak for such a Trial, and therefore unless supported by some
external strength and fenced thereby against all assaults of opposers they must
necessarily fall to the ground and again come to nothing, and where education
or the force of long received custom is not strong enough for this (and neither
can in the first propagating of an Imposture) there the sword must come in to
over rule all, or nothing of this nature can be established among Men. But
Jesus Christ and his Apostles instead of making use of any such force to
establish the Religion which they taught, had all the force and powers of the
World in opposition against it, and yet in spite of the World it at length
prevailed over the World by the dint of its own truth only, and after having
stood the assault of all manner of persecutions, as well as other oppositions
for three hundred years together carried the victory over the fiercest of its
enemies, and made the greatest of them, even the Roman Emperors themselves to
submit thereto, and all this while it had sharpened against it, not only the
Sword of the Superior Powers, but also the tongues of the slanderers, and the
wits of all the learned of those times. But how much soever it was oppressed by
the first of these, blackned by the second, and sifted and searched into by the
last, it stood all these Trials without losing any thing thereby, but at last
came out of them all, like Gold out of the Furnace, still of the same weight,
fineness, and purity, without receiving from that fire, which consumes all
things else, the least wast or diminution thereof. Had it been false and owed
its Original only to Deceit and Imposture, it would have needed all those means
of Violence for its establishment and support, but since it thus stood not only
without them, but also in spite of them; when all armed on the adversaries
side for three Centuries together in bitter opposition against it, what greater
argument can we have for the truth thereof? For can you think that Falsehood and
Imposture could ever have held out with such steady and unshaken constancy for
so many years, as Christianity thus did? or that it is possible for any sort of
Men so long to have born all this for the sake of a Lie? Falsehood can have no
foundation for such a Constancy, or Imposture any reason to engage Men thereto.
The interest of this World is ever the bottom and foundation of all such
Forgeries; and therefore, as soon as punishments, and persecutions make it to
be no Man's interest to be for them, they ever fall of themselves for want of
that foundation on which they afore-stood. But Christianity having come into
the World contrary to all the interests of it, and in its very infancy thus
stood the shock of all the powers thereof engaged in persecution against it, as
I have mentioned; and not only so, but also prospered and became established in
the midst of the hottest assaults thereof, this plainly shows that it had
another kind of foundation on which it was built, a foundation of Truth and
Righteousness, and not only so, but a foundation that was laid and fixed in
such a manner by the hand of God himself as never to be shaken. For what truth
of it self alone could ever have made its way into the World in such a manner
as the Christian Religion did, or ever have gained against all the powers
thereof such a prevalency over it without some extraordinary assistance
conducting and helping it therein? The strongest Truths we know are crushed by
such means of violence, as that encountered with, and even first principles
themselves have been overpowered by them. And therefore that Christianity
should thus enter the World, and thus from its first Entry bear up against such
long and terrible Trials of persecution and oppression, as it met with, without
the least flinching under them, must be owing to somewhat more than its own
bare truth. And what but the hand of God himself backing and strengthening it
in the conflict, could be sufficient to give it such a victory therein? For
that a few poor Fishermen, the Disciples of a Crucified Master, should without
power, learning, or reputation, or any other of the interests, or favors of
the world on their side, be able to introduce a new Religion into the World
directly opposite to all the interests, pleasures, and prevailing humors of
it, as Christianity then was, and that this Religion in spite of all the
powers, cunning, malice, and learning of the World joined together in most
fierce opposition, and bitter persecution against it for three hundred years
together should not only bear up, but also at length prevail over the World,
and subject the highest powers therein to the obedience of its Laws is an event
so strange and wonderful, and morally speaking so far above the possibility of
all ordinary means to bring it to pass, as plainly manifests the
extraordinary working of God himself therein. And for my part had Christian
Religion no other Miracle to bear witness thereto, this alone would be Miracle
enough to me sufficiently to convince me of the truth thereof. At least since
it thus entered into the World, and thus became established in it, it must be
allowed to be so far differing from an Imposture in that method of violence
which that needs for its establishment, as to be totally opposite thereto, and
in this particular (as I hope I have shown of all the rest) not to have the
least mark or character thereof.

And thus far having laid before you all the obvious marks of Imposture, and
proved that none of them can belong to Christianity, I hope what has been said
will sufficiently infer the conclusion, which I have undertaken to make out
unto you, That our Holy Christian Religion cannot be such an Imposture, as you
would have it to be, but really is that sacred truth of God, which you are all
bound to believe.

It is too common with mankind to frame their judgments according to their
inclinations, and upon very slight grounds hastily to run away with Idea's of
things, when they correspond with the prevailing bent of their affections,
which, whenever put into a true light before them, must all appear to be false
and wrong taken. And this I reckon to be your case. Your inclinations strongly
leading you into Infidelity, you would fain have Christianity be an Imposture,
and therefore have over-easily and hastily been induced on very weak grounds to
believe it so to be. And that you may be undeceived in so dangerous and
destructive an error, I have endeavored in the easiest and most familiar
manner I could think of, to put this business in a true light before you. 1. By
letting you see what an Imposture is in that true picture, which I have drawn
of it in the Life of him who was really and truly such an Impostor, as you
would have Jesus Christ to be; And, 2. By examining into the Marks and
Properties which naturally belong to every such Imposture, and showing of each
of them that they cannot belong to that holy Religion which we profess. And I
hope, when you have considered all this thoroughly, you will see how much you
have been deceived in those Opinions, which you have so precipitately given up
your selves unto.

You cannot but be sensible how great the stress is, which we lay on this
matter, and how very ill your case must be, if we are in the right and you in
the wrong; and therefore the thing is of sufficient importance to deserve your
most serious consideration, and that in such a manner as to make you lay aside
all those groundless prejudices and wrong byasses which may obstruct an
impartial inquiry; and if you will be pleased, for the sake of your own Souls,
to do thus much, I am content to leave the success of what I now offer unto
you, to God's grace, and your own judgments.

As to the particular reasons which you may allege for your disbelief of our
holy Christian Religion, whether they be Objections drawn against it either
from History, Philosophy, or the inconsistencies which you imagine you find in
the Books of holy Writ in which it is delivered down unto us, it is not my
purpose now to enter into any Disputes with you about them. That which I at
present purpose, is not so much to consider those premises, as the conclusion
which you pretend to draw herefrom, That Christianity must therefore be an
Imposture, and from the nature of such an Imposture, and the nature of our holy
Christian Religion laid in a true light, and compared together with each other
to evidence unto you the inconsistency of this Charge; and if what I have now
said can be of any force to let you in to a clear sight of this matter, it will
be totally needless for me to meddle any further. For all those Objections,
which you pretend to have been the particular Reasons of your Infidelity, have
been already abundantly answered and confuted by others. But the opinion which
you have conceited that Christianity is an Imposture, having so far
pre-possessed your judgment, as to influence it against all things of this
nature that can be proposed unto you, it will be in vain to offer any thing
farther as to those particulars, till this prejudice be removed; and were it
once removed, what has already been said in answer to them, will be abundantly
sufficient to give you full satisfaction. Although this method may seem
illogical thus to assault the Conclusion without meddling with the Premises
from which you pretend to have deduced it; yet it is no other, than what you
your selves have necessitated me unto by taking up the Conclusion first, and
the Premises afterward. Had you indeed first began with those Reasons which
you offer for your Infidelity, and been really by the conviction of them led
into this Conclusion, That Christianity is an Imposture, it would then have
been proper and fitting that I should have begun there too, and no otherwise
have endeavored to overthrow the Conclusion, but by first overthrowing the
Premises from whence you deduced it. But since it is well known that the
Conclusion has been of greater force with the most of you to make you assent
to the Premises, than the Premises to prove the Conclusion; and it is only
the fond conceit you have taken up in compliance with ill-company or worse
inclinations, that Christianity must be an Imposture, that has made any of
those arguments seem so conclusive with you, which are brought to prove it;
this makes it necessary for me to begin my endeavors for your conviction at
that same point, where you first began your Infidelity, and to attack the
Conclusion in the first place, before any success can be expected toward the
setting you right as to any thing else. For as long as you are wilfully bent
out of a mere fondness for Infidelity to hold Christianity to be an Imposture,
this will make every Argument seem strong to you that is brought to prove it,
and every Solution insufficient which is given thereto, and render all means
for your Conviction utterly ineffectual unto you. And therefore this being in
truth the first Error which has influenced your Mind to all the rest, this
must be first removed; and if what I have said can be of any force in order
hereto, by letting you see how much you have been mistaken herein, this I hope
will remove that prejudice, which has hindered you from seeing the strength of
those Arguments, which have been already offered for your Conviction as to all
other particulars of that Infidelity which you have given up your selves unto,
and make you clearly discern how much you have been mistaken in them also, and
thereby become the means of delivering your Souls from that terrible danger,
which you expose them unto; the accomplishing of which is the whole End, Scope,
and Design of the Discourse, which I now offer unto you.

But here perchance it may be asked, and I think it reasonable to give you
satisfaction herein, Why I have set forth unto you an Imposture by so foul a
picture as that of Mahomet? And to this I have these two Answers to return? 1.
Because I have none other to do it by, Mahomet being the only Impostor, who
could ever prevail so far, as to establish his Imposture, and make it a
standing Religion in the World; and had it not gone so far, it could not have
been such an Imposture, as you would have Christianity to be, or at all fit to
be compared with it in the Argument now before us. And, 2dly. How foul soever
the Picture of Mahomet may be, we have no reason from the nature of the thing
ever to imagine that any other Impostor can have a fairer, till you bring us an
instance thereof. And these two I hope may be sufficient to clear me from
acting any way unfairly in this matter, as if I had made choice of the Life of
so wicked a person as Mahomet therein to picture out an Imposture unto you only
to make it appear in the foulest dress it is capable of, the better to
advantage thereby that Cause which I handle.

But to the first of these Answers, I foresee this Objection will be made: If
Mahomet be the only Impostor that ever established his Imposture in the World,
how then has it come to pass, that there have been so many false Religions
among Mankind? To which I reply, Not by Imposture, such as Mahomet's was, and
such as Christianity must be, if it be such an Imposture as your charge against
it supposes, but by corruptions insensibly growing on from that Religion,
which was first true. The first Religion which God gave unto Man was that
Natural Religion, which he imprinted on his very Nature, when he first created
him, and as much of that as escaped that ruin, with which the fall overwhelmed
him, was that whereby God was worshipped and served by him afterward; only
with this addition, That whereas Man in his innocence addressed himself to God
immediately of himself alone, and in his own Name, he could never after his
fall from it have any more access unto him, but through a Mediator; God's
infinite purity and greatness on the one hand, and Man's infinite guilt and
vileness on the other after that fatal miscariage of our first parents did put
them at so vast a distance the one from the other, that in the nature of the
thing there could be no other way thenceforth of maintaining any Communion
between them; and therefore had not this way been found out again to bring Man
to God, he must totally have been estranged from him for ever after. But God of
his infinite Mercy having resolved not thus to cast us off, he appointed us a
Mediator as soon as we had fallen, and promised to send him in his appointed
time to take our Nature upon him, and therein pay down that price of redemption
for us; by virtue whereof, his Mediation should always be sufficient to obtain
mercy, and pardon, and acceptance for us. And this is that which was meant by
God*s promising immediately after the Fall, that the seed of the Woman should
break the Serpent's head; which being farther explained by After- Revelations;
the whole Religion of God's people after that was to offer up their Worship
unto him through hope in this Mediator, and all the Idolatry, Polytheism, and
other false Worships which after arose in the Heathen World, were all by such
corrupt deviations therefrom, as the superstitions of Men, the unfaithful way
of transmitting divine Revelations by tradition only, and the decay of all
divine Knowledge, occasioned thereby, in process of time, introduced among
them. For when Mankind began to increase after the Flood, and they were taught
from Noah their Forefather thus to worship God through hope in a Mediator, as
the knowledge of those divine Truths which he delivered to them began to decay,
and Superstition to increase among them they began to determine themselves to
such Mediators, as their own imaginations led them to fancy, and some chose
Angels and others Men deceased for this office; and in process of time erected
Temples and Images unto them, and honored them with divine Worship in order to
render them the more helpful and beneficent unto them. The Babylonians or
Chaldeans, who were the first formed State after the Flood, looked on Angels to
have been the Mediator's God had appointed, through whom they were to come unto
him; and for this reason directed their Worship to the Sun, and Moon, and the
rest of the Planets, which they fansied to be the Habitations Hence Aristotle
seems to have had his Doctrine of the Intelligences moving the Spheres; and
Plato that which he taught of the Stars being living Bodies. For it was the
Opinion of the Ancient Chaldeans, as it is of the Sabii now, who are descended
from them. That there was in each Star an Angel in the same manner as our Souls
are in our Bodies, and that the Stars are animated by these Angels, and hence
have all their Motion, and also that influence which they are supposed to have
over this World, and for this reason was it that they worshipped them.
, where those Angels dwelt; and also erected Images unto them, into which they
reckoned their influence and divine power did descend, and remain with them,
when those Luminaries themselves were set and disappeared in their Horizon, so
that their notion was to make their addresses through the Images to the Planets,
and through the Planets to the Angels that dwelt in them, and through the Angels
to God himself, whom they acknowledged to be the one supreme Being, who was the
Creator and Governor of all things. And this was the first Idolatrous
Religion, which was established in the World, and long prevailed over a great
part of it, and is still preserved in the East among the Sect of the Sabians
even to this day. But the Persians not liking the Worship of the Planets by
Images, would endure no other symbol to represent those glorious Luminaries by,
but fire only, of which they reckoned them to be Constituted; and therefore
wherever they prevailed, they destroyed all Images out of the Temples, and
placed fire in their stead: And from hence the Magi or the Worshippers of Fire
had their Original. But from their having one Symbol, they speedily came to the
asserting but of one Deity represented by it, which they would have to be
Light, and that of the mixture of this and Darkness all things in this World
were compounded; that Light was the cause or principle of all Good, and
Darkness the cause or principle of all Evil; and therefore under the Symbol of
Fire they worshipped Light as their God, but detested Darkness in the same
manner as we do the Devil. And from hence Manes the Heretic had his two
Principles, which he would have introduced into the Christian Religion. But
above both these they acknowledged a supreme God, in respect of whom their God
Light, was but an inferior Deity, or a God Mediator, by whom they were to have
access unto him. And this Religion obtained through all Persia, and other Parts
on the East of it, and does there remain even unto this day among the Persees
in India, and the Inhabitants of the Province of Kerman, on the Southern Coast
of Persia But the Practice of the Babylonians or Chaldeans in worshipping their
Gods Mediators by Images obtained in all the Western Parts of the World. For
they holding, that they were to have access to God through Angels as their
Mediators, and to the Angels through the Planets, and to the Planets through
the Images which they erected to them, did give to those Images the names of
the Pla^ets, and under those names paid divine Worship unto them, which
Idolatry passing from Babylon or Chaldea into Arabia, and from thence to the
Egyptians and Phoenicians was by them carried into Greece, and from thence
spread it self into all Parts on this Western-side of the World, as that of the
Magi did on the Eastern. For the chief Gods of the Greeks as well as the Names
by which they were called, came from the Egyptians and Phoenicians, and were no
more than the Images, by which the Babylonians worshipped the Sun, Moon, and
other Planet with the Names of those Planets given unto them. Afterward indeed
they added to their number other Deities also, which were originally either
some of the fixed Stars, or else the Souls of Men departed, as of Bell or Belus
among the Babylonians, Abraham and Ismael among the Arabians, Orus and Osiris
among the Egyptians, Aesculapius and Hercules among the Greeks, and Romulus or
Quirinus among the Romans. For it early began a Custom among all the
Worshippers of Images, as well Greeks as Barbarians to Deify Men departed,
reckoning those who lived justly and righteously, or had made themselves
eminent by any great and worthy Actions in this life, to have those habitations
allotted them in the Heavens above, where they were in a Capacity to be
Mediators to God for them; and therefore they offered divine Worship to them as
such. And this was it that gave occasion to so many Apotheoses's or
Deifications among them, and so vastly increased the number of their Gods in
all the Idolatrous Parts of the World, and also the various Methods of
Superstition whereby they paid their Worship unto them. Yet they all still held
to their notion of one supreme God, and reckoned all the others to be no more
than God's Mediators under him. And this one God, whom they held to be made of
none, and to be the Maker or Father of all things else that are, was among the
Chaldeans of old (as still among the Sabians, who are the remainder of them)
called Deus Deorum, and among the Arabs, Allah Taal, i. e. the high or supreme
God; and agreeable hereto, among the Greeks, was there also their (...); i. e.
One supreme God, who was the Father both of Gods and Men. And thus far in
answer to your Question have I given you an account how all the false Religions
in the Heathen World had their Original; and herein I have been the longer for
the sake of two Reflections which are obvious for you to make hereon.

1. That the Notion of a Mediator between God and Man was that which did run
through all the Religions that ever were in the World, to the Coming of Jesus
Christ, and was the Fundamental Principle which prevailed in every one of them
as to all the Worship which was practiced in them, which could no otherwise
become so universal among Mankind but by a Tradition as universally delivered
unto them. And what can better account both for this Tradition, and also the
Universality of it, than what is delivered unto us in Scripture of our being
descended from one common Parent, who on his Fall from the favor of God having
had this promise of a Mediator made unto him, through whom we might be again
reconciled unto him, transmitted it to all his posterity.

2 dly. That the mistakes and errors about the Worship of God, and the Service
we owe unto him, which Men are apt to run into, when left to the conduct of
their own light only, are monstrous and endless, and therefore evidently
demonstrate the necessity of divine Revelations. For if God does expect from us
an account of our Actions, it is necessary he should give us a Law for the rule
of them; and if the Law of our Reason alone be insufficient for this (as from
the continual errors and endless absurdities, which mankind, when left to
themselves, have ever hitherto run into, it does evidently appear that it is:)
this demonstrably proves the necessity of another to supply its defect, and
that in our case we must have a Revealed Religion as well as a Natural, or else
we can have no certain certain Knowledge of the Will of God, or any of those
duties of Worship and Service which we are to perform toward him. And if this
proves the Necessity of such a Revealed Religion (as I think it undeniably must
to every one that believes God will account with us for what we do;) all that I
have farther to offer is, That you would thoroughly examine and consider that
holy Christian Religion, which we profess, and compare it with all the other
Religions, that are in the World; and if it do not appear vastly above them
all, the worthiest of God for him to give unto us, and the worthiest of us to
observe, and that not only in respect of the honor given to him, but also of
the improvement and perfection brought to our own Nature thereby, I will be
content that you shall then persist to believe it an Imposture, and, as such,
reject it for ever.

Humphrey Prideaux,

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Authors quoted in this Book.
Arabic Authors.
ABul Faraghius, a Physician of Malatia in Lesser Armenia, of the Christian
Religion, and the Sect of the Jacobites. He is an Author of eminent note in
the East, as well among Mahometans as Christians. His History of the Dynasties
is from the Creation of the World to the Year of our Lord 1284. It was
published at Oxford with a Latin Version by Dr. Pocock, A. D. 1663. He
flourished about the time where his History ends. His name at length is
Gregorius Ebn Hacim Abul Faraghi.

Abul Feda, an Author of great repute in the East for two Books which he
wrote: The first a General Geography of the World after the Method of Ptolemy;
and the other a General History, which he calls the Epitomy of the History of
Nations. He was born A. D. 1273. He finished his Geography A. D. 1321. Twenty
years after that he was advanced to the Principality of Hamah in Syria, from
whence he is commonly called Shahab Hamah, i. e. Prince of Hamah, where after
having Reigned three Years, two Months, and thirteen Days, he died A. D. 1345.
being Seventy two years old. He was by Nation a Turk, of the Noble Family of
the Jobidae, of which was Saladin the famous Sultan of Egypt. His name at
length is Ismael Ebn Ali Al Melec Al Moaiyad Amadoddin Abul Feda. Ecchellensis
quotes him by the name of Ismael Shiahinshiah.

Abunazar, a Legendary Writer of the Mahometans, much quoted by Hottinger.

Agar, a Book of great Authority among the Mahometans, says Guadagnol (page
165.) wherein an Account is given of the Life and Death of Mahomet. Joannes
Andreas makes great use of it under the name of Azaer, as does Bellonius in the
Third Book of his Observations under the name of Asaer. Guadagnol, who had a
Copy of the Book, calls it the Book Agar, and takes most of what he objects
against the Life and Actions of Mahomet out of it.

Ahmed Ebn Edris, an Author that writes in the defense of the Mohammedan
Religion against the Christians and the Jews.

Ahmed Ebn Yuseph, an Historian, who flourished A. D. 1599. for then he finished
his History.

Ahmed Ebn Zin Alabedin, a Nobleman of Hispahan in Persia of this last Age, who
has wrote the sharpest and acutest Book against the Christian Religion, in
defense of the Mohammedan, of any they have among them on this Argument. It was
published on this Occasion. Ecbar the Great Mogul, Great Grandfather to Aurang
Zeb, who at present reigns in India, for some Reasons of State making show of
encouraging the Christian Religion, did in the Year 1595. write to Matthias de
Albuquerque, then Viceroy of the Portuguese in India, for some Priests to be
sent to him to his Court at Agra. The Persons pitched upon for this Mission
were Jeronimo Xavier, then Rector of the College of the Jesuits at Goa, and
Emanuel Pigneiro and Benedict de Gois, two others of that Society. On their
coming to Agra, they were very kindly received by the Mogul, and had a Church
there built for them at his Charges, and many Privileges and Immunities granted
unto them, which on the death of Ecbar (which happened A. D. 1604.) were all
confirmed to them by his Successor Jehan Guire. At the Command of this Ecbar,
Xaverius wrote two Books in Persian (which is the Language of that Court); The
first the History of Jesus Christ, collected for the most part out of the
Legends of the Church of Rome, which he intended to be instead of the Gospel
among them; and the other called A Looking-Glass showing the Truth, which is a
defense of the Doctrines of that Gospel against the Mahometans. What the former
is, those who have the Curiosity to see what kind of Gospel the Jesuits preach
in the East, may satisfy themselves, for the Book is translated into Latin by
De Dieu, and was published by him with the Original, A D. 1639. This Gospel of
the Jesuits was first presented to Ecbar by Xaverius at Agra, A. D. 1602. But
the other Book was not published till a Year or two after. When it first came
abroad, it unluckily fell into the hands of this Learned Persian Gentleman, who
immediately wrote an Answer to it, which he calls The Brusher of the
Looking-Glass, wherein he makes terrible work with the Jesuit through the
advantages which he gave him by teaching the Idolatry and other Superstitions
and Errors of the Church of Rome for the Doctrines of Jesus Christ. When this
Book came abroad, it so alarmed the College de propaganda Fide at Rome, that
they immediately ordered it to be answered. The first who was appointed for
this Work was Bonaventura Malvasia, a Franciscan Friar of Bononia, who
published his Dilucidatio Speculi verum monstrantis, in answer to this Brusher,
A. D. 1628. But this, I suppose, not being judged so sufficient by the College,
they appointed Philip Guadagnol, another Franciscan Friar, to write a second
Answer thereto. And on this occasion he composed his Book styled Apologia pro
Christiana Religione, which was published at Rome first in Latin, A. D. 1631.
and after in Arabic, 1637. For this, I suppose, meeting with better approbation
from the College, they ordered it to be translated into that Language, and it
being accordingly done by the same Author, they sent it into the East to be
dispersed among the Mahometans for the defense of the Jesuit's Looking-Glass
against this rude Brusher of it. But his performance does by no means answer
the Design, abundance of his Arguments being drawn from the Authorities of
Popes and Councils, which will never convince an Infidel of the truth of the
Christian Religion, how much noise soever they may make with them among those
of their own Communion.

Al Bochari, an Eminent Writer of the Traditionary Doctrines of the Mohammedan
Religion. He is reckoned by Johannes Andreas, c. 3. and Bellonius, lib. 3. c.
4. to be one of the Six Doctors, who by the appointment of one of the Califs,
meeting at Damascus, first made an Authentic Collection of all those
Traditions which make up their Sonnah. His Book contains the Pandects of all
that relates either to their Law or their Religion, digested under their
several Titles in Thirty Books, and is the Ancientest and most Authentic which
they have of this matter, and next the Alcoran, of the greatest Authority among
them. He was born at Bochara in Cowarasmia, A.D. 809. and died A. D. 869.

Al Coran, i. e. The Book to be read, or the Legend, it is the Bible of the
Mahometans. The name is borrowed from the Hebrew Kara or Mikra (words of the
same root as well as signification with the Arabic Al Coran) by which the Jews
called the Old Testament, or any part of it; And so any part of the Mohammedan
Bible is called Alcoran. The whole together they call Al Moshap, i. e. The
Book, which also in respect of the Chapters, into which it is divided, they
call Al Furkan, from the Arabic word Faraka, which from the Hebrew Pharak
signifies to divide or distinguish; but others will have that Book to be so
called in respect of the Matter or Doctrine therein contained, because, say
they, it distinguishes Good from Evil.

Al Fragani, an Astronomer of Fragana in Persia, from whence his name Al
Fragani, i. e. Fraganensis, by which he is commonly called. His name at length
is Mohammed Ebn Katir Al Fragani. He wrote a Book called, The Elements of
Astronomy, which has been several times published in Europe at Nurenburg, A.D.
1537. at Paris, A. D. 1546. at Frankfort cum Notis Christmanni, A.D. 1590, in
Latin; and afterward by Golius in Arabic and Latin at Leiden, A. D. 1669. with
large Notes of great use for the understanding of the Geography of the East. He
flourished while Al Mamon was Calif, who died A. D. 833.

Al Gazali, a famous Philosopher of Tusa in Persia. He wrote many Books, not
only in Philosophy, but also in the defense of the Mohammedan Religion against
Christians, Jews, Pagans, and all others that differ therefrom, whereof one is
of more especial note entitled, The Destruction of Philosophers, which he wrote
against Al Farabius, and Avicenna, and some others of the Arab Philosophers,
who to solve the Monstrous Absurdities of the Mohammedan Religion, were for
turning many things into Figure and Allegory, which were commonly understood in
the literal sense. Those he violently opposes on this account, accusing them
of Heresy and Infidelity, as Corrupters of the Faith, and Subverters of
Religion, whereon he had the name of Hoghatol Eslam Zainoddin, i e. The
demonstration of Mahometism, and the honor of Religion. He was born A.D. 1058.
and died A. D. 1112. His name at length is Abu Hamed Ebn Mohammed Al Gazali Al
Tusi.

Al Jannabi, an Historian born at Jannaba, a City in Persia, not far from
Shiras. His History comes down to the Year of our Lord 1588. and therein he
tells us, that he went in Pilgrimage to Mecca, and from thence to Medina, to
pay his Devotions at the Tomb of the Impostor, in that Year of the Hegira which
answers to the Year of our Lord 1556. His name at length is Abn Mohammed
Mustapha Ebnol Saiyed Hasan Al Jannabi.

Al Kamus, i. e. The Ocean, a famous Arabic Dictionary, so called, because of
the Ocean of words contained in it. It was written by Mohammed Ebn Jaacub Ebn
Mohammed Al Shirazi Al Firauzabadi. He was a Person of great esteem among the
Princes of his time for his eminent Learning and Worth, particularly with
Ismael Ebn Abbas, King of Yaman, Bajazet King of the Turks, and Tamerlan the
Tartar, from the last of which he received a Gift of Five thousand pieces of
Gold at one time. He was born A. D. 1328. being a Persian by birth, but he
lived most at Sanua in Yaman. He finished his Dictionary at Mecca, and
dedicated it to Ismael Ebn Abbas, under whose Patronage he had long lived, and
afterward died at Zibit in Arabia, A. D. 1414. being near Ninety years old.

Al Kodai, an Historian. He wrote his History about the Year of our Lord 1045.
and died A. D. 1062. His name at length is Abu Abdollah Mohammed Ebn Salamah
Ebn Jaafar Al Kodai.

Al Masudi, an Historian. He wrote an History called the Golden Meadows, but in
what time he lived, I do not find. His name at length is Ali Ebn Hosain Al
Masudi. He wrote also another Book, wherein he makes it his business to
discover and expose the Fraud which the Christians of Jerusalem are guilty of
about lighting Candles at the Sepulcher of our Savior on Easter-Eve. For then
three Lamps being placed within the Chapel of the Sepulcher, when the Hymn of
the Resurrection is sung at the Evening-Service, they contrive that these three
Lamps be all lighted, which they will have believed to be by fire from Heaven,
and then a multitude of Christians of all Nations are present with Candles to
light them at this holy Fire, which has been a fraudulent Practice kept up
among them for many hundred years. And the Emperor Cantacuzenus was so far
imposed on by this Cheat that in his Third Apology for the Christian Religion
against the Mahometans he makes mention of it, and urges it against those
Infidels, as a Miracle, which being annually performed in their sight, ought to
convince them of the truth of the Christian Religion, and convert them thereto.
But the Imposture has all along been too well known to the Mahometans to be of
any such effect with them. For the Patriarch of Jerusalem always compounds with
the Mohammedan Governor to permit him to practice this Trick for the sake of
the Gain which it brings to his Church, and annually allows him his share in
it. And therefore, instead of being of any effect to convert them, it becomes a
matter of continual scandal among them against the Christian Religion. And not
only this Author, but Ahmed Ebn Edris, and most others of the Mahometans, that
write against the Christian Religion, object it as a reproach thereto (as in
truth it is) and urge it with the same earnestness against the Christian
Religion, that Cantacuzenus does for it. Al Mansor Hakem Beamrilla, Calif of
Egypt, was so offended at it, that A. D. 1007. he ordered the Church of the
Resurrection at Jerusalem, wherein this Chapel of the Sepulcher stands, to be
for this very reason pulled down and rased to the Ground, that he might thereby
put an end to so infamous a Cheat. But the Emperor of Constantinople having by
the release of Five thousand Mohammedan Captives, obtained leave to have it
rebuilt again, the Imposture has still gone on at the same rate, and it is
there to the great sport of the Mahometans, (who come in Multitudes every Year
to see this Farce) acted over in their sight in the same manner as is above
related even unto this day. Thevenot, who was once present at it, gives us a
large Account of this whole Foolery in the first part of his Travels, Book II.
Chapter 43.

Al Mostatraf, the name of a Book, written by an unknown Author.

Al Motarrezi, the Author of the Book called Mogreb, he was born A. D. 1143.
and died A. D. 1213. His name at length is Nasir Ebn Abil Macarem Abul Phatah
Al Motarrezi. He was of the Sect of the Motazali, and seems by his last Name,
Al Motarrezi, (by which he is usually called) to have been by Trade a Tailor,
that being the signification of the word in Arabic.

Assamael, a Book much quoted by Johannes Andreas, and also by Guadagnol.

Bidawi, a famous Commentator on the Alcoran. He died A. D. 1293. His name at
length is Naseroddin Abdollah Ebn Omar Al Bidawi. His Commentary is written for
the most part out of Zamachshari.

Kazwini, an Arabic Author, so called from the City Kaswin. His name at length
is Zacharias Ebn Mohammed Ebn Mahmud Al Kaswini. In what Age he lived, I cannot
find.

Dialogus Makometis cum Abdollah Ebn Salem, a Book wrote in Arabic, containing
a great many of the Fooleries of the Mohammedan Religion, under the form of a
Dialogue between Mahomet and this Jew, who was his chief helper in forging the
Imposture. It was translated into Latin by Hermannus Dalmata, and that Version
of it is published at the end of the Latin Alcoran, set forth by Bibliander.

Disputatio Christiani contra Saracenum de Lege Mahometis. It was written in
Arabic by a Christian, who was an Officer in the Court of a King of the
Saracens, to a Mohammedan Friend of his, who was an Officer with him in the same
Court, and contains a Confutation of the Mohammedan Religion. Peter, the famous
Abbot of Cluny in Burgundy, who flourished A. D. 1130. caused it to be
translated into Latin by Peter of Toledo; an Epitome of which is printed with
the Latin Alcoran by Bibliander, taken out of the 24th Book of the Speculum
Historiale of Vincentius Bellovacensis.

Elmacinus, an Historian of the Christian Religion. His History is from the
Creation of the World, to the Year of our Lord 1118. The latter part of it,
which is from the beginning of Mahometism, was published by Erpenius, under the
Title of Historia Saracenica, A. D. 1625. He was Son to Yaser Al Amid, who was
Secretary of the Council of War under the Sultans of Egypt, of the Family of
the Jobidae, for 45 Years together, and in the Year of our Lord 1238. (in which
his Father died) succeeded him in his place. His name at length is Georgius Ebn
Amid; and for his Eminent Learning, he was also styled Al Shaich Al Raiis Al
Macin, i. e. The prime Doctor solidly Learned. The last of which Titles,
Almacin, was that whereby Erpenius (who pronounces it Elmacin) chose to call
him; but by others he is generally quoted by the Name Ebn Amid.

Ebnol Athir, a Mohammedan Author, who was born A. D. 1149. and died A. D.
1209. His Name at length is Abussaadat Al Moharac Ebn Mohammed Al Shaibani
Ebnol Athir Al Jazari Magdoddin.

Ali Ebnol Athir, an Historian, Brother to the former Ebnol Athir. His name at
length is Abul Hasan Ali Ebn Mohammed Al Shaibani Ebnol Athir Al Jazari
Ezzoddin. He was born A. D. 1160. and died A. D. 1232. His History, which he
calls Camel, is from the beginning of the World to the Year of our Lord, 1230.

Ebnol Kassai, Author of the Book called Taarifat, which is an Explication of
the various Terms used in Arabic by Philosophers, Lawyers, Divines, and other
sorts of learned Professions among them.

Ebn Phares, a Mohammedan Author, who died A. D. 1000.

Eutychius, a Christian Author of the Sect of the Melchi^es, his Name in
Arabic is Said Ebn Batrik. He was born at Cair in Egypt, A.D. 876. and became
very eminent in the knowledge of Physic, which he practiced with great
reputation, being reckoned by the Mahometans themselves to have been one of the
Eminentest Physicians of his time. But toward the latter part of his life
giving himself more to the study of Divinity, he was A. D. 933. chosen
Patriarch of Alexandria for his Sect (for there was another Patriarch of that
place for the Jacobites at the same time) and then he first took the Name of
Eutychius. But he happened not to be so acceptable to his People, for there were
continual Jarrs between them until his death, which happened seven years after,
A. D. 940. His Annals of the Church of Alexandria were published at Oxford in
Arabic and Latin by Dr. Pocock, A. D. 1656. at the Charge of Mr. Seldom, and
this is the meaning of these words in the Title Page, [ Johanne Seldeno
Chorago] for he who was the Choragus in the Play, always was at the Charges of
exhibiting the Scenes And therefore Mr. Seldom having born the Expenses of this
Chargeable Edition, the most Worthy and Learned Author of that Version
acknowledged it by those words in the Title Page, which several having mistaken
to the robbing him of the honor of his Work, as if Mr. Seldom had begun the
Translation, and Dr. Pocock finished it, I cannot but do this justice to that
worthy Person, now with God, as to clear this matter. For he needed no Partner
in any of his Works. The Translation was totally his, and only the Charges of
printing the Book Mr. Selden's. Mr. Seldom did indeed publish a Leaf or two of
that Author, which he thought would serve his purpose to express his Spite
against the Bishops of the Church of England, in revenge of the Censure which
was inflicted on him in the High-Commission-Court for his History of Tithes;
but he made those slips in that Version, that Dr. Pocock was not at all eased
of his labor, by having that little part of it translated to his hands.

Liber de Generatione and Nutritura Mahometis, a most frivolous and silly
Tract, wrote originally in Arabic; and being translated into Latin by Hermannus
Dalmata, is published with the Latin Alcoran by Bibliander.

Geographia Nubiensis, so the Book is called by Sionita and Hesronita, who
published it in Latin with a Geographical Appendix annexed thereto, A. D. 1619.
But this Book is only an Epitome of a much larger, and much better Book written
by Sharif Al Adrisi, at the command of Roger, the second of that name, King of
Sicily, for the explaining of a Terrestrial Globe, which that King had caused
to be made of a very large Size all of Silver. He finished this Work A.D. 1153.
and Entitled it Ketab Roger, i. e. the Book of Roger, from the name of him who
employed him to compose it. The Author was of the Race of Mahomet, and
therefore is called Sharif, which word signifies one of a Noble Race,
especially that of Mahomet, and was descended from the Noble Family of the
Adrisidae, who reigned in some parts of Africa, and therefore he is called Al
Adrisi, that is, of the Family of Adris. His name at length is Abu Abdollah
Mohammed Ebn Mohammed Ebn Adris Amir Olmuminin. There was a very fair Copy of
this Book among Dr. Pocock's Arabic Manuscripts.

Georgius Monachus, Abbot of the Monastery of St. Simeon. He wrote a Tract in
defense of the Christian Religion against the Mahometans, which is a
Disputation he had with three Mahometans, of whom the chief Spokesman was
Abusalama Ebn Saar of Mosul.

Jauhari, the Author of a famous Arabic Dictionary, called Al Sahah: His name
at length is Abu Naser Ismael Ebn Hammad Al Jauhari. He was by Nation a Turk.
He died A. D. 1007. This is reckoned the best Dictionary of the Arabic Language
next Kamus. Golius makes his Arabic Lexicon mostly out of it.

Jalalani, i. e. the Two Jalals. They were two of the same Name, who wrote a
short Commentary upon the Alcoran, the first began it, and the second finished
it. The first was called Jalal Oddin Mohammed Ebn Ahmed Al Mahalli; and the
second Jalal Oddin Abdorrahman Al Osyuti. This latter on the death of the
former finished the Book A.D. 1466. and was also Author of an History called
Mezhar.

Shahrestani, a Scholastical Writer of the Mohammedan Religion. He was born at
Shahrestan A. D. 1074. and died A. D. 1154.

Safioddin, the Author of a certain Geographical Dictionary in the Arabic
Tongue.

Zamachshari, the Author of the Book called Al Ceshaf, which is a large
Commentary upon the Alcoran, and that which is of the best esteem among the
Mahometans of any of its kind. His name at length is Abul Kasem Mohammed Ebn
Omar Ebn Mohammed Al Chowarasmi Al Zamachshari. He was born at Zamachshar, a
Town of Chowarasmia, A. D. 1074. and died A. D. 1143.

Hebrew and Chaldee Authors.
CHaldee Paraphrase, an Interpretation of the Old Testament in the Chaldee
Language. That of Onkelos on the Pentateuch, and that of Jonathan on the
Prophets are ancient, being written according to the Account which the Jews
give of them before the time of our Savior. But those which are on the other
parts of Scripture, as also that which bears the Name of Jonathan on the Law,
were written by some later Jews. The Author of the Chaldee Paraphrase on Job,
the Psalms, and Proverbs, was Rabbi Joseph Caecus.

Sepher Cozri, a Book written by way of Dialogue between a Jew and the King of
the Cozars, from whence it has its Name Sepher Cozri or Cozari, i. e. the Book
of the Cozar. The Author of it was Rabbi Judah Levita, a Spanish Jew, who
wrote the Book originally in Arabic about the Year of our Lord 1140. and from
thence it was translated into Hebrew by Rabbi Judah Ebn Tibbon, in which
Translation it was published by Buxtorf with a Latin Version, A. D. 1660.

Rabbi David Kimchi, a famous Jewish Commentatour on the Old Testament. He was
by birth a Spaniard, Son to Rabbi Joseph Kimchi, and Brother to Rabbi Moses
Kimchi, both men of eminent Learning among the Jews, but he himself far
exceeded them both, being the best Grammarian in the Hebrew Language which they
ever had, as is abundantly made appear not only in his Commentary on the Old
Testament (which gives the greatest light into the literal sense of the Hebrew
Text of any extant of this kind) but also in a Grammar and Dictionary which he
has wrote of the Hebrew Language, both by many degrees the best of their kind:
The first of these he calls Miclol, and the other Sepher Shorashim, i. e. the
Book of Roots. Buxtorf made his Thesaurus Linguae Hebraeae out of the former,
and his Lexicon Linguae Hebraeae out of the latter. He flourished about the
Year of our Lord 1270.

Maimonides, a famous Jewish Writer, his Book, Yad Hachazakah, is a Digest of
the Jewish Law according to the Talmudists. His Book Moreh Nevochim, contains
an Explication of Words, Phrases, Metaphors, Parables, Allegories, and other
difficulties, which occurr in the Old Testament. It was first wrote in Arabic,
and after Translated into Hebrew by Rabbi Samuel Ebn Judah Ebn Tibbon, from
which Translation it was published in Latin by Buxtorf, A. D. 1629. He was born
at Corduba in Spain, A. D. 1131. but lived mostly in Egypt, from whence he is
commonly called, Rabbi Moses Aegyptius, where he died, A. D. 1208.

Mishnah, a Collection of all the Ancient Traditions of the Jews to the time of
Rabbi Judah Hakkodish, the Compiler of it, who flourished about the middle of
the second Century in the Reign of the Emperor Antoninus Pius. This Book is
the Text to the Talmud, and that a Comment on it. The Jerusalem Talmud was
compiled by the Jews who dwelt in Judaea about 300 Years after Christ; and the
Babylonish Talmud by those who dwelt in Mesopotomia about 500 Years after
Christ, according to the account which the Jewish Writers give of them. But
there are several things contained in the latter, which seem to referr to a
much later date. These Three, with the Two Chaldee Paraphrases of Onkelos and
Jonathan, are the ancientest Books which the Jews have next the Bible. For how
much noise soever may be made about their Rabbinical Writers, there are none of
them above Seven hundred years old. There are some of them indeed lay claim to
a much ancienter Date, but without any reason for it.

Greek Authors.
ARistotelis Ethica and Politica.

Bartholomaei Edesseni Confutatio Hagareni, a Greek Tract against Mahometism,
published by Le Moyne among his Varia Sacra. The Author was a Monk of Edessa
in Mesopotamia. In what Age he lived, it does not appear.

Cantacuzenus contra Sectam Mahometicam. This Book contains four Apologies for
the Christian Religion, and four Orations against the Mohammedan. The Author
had been Emperor of Constantinople, but resigning his Empire to John
Palaeologus his Son-in-Law, A. D. 1355. he retired into a Monastery, where
being accompanied by Meletius, formerly called Achaememid, whom he had
converted from Mahometism to the Christian Religion, he there wrote this Book
for the said Meletius in answer to a Letter written to him by Sampsates a
Persian of Hispahan, to reduce him back again to the Mohammedan Superstition.

Cedreni Compendium Historiarum, An History from the beginning of the World, to
the Year of our Lord 1057.

Chrysostomi Homiliae.

Confutatio Mahometis, a Greek Tract, published by Le Moyne among his Varia
Sacra, the Author not known.

Dionysii Halicarnassaei Antiquitates Romanae.

Eusebii Historia Ecclesiastica and Praeparatio Evangelica.

Hierocles, the Fomenter and chief Manager of the Tenth Persecution against the
Christians. He was first Governor of Bithynia, and after of Egypt; in both
which Places he prosecuted the Christians with the utmost severity; and not
content herewith, he also wrote two Books against them, which he called (...),
wherein, among other things, he compared Apollonius Tyanaeus with Jesus Christ,
and endeavored to prove him in working of Miracles to have been equal to him;
to which particular Eusebius wrote an Answer, which is still extant among his
Works; but these Books of Hierocles are now wholly lost, excepting some
Fragments preserved in the said Answer of Eusebius.

Josephi Antiquitates Judaicae, and de Bello Judaico.

Origenes contra Celsum.

Philostratus de vita Apollonii Tyanaei.

Phlegon Trallianus, a Freed man of Adrian the Emperor. He wrote a Chronicon
or History, which he called the History of the Olympiads. It contained 229
Olympiads, whereof the last ended in the Fourth year of the Emperor Antoninus
Pius. But there is nothing of this Work now extant, except some few Fragments,
as they are preserved in such Authors as have quoted it. That relating to the
Eclipse of the Sun at our Savior's Crucifixion is preserved in Eusebius's
Chronicon, and is also made mention of by Origin in his 35th Tract on St.
Matthews Gospel, and in his second Book against Celsus.

Plato.

Plutarchi Vitae.

Strabonis Geographia.

Socratis Scholastici Historia Ecclesiastica.

Sozomenis Historia Ecclesiastica.

Theophanis Chronographia, This is one of the Byzantine Historians, and
contains a Chronological History of the Roman Empire, from the Year of our Lord
285. to the Year 813. The Author was a Nobleman of Constantinople, where he
was first an Officer of the Imperial Court, but afterward turning Monk wrote
this History. He was born A. D. 758. and A. D. 815. died in Prison in the
Island of Samothracia, a Martyr for Image Worship, for which he had been a
zealous Champion in the Second Council of Nice.

Zonarae Compendium Historiarum. Another of the Byzantine Historians. It
contains an History from the beginning of the World to the death of Alexius
Comnenus, Emperor of Constantinople; which happened A. D. 1118. when the
Author flourished. He was first a Prime Officer of the Imperial Court at
Constantinople, but afterward became an Ecclesiastic, and is the same who
wrote the Comment on the Greek Canons.

Latin Authors Ancient and Modern.
AMmiani Marcellini Historia

Anastasii Bibliothecarii Historia Ecclesiastica. The Author was a Priest of
the Church of Rome, and Library Keeper to the Pope. He flourished about the
Year of our Lord 870.

Bellonii Observationes de locis ac rebus memorabilibus in Asia. The Book was
first published in French, A. D. 1553. and after in Latin, A. D. 1589.

Bocharti Hierozoicon.

Busbequi Epistolae, the Author was Ambassador from the Emperor Ferdinand
the First to the Port, from whence he wrote his Epistles.

Buxtorfii Lexicon Rabbinicum.

Buxtorfii Synagoga Judaica.

Caroli a Sancto Paulo Geographia Sacra sive Notitia antiqua Episcopatuum
Ecclesiae Universae. Lutetiae Parisiorum, A. D. 1641.

Clenardi Epistolae. The Author of these Epistles was the famous Grammarian of
his Age. Out of love to the Arabic Tongue, he went to Fez of purpose to learn
it, A. D. 1540. when well advanced in years, from whence he wrote many things
in his Epistles of the Manners and Religion of the Mahometans. He died at
Granada in Spain as soon as he returned.

Cusani Crebratio Alcorani. The Author of this Book was the famous Nicolas de
Cusa, the eminentest Scholar of the Age in which he lived. In the Year 1448. he
was made Cardinal of Rome, by the Title of St. Peter's ad vincula, and died A.
D. 1464. about Ten Years after the Turks had taken Constantinople. Which seems
to have given him the Occasion of writing this Book, that so he might provide
an Antidote against that false Religion, which on that Success had gotten so
great an advantage for its further spreading it self in those Parts of the
World. For it appears by the Dedication, that this Book was not written till
after the loss of that City; it being dedicated to Pope Pius Secundus, who
entered not on the Papacy, till the Turks had been about Three Years in
possession of it.

Abrahami Ecchellensis Historia Arabum. This Book is subjoined to his Chronicon
Orientale, in Two Parts, collected out of the Arab Writers. The Author was a
Maronite of Mount Lebanus in Syria, and was employed as Professor of the
Oriental Languages, in the College de Propaganda fide at Rome, from whence
about the Year 1640. he was called to Paris, to assist in preparing the great
Polyglott Bible for the Press, which was there publishing, and made the King's
Professor of the Oriental Languages in that City. The part assigned him in
this Work, was that which they had before employed Sionita in, a Man of thorough
Abilities to perform it; but on some distate taken against him, they discharged
him, and sent to Rome for Ecchellensis; of whose Performance herein, a Learned
Sorbonist making a Censure, truly says, Ibi peccatum est toties ac tam
enormiter in apponendis vocalibus and apiculis, ut quod ibi primum inter
legendum occurrerit summam sapere videatur Tyronis alicujus oscitantiam. He was
indeed a Man but of little Accuracy in the Learning which he professed, and
shows himself to be a very Futilous and Injudicious Writer, in most of that
which he has published.

Abrahami Ecchellensis Eutychius vindicatus; which Book is in Two Parts; the
first writ against Mr. Selden's Eutychij Patriarchae Alexandrini Ecclesiae suae
Origines; and the second against Hottinger's Historia Orientalis. The greatest
skill which he shows in this Book, is in railing. It was published at Rome, A
D. 1661.

Forbesij Instructiones Historico - Theologicae, published at Amsterdam, A. D.
1645.

Fortalitium Fidei, a Book written in defense of the Christian Religion against
the Jews, Mahometans, and other Infidels. The Author was a Franciscan Friar
who wrote this Book, A. D. 1459. and it was first printed at Nurenbergh A. D.
1494. and afterward at Lions, A. D. 1525.

Golij Notae ad Alfragani Elementa Astronomica; which are exceeding useful for
the understanding of the Geography of the East. The Book was published at
Leiden, A. D. 1669.

Philippi Guadagnoli Apologia pro Christiana Religione, contra Objectiones
Ahmed Filij Zin Alabedin Persae Asphahensis. Of which Book I have already given
an Account, in what I have written of Ahmed Ebn Zin, against whom it is written.

Gentij Notae ad Musladini Saadi Rosarium Politicum; published at Amsterdam, A.
D. 1651.

Groti^^ de Veritate Christianae Religionis; and Epistolae ad Gallos.

Hottingeri Historia Orientalis. Of this Book there are two Editions; the first
A.D. 1651. and the second A. D. 1660. the latter is much enlarged. The Author
was Professor of the Oriental Tongues, first at Zurich in Swisserland, and
afterward at Heidelbergh; from whence being called to be Professor at Leiden,
he was while on his removal thither, unfortunately drowned in the Rhine. He was
a Man of great Industry and Learning; but having written very much within the
compass of a few Years (for he died young,) his Books want Accuracy; though all
of them have their Use.

Historia Miscella, a Roman History begun by Eutropius, continued by Paulus
Diaconus, and finished by Landulphus Sagax.

Johannes Andreas de Confusione Sectae Mahometanae. The Author of this Book
was formerly an Alfaki, or a Doctor of the Mohammedan Law; but in the Year
1487. being at Valentia in Spain, converted to the Christian Religion, he was
received into Holy Orders, and wrote this Book in Spanish against the Religion
which he forsook; from whence it was translated into Italian, by Dominicus de
Gazelu, A.D. 1540. And out of that Translation, it was published in Latin by
Johannes Lauterbach, A.D. 1595. and reprinted by Voetius at Utrecht, A. D.
1656. He having thoroughly understood the Religion which he confutes, does much
more pertinently write against it, than many others do, that handle this
Argument.

Macrobij Saturnalia.

Caij Plinij Secundi Naturalis Historia.

Caij Plinij Caecilij Secundi Epistolae.

Pocock: The Famous Professor of the Hebrew and Arabic Tongues at Oxford; who
was for Eminency of Goodness, as well as Learning, the greatest Ornament of the
Age in which he lived, and God blessed him with a Long life to be useful
thereto. He was born A. D. 1604. and died at Christ-Church in Oxford in the
Month of September, A D. 1691. He was for above sixty Years a constant Editor
of learned and useful Books. The first which he published contains an Edition
of four of the Catholic Epistles in Syriac, i. e. the second of St. Peter, the
second and third of St. John, and the Epistle of St. Jude, with Versions and
Notes, which was printed at Leiden, A. D. 1630. by Vossius, to whom he
presented it the year before at Oxford, on his coming thither to see that
University; and the last was his Commentary on Joel, which came forth the Year
in which he died. His Specimen Historiae Arabicae, which I frequently make use
of in this Tract, was published A. D. 1650. and is a most accurate and
judicious Collection out of the best Arab Writers, relating to the Subject
which he handles.

Richardi Confutatio Legis Saracenicae. The Author was a Dominican Friar, who
in the Year 1210. went to Bagdad of purpose to study the Mohammedan Religion out
of their own Books in order to confute it; and on his return published this
Learned and Judicious Tract concerning it. Demetrius Cydonius translated it
into Greek for the Emperor Cantacuzenus, who makes great use of it, taking
thence most of that which he has of any moment in his four Orations against
the Mohammedan Religion. From this Greek Version of Demetrius Cydonius, it was
Translated back again into Latin by Bartholomaeus Picenus, which Translation is
published with the Latin Alcoran of Bibliander, and that is all we now have of
it, the Original being lost. This and Johannes Andreas's Tract de Confusione
Sectae Mahometanae, are the best of any that have been formerly published by
the Western Writers on this Argument, and best accord with what the Mahometans
themselves teach of their Religion. Others have too much spent themselves on
false Notions concerning it, for want of an exact knowledge of that which they
wrote against.

Roderici Toletani Historia Arabum. It contains an History of the Saracens from
the Birth of Mahomet to the Year of our Lord 1150. The Author was Archbishop
of Toledo in Spain, and was present at the Lateran Council, A. D. 1215. His
History from the Tenth Chapter is mostly confined to the Saracens of Spain, and
is but of little Credit, where he relates any thing of them out of that
Country. It was published with Erpenius's Historia Saracenica at Leiden, A. D.
1625.

Schekardi Tarich seu Series Regum Persarum, Tubingae, A. D. 1628.

Spanhemii Iutroductio ad Historiam Sacram, Amstel. A. D. 1694.

Scaliger de Emendatione Temporum, and Notae ejus ad Sphaeram Manilii.

Valerius Maximus.

Vaninus, a famous Atheist. He was by birth a Neapolitan, and came into France
on purpose to promote the Impiety he had embraced, of which being convicted at
Toulouse, he rather chose to become a Martyr for it, than renounce it; and
therefore was publicly burnt in that City, A. D. 1619. persisting to deny the
Being of a God with a wonderful obstinacy even in those very Flames in which
he perished. He wrote two Books, the first was published A. D. 1615. Entitled
Aeternae Providentiae Amphitheatrum, and the other the next Year after, which
is his Dialogi de admirandis Naturae, in both which he serves that Cause for
the sake of which he died.

English and French Authors.
PUrchas's Pilgrimage.

Ricaut's History of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire.

Smyth's Remarks upon the Manners, Religion, and Government of the Turks.

The venot's Travels.

FINIS.

