A BRIEF NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings of Doctor Parr, And some of the
Parishioners of Mary Magdalen-Bermonsey in the County of SURREY.

Against certain People called Quakers, Inhabitants of the said Parish, for not
Paying and Complying with an Illegal Tax, laid under pretense of Repairing
their Church.

Showing how some of the said people did endeavor (as of right belongs to
every English man) to defend themselves from the Rigor and Cruelty of the
Ecclesiastical Courts about the same, by seeking to gain a Prohibition to stop
the Proceedings in the Bishop's Court, and to bring their Unreasonble Illegal
Imposition of 1800 l. upon the said Parish to trial at Common Law; and by what
Means they have been prevented therein.

Also an EXHORTORY REPREHENSION upon the whole.

Published to prevent a Misunderstanding concerning the said people, who are
and may be more presented, as that they in Enmity, Stubbornness and
Self-willedness have refused to pay toward the said Rate, and occasioned a
Charge to the said Parish. Whereas in Truth the Cause of their endeavor to
defend themselves was, to keep their Consciences void of Offense to God and Men
(To God, in not yielding to Repair an Idols Temple; for so they believe it to
be: To Men, in that their Proceeds therein were contrary to all the known Law
in being) And having done their endeavor in trying the Courts of Judicature,
and finding Iniquity in the place of Judgment, and the Cause of the Poor
slighted, they are clear in their Consciences, and can leave their Cause to
God, and lie down in Peace and Good Will to all men. But the gnawing Worm, that
never dies, will fasten upon the Wicked in the Day of Account.

Eccles. 5.15. And moreover I saw under the Sun the Place of Judgment, and
Iniquity was there; and the Place of Righteousness, and Wickedness was there.
Printed in the Year 1677.

To the Reader.
Friend,
THou may understand, we live in a Nation whose Laws and constituted
Government excels most Nations in the World, being very tender and careful in
defense of its Inhabitants Liberties, Persons, Estates and Lives from the Wills
and Arbitrary Power of lawless unreasonable Men; and every English man has a
Birth right and Inheritance in this Law; and it is the Just Interest of every
honest man, to endeavor to keep up this Standard and Bulwork of Property,
Lives and Liberties against all that would invade them, or attempt to rob and
spoil them of either.

It Is true, there is much Failure and Corruption in the Executive Part of this
well framed law and government, and there is so much Partiality, Self-interest
and Iniquity got into the Place and Seat of Judgment, that many times the clear
Stream and Current of Justice and Equity is stopped, defiled and corrupted, and
it is a very hard thing for a poor man, who is oppressed and abused by his
Neighbor, to get Relief; but this is not to be attributed to the Law, but to
the Abusers and Corrupters of it, whose Work is to pervert the End of all good
Law and Government, which is to be a Terror to the Evildoers, and a Praise to
them that do well; wherever this just End is not answered, such do not rule
nor judge for God, let them pretend what they will, but are Contemners,
Despisers and Perverters of the Law of God, and all good men.

In this Case of ours we apprehend our selves Arbitrarily (contrary to Law)
imposed upon by a sort of rash inconsiderate men who have run themselves upon a
Work more proper for a Parliament then a Parish, and if they had a Reward
accordingly, they would receive but their desert; and it being to do a Work
illegal and so For the Truth of this we may appeal to the Consciences of many
of the Inhabitants of Magdalen Parish, whether they and their Neighbors were
not more sober, temperate, grave and wise, and guilty of less sin and
Transgression against God and man twenty or thirty years ago, then at this
time; if so, then wherein are people profited by the studied Sermons of
Hirelings?
needless and unprofitable to our selves and Neighbors, we were willing to
stop their Ecclesiastical Proceeds, otherwise we should have been passive, and
silently suffered the weight of the leaden Hands of unholy Church, whose
Mercies are very Cruelties; witness the Popish Inquisitions, and cruel Torture
and Burnings of conscientious men, and the Protestants Goals, Whips, Stocks,
Cutting off Ears and Stigmatizing, and Hanging also, as in New England, upon
the account of Church, Religion and Worship; all which we testify against, as
directly contrary to, and inconsistent with the Pure Christian Religion and
Church of Christ, as is signified in short in what follows; but is according to
the Whore, or false Church, whose Weapons are carnal, and not spiritual, who is
and has been since the Apostasy very busy in Christendom in spoiling peoples
Goods, imprisoning and torturing their Bodies, and sometimes killing them also,
and making her self drunk with the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus.

Now, it is so far from the Nature and Life of the true Church to inflict
Corporal Punishments for Spiritual Offenses, or to hurt any man's Liberty,
Person and Estate in this World, about the things of the World to come, as
Faith, Conscience and Manner of Worship, that it is both unnatural and
unreasonable; for if People do err in their minds, and understand things
relating to their future Estate amiss, and are of an unsound Judgment in the
things of God, and in matters relating to his Kingdom, etc. Spiritual-weaponed
Men, and not Goalers and Executioners of corporal Punishments, are to deal with
such People, and inform and restore them with the Spirit of Love and Meekness,
if they can, according to the Example and Doctrine of Christ Jesus his Apostles
and primitive Christians, who never used outward Force and Violence, or
corporal Punishments to compel People to be of their Religion; Christianity
came not this way into the World, neither is it, or ever was it upheld or
propagated by such means; it is a Gospel of Life and Salvation, and brings Peace
on Earth, and Good Will to Men; and the true Ministers of it being endued with
Power from on High, in the universal Love of God persuaded men to be reconciled
to him, by turning them from the Darkness within to the Light and Grace of God
Within from the Power of Satan within, by which their minds were captivated, to
the Spirit and Power of God within, that they might receive Remission of their
Sins, and Inheritance among them that are sanctified.

And if people would not receive them into their Houses, or build them some
Houses to preach this Gospel to them in, they were not to call for Fire from
Heaven upon them, nor send their Bodies to Goal, or take away or spoil them of
their Earthly Treasures, because they would not receive their heavenly
Treasures, nor own and believe them to be Dispensers and ministers of it; let
all that pretend themselves to be Christ's Ministers compare themselves
herewith.

And let this be considered by every true English man, That if the rash,
inconsiderate, unlawful Proceeds of a few of our Neighbors becomes
presidential, and escapes Correction, which is so direct against the
fundamental Law of our Country, others may take Boldness to rate and raise
Eighteen Thousand Pound as well as Eighteen Hundred Pound upon the like
Pretense.

But we attribute this Favor and Connivance to the powerful Influence of the
Ecclesiastical Authority, whose Inclination and nature is to creep over the
Heads of Law and Gospel too, and to sit as a Queen over men's Persons,
Liberties, Lives and Estates; so that if people please not the Church (or that
Sect or Sort of men, that in a Nation or Country calls themselves so, and has
the Power in their hand, then all that is contrary is liable to Ruin by the
Power and Influence of holy Church, (falsely so called) being indeed no other
then the great Whore, which John saw sit upon the Waters, and ride upon the
Scarlet-colored Beast.

For it has been the Work of the false Church for many ages and generations
past, and is her endeavor at this day, to get upon the backs of Lords, Dukes,
Kings and Emperors, and other great men of the Earth, and to lead them which
way she pleases; and she arrayeth her self in such beautiful Apparel, and
gives her self such glorious Titles, and holds forth such a glorious Cup, that
through the Mystery of Iniquity, that works in her, they are so far deceived
and intoxicated, that they think and are persuaded, she is the Church and
Spouse of Christ; and so many mighty men and Monarchs of the Earth, in this
part of the World called Christendom especially, are as obedient to her, and as
tractable under her, as a Beast is under its Rider, and ready to do any
Drudgery for her.

And this is observable, That if any of these become sensible of the Weight of
their Burden, and to see what a Mystery of Iniquity they have upon their Backs,
and begin to be weary and unwilling to carry it any longer, then such a one,
let him be Lord, Duke, King or Emperor, if her severe Sensures, Curbs and
Threats, will not serve to bring him again into Obedience to holy Church, she
will get his Blood to drink, if she can, as might be instanced at large by many
Examples.

It Is said, That it is a Maxim in the Church of Rome, not to keep Faith with
such she accounts Heretics, longer then till she has an Advantageous
Opportunity to break it; and that she is very ready with her Dispensations to
absolve Subjects from their Obedience to their Natural Prince and Governor, if
they judge him an Enemy to holy Church: if this Report and Saying be true, we
declare it a Cursed Opinion, and Inconsistent with Humane Society and the
Well-being of Mankind, and an evident Mark and Sign of the Whore, Beast and
False Prophet, and not of the Church of Christ.

And if the Church of England and other Protestants be of the mind and Opinion
of Doctor Parr, that when People differ in their Judgments and Understandings
about spiritual Matters, and are tender and Conscientious, and cannot conform
to their Way of Worship, and have the Nick Reproachful Name of a Quaker given
them (as the Primitive Christians had that of a Nazarine) though they live
never so Soberly, Righteously, Justly, Uprightly and Inoffensively among their
Neighbors and all people, relating to the things of a Man, that
notwithstanding this, SUCH ARE NO SUBJECTS OF THE KING, which in plain English
implies thus much, that the King nor Law is not concerned to defend their
Lives, Liberties nor Estates; but that, because they are out of the Pale of
their Church, they ought to lie open to the Mouth of every Raveuous Beast and
Devourer. So far as the Protestants are tainted with this Opinion, they are
guided and governed by the same spirit of Darkness, Ignorance and Cruelty, and
in the Ground is one with the other, and the same evil Effects and cruel
Consequences attend it; for that People, Sect or Opinion that will take upon
them to absolve Kings and Governors, and the Judges of the Law, from being
concerned in Duty to administer Justice and take a fatherly Care of Harmless
Innocent People, that dwell within their Dominions, because they are not of the
same mind about Religion, nor do not conform to their Church Discipline; we
say, it is the same spirit of Deceit and Delusion with that which pretends a
Power to absolve Subjests from their Obedience to their Superiors, and is also
inconsistent with Humane Society, Cruel, Unnatural, Bloody and Unreasonable:
Let such as are concerned therein Repent thereof; for they have not the Spirit
of Christ ruling in their Hearts, though they may have his Name in their
Mouths.

Here follows a Copy of a Letter sent to Dr. Parr, and the rest concerned, in
which was enclosed a Copy of the Substance of what follows.
Doctor Parr,
THe Enclosed we send thee, before we communicate it further, that if thee, or
any of the rest whom it does concern, can except against or disprove any thing
thereof, as relating to matter of Fact, contained therein, you have your
liberty or opportunity to signify the same; for when your forty days are
expired, we expect the end of your work designed against us to be soon
accomplished, that is, to have our Bodies in Goal, from our Wives, Children,
Trades and Families, which is a work of Cruelty, and not of Christianity: and
know this, the Cry of the Innocent will enter the Ears of the Lord against you;
and if you shall be suffered to make our Wives Widows, and our Children
Fatherless, though we can forgive you, yet it is just with the Lord if he
measure the same measure to you again; for the Blood of the Righteous will cry,
as Abel's did, and Vengeance will pursue the Evil-doer, and you shall be justly
charged as the Prophet Micah charged the professing Jews, Mic. 3.10. They build
up Sion with Blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity: (read the whole Chapter, which
indeed is applicable to England, as truly as ever it was to the Nation of the
Jews) And let this be considered, that if you polute and stain your
Church-building with the Blood of the Innocent, through Imprisonment in nasty
Holes, and put them out of a Capacity to provide Bread for their Wives and
Children, this will so defile you and your Temple, that the Bishop of this
Diocese, nor all the Bishops of England will not be able to remove and take it
away by all the power of Consecration they have; and the stones in the Wall
shall witness against you in the Day of Account.

Now, for the Causes mentioned in the first page, we do intend to make your
Work public, that all may see what spirit rules in thine and your Hearts,
notwithstanding your talk and profession of Christ and Christianity, and that
you concerned may be convinced concerning the Evil of your proceeds against us
(seeing it is matter of Conscience unto us) and Repent thereof, and decline the
prosecuting that which the spirit of Enmity and Violence (and not the spirit of
Christ) would lead you to; so would you bring forth Fruits more becoming the
Christian Religion, which is the Desire of your Friends and Neighbors, whose
daily endeavor and practice is, to shun the way of the wicked, and to avoid
the Path of evil men, and to live in that Love which teaches to desire the
good of all, and the fall and hurt of none; and herein our sleep is sweet, and
our rest is pleasant, even as we hate the bread of wickedness and the wine of
violence; and this is the Path of the Just, which is as a shining Light,
shining more and more unto the perfect day; but the way of the wicked is
Darkness, they know not at what they stumble.

And Dr. Parr, know this, If thou made choice of those words in the 4th
chapter of the Proverbs, verse. 14, 15, 16. for thy Text the Day thy
Excommunication was read against us (as is at least supposed) as if they did
concern us, or were applicable upon us, thou art greatly mistaken; for we have
not only talked of and professed the Light, Law, Grace and Spirit of Truth, but
received the same, learned of and walked in the same, and are guided thereby
out of the Path and Way of the Wicked, and out of the spirit of envy, evil-wil,
mischief and violence against any man's Person, Life, Liberty or Estate; it
would be well for you if thee, nor none of thy Flock, were found in those
steps: not farther to enlarge, only remember and consider this one saying
written in the 5th of the Proverbs, The Ways of a Man are before the Eyes of
the Lord, and he pondereth all his Goings; if this Sctipture, with that which
says, Men shall give an Account of their Deeds done in the Body, whether Good
or Evil, were truly weighed and believed by all that read them, it would put a
stop to the Worker of Iniquity, and quench the Spirit of Violence and Cruelty,
Prejudice and Evil, and Meekness, Love and Righteousness would grow and
increase amongst our Neighbors and Countrymen, and Peace, Quietness and good
Neighborhood would abound, which is indeed the Desire of our Hearts and our
daily Practice to promote, according to our state and capacity, and can in
Truth subscribe our selves, Lovers of our Neighbors, and Haters of no man.

Signed on the behalf of the rest of our Friends by us, John Otter, Griffith
Jones, John Torletonr, John Potter.


A BRIEF NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings of Doctor Parr, etc.
WE the said people being presented and cited to the Bishop's Court, made our
Appearance, and according to the Privilege and Right of every English man
demanded a Copy of the Lybel formed against us, which was granted, and finding
their proceeds were contrary to the known Law, and that the design of the
Bishop's Court was forthwith to curse or excommunicate us out of their Church,
and to cast our Bodies into Jayle, did account it our Duty both as Men and
Christians, to endeavor to prevent the same, and accordingly made motion by
Council at the King's Bench Bar for a prohibition, which was not there
positively denied, but deferred; and we were advised by one of the Judges, To
apply our selves further to the Bishop's Court, presuming they would do as
Right, as the Case did require; if not, then to This commonly proves according
to the English Proverb, Out of the Drying Pan into the Fire.
appeal to the Arches or Delegates. So upon this his Presumption, that the
Bishop's Court would do us Right (or because he was willing to please the
Priests) refused to grant a Prohibition.

Then being left to the Mercy of the Bishop's Court, we again received
Citations to appear, and did appear accordingly diverse times; but finding our
lawful Exceptions against the Lybel, and all we could offer and plead, though
never so just and according to their own Law, slighted and overruled, and our
selves pronounced excommunicate by a Person who declared himself Ignorant in
the Matter (but willing to fulfill the Design of the Court) for they refused to
receive our Answers under our Hands and Seal by proxy rendered, which according
to Law and the Rules of their own Court they ought to have received; but
perceiving they had to do with a People that made Conscience of keeping that
eminent Precept and Command of Christ [SWEAR NOT AT ALL] and seeing their other
gins and traps were too weak to hold them, and to stop their Passage toward
Relief at Common Law, seemed resolved to make this occasion of refusing to
Swear the Color and Ground to pronounce us excommunicate for contempt to their
Court, though we had showed Diligence to appear time after time, according to
their citations and arbitrary summons in their own name and authority, and had
answered them in all their Proceeds, so far as lawfully they might, both as Men
and Christians: And the dishonor and contempt of their Court is on their own
parts, occasioned and contracted by their own evil doing, in trampling upon the
Law and the Legal Right of others, yea, and the Rules and Presidents of their
own Court (though called spiritual) when they stand in the way of their own
Interest and Design, as in this particular Case is proved true by Experience.

So contrary to the Doctrine of Christ (whose Ministers and Servants they
pretend to be) they would compel people to swear, and so break his Command; and
if they refuse, call it contempt to their Court, pronounce them excommunicate,
and get their Bodies into Goal, separate Husband and Wife, Father and Children,
Master and Servants, put all Relations out of a Capacity to serve one another
according to the Law of Nature and Grace, and all about a Matter of Conscience,
this is neither like Christ nor Christianity, but unnatural and inhumane: And
you have not showed forth the Qualifications of spiritual Men or good
Christians, but do clearly demonstrate your selves to be selfish, carnal,
unjust and unreasonable, and great Strangers to that Royal Law of Christ Jesus,
As you would have others do to you, so do you unto them; such Doings will never
convince any that you are indeed what you have a Name to be, but rather confirm
them in their present Persuasions: And if you by your Threats, Cruelty and
injustice fright any out of Tenderness of Conscience, and bring them through
fear of suffering into an outward conformity to your Church and Worship, know
this, you make them twofold more the Children of Hellthen before: Outward
force, violence and compulsion may make hypocrites, but no true Christians; it
may change the manners, but not the mind, etc.

It might be well if you spiritual men, so called, would seriously consider,
whether your Self-interest [and not the Love and Care of Souls] be not the
ground of your Church and Court Proceedings, seeing Money will satisfy for all
sins and trangressions against you and your Church, as in your Mother Church of
Rome? Whenas indeed all the bodily Exercise, together with all the Gold and
Silver in the World, is not able nor sufficient to expiate or satisfy for one
sin committed against God, Christ and the true Church; neither did the true
Church in any Age since Christianity was in the World, ever absolve or acquit
sins and transgression against her for Money: It Is time to consider your way,
and amend, and cease to exercise deceit and violence over the People for
selfish ends; and if you have no better Way, Means and Arguments to inform
persuade and convince people, that you are of the True Church, because you have
Power and Compulsive Laws on your side, and can destroy their Liberty, Estate
and Lives through straight Imprisonment in nasty Goals (this being the Way and
Means of the False Church, whose Weapons are and were always Carnal) there are
a People whom God has raised up in this Age, and instructed in the pure
Christian Religion, whose goods you may spoil, whose bodies you may torture and
imprison, and whose blood you may drink also, sooner then force and compel them
by your unchristian means to become conformable Members to your Church.

Now we seeing our selves thus abused, and that they overrun the Rules of
their own Court, to hasten us into Goal, we again moved for a Prohibition at
the Exchequer-Bar, and the chief Banon showed himself just and moderate, and
was ready to grant the same, their Council refusing to plead further in their
behalf, their own Lybel saying, that the greater part or some part of the
Parish made the Rate, dissatisfied their Council, and would then plead no
further, only prayed time till the first day of the next Term, which was the
second instant, betwixt which time, as the sequel plainly proves, Doctor Parr
with other had made way so far in the matter, by devised untrue Allegations and
other ways, that our Request of a Prohibition might not be answered; for when
our Council pleaded, they were very much discountenanced by some of the Judges
with Words, Nods and Frowns; and though they pleaded Law in the case, it was
not regarded; only the chief Baron showed himself very just and impartial, and
declared his Opinion, That a Prohibition did property lie in the case; but
seeing his Brethren were of another Opinion, he should leave it.

Now, it is to be observed, that the Court could not without man fest
partiality deny a Prohibition, until false Allegations were devised, and
pleaded in open Court to overturn our Suggestion; therefore Doctor Parr, with
the rest, had by Untrue Information and Large Fee (or to use some of their own
words, Large Grezing) fitted and prepared their Council to plead very grand
Lies or Untruths, and produced an Oath in Court, together with the Witness and
Testimony of Doctor Parr to affirm to the same.

The particular Lies were as follows; First, That there was a Necessity to
pull down the said Church, the Pillars being Wood, bowed and rotten, the Roof
and South Wall ready to fall, many being hurt and wounded with the fall of part
of the same.

Secondly, That Dr. Parr and some others did contract with the Workmen for 120
l. to build the Chancel, South-Porch and new Enlangments; and he and others
paid distinctly for those parts, and that it was not included in the
Parish-Rate, himself giving Fifty pound part of the Hundred and Twenty pound
agreed for the Building the same.

Thirdly, That all the Parishioners, yea, every man, were satisfied, and had
all paid their Money, only Twenty Four Quakers; and that the whole Assesment
upon them was not above Forty pound, the greatest amongst them being not above
Fifty shillings.

These, with other things to the same effect, being affirmed as with a Face of
Brass in open Court, though great Untruths, yet great Credit (we judge, by
reason of the Presence and Testimony of Doctor Parr) was by three of the four
Judges given to them, and all that could be urged to the contrary rejected and
slighted; and though by our Council we much pressed to go to Trial, and if we
did not prove our Suggestion, we would give them Cost; yet nothing that could
be said on our parts would prevail, the burden of the Plea against us being,
NONE BUT QVAKERS, MY LORD; NONE BUT TWENTY FOUR QVAKERS, MY LORD: As if, when
people have the Nickname of a Quaker put upon them, they then lose all their
Right, and forfeit all their Privileges as Men, and the Benefit of the Law of
their Native Country; as if, to have the Frowns of the Church, were sufficient
to turn them out of the Protection of the King, Law and Government, and to have
their Liberties, Estates and Lives exposed to Ruin; and that Dr. Parr is of
this Opinion, appears by his own words speaking that day, being the second of
the third Month called May, to one in this manner and words, THAT THE QVAKERS
WERE NONE OF THE KING's SUBJECTS.

This Saying does not become a man of his Profession; it shows plainly what
spirit rules in his Heart under all his Talk of Religion and Christianity, he
is a great way off the Mind and Spirit of Christ Jesus, whose Minister or
Servant he pretends to be. It may truly be said of him as Christ said to his
Disciples, Luke 9.54.
who desired to have Liberty to command Fire to come down from Heaven to
destroy those that would not receive him, it is said, He turned, and rebuked
them, and said, they knew not what spirit they were of; for the Son of Man came
not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them; and his Disciples and Ministers
indeed are of the same Mind and Spirit now. But what would this Spirit and
Opinion do with the Quakers, and such as do not comply with his Mind and
Understanding in and about Matters of Church and Worship? Let him seriously
consider the extent thereof, this unnatural bloody Conceit of his, (viz.) That
if people please not the Priests, or transgress against their Church, then they
cease to be the King's Subjects, and lose their Birthright as men, and the
Benefit of the Law of their Native Country: Would not this Notion and Judgment
of his lead him into that Ravenous Appetite which some Priests had in the
Prophets days, which he compared to Dogs, yea, greedy dumb Dogs, that could
never have enough, (bear the Roughness of the Speech being they are the
Prophet's words) read verse. 10 and 11. of the 56th chapter of Isaiah, and see
if England does not abound with such blind, ignorant, ravenous Watchmen there
spoken against, who, when people put not into their Mouths, they prepare War
against them; such there were in the Prophet Micah's time, and such there are
now in England, that preach for Hire, and divine for Money, etc. read the third
chapter of Micah's Prophecy against the Cruelty of Princes, and the Falsehood of
Prophets and Priests, that cause people to err, and that bite with their Teeth,
and cry peace so long as people feed them.

Indeed Dr. Parr's Moderation and peaceable Behavior has hitherto been noted
and commended, in that he has not thrown so many into Goal for Tithes as he
might, nor persecuted Dissenters that dwell within his Parishes for not
Worshipping in the same Manner, Form and Way as he does: But now one of his
Parishes has more in it presented for not coming to Church (and as is said, to
be proceeded against by the Statute of 20 l. a Month) and Excommunicated for
not Repairing their Church, then all the Parishes in and about London: so that
if he gives farther place to this unnatural Opinion of his ( That people cease
to be Subjects to the King when they are called Quakers) it will quickly lead
him out of all his Moderation and seeming Tenderness, and his Mouth will open
wide enough to swollow down their Bodies, Liberties, Lives and Estates; and if
his Church's Curse was powerful enough, would send their Souls to Hell also.
This would be the Work of a sad Pastor; who is found in it, cannot be a
Watcher for the good of Souls, nor a good Shepherd, that cares naturally for
the Sheep; but are found Watchers for Gain from their Quarter, and for the
Fleece: And it is an infallible Mark, Sign and Demonstration of a Minister of
Antichrist, False Prophet and Deceiver, to declare, That people ought not to
live in peace, and enjoy their Liberty and property, and benefit of the Law of
their native Country, as Subjects of the King, except they will be his
Disciples, or members of his Church, repair the same, and put into his mouth
also; these are such as serve their own Bellies, and not the Lord Jesus Christ,
but are a Scandal and Reproach to the Christian-Religion while they profess
themselves Ministers of it. But the nakedness, greediness, covetousness,
enviousness, deceitfulness and cruelty of the priesthood appears more and more
daily, and is obvious to Thousands and Ten Thousands of people in this our
native Country of England, who make a trade of Religion, and learn to be
Preachers of the Gospel (as they say) as a Man learns to make Shoes; they learn
and buy their Skill of Preaching of Man; and they not only sell it again to
their free Customers, that willingly buy, but they impose the sale and exact
the price of others that dwell within their Quarter, though they like them not,
nor will have none of their Ware; this is a sore Evil in the Priesthood, and a
great Burden upon the people. So much by the way.

But to proceed to show the truth of our Plea, and the groseness of our
Adversaries lies. First, there was not a necessity to pull down so much as was
pulled down; neither was a danger of its sudden fall, as was pretended, the
wooden Pillars were mostly Sound; and the Roof and Walls might have been
Repaired and Amended according to our sugestion, for Three or Four Hundred
Pound: Only you would have it Fine, and Beautiful and honorable Vaults; for
when some urged to have it Repaired, and not pulled down, (it is said) D. P.
answered, What did they think he would Preach in a patched Church, or have a
place propt up with Prongs and Forks? So that if we could have had Liberty, we
could have answered the chief Baron's Question very fully; which Question was,
Whether there were any thing done more out of Curiossity, then of Necessity?
Secondly, there was no Contract made, nor so much as propounded to be made with
the Master Workman for the new Foundation work, south Porth Chancel nor
Vaults, distinct and separate from the rest of the Work, before the rate was
made, and your Lybel formed against us; but all was Included together in one
Bargain. And the Rate mentioned in your Lybel is sufficient to pay for all, if
Collected: And that this your Plea and invented Lie, took beginning since you
saw that you had out gone the Bishop's-order, any President or Law either: And
that, what has been done through Curiossity, has occasioned great part of the
Charge. And your pleading an agreement with the Workman for One Hundred and
Twenty Pound for the said work, was a late forged device to baffle and prevent
the Course of Justice. Thirdly, every Man in the Parish were not satisfied nor
Consenting to what was done: Neither had every one paid their Money, but Twenty
Four Quakers: Neither is Fifty Shillings the greatest Sum Rated upon any
Quaker, nor Forty Pound the whole Sum laid upon them, some being above Six
Pound, and the Sum rated upon them about One Hundred Pound: And more then a
Hundred that pay to the Poor besides Quakers, did not consent to the same: So
this is a fourfold Lie. And seeing you have by corrupt Interest and Lies,
stopped the Current of Justice, you have no cause to rejoice, nor ring Bells
for Joy, the consideration how you have come by, and accomplished your designs,
truly weighed in a serious Spirit, and Measured by the rule of Christianity, of
which you have a Profession, is really a great cause of Sorrow: and when you
come to give an Account of your Deeds done in the Body, you shall be sensible
thereof.

The Primitive Christians practice was, to rejoice in the Truth and not in
Iniquity, and to speak the Truth, every man to his Neighbor, and to bear false
witness against none, and despise dishonest Gain, or the gain of Oppression,
and to do as they would be done by: Never so much as attempting to Compel such
as did not believe nor receive their Doctrine, nor own them as true Ministers,
or a true Church to Contribute to their Maintenance, or to Build or Repair
their Meeting-places. Neither Law nor Gospel does afford you any President or
Example for such a practice; you are feign to make use of such Laws and Cnanos
as were made in the dark Night of Popery, to Authorize you in such kind of
work. You deny the Pope and Papists in Words, but imitate them in Practice, and
make use of all their Laws and Customs in being (as you have occasion) to serve
your Interest, and defend you in your Trade of preaching for Money, praying and
Singing for Money, Christening, Churching and Burying for Money, Selling
Absolutions and Licenses for Money; and for Money a Man may get into your
Church again, after he is Cursed out, or Excommunicate; and for Money a Man may
purchase any part of your Religion; yea, for Money a Man may have Prayers and
Sermon made for him after he is Dead; but without Money it is hard to get any
thing of the Priesthood; not a Child Christened, nor a Corpse buried without
Money by many Priests, though the persons concerned, have scarce enough to buy
them Bread; these and such like covetous Practices of the Priesthood, together
with the Unchristian-like Conversation of their people makes the Christian
Religion stink among Jews, Turks, and Infidels.

Now that Religion and Religious practices that is or can be bought or sold for
Money, is an Abomination in the sight of the Lord, and Relected by all
tenderhearted Conscientious People. And it is a grief to many, to observe and
behold how those called protestants do follow the Example, and Imitate that
dark Superstitious Sect of the papists; who sell their Masses, Pardons,
Absolutions and Dispensations, etc. for Money; so the protestants Pray, Sing,
Preach, Absolve, and sell Licenses for Money; who are only changed in Name,
Manner, Form, and Ceremony, and some outside Practices, but not in Nature and
Life; the same Spirit of Cain, Core, False Prophet, Idol Shepherd, Hireling,
Money Diviner, Pilate, chief Priest, Judas; and the rest of that Generation,
mentioned and testified against in the holy Scriptures, Rules and Reigns in the
Hearts of the formal protestants as in the papists; and it is to the Heart, the
inside that God looks: And all true Reformation begins within, in the Heart, if
that be, and continue Corrupted, Deceitful and Deseparately wicked; Unpurged,
Uncleansed, and Unsanctified by the precious Blood and Life of Jesus, all
Names, and outside Reformations, Worships, and Sacrifices, etc. are of no
worth, nor acceptable in the sight of God, according to Christ's teaching in
the Sixth Chapter of Luke, 43.44, 45. verse. A good Tree brings not forth
corrupt fruit; neither does a corrupt Tree bring forth good fruit, every Tree
is known by his fruit, for of Thorns men do not gather figgs, nor of a
Bramble-bush gather they Grapes: A good man out of the good Treasure of his
Heart, brings forth that which is good, an Evil man out of the Evil Treasure
of his Heart, brings forth that which is Evil; for out of the abundance of
the Heart, his mouth speaks; the Tree must be good, the Heart purged, ere the
fruit can be good or well-pleasing to God. So it is not a changing from one
Opinion to another, or from the Form of the Romish Prelacy, to that of
Episcopacy, or from that to Presbytery, or from any one Sect to another, is of
any worth, or acceptable to God; it is the turning from Darkness to Light, from
Sin to Righteousness, from the Power of Satan to the Power of God; it is the
Greation of a clean Heart, and the renewing of a right Spirit, it is to know
the inside cleansed, and then the outside will be clean also: These are the
things that are of an absolute necessity, and of great Worth, and this to know
and witness will stand People in stead in the Day of the Lord, when all
Formallity and outside Worship among all the Sects in Christendom will vanish
away like Smoke, this will stand and abide: And these are the true Worshippers
of God, in the Spirit and in the Truth, who Experimentally know the Power,
Virtue, and Opperation of the Spirit of Truth in their own Hearts, Minds and
Consciences, making them free from that which did defile, corrupt and darken
them: These are Christians indeed, Jews inward indeed; all others are but
Christians in Name, let their Profession and Form of Religion be what it will.

But to proceed, we being denied a prohibition at the Exchequer Court, through
corrupt Interest, and the false Allegations before mentioned, we moved by two
Councels at the Commonpleas Bar, who pleaded and urged their own Law to show
that of Right, A Prohibition ought to be granted, like men of honesty; but the
same untruth as was urged at the Exchequer Court being pleaded again, and that
Sentence, NONE BUT QVAKERS, MY LORD; NONE BUT TWENTY FOUR QVAKERS, MY LORD;
being often repeated, that Sentence seemed enough to turn all against us; so no
Prohibition could be obtained, though offer was made to go to Trial in few
days; yea, the Council desired but two days to prove our suggestion or give
them Cost, but all in vain, nothing could prevail, whether because we were
Quakers, or because they were not willing to offend the Ecclesiastical
Authority, is not certain; in the Priests Hands they found us, and there they
seemed resolved to leave us, till they had wrought their Wills upon us, and
sitted us for a Jayle; and because they were greedy to effect the same, and not
willing to loose any time, they proceeded the very next day to publish their
Excommunication in their Meeting Place, commonly called a Tabernacle; (but by
some of their own Church, a Smock-House, because Built by a Collection among
Women) in some time they found they had committed an Error in their haste, in
reading their Excommunication in this new Erection; and that it must be read in
a place called a Church; and they having not any fit, and Consecrated in their
own Parish, lest their Fathers work of Violence and Persecution should loose
time they procured their Curse to be published in another old Masshouse hard
by, standing in the same County. And now the next thing they wait for, is, the
end of the mercy of the Statute Law which allows Forty Days at least, in
favor of every Excommunicated person, ere the Priests can get a Writ to throw
their Bodies into Jayle. It is much to be questioned, whether the Mercy of
Ecclesistical Courts would extend to forty hours; did not the Statute Law put a
check upon them; yet these Courts are made up of the Principal Members of their
Church, and called Spiritual Men, such as have entered into holy Orders; but
what Spirit, Church and Order they are of, their Fruits sufficiciently declare
to all that are not wilfully blind. And all People may Pray, From the Bishops
Courts and unreasonable men, Good Lord deliver us.

And now, let all concerned in the Parish of Mary Magdalen's, who have given
out such unchristian Words, and cruel Threats against the Quakers; as that they
would send them to the Devil; and that they should lie in Jayle and Rot; and
that they would Ride many miles to see them Hanged; and that they should be
prosecuted for Twenty pound a Month, for not coming to Church; and to Ruin
their Estates and Trades, and not leave them a Bed to lie upon; and to prove
them no Subjects to the King: Let such Evil-minded men know, that the God whom
they fear and serve, is able to deliver out of their Hands; but if he will not,
know this, they are not careful to answer your Unrighteous Demands, nor bow to
your corrupt Wills, nor Worship the Image you set up: And if the Lord should
deliver them into your Hands, as he did Job into the hand of the Devil; they
are assured of this, that he will furnish them with strength and patience, to
undergo all you shall be suffered to do against them: And as they abide with
the Lord, and live in his Fear, his refreshing Consolating presence will
accompany them, and fill their Hearts with Joy, Peace, Content, and
Satisfaction, though without the pale of your Church, though in a nasty Prison
upon Straw, and out of the King's protection, and counted as the Offscouring
of all things, not fit to live in their native Country, as their Brethren the
ancient Christians were in Ages and Generations past: I say, as they suffer for
Righteousness sake in Conscience to God, and not as Evil doers, they shall have
the Answer of a good Conscience, and enjoy the Presence of the Lord, which is
better then Life, and all those things you threaten to deprive them of; and
they shall live the Life and dye the Death of the Righteous, and enter in and
inherit the Crown of Life, when you that are of a bitter spirit, a persecuting
envious spirit (against your Neighbors, who have done you no Wrong) and yet
profess Christ and Christianity, shall see your selves shut out; and when
trouble, anguish, sorrow, pain, perplexity of spirit and horror of conscience
shall attend you in your Houses and upon your Beds: for the Hand of God will
lie heavy upon the Evil-doer and Cruel Men; and Vengeance is the Lord's, and he
will repay it, and to him they can commit their Cause, and appeal to for
Justice, seeing their Importunity (though like the poor Widow's to the Unjust
Judge) cannot prevail with men.

They are known ( viz. the people called Quakers) to be a quiet, peaceable
people among their Neighbors in all parishes, Towns, Cities and Countries
where they dwell, throughout England; and great Observers and Honourers of the
End of Magistracy and true Christian-Government, which is a praise to them that
do well, and a terror to them that do evil; and are true Subjects to the King,
and obedient to all the good and wholesome Laws of their native Country, which
tend to preserve men Liberties, Properties, Persons and Estates, not for fear
of Punishment, but for Conscience sake; and they are ready to obey every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, in all things relating to the Things of a
Man, giving Caesar his due, and readily paying all Rates and Taxes that tend to
the Good, and Service, and Preservation of their Neighbors and Countrymen,
which is proper for any Christian men to do; but in things relating to God and
his Worship, and Conscience, they cannot endure to be imposed upon, they rather
choose to obey God then Man in all such Matters, and rather choose to suffer the
spoiling of their Goods, imprisonment of their Bodies, and give up their Lives
also, then submit to the Wills and Commands of men in Matters of Religion,
Church and Worship contrary to their Consciences and the persuasions of the
Spirit of God in their own Hearts, knowing it is a grievous thing to fall into
the Hands of the living God, and to sin against Light and Knowledge for fear of
suffering; therein they would not only be like the Common Sinners of the Times
(but worse) who in their common Service daily confess, They do that which they
should not do, and leave undone that which they should do, who confess they
have no Health in them, but are full of putrified Sores from the crown of the
Head to the sole of the Foot: I say, they would be worse then these (if worse
can be) and would be Abomination in the sight of the Lord, and a Stink in his
Nostrils, and his Righteous Soul would be vexed with them from day to day, and
they would not enjoy the Light of his Countenance, which to them is better then
the increase of Corn, Wine and Oil.

They can say, and that truly in the sight of God, That they desire the good of
all men, and have Love and Good-wil to all their Neighbors and countrymen,
and can truly pray for their enemies, though they use them despightfully; and
do desire, they may see the evil of their ways and repent, that they may enjoy
Blessings and Peace temporal and eternal. And if any thing to the contrary, as
Evil Thoughts, Evil Will, Prejudice or Enmity arise in them or among them
against any, they judge it with the Light and Spirit of God, as an Evil
inconsistent with their Profession of Christianity, and directly contrary to
the Life and Nature thereof; for they have and do declare and own it their
duty, to live and walk according to the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, and to know the same written in their Hearts; and this Law was the Guide
of Mankind before Sin entered the World; before outward Laws were written in
Tables of Stone, or in a Book. And those that are led by this Law of the Spirit
of Life, are the righteous Men and righteous Women; against whom there is no
Law, being living Witnesses of its power and virtue, making them free from
that, and giving them Victory and Dominion over that, because of which, the
outward Law was added, viz. Sin: And these own all good Laws outwardly, and
will not transgress against them. And the Law as says Paul, Is not made for
the Righteous, but for the Wicked, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.
or Lawless and Disobedient; for the Ungodly, and for Sinners; for Unholy and
profane; for murderers of Fathers, and murderers of Mothers; for
man-slayers, for Whoremongers; for them that defile themselves with mankind;
for men-stealers, for Liars, for perjured Persons; and if there be any other
thing that is contrary to sound Doctrine, etc.

And whoever talks and professes the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus,
and lives under the power of Sin and Death, (or continues in evil-doing) they
are no true Subjects to it; nor lovers of it, nor walkers in it; but a shame
and a Scandal to the Christian Religion, and Strangers and Alians from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and the Law of Sin and Death rules in their Minds and
Members, and leads them Captive into Evil; and these are in great Bondage to
the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life: And these
are the Children of disobedience; in whose Hearts the Prince of the Air, the
Prince of Darkness Rules, and leads them to Envy, Hate and Persecute their
Neighbors about Religion; which was never the work of a true Christian: For he
that hates his Brother, is a manslayer, 1 John 3.15. He that loves not his
Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? 1 John
4.20.

Be Serious, consider your Work and Condition; and see how you stand in the
sight of God, and mind God's witness in your own Consciences, and hearken to
the Voice thereof; and it will Infallibly inform, and show you whether the
Spirit of Christ and Christianity, which is the Spirit of Meckness, Gentleness,
Kindness, and Brotherly love, rules in your Hearts, or the contrary; and the
Voice of this, whether it be with you or against you, is as a Thousand
Witnesses, and all that slight, and disregard its Voice, and stop their Ears
at the Reproof thereof, while the day of their Visitation lasts, Time will come
upon them, and the Night will overtake them; wherein they shall hear its Voice
whether they will or no, and be judged according thereto: Conscience is
compared to a Book; and the Deeds done in the Body are written therein. And the
time will come upon them, when this Book shall be opened, and Men shall be
judged according to what is written therein. And remember, the Testimony of a
good, Conscience both in the day of Health and Prosperity, and in the day of
Sickness and Adversity, in Life and Death, is of more vallue then all the
World: And in any of these States and Conditions, a guilty defiled Conscience,
or a Conscience that through custom of doing Evil, becomes as Seared with a hot
Iron; and a hard Heart, is a grievous Plague and sore Judgment from God, and an
inevitable sign, and forerunner of Everlasting Vengeance; and is indeed, the
Fruit and Effect of Evil, or of sleighting and despising the voice of God's
Witness, and the striving of his Spirit in Peoples Hearts and Consciences: But
the answer and Testimony of a good Conscience is of God; and is as a
Wellspring of Life to those that have it; where Blessings and Peace are
enjoyed in the inward Man, amidst of all Adversity, Exercises and Trials that
may attend, both the outward and the inward; and such can lie down in Peace,
notwithstanding all the Spirit of Enmity and Cruelty can work against them;
whether it arise from an ignorant blind Zeal about Religion, Church and
Worship; (as very much does in Christendom) not only against those called
Quakers, but one Sect against another: Some of them being so full of Zeal, and
so empty of Knowledge, that they think they do God Service, to accomplish the
Ruin of such as are not of their Church, etc. Or whether it arise from corrupt
Interest, Prejudice, and Evil will; the ground is one, though the end be
various. The Lord give all People Wisdom, to see their way out of the same;
that they may be not only Christians in Name and Profession, but in Life and
Nature: Then all Enmity, Cruelty and Violence would cease, and Love, and
Brotherly-kindness would abound: And then People would lie down like Lambs
together, in that holy Mountain, (or Mountain of Holiness) where no destroyer
is, where no Violence, Cruelty, and Oppression is: And this is the hearty
desire of every true Christian, for their Neighbors and all People, who never
were, nor ever will be found seeking the hurt or ruin of any man, threatening
nor envying any, because they conform not to the same sort of Religion and
Ceremonies that they are of. Whoever are found in this Spirit of Envy and Evil
against their Neighbors and Countrymen, about matters of Faith, Sacrifice and
Worship, are of the Generation of Cain the first Envyer and Murderer about
Religion; and such are not Christians indeed; neither does the Law of God, nor
their Neighbors dwell in their Hearts, nor the Fruits of the Spirit appear and
grow amongst them; which Fruits are Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance; against whom there is no
Law; for the whole Law and the Prophets is fulfilled in this: Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart; and thy Neighbor as thy self, read Matthew.
22.37, 38, 39, 40. and Gal. 5.14. to the end of the Chapter; and the Lord
prepare your Hearts to consider what you read, that you may not only profess
the holy Scriptures, but love and obey them, and receive that grace of which
they testify; which taught and enabled the Primitive Christians, to live the
Life of Holiness they call for, and to avoid the contrary; that you may not
always be like silly Women laden with Sin, and led about with diverse lusts,
ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, which
makes free; but that you may know deliverance from the burden of Sin, and
bondage of Iniquity, and from the Lusts that lead aside, and come to be made
wise unto Salvation, and to feel the love of God spring in your Hearts; and
Blessings and Peace attend you in your comings in, goings out, lyings down, and
risings up; even that Blessing and Peace, which the World cannot give nor take
away.

And that you and all people may come to inherit, possess and enjoy inward
Peace with the Lord, and heavenly Consolation in the Spirit, and Life
everlasting, is the hearty Desire of your Friends and Neighbors, in Derision
called Quakers, who are redeemed from the spirit of Envy, hatred and Evil-will,
from the spirit of Cruelty, Violence and Revenge, into that Love which desires
that Peace on Earth and Good Will to Men, may more and more increase and
abound; and so far as it is possible make it their daily Practice and Endeavor
to live in Peace, and to follow Peace and Quietness with all men, according to
the Doctrine of the Christian Religion, which whosoever obeys and walks
according thereto, are preserved out of all Strife, Contention and Evil-Will,
Prejudice, Enmity, Cruelty and Violence; and who ever are found bringing forth
these Fruits, let their Talk and Pretense to Religion and Christianity be never
so great, they are certainly corrupt Trees, and disobedient Children, in whose
Hearts the Enemy of God and Man rules, and they have not the Love of God and
their Neighbor abiding in them, nor the Answer of a good Conscience, neither
are they Christian indeed, though they profess the Name, which will stand none
in stead in the Day of Account.

Let all such, to whom this may come, remember they have been told so, and it
is the Word of Truth to them, whether they will hear or forbear.

Now we, the Quakers (so called) do solemnly testify in the sight of God,
Angels and Men, That we do not refuse to pay Tithes, to Repair old Mass-Houses
(commonly and ignorantly called Churches) or to pay Priests and Clarks Wages,
Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues, and such like, out of Wilfulness or
Stubbornness, or out of any Enmity, Prejudice or Evil-will against any man's
person whatsoever; but really and truly upon the Account of Conscience to God,
knowing and believing that we should sin against God, and the Light of his
Spirit in our Hearts, and wound our own Consciences in so doing. And we do upon
the same account refuse to come to those old Mass-houses vulgarly called
Churches, to hear a man of unclean lips and corrupt heart Say common Service to
God, but Do none; read over common Prayer formally and customarily without the
Spirit of Prayer; sing David's Psalms (turned into Meeter by Queen Elizabeth's
Fiddlers or Musicians) but not with the Spirit nor good Understanding; hear
studied invented Sermons of an Hour long, composed in the Wisdom which this
World teaches, and so not profitable to Salvation, being only a profitable
Livelihood to men of that Trade, who preach for Hire, and divine for Money, and
seek for their Gain from their Quarter, and would exact and compel Money and
Goods from such as like not their Merchandise, if they dwell within their
Quarter or Parish: Those Prayers, Singers and Preachers for Money and Hire, are
not like Christ's Ministers, who received and do receive freely, and did and do
freely give; and they were and are Ministers of the manifold Grace of God. But
these Hirelings, or Preachers for Money, have not received freely, neither from
God nor Man; but have purchased their Ministry with Money, and are made by Men
at Schools and Colleges, and are sent and ordained by Men, and not by the
Lord, therefore they did not profit us when we were their Hearers and
Disciples; neither do they profit the people at all, but rather cause them to
err, as the False Prophets and Teachers did in the Prophet Jeremiah's time,
recorded in the 23d chapter of his Prophecy, read from the 11th verse to the
32d verse, and what thou find testified against the False Prophets in that
day, is true against all that are found in the same spirit and practices at
this day; the Priesthood of England now (as the Prophets then) speak a Vision
of their own Heart, and not out of the Mouth of the Lord; they fill peoples
Ears with a Noise of Words, and with fair Speeches or eloquent Discourses
deceive the Hearts of the Simple, talking much of the Righteous Holy Men's
Words, but not living their Life; speaking and smiting against Sin with that
Weapon which can never destroy it in themselves nor others; their Preaching is
like that of the Scribes and Pharisees, and not as one having Authority; they
say, Hear the Word of the Lord, but speak their own words, conceivings and
Inventions; they are of those that steal the Word from their Neighbor, and
boast in other men's Lines, etc.

In Christendom, so called, what a great Trade do these Schoolmen, Rabbis,
Doctors, Bishops and Hireling Priests make of the poor, honest, plain
Tradesmen's Words, who were some Plough-men, Herds-men, Shepherds and
Fishermen, ome of whom it is said knew not a Letter? And how is this part of
the World (called Europ) filled with Books and Commentaries of Papists,
Prelates, Presbyters, and other Sects, under Pretense of opening and giving the
right Meaning of their Words, whereby indeed people are divided and confused,
and various in their Understandings, and know not well what to do, nor whom to
believe, nor which to follow; so instead of gathering people into Unity, they
divide and scatter them, and lead them into Sects and Opinions; instead of
Repairing the Breaches of the Walls of Jerusalem, they Build up the Tower of
Babylon; instead of communicating to people the Key of Knowledge, they shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and neither enter themselves, nor suffer
those that would.

These things we have by sad and woeful Experience known, while we were seeking
the Living among the Dead, and wandering from Mountain to Hill, from one Priest
and Profession to another, changing, from one sort and fashion of Worship unto
another, from one Sect and Opinion to another; but not from Sin to
Righteousness, not from Evil to Good, nor from Death to Life; neither through
them all did we witness a Translation from the kingdom of Darkness into the
Kingdom of Christ, as the Primitive Christians did, but remained in Sin and
Corruption, in Death and Darkness, talking of the Fame of Wisdom, and
professing the holy Scriptures, the Words of holy, righteous, wise Men, the
Words of sanctified, justified and redeemed Men; but not living the Life of
Righteousness, Wisdom, Sanctification, Justification and Redemption; nay, we
were so far from it, that we did not believe it was possible so to do while on
this side the Grave; our Teachers caused us to err, teaching for Doctrine the
Precepts of Men, and the Thoughts and Conceivings of their own corrupt Hearts,
instead of the Word of the Lord: so we were as Blind led by the Blind, and
walked in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, and knew not whither we went;
we stumbled, and knew not at what; and grouped, like blind men, for the Wall;
following the diverse, uncertain, fallible Voices that are in the World, which
say, Lo, here is Christ; Lo, there is Christ; others. Behold he is in the
secret Chamber; and we were going forth, and wandering after them, and wearying
our selves for a very Vanity, spending our Money for that which was not Bread,
and our Labor for that which did not satisfy. This was our state and
condition in the day of our Ignorance, in the day of our Captivity and Bondage
to the lust of the eye, the lust of the flesh and the pride of life: But now we
can say as the primitive Christians did, 1 John 5.19, 20. We know that the Son
of God is come (not only that he Did come above Sixteen Hundred Years ago, but
Is come) and has given us a good Understanding, whereby we may know him that
is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is
the true God and eternal Life: And God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our
Hearts, whereby we can call God Father, and whereby we are led and guided out
of all false ways and false worships, out of the crooked ways and by-pathes
of our own finding out, into the one, true and living Way, and everlasting
Worship, which is in the Spirit and in the Truth, which was before all the
false Ways and invented Worships upon the Face of the Earth, and will remain
when they all vanish away.

So it is no new Sect or Opinion that we are now come unto, but the ancient
Way, wherein the holy Fathers, Prophets, Apostles and all the Righteous walked
in all Ages and Generations past, from Abel and Enoch unto this day, which is
Christ, the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sin; which is Christ, the true
Light, that lights every man coming into the World; who is indeed the Way,
the Truth and the Life, the Savior of his People (not in their Sins, but) from
their Sins: And the true Light now shines out of Darkness in thousands in this
our Native Country, and makes manifest, reproves and condemns every appearance
of evil, and leads the Children of it out of the same; this is the Universal
Way of God, wherein he is known, worshipped and served acceptably; this is his
Son, in whom he is well pleased, and with all that are in him.

Therefore in this Light must all the Nations that are saved walk; and all that
walk in it witness Safety from, and Power and Victory over the Evil One, and
Blessings, Peace and Consolation abound in their inward man. But all that
Reject and Despise, Slight and Contemn the Light and Grace of God teaching and
shining within, and the leading, guiding and moving of the Spirit of God
within, they reject and despise the Way and Means of Salvation, and have no
Strength against Sin, nor Victory over their Enemy the Prince of Darkness,
which rules within in their Hearts; but remain Slaves and Captives to him,
under the Chains of darkness, let their Talk and Profession of Christ and
Christianity be what it will, this is the Word of Truth to all our Neighbors
and Countrymen, whether they will hear or forbear, they shall find it Truein
the Day of Account.

The 17th of the 3d Month, 1677.
Something after.
Whereas the Cry against the Quakers is, That they are Disobedient to the Law,
Enemies to Magistrates, Haters of the Ministry of the Gospel, and no Friends to
the Lawyers; and that they would overthrow good Government, pull down Churches,
but build and repair none, etc.

In Answer to which we in short say thus much, That this Charge is utterly
without just Cause, and directly false: For First, We are obedient to the whole
Law, either actively or passively; and our Principle and Profession leads us
to obey every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, not for fear of Punishment,
but for Conscience sake; and herein stood the Christian Obedience in the
primitive times, to every Law and Ordinance of Man that tended to the
Encouragement and Praise of them that did well, and to the Terror of those that
did Evil; to other Laws, Ordinances and Commands of Men, which did not carry
this along with them, they were never actively obedient, but Witnessers against
them, and Sufferers by them, as might be evidenced at large by a multitude of
Examples throughout the whole Scriptures, and every Conscientious Christian Man
must needs acknowledge, that God is to be obeyed rather then Men, when they
command things repugnant to his Law, and impose upon the Mind, Heart,
Conscience and Understanding, contrary to the Light and Law of God therein;
this is to usurp the Throne of God, and to give Laws in his Kingdom, which is
spiritual, and not of this World; and where God rules and governs in the hearts
of men, which is and ought to be his Throne; and they know his Law This is the
New Covenant that God promised, and every Christian is to witness the law of
God writ in his Heart, and his Fear in his Inward Parts; and none can be a
Christian without it.
writ therein (from whence all just, reasonable, good Laws outwardly did
proceed) such cannot transgress against them, nor disobey them: So it is a
manifest spirit of Envy that says, We are disobedient to Law, seeing our
Conversation among our Neighbors throughout this Nation witnesses the
contrary, and they find no just Cause or Occasion against us, but in things
appertaining to Worship, Church, Religion and Conscience, which indeed are of a
spiritual Concern, and not belonging to Men of corrupt Minds (though they give
themselves the Name of spiritual men) to make and impose Laws about.

And as concerning Magistracy and Magistrates, whose Work is to judge between
Man and Man, when they trespass one against another, according to Equity and
Righteousness, without Respect to Persons, or any sinister Interest; these we
truly Love and Honor, who bear not the Sword in vain, but relieve the
Oppressed, and judge the Cause of the Innocent, and help the Poor against the
Mighty, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7, 8.
and are a Terror to the Evildoers; these judge for God, and not for Men; and
the Lord is with them in Judgment, and the Blessings and Presence of the Lord
will be upon them.

Now, it is the Evildoers that are Enemies to Magistracy, and that make and
create Trouble to good Magistrates, such as break and violate the Law of God
and Man, and kill and steal, and commit Adultery, and bear false witness
against them, and covet their Neighbors Wife, Ox, Ass, nor any thing that is
his, etc. these are they that are Haters of Law and Magistrates, and
disobedient to Authority.

Now we are kept by the Grace of God out of these things, and do by virtue of
the Nature and Power thereof the things contained in the Law, which shows the
Effect of the Law written in our Hearts; and so because we love and obey the
Law and Magistrates, we fulfill the End of them both: But they that say, They
love and honor the Law and Magistracy, and yet are found in the Evil-doing,
they lie, and do not the Truth, and would subvert the Law, and overthrow
Magistracy, and all Good Government among men, and are direct Enemies to
Magistrates.

Now, to those that say, we Hate those that are Ministers of the Gospel; we
say, and that truly, that it is a False Accusation; for we love no men more:
they are indeed Ambassadors of Peace and Reconcilation of Mankind to God; and
they have the Power of Persuasion, and in the Spirit of Love and Meekness do
prevail, and turn many from the Evil of their Ways, and direct them into the
Good Old Way and Ancient Path of Peace, which the Righteous in all Ages walked
in, from Enoch unto this day; in which Way the Wayfaring man; though a Fool,
cannot err [mark that] and seek and enquire for this Way.

Now, all such as pretend to be Ministers of the Gospel, and do not do and
Effect this Work in and among people, it is an evident sign the Lord never sent
them, and that they are not in Deed what they profess in Words; yet let all
know, that we hate no men's Persons, though we bear witness against Deceit and
Hypocritical Pretenses amongst men of all Degrees and Professions, and would
have men to be and to be known to be as they are in the sight of God, where all
Coverings avail not.

And to such as say, we are no Friends to the Lawyers; and that, we would
overthrow good Government, etc. We say, we are Friends to all men; and should
rejoice to see good Government set up among them; and especially amongst the
Lawyers, that, that common Honesty and Right might be fulfilled among them, as
is among other Tradesmen, who sell a Pennyworth for a Penny: And we desire
the Law might be declared in such plain terms, that the Lawyer Knowledge and
Counsel might be certain; that he might undertake to do Peoples work and
business to their Content, if he expect to receive their Money; as other
Tradesmen must: And that they would be so honest, that when People come to
them with a bad Cause (which the Law is against) that they would Instruct and
Advise them better, and refuse to appear in it for love of Money: Then would
Equity enter, and Justice run down as a mighty Stream. But when Lawyers
undertake bad Causes, for bad People, for love of Money; Equity is obstructed,
and the current of Justice stopped, delayed, deferred, if not pervented, and
turned backward; and by this means, honest men are unjustly vexed, troubled and
abused, trhough the Promisciousness of the Law, and the crafty skill, Rhetoric
and Interest of a bad Lawyer, and by these a poor man's Cause, though never so
good, is overthrown; all these things we would have amended; and have every man
honest in his Employment, and do as he would be done by; and this only being
observed, will bring People to be good friends, and love one another, and live
together in Peace, as becomes Christians: And then we believe the Lawyers
would not have so great a trade and Employment. But if we are accounted no
friends to the Lawyers, because we desire them to be honest; if that be a
fault, we must and shall be found guilty; however we are ready to judge and
conclude, that the Deceit, Corruption, self-Interest, and love of Money among
the Lawyers and those diverse Officers exercised about the Law, is a sore Evil,
and a great burden to this Nation: And that when Judges are restored as at
first, and Counselors as at the beginning, such Corruption will be swept away,
and such abuses will be reformed, and good Government will be established;
first within in the Minds and Hearts of men, and then without, which is our
hearty desire to see effected in this our Native Country.

And as for the cry against us, that we would pull down Churches, etc. We are
so far from it, that we wish, where there is one Church of Christ in a Nation,
that there were an hundred: But as for old Mass-houses and such like, which are
now used as Shops for those that make a trade of Preaching, to sell their
Common Prayer and Studied Sermons in, which ignorant People call Churches,
those that believe them to be so, and love and delight in them, and those that
drive a profitable Trade therein, etc. It is most right and proper forsuch to
repair and build them; and such have a Propriety therein. So not lawful nor
right, that we or any should pull down, impair or demollish any man's
propriety; being also directly contrary to the Fundamental Law of this the Land
of our Nativity, which all ought to observe and obey.

Now a Church of Christ, according to the Testimony of the holy Scriptures,
What a Church of Christ is.
is a Company of Believers in Christ, who areledand guided by his Spirit, learn
of him, keep his Sayings, observe his Doctrine, and walk according to his
Precepts and Commandments; and this Church may meet together in a House, as
they did in the primitive Times; but a House cannot be a Church: and though the
Church of Christ be one, yet there may be many of these Churches in diverse
Places, Nations and Countries, as there was in the primitive Times diverse
Churches in Asia, Corinth, Galatia, 1 Cor. last Chap.
Ephesus and Rome; and Paul writes a Salutation to Pricilla and Aquilla, and
the Church in their House; but never called a House a Church.

And the Church of Christ needs no man to build or repair it, being all living
Stones, fitly joined together by him, Note that the Word Church throughout the
New Testament ought to be rendered Congregation, as in ancient Translations and
primitive Times, and has no relation to a House, as people falsely imagine and
esteem.
who is the Master Builder, Foundation and chief Cornerstone also; and this
Church edifies it self in Love, and grows up an holy Habitation for God in the
Spirit; and this is the Substance and Antitype of that Tabernacle and outward
Temple which God once commanded to be built, and was the Glory of Israel in its
time, and the only Place wherein God appeared and was worshipped; but now he
dwells not in Temples made with Hands, neither is worshipped with men's Hands,
as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all Life and Breath, and all
things, etc. Acts 17.25.

Now, it is a very foolish, ridiculous and wicked thing for those called
Christians to take their Neighbors and Country men by the Throat, and say to
them, Give us Money to build and repair our Church, or we will Excommunicate
you, and throw your Bodies into Goal, where they shall rot, and spoil and ruin
your Trades and Families, etc.

If you have any Precept, President or Example for such kind of work in the
holy Scriptures (which you pretend to be your Rule for Faith and Practice)
let us know the Chapter and Verse where it is written, or else be ashamed and
Repent of your Work, and make not Christianity (by your Wicked Practices) a
Stink in the Nostrils of Atheists and Unbelievers.

So, whoever thou art that readst these things, thou may in short understand,
that we are cried out against in this Age, and reported and presented to be
such like Monsters as Paul (that harmless man) was said to be, when he was
called a Pestilent Fellow, a Ringleader of Sects, a Turner of the World
up-side down, not fit to live upon the Earth, etc. and this cry arose chiefly
from the Priests, Rabbis, Doctors, and great Professors of those times, which
soon influenced the common People, and it arises from the same spirit and like
persons now against us, and for no other Cause then bearing witness to the
Truth. Therefore we would have all people take heed how they hear and receive
Reports, lest they judge and condemn the Innocent without fair Trial, and hedge
up their own way, and abide in the midst of Darkness; but be ready to obey that
good Advice and Exhortation, Try all things, and hold fast that which is good:
And as they come to find and hold fast that which is good, it will quickly
furnish them with Strength against that which is Evil, and make them free from
it also, and deliver them from those Chains and Fetters of carnal private
Opinions traditionally and superstitiously introduced into their Minds and
Understandings, through the Wiles of the Enemy, Deceit and crafty Devices of
Men of corrupt Minds, who make a Trade of Religion and the Scriptures, and
serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies; who though they may
have a Zeal for their Opinions, it is not according to Knowledge, as is
demonstrated by their Fruits, who like Paul, when he was a Pharisee, in his
Blind Zeal thought he did well in Persecuting the Church of Christ, and in
haling the Saints to Prison by Virtue of his Orders and Packet of Letters from
the Priests; however, he did it ignorantly, therefore obtained Mercy. If Dr.
Parr and the rest of our Persecutors have thrown us into Goal in a Blind Zeal
for their Religion, and Excommunicated us out of their Church because they
believe us to be more wicked, profane and ungodly then others that dwell
within the Parish, we say, if it be so, their Sin is the less: but if it be
upon the account of Self-Interest and Enmity (as is most probable) their Sin
will be marked as with the Point of a Diamond, and it will be much if they find
a Place of Repentance: let those concerned consider of it, before it be too
late; for you must be accountable to God (if not to Men also) for your Actions;
and let it not seem a light thing in your Eyes, to throw Persons into Goal,
from their Wives, Families, Trades and Employments, for a thing of naught, only
call it Contempt to your Ecclesiastical Authority, when in time, it may yet
appear, that we attending your Courts from time to time, and offering our
Answers under our Hands and Seals by Proxy, was sufficient to prevent you of
that fained pretense of Contempt, upon which you have unlawfully by your lying
Lips Suplicated, Prayed, and gained a Writ against us, out of the King's Court
of Chancery, but were never willing to let us have a fair Trial, neither in
your cruel Spiritual Court, nor at Common Law; using Deceit and Lies, as has
been hinted before to hinder us of a prohibition.
The Law of England is very tender of the Liberties, Lives and Estates of Men,
and when Justice takes place, some may be called to Account for their heady,
rash, unlawful arbitrary Proceedings.

And seeing you know, or may know, that the Law is not on your sides, in your
thus dealing with us, how is it that you are so hardy, and overgrown with Envy,
as to give the Jailer so strict a Charge concerning us, That he must keep us
close Prisoners, as if we were great Malefactors? would it not please you well,
if his Heart was as cruel toward us as yours, and that he would exercise as
much Hardness of Heart, unlawful and unchristian Practices upon us in Prison,
as you have done to bring us thither? It Is hardly a Question whether some of
you would not be glad if he would throng us together into some stinking
Dungeon, where we might soon end our Days, and not live to see you mend, nor
be rewarded according to your works.

But God be thanked, he has so ordered and prepared the Minds and Hearts of
many Jaylors in England, that they are ready to show, and manifest Humanity,
Favor and Kindness toward us, who suffer for Conscience Sake, and not for
Evil doing.

It Is said, ( Luke 10.33.) the Samaritan was more compassionate, or merciful
then the Priest and the Levite, and that, Publicans and Harlots go into the
Kingdom of God, Matthew. 21.31.
before the chief Priests and Elders of the people; this Christ said many Ages
ago to the Priest and Elders then; and it is infallibly true in this Age, for
the Hireling Priest who Persecutes for his Belly, and the Elders of the People,
who are Cruel and Violent against their Neighbors about Church and Worship;
Matthew. 23.13. Luke 11.46.
and the Lawyers who lay heavy burdens upon the People; these shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men (now as then) and neither enter themselves, nor
suffer those that would.

And it is from these sort of Men that profess Law and Religion,
but practice neither, that Threatenings and Complaints have been, and are made
against some Jaylors, for behaving themselves kindly toward us, their honest
Prisoners, who they can trust to go forth and buy themselves Bread and small
Bear, and other necessaries at the best hand, knowing they will return again,
according to their word. But the Envy of our Persecutors, now they have thrown
us in Prison from our Employments, (being most poor Tradesmen, and have but
little Money) would by threats and other means, engage the Jailer to abridge us
of that Liberty, or of any kindness he is capable to show unto us: If this be
the Fruits of your Religion, and Spiritual-Courted men, and the effect of D.
P's teaching and Doctrine among you this many Years, you will by this never win
us to be of your Church, nor to be in love with your Way nor Works. To
conclude, we may say of you, as Jacob said of his two Sons, Simeon and Levi,
You are Brethren; Instruments of Cruelty are in your Habitations. Oh my Soul,
come not thou into their secret, unto their Assembly, etc. Genesis 49.5.

Joseph Rawbone, Henry Day.

Page 29. line 14. for Law read Love. p. 34. l. 23. for them r. their Neighbor
l. 24. for nor r. or. p. 35. l. 33. for pervented r. perverted. l. 35. for
trhough r. through.


