A PARAPHRASE ON THE Clergies Address TO THE KING, upon Occasion of His Order
in Council for Reading His late Declaration For Liberty of Conscience In all
CHURCHES.
With allowance.

The Text. The Paraphrase. We are not averse to the Publishing of the
Declaration, for want of due Tenderness toward Dissenters, with relation to
whom we shall be willing to come to such a Temper as shall be thought fit, when
the matter comes to be considered, and settled in Parliament and Convocation.

But the Declaration being founded upon such a Dispencing Power, as may at
pleasure set aside all Laws Ecclesiastical and Civil, appears to us Illegal,
and did so to the Parliament in 1672. And it is a Point of such great
Consequence, that we cannot make our selves Parties to it, so far as the
reading of it in the Church in the time of Divine Service will amount to.

We, who without any Bowels of tenderness, have hitherto exercised many inhuman
Cruelties upon Dissenters, observing the favorable regard that the Government
has now toward them, do promise, that We will hereafter come to such a Temper
in those Matters, as shall be settled by our Selves in Convocation, and by a
Parliament of our own Party.

But tho we suppose the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience to be
founded upon that Arbitrary Power which we have vigorously endeavored to
advance above all Law, when it could be strained to the Oppression of
Dissenters, and to the Establishment of our Greatness; yet finding it to be now
Calculated, for a more Equal and Impartial end, and destitute of those private
Considerations which have formerly animated Us, We are desirous in this
Conjuncture (as We were formerly, in the Year 1672) that those Laws for
Persecution, by which our Ecclesiastical Empire has been maintained should
retain their Force, and do by no means think fit to countenance the dispencing
with them, upon that single Motive of General Good which the Declaration
carries along with it.



Printed for R. C. and H. L. 1688.


