A SERMON PREACHED AT EXON, In the Cathedral of St. PETER; AT THE VISITATION OF
THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, ANTHONY, by Divine permission, Lord Bishop of
EXON.

By John Prince, Minister of the Gospel, at St. Martins, EXON.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, for R. Royston, Bookseller to His Most Sacred
Majesty; and are to be sold by Abisha Brocas, Bookseller in Exon. MDCLXXIV.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Drake, of Ash, in the County of Devon,
Baronet.
SIR,
FOR the confidence of the present Address, if an humble Gratitude become not
Apology sufficient, I must ingenuously profess I am provided of none. That Is a
Virtue (however Drolled upon by no small Wits, for a formal foppish thing) of
no common veneration among the Wise and Good of all Ages; of which, whosoever is
destitute, has been deservedly reputed in the rank of neither. Sen.
The Philosopher having numbered several of the worst of Crimes, concludes all,
with an -- Infra ista omnia Ingratus. To avoid which worst of Characters, Sir,
I am not a little happy of the present opportunity, of acknowledging to the
World, how much I stand obliged to your Worthy Family: A Family Great, not only
in its Antiquity, and most Noble Alliance, (if so near Relation to the
Villiers, Boteler, Marleburgh, Newport -- can speak it so:) But if there be any
truth in -- Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus -- like to be much more so,
in your great Virtue, and Sobriety; which truly in a Gentleman of your Years
and Quality, looks in this Age like the Poets -- Rara avis -- and attracts not
only Applause, but Wonder.

You are not ignorant, Sir, of the strange Innovations the present Generation
seems imposing upon all things, how Sacred or Venerable soever. The Notion of
the present Virtue we find with some, differs as much from the Ancient, as the
Mode-Cravett, does from the Yellow Ruffs of our Ancestors: And those Vices,
which heretofore would be owned by none, but the most Profligate Ruffian, are
now made the Ingredient of an Accomplished and Brave Man. Grace sometime was
without Morality, and now Morality is made to swallow up all Grace. The most
Reformed Religion (as 'twould be accounted) we find had wellnigh banished
Philosophy, and all other Learning out of the Land; but Philosophy now begins
to stomach the affront, and thinks to revenge the indignity, by threatening an
Ostracism to Religion; which seems to bode thus much, That among so many
contrasts of Opinion about both, we shall not enjoy (if some can do it) either
long.

But, Sir, I crave leave to remember you of an excellent Passage of your Great
Uncle, Lloyd, Fair Warn.
the late Earl of Marl. in his Letter to Sir H. P. That a certain thing going
up and down the World, called Religion, though pretended and dressed
Fantastically, and to purposes bad enough, does not yet by such evil dealing
lose its Being. And though it requires no small Resolution to pass through the
Raillery of a Frolic Age, in the Embrace of a despised Virtue; yet the Honor
'twill create you in all good men's breasts while you live (whose Censure only
is truly Valuable) and the sweet Perfume 'twill leave on your Name when you
dye, and that continual Feast 'twill prove to your Conscience living and dying,
will, I doubt not, carry you on in all virtuous Practices steadfast unto the
end: Whereby you will not only highly Accomode your truest Interest (as every
Wiseman should) but prove likewise an Example of real Greatness and
Generosity, to others of your own Age and Quality (who do not a little need it)
as every charitable Man would. And what is more, infinitely endear your self
and all your concerns to the Great and Good God, whose loving kindness, is not
only better than all the Honor and Grandeur of this World; but as the royal
Prophet tells us, Better than Life it self: Unto which I take leave to commend
you, with the humble Ambition of being owned for

Your most faithfully devoted Servant JOHN PRINCE.
St. Martins Exon. December. 18. 1674.
1 TIMOTHY 4.16. Take heed unto thy self, and to thy Doctrine; continue in them:
For in doing this, thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee.


AELIAN, in the 41st. chap. of the 9th. Page 260.
Book of his Histories, tells us, That when Pausanias the Lacedaemonian at a
certain Treat, desired Simonides the Poet to bestow upon him some wise Saying,
he gave him this; -- (...), -- Remember you are a Man. But the great Captain
swollen with Pride and Ambition at that time, made little account of it; till a
while after, Misery and Famine bringing him down nigher to himself, He thrice
breaks out into this Acknowledgment, -- (...) O Cean! There was great weight in
that Golden Sentence of thine. Truly, let who will among our selves seriously
consider it, he will not deny it the same just Encomium: The ignorance and
misapprehension of which, is one great occasion of the many disorders
observable in human life. There are but few who remember themselves Men; either
Pride and Arrogance elates them above the species of Humanity, and they bestow
a strange Apotheosis upon themselves, as Alexander, Commodus, and others have
done; or else on the other hand, by Luxury and sottish Practices, they debase
their Noble Natures to the condition of Brutes: on whom the observation of
Tacitus concerning Aulus Vitellius may be inverted, Through the stupidity of
their drenched Natures, if others did not remember they were Men, they
themselves would utterly have forgotten it. What renders the Delphick Oracle
very famous was, that wise Sentence 'twas heard to deliver, Know thy self. They
are but few words, but as much sense as Jupiter himself knew; Page 88. B.
As Plutarch in his Consolatory Oration to Apollonius, quotes it from Ion. The
great Miscarriages on both hands, most certainly arise from the unjust Measures
Men take of themselves, either from Pride, or Contempt. The famous Moralist
among his Apothegms, relates this memorable one of Cato Senior, Page 53. B.
That he thought it every ones duty -- Seipsum maxim vereri, -- To pay the
greatest reverence to himself: For he who shall once come to despise and
contemn himself, soon sinks infinitely beneath the Dignity of his own Nature,
and becomes a Swine, a Wolf, a Goat erect and clad in the Mode and Garb of a
Man: This certainly is the Duty, this the Obligation of all.

But how much more so may we conclude it theirs, who are, or should be, the
more wise and refined part of Mankind, the Guides and Curates of Souls: These
should especially attend themselves and their Doctrines too, on a conscientious
regard to which, so weighty a Concern as their own and others Salvation, is
said to depend in the words of the Text -- Take heed unto thy self, and thy
Doctrine; for in so doing, etc. --

And here to give you a tedious Analysis of the Chapter, to show the Connection
of the Text and Context, or to crumble the Words into nice or syllabical
Particles, might justly be interpreted an abuse of your Time and Patience; of
both which, I shall be as cautious as I can. It suffices to observe, That our
great Apostle, having laid down many weighty Remarks for his Beloved Timothy's
more faithful discharge of his Office in the foregoing Verses; seems to give an
Anacephaleosis, or Summary of all, in the words of the Text (which needs no
further Preface) Take heed unto -- In which we have two general Parts.

1. An earnest Exhortation -- Take heed unto thy self, and to thy Doctrines;
continue in them.

2. A weighty Motive to enforce it; -- For in doing this, thou shall save both
thy self, and them that hear thee.

For the Exhortation; Part. I.
In which we are to take notice of these two Circumstances; The Person
Exhorted: And the Subject Matter of the Exhortation.

1. For the Person Exhorted; We are to seek in the relative -- Thy self -- and
this we find to be Timothy, Bishop of the Church at Ephesus. Though we are not
to relate this Counsel and Advice, only to the Reverend Persons of that
venerable Order, as I might satisfy you, if I thought it needful, from
undeniable Authority; but to the lower and inferior Clergy likewise. Nor are
they to look upon themselves as excluded neither, but that they are included
with a -- (...) -- And what is the duty of the lesser Stars in this respect, is
much more so of those greater Luminaries in the Firmament of the Church, That
they take heed unto themselves, and to, etc. Which leads me to the

Second thing proposed, The Matter of the Exhortation in three Particulars. 1.
That we Take heed unto our selves. 2. To our Doctrine. And 3. That we continue
in them. But here by reason of the straitness of the Time, I shall crave leave
to blend the last of these with both the former, That we continue to attend our
selves, and our Doctrine. To begin with the

First, Of that Care and Heed we are to take unto our selves. In which are two
things to be considered; How, and Why.

1. How, -- (...) -- The word, as Strigelius observes, admits of a double
interpretation -- Adhibere, and Cohibere: Both which are very expressive of the
Duty incumbent on every Minister of the Gospel. Briefly of both.

1. Adhibere, To apply himself to -- And there are these three things more
especially, unto which we are carefully to apply our selves.

1. We are to take heed to our selves, To be competently qualified with those
Accomplishments necessary for the discharge of so weighty a Function; such as
skill in the Tongues, and some acquaintance with the Arts and Sciences, those
necessary Handmaids to Divinity. For however some blatter, that the holy
Apostles were but Illiterate Mechanics, never acquainted with
University-Learning; the Objection is as Brutish as the Authors of it: They
were extraordinarily supplied by the immediate assistance of the Holy Spirit,
and they understood all Languages in an instant; so that The Medes, and
Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, with other Nations, heard them speak
in their own Tongues the wonderful things of God. But if it be examined 'twill
be found that all the Apostles were not Men of such illiberal Education. St.
Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel an eminent Doctor of the Jews: And
how learned St. Luke was, even in profane Authors, his Style and Quotations,
in his excellent History of the Apostles, sufficiently demonstrate. But Why?
What offense has Learning done, it should be thus condemned? No, we see it is
only by such as are much in Mahomet's Circumstances, and are afraid it should
detect their Fanaticism and Folly. These Owls are afraid of the Light, and so
could wish all Universities, those Lumina Mundi, quite put out and
extinguished; so true is that -- Nullum habet inimicum -- But why should Wisdom
and Knowledge (for Learning is no more) now Miracles and extraordinary Gifts are
ceased, be less needful for the defense of the Gospel, than't has been always
accounted for all other Religions whatever? We find that the very Heathen
expected and preferred it in their Religious Persons. So were the Priests among
the Egyptians, to whom Lycurgus, Pythagoras, Plato and others, are said to
apply themselves for Learning: So were the Chaldees, among the Babylonians; the
Magi, among the Persians; the Flamins, among the Romans; the Gymnosophists,
among the Indians; the Druids, among the Gauls, etc. And that Christianity (the
Noblest and Divinest of all Religions whatever) should have its fence pulled
down, and be laid open to the fury of Atheists, Heretics and other invidious
Oppugners of it, proclaims the hearty good will of such as would have it so.
Not that it is necessary that every one in holy Orders, should be as Learned as
an Archbishop, or a Doctor of the Chair; It Is possible, meaner Parts and
Abilities may be of good use in their place. Though I must crave leave to add,
That if Persons were so industrious and studious as they might be, even after
holy Orders, they might improve that little Stock they sat up with, to such a
degree, as to prevent much of the Scandal their Ignorance reflects upon
themselves, and those Venerable Persons that ordained them. And truly it is
every ones Concern, To approve himself a workman, that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth. But then to this of Human Learning, there
is another no less necessary Expedient; and that is Holiness and Purity of
Heart and Life. Every good Man, said a good Man once, Joh. 7.17. Psalm. 25.14.
Prove. 23.5.
is (...) -- taught of God. If any man do his will, he shall know the Doctrine
whether it be of God. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show them his Covenant. And though I am not recommending what some of late
years did, a sanctified Duncery; yet without doubt, Sanctification is the best
help and expedient a Clergyman can find, for the right understanding and
explaining the great Mysteries of the Gospel: As the Learned and most ingenious
Bishop Tailor has fully demonstrated, Via intelligentia.
in his excellent Sermon to the University of Dublin. This then is the first
thing you are to take heed unto. But then,

2. The best Natural or Artificial Accomplishments, are not sufficient to
constitute a Minister of the Gospel, without a Lawful external Call. Heb. 5.4.
Exodus 4.14, 15, -- 27, 28.
None takes this Office upon him, it is said, but he that is called of God, as
Aaron was. And how was that? Not only by his admirable internal Qualifications,
but by the external Call likewise of Moses the Prophet of the Lord. Our Savior
himself pleads his Commission, That he was sent of God, and he confirms it by
Signs and Wonders. And as the Father sent him, he tells his Apostles, Joh.
20.21.
So send I you. And St. Paul's Question puts the matter quite out of question,
Romans 10.15.
How shall they Preach except they be sent? But then what is this Call or
Ordination we are to take heed unto? A Call of the Laics only? Nothing so;
For, however 'twas a Custom among the Ancients, for the People to nominate and
elect those who were to be ordained, and prefer them unto the Bishop; yet this
Nomination was never looked on as a sufficient Ordination, without laying on of
hands. But then whose hands must it be? Of a Lay-press-bytery, or a (...), a
Galamawfree of Lay-and Church-Elders? Nothing so neither; there is not a word
countenancing so wild a fancy, either in Scripture, or any sober Ancient
Writer. The Learned Scultetus acknowledges that he was sometime, Scult. observe.
in prim. Ep. ad Jun. page 35.
by great names led into this Error; but in his Observations on this Epistle,
he publicly retracts it in these words -- Me errasse ingenue profiteor; nam
quocunque me vertam, nullos ego Laicos Presbyteros, nullam Laicorum manuum
impositionem in allegato D. Pauli loco invenio. And then for the explaining
that phrase some have kept so much pother about -- The laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery, he has a little after these words -- Itaque Page 36.
si demus -- If we grant that the Presbytery here signifies the Assembly of the
Elders, those Elders were Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, and the Seventy two
Disciples -- and not Lay Elders. Quorum scriptura unsquam meminit, Ibid.
says he, and qui hoc ipso loco a Presbyterio, velut ex professo, excluduntur.
But then are the hands of mere Presbyters sufficient Ordination? We cannot find
it neither without the concurrence of a Bishop. Our Blessed Savior (the great
Bishop of Souls) ordained Apostles, and they Bishops, and they were to Ordain
Elders in every City. Tit. 1.5.
The Learned Bishop Hall, has a memorable passage to this purpose in his Tract
of Episcopacy: Confirmation and Ordination were ever held so intrinsecal to
Episcopacy, that I would fain see, says he, where it can be showed, That any
extremity of necessity, Vid. Bishop Hall, of Episc. Part. 2. Sect. 15. p. 91.
and 95.
was by the Catholic Church of Christ, ever yet acknowledged a warrant
sufficient to diffuse them into other hands. And I find in the second Apol. for
Athanasius, that Ischyras was pronounced by no less than a General Council, to
be no Presbyter, because Ordained only by a Presbyter. Cons. de hoe Ep. Hall,
de Epis. page 92.93. Secundae Par.
-- (...): So the Apologist. All that were Ordained by Coluthus the Presbyter
in that Schism, were looked on no other than as Laics. And how Ordination has
been all along established by Councils and Canons of the Church in the hands of
Bishops, would be too tedious here to relate. From all which, we cannot but
admire at the boldness of some, who dare invade the secret Function, without
any justifiable warrant, nothing dreading the dire fate of Vzziah the King; 2 Chronicles. 26.19.
and the obstinacy of others, who having received their Orders from no other
then Presbyters, will not yet submit to the imposition of the Episcopal hands.
So that this is one material point farther, every Minister of the Gospel should
take heed to himself in. But then

Lastly, What he is farther to take heed unto, is, Faithfully to discharge his
weighty Office, after lawful admission into it; and that not only in Doctrine
(of which anon) but in making Conscience likewise of fulfilling those Oaths and
Promises he has made to Conformity. It Is feared a small enquiry would discover
a too great Unfaithfulness in this particular: How shamefully do some cramp and
curtail the solemn Devotion of the Church, to make room for their own extempore
Conceptions? In which how warm and earnest are they, as if they would be
thought that they did not truly pray till now; posting through the Liturgy with
that haste and negligence, as if they suggested they did it only to avoid
Censure, and not because the great God could be very acceptably worshipped, by
that reasonable Service. Which has this honor and recommendation, that all its
most spiteful Adversaries (who have not been a few) could never yet in so many
years draw up any material Objection against it, and have still discovered more
weakness in themselves, than in that. Now there are a sort of persons among us,
that are Con-Non-Cons party per-pale -- who serve an humor and an interest of
Faction, and would be thought a great deal more holy than their Brethren by
making Conscience of not doing their Duty. These are the bane and pest of the
Church, as Dr. Ashton in his Case of scandal calls them, and work it more
mischief than its most professed enemies without. The Wild-Boars, and subtle
Foxes (if the Mound and Fence be good) may foam and howl, and that is all:
Whereas those creeping Moles work underground, undermine the Foundation, turn
up the Garden of the Church, hinder the Growth and spoil the Beauty of it. To
abate the Cross or Ring, to throw aside the Surplice, to omit the Litany and
second Service, shall recommend a Man farther to some humors, than all the
Parts, and Learning, and Sobriety of another that is faithful to his Duty. But I
beseech all to remember, That it is God, and Conscience, and the public Laws
that ought to be satisfied, and not a private Interest or a Faction. These
things, Reverend and Beloved, I crave your pardon to be your remembrancer in.
And so much for this first acceptance of the word, Take heed. -- I proceed now
to the

Second, (...) -- Refrain, Restrain your selves as to some things; And here I
shall briefly consider what they are: All things evil; And all things of evil
report.

1. All sinful things: To enumerate which, the Time forbids me to be
particular. Nor need I, in this grave Auditory, declaim long against the
intemperance either of Mind or Body, Pride or Envy, Avarice or Dishonesty,
Softness or Effeminacy, which reproach not only the sacred Function, but our
Natures, and are the stain and shame of the Soul; That blushes to be upraided
with such things. They are Swine- Epicuri de grege Porci -- who are found to
delight and glory in such filth as this. Hor. Ep.
However there is one sin, the Danger as well as Scandal of which is so great,
that I shall crave your patience to be a little more distinct in; And that is
the gross and crying sin of Simony, in which sense soever ye take the word.

1. If for unlawful conferring or obtaining Holy Orders, which is generally
owned to be the proper Simony; we find it a sin of dreadful consequence, by
that cutting reprehension given to Simon the Sorcerer in the Acts of the
Apostles: It Is he whose head is fullest of Learning and Knowledge, and whose
heart is fullest of Grace and Sanctity, and not he who has the fullest Purse,
or can make the best Interest, that ought to be admitted to so weighty a Trust.
Though from the great Piety and Providence of the Reverend Bishops, there can
be found no just ground of complaint in this particular. And that there are now
and then illiterate and unworthy Persons preferred to the sacred Function, is
often very much from the facility of the Inferior Clergy, who are so easily
persuaded (whether out of kindness or interest) to pass Testimonials and confer
Titles on such as no way deserve them. Which, if it were considered what
Detriment it brings the Church, and what Scandal it reflects upon the Reverend
Fathers of it, cannot but prevail with all, who wish the welfare of either, to
be exceeding cautious in this particular. But then

2. If be taken for obtaining or bestowing unlawfully Ecclesiastic Promotions
(as commonly it is) It Is what every one should take special heed to himself in.
I had thought I needed not have spoken much on this Theme in this place, 'till
I observed it so publicly muttered, that in point of Disposing, the Clergy are
but little less corrupt than the Laity; but in obtaining a great deal worse.
For if there were no Buyers, there could be no Sellers; and he that buys Souls
at the rate of Money, no wonder if he sells them for the same Coin. Whereas
it is much that Persons of so ingenuous Education should prove such Fools and
Knaves: For what other than folly is it, to purchase that at a dear rate, which
must otherwise necessarily descend gratis? And is it not the highth of Knavery
to obtain Promotion by Perjury and Baseness? If all Persons would consent but
to be honest, this cursed Trade would soon fall to the ground. Now, With what
Conscience will such discharge the Offices of that Church, into which they come
by perjury and corruption? With what comfort or satisfaction can any administer
the Blessed Eucharist, or indeed celebrate any other Religious Office, with the
guilt of such gross sins upon their Souls, and in which they resolve still to
persist? They are serious words of a most pious Prelate, Bishop Tailor in his
right Evan. p. 10.
I beseech you consider them; If a Priest be Simoniacal, he cannot be esteemed
righteous before God, by Preaching well and taking care of his Charge. Better
far were any to live a Curate all his days, at the stipend of a Groom or
Shepherd, than purchase the best Temporal preferment at the ruin of his Soul.
(...) -- Beware, Take heed to your selves here. But then,

2. It Is not enough to refrain from evil, but from things too of evil Report:
As Caesar said of his Pompeia, That 'twas not enough that Caesar 's Wife be
free from guilt, but she should be from suspicion too. There are many things in
themselves innocent and lawful enough, which prejudiced by custom, and raising
as ill opinion, in the minds of Spectators, as if they were really evil, ought
carefully to be avoided. Such an Action, such a Game, or Recreation, may not be
in its own nature sinful; but yet because it is ill interpreted and gives
offense, and depretiates the holy Function, it ought rather to be abstained
from; And it is a less evil to abridg my Privilege in so indifferent a matter,
than expose my Person or Profession to obloquie or Censure. All things, says
the Apostle, are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient; and what may
be Genter, and a piece of Gallantry in another, shall be interpreted a Crime
inexpiable in a Minister of the Gospel. Council. Trid. ses. 22.
I shall conclude this with that serious advice, whoever was the Author; Levia
etiam delicta, quae in ipsis maxima essent, effugiant, and eorum actiones
cunctis asserant venerationem. Even light offenses, which in them would be the
greatest delinquencies, let them carefully avoid, and let their actions strike
all into a reverence. This is that earnest Heed and Care which all Curates of
Souls, have great Reason to take always unto themselves. Which leads me on to
the

Second thing proposed, Why we should take such earnest Heed?

1. It must be considered that we have many eyes upon us: (...), says the
Apostle, We are become a Spectacle, a Theater to the World, to Angels and to
Men. And among those many, whose eyes are upon us, some observe us with fear,
others with envy and ill will; some are concerned at our failings, and others
triumph. We are like a City set upon an hill (as our Blessed Savior's
comparison is) which cannot be hid. There is a great deal of malice and
curiosity, which make many pry into the actions of a Clergyman: And the
Schismatic, the Profane, the Recusants of all persuasions think to excuse
their greater, by putting them in view with the lesser Failures of a Man in
Orders. And the very truth of it is, Sins receive a mighty aggravation from the
Quality of the Person by whom committed. -- Tanto conspectius in se crimen
habet -- We are still upon the Stage, and had need look well to our selves.

2. Be pleased to consider farther, that we are set to be a Pattern and an
Example unto others. Ye are the Light of the World, says Christ, and if the
light be darkness, how great is that darkness? Ye are the Salt of the earth,
and if the Salt has lost its savor, for what is it good? How sad is it when
those Examples, which should invite to Heaven, precipitate the speedier way to
Hell? How deplorable when they shall have their People -- Suorum Criminum
Testes, Socios and Consocios -- Not only Witnesses of, but Associates in
Villainy, whom they ought to show a better Example? It Is a most undoubted Truth,
whatever the Author were,- Causa sunt ruinae populi, sacerdotes mali, Clich.
Wicked Priests are a peoples ruin. We are sat upon a Tribunal, says a
Learned Forreigner, and if we Live well, and Preach well, we judge others; If we
Preach well, and Live ill, we condemn our selves. By living well and preaching
well, we instruct others how to live; but by preaching well and living ill, we
show God how to damn us. With what confidence can a Minister reprove his Flock
for that, which he himself at the next turn may be dashed in the teeth withal?

3. There is yet a farther Inducement, In that the effect of their Doctrine,
depends much on the Credit of their Persons and Conversations. If the Man's
Person once fall into contempt, let his Parts and Accomplishments be never so
great, his Doctrine will lose its Edg and Pungency; he has lost his Authority
in their Consciences, and is looked upon but as one of them. And among all
other things, it is Sin and Vice (this neglect of himself) that sets a person so
very low in the repute of others. It Is true, an indiscreet familiarity with the
Vulgar, vain discourse, light and trifling actions, is what often sets a person
very low in the esteem of those he shall converse with. De vita and morib.
sacerd. cap. 17. p. 18, 19.
Quotidiana sacerdotum cum Laicis conversatio, as Clichthoveus observes,
contemptibiles ipsos reddit. I shall forbear to English it. But what truly and
most sadly lessens and disparages the Man, is Vice. When they see the Man of
God given to the same inordinacies, and enslaved to the same lusts, they begin
to look upon him but as another Man, and that none of the best neither. It Is a
sincere Virtue, and a severe Conversation, that makes a person truly
Honorable, and enforces the greatest and the loosest to do him a silent
Reverence. There was never yet a truly sober, grave and virtuous Person, (who
pared off sin and trifling from his Conversation) but obtained a mighty
Reverence wherever he came, though his other Qualifications were but ordinary.
And truly this is the best, the only way I know left, to make your Persons and
your Doctrines both, acceptable and venerable wherever ye come. Some may be
admirable Preachers; but if their Lives give the Lie to their Doctrine, they
give too just occasion of having that crimination of the Spanish Ladies,
reflected upon them, That they are Angels in the Church, but Devils out on it:
or else that Sarcasme cast on some among our selves, That when they are in the
Pulpit, it is pity they should ever come out on it; and when they are out, it is
pity they should ever come there. It lies us then much upon, to take all
possible heed. -- Especially in

The Last place, When we consider how much this caution and circumspection will
conduce to the true splendor and honor of that Church, whose dutiful Sons we
would be thought to be. We might even tremble to think, in what a trembling
posture, this poor Church seems to be; but then you should remember, That when
the Ark of God was shaken 'twas because carried by Beasts. It Is wonderful to
observe from what improbable beginnings Christianity rose to that degree and
prevalency it has in the earth: What? was it from the great Eminency, Parts and
Learning of its first Founders? Alas! These, were but some poor mean persons --
Ignoti nominis -- of no Name or Reputation where they lived. And that a few
Fishermen and others of no higher Dignity should thus bear down before them
all the Wisdom of the Ethnick-World, which was observed then to be at its very
(...), and its debauched Powers; and what was no less strange, the perverse and
obstinate Jews, is a matter most worthy Admiration. But if you would know the
true reason on it, 'twas as well from the Exemplariness of their Lives, as the
Powerfulness of their Doctrines; because they did -- Been agere and male pati
-- And were eminent themselves for that Purity and Holiness they inculcated
upon others. Bishop Tailor.
'Twas the observation of an excellent Person, That the great Learning of the
Fathers, was more owing to their Piety, than to their skill, more to God than
to themselves. 'Twas Holiness and Purity, brought the Catholic Church to that
veneration and perfection it ever had in the World; And truly no National
Church can ever expect to thrive any other way. It Is not all the Hecking and
Vapouring of its greatest Braves, about those Fimbriae of its ceremonious
Constitutions, will be able to do it; Their importune intemperate heat may do
it a far greater mischief than advantage. Though I wish from my soul, that all
would with zeal and unanimity conform heartily to the innocent as well as
decent Modes which are enjoined us, being no way able to find any thing can
excuse their Disobedience in this kind from sin; yet it is a true and sober
Virtue, when all is done, that must make it glorious. To be fond of the Shadow
and let go the Substance, is the Discretion of Esop's Dog: Or, to be curious
about the knots or fringes of our Garment, and in the mean time neglect the
Body, is not a greater madness than they are guilty of, who keep a mighty noise
to preserve some few Rites, but all the while neglect its truest Interest and
Concern. Sermon. page 200.
They are the words and judgment of no less Person than that Learned Bishop
Tailor, in his Christian Prud. They that are zealous for their Rights, and tame
in their Devotion, furious against Sacriledg, and Companions of Drunkards,
implacable against breakers of a Canon, and careless and patient enough with
them that break the Commands of the Decalogue, tell all the World, their
private sense is to preserve their own interest with scruple and curiosity, and
leave God to take care for his. It Is this is the way still left us of making
this poor Church to become truly splendid. Those certainly are the greatest
Enemies she has, who would be known for her Sons by their being more lewd than
others: In that they will not bungle, or be shy of an Oath, but let it fly in the
full of the mouth; that they dare be Drunk and boast on it too, commit Folly and
blush not to own it. These play the Judas, and betray while they kiss her; and
whilst they pretend kindness with Abner, wound her in her Vitals: when all her
other professed Adversaries, whether of Rome or Geneva, whatever flourishes they
make, can scarce so much as reach her in her Clothes or Habit. Does this our
most dear and venerable Mother, in any of her Articles or Constitutions, allow
of any such things as these? No, She obliges to as much Purity, and as sincere
a Virtue, as the greatest Precisian dares pretend to. It could be therefore
wished that such Learned persons would pretend to some other Mother, and not
abuse the best Church in the World, by claiming so near a Relation, when they
are of spurious Extraction all the while. Why cannot we, why should we not be as
great lovers of Virtue as others would be thought to be? Why should we suffer
others Demureness, and Starchedness to carry away the credit of all Religion
and Sobriety? Dare we not own as great strictness and severity as they? Truly
if we would contribute any thing to the repair of this poor languishing Church,
It must be this way: This lies within our Sphere, this we can undertake for our
Selves and our Flocks. And if we are serious and faithful in it, we shall not
doubt of seeing her once more to lift up her most beautiful face, and become
the Joy of the whole Earth; which God of his infinite mercy grant. If we would
have it so, if we would contribute what we can unto it -- (...), Take heed unto
thy self, and to thy Doctrine: Which brings me to the

Second Branch of the Exhortation, That we take heed to our Doctrine too, and
continue so to do; where I shall briefly consider what this Doctrine is, and
how we should take heed unto it.

1. Raven. in vex.
Doctrine here is taken -- Pro functione docendi; For the Office and Function
of Teaching: And it seems much the same with that advice given by our great
Apostle some other where; Take heed unto your selves and all the Flock, over
which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God. This
is the heed you are to take, not to fleece but to feed your Flocks. How then do
such answer this weighty Injunction, who seldom visit them but at shearing
time? When it is too palpable that they come, not to feed them, but themselves?
Now this taking heed to our Doctrine, chiefly shows it self these two ways; In
Catechizing; in Preaching: In both which respects we are to take all earnest
heed unto it.

1. For Catechizing: And here to undertake to show the import and advantages of
it, how necessary it is a good Foundation be first laid, before a firm
Superstructure can be raised; how needful it is the first Principles should be
well understood, before the greater Mysteries can be thoroughly apprehended;
what a most excellent expedient it is to prevent Heresy and Schism; what
benefit would hence accrue both to Church and State, I suppose altogether
needless in this venerable Assembly. Though I am bold to say, That for matter
of Instruction it has great advantage over Preaching it self; and they are like
to receive little benefit by a Sermon, who are not well learned in the
Catechism. Nor is the office of Catechizing beneath the Dignity of the greatest
Minister of the Gospel; it is what the holy Apostles themselves did; The Ancient
Fathers themselves were (...): And it is a good example our right Reverend
Diocesan is pleased to give you, whose weekly practice in this particular
convinces you that it is not beneath the Dignity of a Bishop. I shall only mind
you of the Injunction of the Church, which requires you Sundays and Holy Days
after the second Lesson at Evening-Prayer, The Rubric after the Cat.
to Catechize the Children of your Parishes in the Church-Catechism: A
Catechism so short and yet so copious, that all Divinity, says the Divine
Herbert, Country Pars.
may easily be reduced unto it. This is one principal part, of that Doctrine
you are to take heed unto But then,

2. The other is Preaching, a duty of infinite Consequence and Advantage;
though I shall not endeavor to advance it by comparison, as some by comparison
have done to depretiate it. Praying, Catechizing, and Preaching, are all Duties
of Eternal Concern: And whether some may have done so well, in raising the Desk
equal with the Pulpit, in bringing in a contention between those beautiful
Sisters, who would have been content to have lived peaceably together, and
mutually have supported each the other, with the pardon of some great Names,
may be a question. Why should we set the Ordinances of our blessed Savior
together by the ears, and make them clash for superiority? Rather let them all
have that Reverence and Respect paid them which is their just due. Nor can I
see how it can consist with true Piety, to disparage the one to advance the
other. God knows! this most weighty Institution of Preaching has been terribly
abused, hardly any thing more; yet I hope that will not lessen it in the judgment
of any serious person. For all its unhappiness, it should still have its due
Veneration, as it is the -- (...), as the Apostle calls it; The power of God to
Salvation. And truly, all in their several places from the highest to the
lowest, that are duly Commissioned to it, should be most faithful and constant
in the discharge of it. This is what (after the Judgment be duly informed by
Catechizing) has a great influence upon the Heart and Affections which are most
capable to be wrought on this way. Take heed then to this part of your Doctrine
too. And from this I proceed to the

Second thing proposed, to enquire, How? And here for Youth and Ignorance to
undertake to prescribe to so much Gravity and Learning, would most justly be
interpreted an unpardonable Presumption. Though I dare not pretend to be an
Instructor to any, I shall crave pardon to be a Remembrancer to all in a few
particulars.

1. Take heed your Doctrine be profitable and wholesome: Many fill the brains of
their Auditors with noise and air; which however it makes good Music for the
time in the Ear, proves like the Spartans Nightingale -- vox and praeterea
nihil -- Such things as are of daily use and practice, as are all earnest
inculcations of Obedience to God, and to Man for Gods-sake, of Humility and
Sobriety, of Love and Charity, of Common Justice and Honesty, of Faith and
Repentance and good Works -- If thou put them in remembrance of these things,
thou shall be -- (...), a good Minister of Jesus Christ. What have the ignorant
vulgar to do with Controversy? Why should their heads be filled with perplexed
Notions, and foolish questions, which engender strifes? It Is Prudence as well
as Piety, not so much to urge things in controversy as out of controversy,
which all confess to be good and gracious. However some make it their business
to dish into their Auditory fine Notions, most rare and quaint Speculations,
Mystical Metaphysical Nonsense, though it may make them gape and stare, 'twill
no more nourish them, than as one words it, a slice of Millstone. But,

2. There is this farther heed to be taken, it be Grave and Zealous. He that
has not so much Learning or Oratory as his neighbor, Bishop Ches. Eccles. p.
130.
may have yet as much Zeal; and it is an hearty urging matters that often makes
them impressive. It Is a memorable story recorded by a late Reverend Bishop:
That diverse Learned men having with much Argument and strength of Reason
contended with another persuading him to be a Christian; he being also Learned,
did subtly evade their Arguments: At length a grave Person among them, of no
note for Learning stands up and bespeaks him in some downright affectionate
expressions, which so wrought upon him, that he presently submitted; yielding
this as his Reason -- Donec audiebam rations humanas -- While I heard nothing
but humane Reason, I repelled it with the same; but as soon as I hear the holy
Spirit speaking, I yield unto the Spirit. There is often far more Energy in a
hearty plainness, than the quaintest Rhetoric. The Vulgar that sit under their
Pulpits are as hard and dead as the Seats they sit on, and need a mountain of
Fire to kindle them, as the pious Herbert speaks. Though I am not now urging
that Fanatical Raving which some, with success enough to their own Designs,
have of late used; but a sober and prudent Zeal, which however some reproach
with the Character of Fanaticism (though I suppose it far from any sober person
to do it) yet is it of great Advantage; it being natural to men to think, that
where is much earnestness, there is something worth the hearing. Nor should the
most solemn serious Truths be delivered in a Theatrical strain; but the Stage
should be made to know its distance from the Pulpit. The Preachers business is
to teach men not to be witty but holy; though that looseness and irreverence,
by some of late called Preaching in the Demonstration of the Spirit, should be
as carefully avoided on the other hand; and Vtile and Dulce are most
successfully contemper'd. Yet this too ought to be remembered, Resus.
that a light Wit and a Buffoon is the greatest solecism in a Pulpit. The
Learned Verulam has a good Remark to this purpose, that there is not -- Major
confusio, quam serii and Joci -- A greater confusion than to commix jest and
earnest. It Is not therefore witty Conceits, nor learned Quotations, nor
flanting Language, that will benefit the poor ignorant soul; It may please an
itching Ear, while it strikes gently on it, but it cannot refresh a parched
Soul, that is a-thirst, not for the droppings of Helicon, but the streams of the
Blood of God. But that I be not tedious;

Lastly, What is farther to be heeded is, That all imprudent, intemperate heats
be avoided in our Doctrine; That there be no hot or violent Reflections,
especially such as are untrue or unsound. Though I must humbly profess there is
not any person present, less affected to the groundless sinful Separations of
our present Dissenters of all sorts; yet cannot I think the Pulpit a fit place
to reclaim them in, who possibly are seldom there, and when they are so, are
but the more hardened by the ill-Language and bitter Invectives thrown on
themselves or Party. All persons whatsoever pretend more or less to honor, and
they cannot be easily reconciled to such as would rob them of that Treasure and
expose them (whatever they are) for Fools and Rascals: Whereas Reason is not
satisfied by the loudest Taunts or Sarcasms, but with Reason; and the Line of
humane Reason must be acknowledged short, Vid. Tossani synops.
and we may easily be mistaken. All the Ancient Fathers of the Church in some
thing or other have been so: And what we may suppose very proper and becoming,
has been adjudged in other parts of the World very incongruous. As the
incomparable Charron observes, Wisd.
That the learned Philosophers were wont in all their Discourses, to say,
Ita videtur, and in Nature there is nothing certain, but uncertainty; which
might teach us in matters dubious and controversial, to be modest and moderate.
There is more good to be obtained by Love and Charity, and personal
Condescentions, than by Haughtiness and intemperate Zeal. Charity edifieth,
says the Apostle; makes us good Men and good Ministers. And thus should we take
heed to our Doctrine, to fulfill it with all faithfulness and prudence. To
which, if ye remember, we have all most weighty Encouragement. Which brings me
to the

Second General Part of my Text, Part II.
Thou shall save both thy self and them that hear thee. In which we find most
weighty inducement to take all imaginable heed both to our selves and our
Doctrines; Our own Salvation, and the Salvation of others.

1. Thou shall save thy self. And this will need a little Explication. Not thy
self Civilly considered; not thy Interest, not thy Honor, not thy Ease, not
thy Concern in this world; No, we find those who are most faithful in this
respect, are not yet able so to save themselves. For what reproaches are
reflected, not upon some particular obnoxious persons, but the whole Function?
Insomuch, with some it is a Scandal to be a Clergyman; and to call him Priest,
or Doctor, or Parson, (Titles of Honor and Deference heretofore), as some will
Mouth it, Dr. South Consecra. Ser. p. 24.
is to set him, as a great Wit expresses it, Ten degrees below his own Servant.
Whereas, if it be considered, we shall find a great Reverence and Esteem due to
every faithful Minister of the Gospel, in the words of my Text, -- He shall
save both himself and others. Where you see a faithful Minister is called a
Savior. Though God be jealous of his Honor, and will not suffer it should be
given to another; yet he seems content his faithful Ambassadors should share
with him in this Title. Not that every one in that sacred Office shall save
himself; Homil. 3. in act. Apost.
no, 'twas St. Chrysostom's Opinion, Ex Ecclesiae ministris non arbitror multos
salvari. I tremble to put it into English: But he that is faithful to his
trust, In so doing, thou shall -- which yet is not from the Dignity of the
Person, but the Virtue of the Office; God Almighty blessing his own Institution
to this happy purpose. And truly, however this holy Profession be despised by
the great Wits and daring Drolls of the Age, it has always had a very large
Veneration in the World, and that by the greatest Personages of it, as well
Heathen as others. Josephus in lib. 11. of his Antiquit. reports, That when
Jaddus the High Priest of the Jews went out to meet Alexander the Great,
adorned with his Pontificals and Robes of Office, that great Emperor (before
whom the World fell) struck with awe, fell down at his feet, and did him
reverence. The great Augustus held it no less Glory, to be styled Pontifex Max.
than Imperator: And you all know whence the Egyptian Mercurius had the Surname
of Trismegistus. De vit. and mor. sacerd. p. 9.
Among the Ancients the same men were Kings and Priests. And Clichthoveus tells
us, among the Egyptians 'twas the Custom, Ex omni Philosophorum numero, To
choose out of their Philosophers, Priests, but out of their Priests a King.
Virgil.
And the Poet testifies of Anius, that he was Rex idem Hominum, Phaebique
Sacerdos. Insomuch, let none presume to despise that Sacred Office, which is
not beneath the most Glorious Angel, or any of the Celestial Hierarchy. And let
none of the Sons of men disdain to be of that Employment of which the Son of
God was. However unjustly despised, let us esteem it the far greatest Honor we
are capable of in this World, and endeavor to credit that, as that credits us.

Nor since those cursed dismemberings of Church-Revenues, is this the way that
takes more to Wealth than Honor, Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus -- and much
good may they do them-But yet that those gleanings which remain of a prodigious
Avarice (for in many places they can be called no other) should be looked on
with a malevolent aspect, this is no less sad than strange. And pray, whence is
it, That a Clergyman, who has spent his Time and Fortune too in the Schools of
the Prophets, in order to be beneficial to the rest of Mankind; who, if he had
turned that way, has parts and abilities sufficient to have advanced him to as
much Honor and Wealth as some others arrive to; that yet after all this, be
envied a small Annuity during life, narrower it may be than that of some
ordinary Mechanic? That I suppose the truest Reason assigned by our blessed
Savior, Ye are not of this World, and therefore the world hates you. Now, how
consonant this is to the Interest of true Religion, let any sober person judge.
Religion is observed to flourish or fade always, as the Priests and Ministers
of it do. Insomuch 'twas said of Julian, when he robbed the Church of her
Revenue, that he did not only occidere Presbyteros sed and Presbyterium, kill
the Ministers, but (what was a prodigious flight of witty Malice) the Ministry
it self. And 'twas a grave Observation I have met with to this purpose, That as
long as the Gentile- Priests had any maintenance and respect left them, so long
their Superstitions continued, even under Christian Emperors; but as soon as
Theodosius deprived them of that, Gentilism presently vanished, and expired
like a Lamp whose Oil was consumed. And truly, whatever some invidiously
pretend of the Ignorance of some, and the Scandal of others of the Clergy, it is
undoubtedly the uncertain slender maintenance in Cities and Corporations, that
has been the true cause of so much Schism and Fanaticism as is now among us: A
Remedy for which can never be expected till there be some settled Provision in
this particular.

So then this is not the meaning of the words, Thou shall save thy self -- No,
we may too truly say with the Apostle, If in this life only we had hope,
Miserabiliores sumus omnibus filiis hominis; so Tremelius. But then this saving
our selves must be understood, of saving our Consciences here whole and entire;
feasting them with the most excellent Banquet of Peace and Tranquillity, and a
sense of having done our Duty; and the saving our Souls in the other World, a
securing a most glorious and blessed Eternity to our selves, with our great
Master in Heaven. And truly this is a very high and a very great Encouragement.
And how should the Apostles care be ours, (...), to beat down our bodies, lest
that by any means, while we preach to others, we our selves become cast-aways.
Faithfulness to his Person and to his Doctrine, is the only way for a Minister
to secure his Salvation; in which, if he miscarries he is undone for ever. And
I should humbly conceive, That Interest (especially in so weighty an affair)
should be more powerful than the most melting Oratory, to engage you to your
Duty; and that entreaties in this matter would be altogether needless and
impertinent; You shall save your selves: But not only so. In the

Second place, You shall save others too, Them that hear thee. Where you see,
that the Salvation of your Flocks, depends very much upon your Faithfulness to
them and to your selves. And would it not be a dreadful thing, if to your own
intolerable guilt, the Damnation of an whole Parish should be charged too upon
your Consciences for ever. It Is no mean thing certainly, to be a Minister of
the Gospel; the consideration of which made many of the holy Fathers to
tremble. St. Chrysostom calls it, Onus Angelicis humeris formidandum. Holy
Court.
And Causinus tells us, It made St. Ambrose hide himself (when they were about
to Consecrate him a Bishop) and three times fly from Milane, and after he had
traveled hard all night, miraculously found himself the next morning at the
very Gate of that City he endeavored to avoid. Did he seriously consider what
it is he undertakes, he could hardly sleep quietly one night all his Life
after, there is so strict and severe an Account at last to be required at his
hands: Not that Success is a Ministers Duty; We may not sin, if our People
will not be bettered and improved i. e. If we faithfully warn them, it is their
fault, and we cannot help that. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25.
The servant of the Lord, says the Apostle, must be gentle to all men, apt to
teach, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves: If peradventure
God will give them repentance, to the acknowledgment of the truth. Where you
see after a Minister has done his best, it is yet but a peradventure, if God
will give them repentance. Though I must crave leave to mind you, that these
words seem to be a certain Promise of success to a Ministers faithful discharge
of his Duty; He shall save both himself and them that hear him. Which last
words intimate what a peoples Duty is, in order to this great End, Attendance
and Submission. Of which briefly.

1. A constant Attendance on their Ministry. They are to hear them; And how can
they hear them; but by frequenting those lawful public places, Consecrated to
that purpose? Not creeping into Chambers, or Barns, or Stables, places destined
to the vilest Offices. It Is strange to observe the fluctuation of the humors
of the giddy Multitude, who shall sometimes turn Churches into Stables, and
Stables back again into Chambers. A Practice that does not a little disparage
Religion, and sink it low in the opinion of the Profane and Debauched, giving
them occasion to account that a low sordid thing, which they shall see
celebrated in so beastly a place. Truly it is not the least Indignity, our
Brethren of the Nonconformity, reflect upon the Church and King both, thus to
seduce silly people into Parlours, and Halls, and Barns, as if they lived in
the times of some Nero, or Dioclesian, and suggest that the true Christian
Religion, were nowhere purely professed but among themselves; not considering
how great a sin Schism and unjust Separations have been by all holy men most
justly accounted. Bakon's Resus.
Non servatur unitas in credendo, nisi eadem sit in colendo, was the
observation of a grave and wise Man. So that it is the peoples Duty to attend
their Minister, their own Minister that God and the Laws have set over them.
The Apostle rebukes it as an ill custom among some in his time, The peoples
heaping to themselves Teachers, having itching ears. Give your own lawful
Ministers then the encouragement of your constant Attendance, lest you incur
the guilt of weakening their hands in the Work of the Lord. But then,

2. There is farther incumbent on the People, Submission and Obedience. Hearing
is often taken for Obeying; and unless you obey and follow what you hear, your
hearing will but aggravate your condemnation. You should submit to them as such
as are over you in the Lord, and yield up your selves to the conduct of their
better Judgments in Religious Affairs, whose Profession, those things more
immediately are, and who have had greater advantages of being better acquainted
with them than you have. It Is sad to see how confidently illiterate ignorant
people will often contend with their Minister. A great sin 'twas among the Jews
to strive with their Priests; though nothing more common with such as would be
thought the best of Christians; when, spiritual pride and conceitedness (this
crying sin of the Times) is not a little dangerous, and requires no small
watchfulness against it. You should therefore be docil and tractable, yielding
a submissive Ear to your faithful and lawful Pastors and Curates; which I shall
endeavor to enforce upon your Consciences in the words of the Apostle. Obey
them who have the Rule over you and submit your selves, for they watch for your
Souls as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy and not with
grief; for that is unprofitable for you.

All that I have now more to add, is only this short Paraenesis to my Brethren
of the Inferior Clergy. First of all,

That you would be persuaded into a conscientious practice of your Duty.
Consider what most weighty moments depend upon it, what great encouragement
attends your Fidelity. Osor. Concion. Tom. 3.
'Twas the Opinion of some of the Ancients, That there was an Additional
Coronet of Glory that shall be bestowed on three sorts of Persons, among which,
Doctors are one, such as Labor in Word and Doctrine. However from a surer word
of Prophecy, this we are certain of, That They that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the
stars for ever and ever.

Next of all I crave pardon to add one word to our Right Reverend Visitor, That
he make it his business to see the Inferior Clergy do their Duty, and to take
all earnest heed unto themselves and Doctrine. Sessi. 14.
It Is serious Advice proposed by the Council (or, as a Great Man styles it, Fas
est and ab host doceri. --
The Conventicle) of Trent, whose greatest excellency was observed to consist
in those good Rules it prescribed the Clergy, -- Monchunt Episcopi suos
Clericos in quocunque ordine fuerint, ut conversatione, sermon, and scientia
commisso sibi Dei Populo praeeant -- ne illud Prophetae impleatur in illis,
Sacerdotes Dei contaminant sancta and reprobant legem. And one thing farther
deserves your Lordships, no less strict inspection, that there be no abuses
creep into the Ecclesiastical Courts of this Diocese, to the shame and ruin of
the Church; that it may not be so frequently heard, That what must be presented
in haste shall be reformed by leisure.

I shall now ease your well-approved Patience, in that serious Obtestation of
our great Apostle to his Son Timothy; 2 Ep. 4. c. 1.2. v.
which you may believe I dare not in my own name or person do, but in the name
of the great Master of us all -- I charge you before God and our Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing and his Kingdom,
Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season: Reprove, rebuke, exhort
with all longsuffering and Doctrine. Which God of his Mercy grant we all do
through Jesus Christ our Lord; To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
all Honor and Glory, World without end. Amen.

FINIS.

