A LETTER TO THE DEISTS.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Castle, next Scotland-Yard, by Whitehall, 1696.

A LETTER TO THE DEISTS.
GENTLEMEN,
THAT a Letter addressed to you, in this Public manner, may not seem strange;
I think my self obliged, in the first place, to acquaint you with the reason of
my Writing it.

Your Title is New. At least, it is not many Years, since Deism has been taken
for a Characteristical Distinction, of any considerable Number or Body of Men.
But however New that Title be, I confess, I esteem it more honorable, in its
true Signification, than any thing can be, upon the account of mere Antiquity.
Nevertheless, I remember particularly, that the first time I ever heard it thus
used, was in a way of Censure; Which then did not a little surprise me. I
considered barely what the Word imported; And could not conceive, with what
color, the Belief or Worship of a Deity was thought worthy of blame. For,
reflecting upon my self, my own Conscience told me that I was included in the
Sense of the Expression; But it did not upon that account reproach me with any
manner of Guilt. I was sure that my Belief of a God had, by no means, made me a
worse Man or worse Subject, than I should have been without it: But much the
contrary. Next therefore, reflecting upon the Narrowness and Bigottry of his
Spirit that spoke to me, (for he was wedded to a Party) I concluded that his
partial Zeal made him mis-apply the Term, and join an ill Idea to a good thing.

In this Persuasion I remained long: And was satisfied with the Integrity of my
own Mind, notwithstanding the Obloquy which attended my Principles. Nay, it was
also some further Delight to me (who am not fond of our ordinary Distinctions
of Sects) that I had found a Name, however mistaken by others, which I could
sincerely and heartily own. And I thereupon sometimes, jestingly, compared my
Pleasure in this, to that of the Citizen in the Comedy, who was over-joyed to
learn that he had all his life been accustomed to speak Prose, though without
knowing it: Which Comparison I thought the more just, because true Deism is in
effect as natural and easy to Mankind as Prose, or ordinary Speech. For it is
impossible for us to reflect upon our selves, and upon all the Objects that
surround us, without admiring and adoring the Almighty Author both of them and
us. And as I had indeed been long a Deist, before I was acquainted with the
Name; So I continued for several Years afterward, to cultivate the
Consequences of that Principle, in my own Mind, and to inculcate occasionally
the Necessity of it to others; Fully persuaded that it was the only Foundation,
upon which either the true Happiness of particular Persons, or any tolerable
Degree of mutual Security in the Conduct of Public Societies, could be
established.

But, Alas, how have I been mistaken! Is Deism an ill thing? Or have Ill Men
shrouded themselves under that Specious Name? Somewhat is in the Matter. For
the Outcry against Deists is now grown so strong, that no body can suppose it
to be wholly without ground. I beseech you therefore, Gentlemen, give me leave
to expostulate a little with you; That we may come to some clearness in the
point, and be thereby enabled to vindicate our selves from the infamous
Aspersions that are cast upon us. You see that I reckon my self in your Number:
And if you are true Deists, I assure you we are Brethren. Let that
Consideration, therefore, prevail with you to bear with me, whilst I require,
and earnestly solicit you, to assist me in the Defense of our Common Cause.

This, then, being the Design of my Letter, it is absolutely needful that, in
the first place, we come to a Scrutiny amongst our selves; And examine strictly
what it is we mean by the Name; And whether or no we do indeed own the Things
that are imputed to us. The word, Deist, I take to signify no more than One
that believes a God; And Deism the Religion of One that so believes. Those
words, I am sure, in their natural signification, do not exclude any other
Belief, unless it be opposite to, or inconsistent with this. My Belief that
there is a God does not hinder me from believing any other thing, that is not
apparently contradictory to the Idea that I have entertained of him. If I have
not a clear Demonstration, from that Idea, of the impossibility of any thing
proposed to my Belief, I may, and ought to examine the probability of that
thing (especially if it be Matter of Fact) by the Credibility of the Witnesses
that report it. And so, in the Histories that we have of the Life of Moses, of
Christ, of Apollonius, or of Mahomet, I may give more or less Credit to any of
them, according to the different strength of their Testimonials. A Deist (for
any thing that the word imports) may be either Jew or Christian, Philosopher or
Turk; Nay, indeed, all Religionists whatsoever must necessarily be Deists.
Never any Appellation was invented more truly Catholic. Only Atheists are
excluded from it.

How comes it then to pass that a Word of, so great a Latitude, is used in so
narrow a sense, as to signify a very small number of those that have equal
right to it? Nay sometimes to signify those that have no such Right at all?
That it is thus used, we cannot doubt: Daily Conversation assures us of it. The
Reason of this Abuse, must of necessity come, either from those that have
assumed, or those that have imposed the Name. Nay, by the best observation I
have been able to make, it seems to me that both sides have contributed
hereunto; by fixing something Negative to the Signification of the Word, which
it does not import. Those that impose it, do thereby at least understand a
Denial of the Grounds of Revealed Religion; In which indeed they stretch the
Word too far: But whilst some of those that assume it, do at the same time deny
the very Principles of Natural Religion also, They plainly abuse and pervert
it, directly contrary to what it signifies; And usurp a Title that no ways
belongs to them. For though the Belief of a God do not necessarily imply the
Belief of Supernatural Revelation; (many having acknowledged a Supreme Being,
infinitely Wise and Powerful and Good, who have been altogether unacquainted
with any Manifestation of his Will, otherwise than by the Use of their own
Faculties in the contemplation of his Works) Yet it does necessarily carry
along with it a Reverential sense of Duty toward him: Which is the ground of
Natural Religion. And, therefore, though the Denial of Revelation do not properly
make Men Deists, in the strict sense of the Word; Yet the total want of Natural
Religion does absolutely hinder them from being Deists, in any sense
whatsoever. Let us then, who insist upon a Right to that Title, in the first
place discard those who are wholly destitute of this sense, from our
Fraternity. And let us afterward consider, as we are able, what our
Fundamental Article, (the Belief of a Deity) does, or does not, oblige us to.

It is not simply the word, God, but the Idea fixed to that Word, which is
capable of having any Influence, either upon Men's Minds or Conversations. And
it is not impossible, but some Ideas of a Deity may have a worse Influence upon
them than none at all. Wherefore it highly imports us to observe, whether some
Persons, that own the Name, do not yet take away the thing; Or perhaps even
substitute a worse in the stead of it. Those that say directly there is no God,
are not Deists, but Atheists. It is neither of such, nor to such, that I write.
For in these Parts of the World, the Notion of a Deity is so universally spread
and received, that no man dares own the open Profession of downright Atheism.
So that this sort of Men (if perhaps there are any few such) are the less
dangerous. But those that retaining the usual Word, endeavor slily to
infinuate a Corrupt sense of it, ought so much the more carefully to be
watched, by how much the more their Title and Outside is less apt to give any
suspicion of their Design.

My Intention yet is not to inquire into all the several sorts of Gods that
these Men frame to themselves. It has been done in a great measure by others;
And the inconsistency of their Notions very accurately exposed. To do it
thoroughly were an endless Task: For I much doubt, whether any two of them agree
entirely in any one System. But if, in pursuing some of their Principal
Hypotheses, I show the mischievous influence that all such like Opinions must
needs have upon the whole State of Mankind, in this World; I hope I shall
persuade you, Gentlemen, my Brethren, who are true Deists, to concur with me
in owning your detestation of such pernicious Principles.

Which of them shall I then choose? It is very indifferent. For all their
several Schemes do equally lead to Irreligion; And consequently to the utter
ruin of Humane Societies. Some Men, because Mr. Hobbs rellished not the sound
of Immaterial Substances (without ever considering whether they are able to
frame to themselves any more distinct conception of the substance of Matter)
fear not, upon his Authority, to ridicule the Notion of Spirit. These, without
trying their Skill upon particulars, resolve in general the Structure of the
whole Universe, and of all the Animate Beings which replenish it, into the
unexplicable Powers of Matter and Motion. Let it be so. For I enter not into
the Absurdity of their Philosophy, which has been sufficiently refuted by
others. I will only consider some Consequences of it, with respect to our
selves. If there be nothing but Matter in the World; Then Thought is either a
Property necessarily belonging to, and inherent in Matter; Or the Result of
some particular Figure and Motion impressed upon it. The first they will not
say: Because the Parings of their own Nails convince them it is false. But the
second, for any thing they know, may be: And therefore they say it is. I pass
over also this precarious May be, which others have fully demonstrated cannot
be: And admitting their Conclusion, That it is; (viz. That the Principle of
Wisdom which discovers itself in the Frame and Government of the Universe, is
only an Effect of the Position and Motion of its Parts) Then, however, I say,
amongst infinite other Absurdities, they must allow that this Principle, this
Effect, this God (as they would call it) must be liable to all the changes that
happen in the Universal Mass of Matter. For if it consist only in some
particular System, that can receive no impression from the rest; Then neither
can it make any impression upon the rest: And so there is an End of all its
Energy. But if they will say that Matter moves always uniformly, and that
therefore the Wisdom of their God is stable; I answer, that the uniform
Mo-Motion of the Particles of Matter is either (in empty space) an Eternal
Progression of separate Particles in straight lines; The supposition of which,
is the same thing, in respect of the Energy of every Particle, as I have even
now expressed concerning a particular System removed from any Communication
with the rest: Or else, (in a mixture of several Particles) it is a regular
Impulse of one Particle upon another, according to Bulk, Figure, Swiftness, and
Incidence; Which, besides that it gives us no Idea of any possibility of
Thought resulting from such Variety of Figures and Motions; Yet if we should
allow that some peculiar Hit, in an infinite Variety of such Modifications,
might produce it, together with Knowledge and Wisdom in the highest Degree;
Nevertheless, we must of necessity allow that every Variation of that
particular Modification which produces them, must not only disturb but utterly
destroy them. So that all the possible Variety of Figure and Motion that we can
conceive in Matter, shows us either an impossibility of any thing like Thought
resulting from it, or at least a Necessity of the Inconstancy and
Changeableness of that Thought, with every change in the Matter which produces
it. And thus every way that we can turn the Notion of a Material God, if we do
(in fiance of all sense) allow him Existence; Yet we can not avoid to
acknowledge him subject to Disturbances, Diseases, Passions, and all manner of
Alterations that are incident to Matter, and altogether unsuitable to the
Perfections which we must of necessity attribute to the Supreme Deity.

This then is the God which these Men frame to themselves. At least, this is
the Idea of the God that results from their Hypothesis, whether they describe
him so or no. A Worthy God indeed! Not the Creator or Disposer of this
Universal Frame of things, but the Effect of some Peculiar Disposition in it;
Posterior to Matter, and liable (if not to Extinction) at least to Inconstancy,
Fluctuation, and Change. If this be He, no wonder if they bear little Respect
to him. A contingent and transitory thing: To which whilst they endeavor to
give some Solidity, by drawing him out of lumpish Matter, they are forced so to
volatilize their own Imaginations, that they destroy the very Idea which they
pretend to give of him.

But before we contemplate the Consequences of this Hypothesis, let us consider
Another. And because This plainly takes away the thing that it pretends to
constitute, and instead of a fundamental Cause, puts us off with a very
transitory Effect, let us set before our Eyes One Omnipotent Universal Cause of
all things. For such an Idea some Men are apt to give of God. Without
determining any thing about his Substance, whether Material or Immaterial; They
suppose it suitable to the perfection of his Nature, that (in the first
Constitution of the Universe) he should have impressed such an Energy into the
Texture and Frame of it, as is capable for ever afterward to continue all the
Appearances of things; that we are or are not acquainted withal, without his
intermeddling or interposing any more in the Production, Guidance or Government
of any thing whatsoever. It is (at least) below his Dignity, say they, to
concern himself in the vain Tumults of Mankind, and to cooperate either with
or against any of our Projects, by his immediate Influx. His business, if it be
any, is about higher things; far remote from our Cognizance. We are pitiful
Engines, moved any way by the Impressions made upon our Senses, by things
without us; And so necessitated to whatsoever we do, by the fatal Chain of
Causes in which he at first linked the whole Universe.

I pretend not, in these two particulars, to give any exact System of the
Opinions of Ancient Philosophers. The fortuitous jumblings of Democritean
Atoms, The Idle Deity of the Epicureans, And the fatal Necessity of the
Stoics, are not the Subject of my Enquiry. But a mixture of such Thoughts as
these, I am sure, fill the Heads of many who now call themselves Deists, and
make too ordinary a Subject of Modern Conversation. And it is upon the Benefit
of this Age, and of my own Country (if I might be able in the least Degree to
contribute toward it) that my Thoughts are now intent.

To these, therefore, I will add yet another Opinion; that has great Affinity
with them. Some Men, without troubling themselves in any manner about the
Notion of a Deity, and considering only how evidently our Thoughts depend upon
the Disposition of the Organs of our Body (because we see the Disorders that
often arise in our Minds, from the Affections to which they are incident) are apt
boldly to conclude, and maintain, that an absolute Dissolution of this
Organical Texture, (which all Men are subject to in Death) must of necessity
extinguish the Principle of Thought that we have now in us, and leave nothing
capable of any Conscious Reflections upon our preceding Life.

I have said already that I intended not to meddle with the Philosophical
Absurdity of any of these Opinions. They have, I think, been sufficiently
refuted by others. My Business now is to consider the Moral Influence that they
are apt to have upon Men's Lives, and upon Societies; And to entreat you,
Gentlemen, to consider how unworthy a thing it is that the Glorious Name of
Deism should be stained with such abominable Consequences.

Take any, take all of their Opinions together, and as many more such like as
you may meet withal suggested by any particular persons: What do they all
amount to? Just as it was said of Video nonnullis videri Epicurum, ne in
offensionem Atheniensium caderet, verbis reliquisse Deos, re sustulisse. Cic.
de Not. D. L. 1.
Epicurus, of old; Whilst to avoid Offense, they make use of the Name of God,
they, nevertheless, destroy the Thing; And in effect absolutely remove him out
of the Tu denique Epicure, Deum inermem facis. Omnia illi Tela, omnem
detraxisti Potentiam: Et ne cuiquam metuendus esset, projecisti ipsum extra
mundum. Seneca De Benef. l. 4. c. 19.
World. A Material God, sprung from the fortuitous jumblings of Atoms, or from
ever so regular Motions supposed to be in the Universal Mass of Matter; Such a
God, I say, is evidently the Result of such Causes; Far from being himself the
first Cause of all things. And it can not be denied, but he must be liable to
continual Alterations, with the whiffling of every Wind. What Effect now can
the Idea of such a God as this have upon the Minds of Men? We may think it a
fine thing; and gape and wonder at it: But that is all. On the other side, take
as Spiritual a God as you please; If you suppose him absolutely removed from
all Cognizance of our affairs, Quae pietas ei debetur a quo nihil acceperis?
Aut quid omnino, cujus nullum meritum sit, ei deberi potest? Cic. de Not. Deor.
l. 2. Nam quid crit quare solito dignemur honor Numina, si demas velle juvare
Deos? Ovid. de Pont. Lib. 2.
What are we concerned in the Contemplation of him? The History of what he once
transacted, in framing the World, (supposing he did it) is no more to us, nay
not so much as a mere Romance; Because That, (by the Application we may make of
it to our own Circumstances) is fitted for our Instruction. And his Retirement
now, is just as the Death of such a Romantic Hero. Or further, if you suppose
this God that now supinely reposes, to have framed the Universal Engine (and us
as part of it) at first so perfectly, that no Wheel, no Spring, no Counterpoize
can ever hereafter fail, in the performance of those Functions that he designed
them for, but all Effects will be Fatis agimur: cedite Fatis. Non solicitae
possunt curae mutare rati stamina fusi. Quicquid patimur mortale genus,
Quicquid facimus venit ex alto. Servatque suae decreta colus Lachesis, dura
revoluta manu. Omnia certo tramite vadunt: Primusque dies dedit extremum. Non
illa Deo vertisse licet, Quae nexa suis currunt causis. It cuique ratus, prece
non ulla Mobilis, ordo. Sen. in Oed.
necessarily produced for ever by this uninterrupted Chain of Causes; What does
this Doctrine teach us, more than that we our selves are some little
inconsiderable Parts in a stupendous Piece of Excellent Clock-Work? None of
these things are, in the least, proper to influence any of our Actions. And if,
in the last place, we add to these, the Opinion of the Mortality of our Souls;
What other Thought can that suggest to us, than that we should Eat and Drink,
and (without any restraint) satiate our selves with whatsoever is Delightful
here; As having no Law (I mean more than humane) to check us, nor any
expectation of a Subsistence hereafter?

This being the Case, I would fain know of these Deists at large, what real
difference they make in the Consequence and use of their Opinions to Humane
Life, from those of the directest Atheism? What Difference to me is there
between a God that neither can influence here, nor will ever hereafter
animadvert upon my Actions, and no God at all? I would fain learn. I can
receive neither Good nor Harm from either Supposition: And therefore am both
ways equally at Liberty. But if I take the Supposition of the Qui introducunt
causarum seriem sempiternam, ii mentem hominis voluntate libera spoliatam
necessitato fati devinciunt. Cic. de Fato.
fatal God (Him that necessitates me by inevitable and irresistible impulses
from without my self, to whatsoever I do) the Consequence of that Belief upon
my Mind, must needs be much worse than mere Atheism. For if I have no freedom
of Will, no power to resist the force of that fatal Chain by which I am
dragged; I am not capable, in those Circumstances, of doing any Moral either
Good or Evil. But for whatever I do, be it never so ill, I may very fairly Fati
ista Culpa est: Nemo sit Fato Nocens, Senec. in Oedip.
excuse my self, and cast the Fault upon him that put me into this Plight. For
it lies at his Door, not mine.

I ask then, Would the World receive any considerable Advantage by the
spreading of these Opinions? Would Mankind become more Just and True, Sociable
and Friendly to one another, in proportion as they became more and more
strongly to disbelieve a Deity, Superintending over their Actions? Sunt enim
Philosophi, and fuerunt, qui omnino nullam habere censerent humanarum rerum
procurationem Deos. Quorum si vera sententia est, quae potest esse Pietas, quae
Sanctitas, quae Religio? -- Quibus sublat^s, perturbatio vitae sequitur and
magna confusio. Atque haud scio, an pietate adversus Deos sublata, fides etiam,
and societas humani generls, atque una excellentissima virtus, justitia,
tollatur. Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
Cicero tells us, That there were Philosophers who held that the Gods did not
at all intermeddle in the Administration of Humane Affairs. But (says he) if
their Opinion be true; What ground is there left for Piety, Sanctity, or
Religion? And afterward he adds, That if those be taken away, Disturbance and
Confusion must needs follow: And that where there is no Religion, there can be
neither Truth, nor Justice, nor even any Society maintained amongst Men. What
is the matter then, that this sort of Deists are so busy and industrious in
propagating their Notions, and gaining Proselytes? They are, or at least
pretend to be, Men of Sense. Nay, many of them pretend not a little to
Benevolence and Good Will to Mankind: Which I take to be the great Fountain of
all Virtues tending to the Establishment and Welfare of Societies: Surely they
have some End proportionable to the Diligence of their Endeavors. It deserves
to be enquired into: And I think the Account they give of it is to this purpose.

Religion (they say) or the Belief of a Superintending God, is wholly useless
to the Government of Men's Actions, in relation to their Neighbors: Which is
all that any one is concerned to look after in another. Humane Laws, fortified
by the infliction of Punishments upon all that commit Injuries, are sufficient
to restrain the Disorders of that kind, which Innocent Men are exposed to. They
do it, in effect, in a good measure. And the Instances of those injurious
practices which yet continue, appear so indifferently amongst the Professors of
all sorts of Religion, that it is evident, Religion (of any sort) signifies
nothing to their Cure: Therefore (say they) Useless. But they also further add,
That it is not only useless, but hurtful. The Expectation of another State of
Life after this, in which Account must be given of our Actions done here, is
apt to fill Men's Minds with Quae fieri in terris coeloque tuentur Mortales,
pavidis cum pendent mentibus saepe Efficient animos humiles formidine divum,
Depressos quae premunt ad terram. Lucr. l. 3.
Anxieties, Doubt, and Fears; Which debase their Spirits, perplex their
thoughts, and render them incapable of attending to many important Duties of
Society, with that Diligence, and Steddiness of Resolution that is necessary:
And the awful Dread of an avenging God inclines them to all manner of Jupiter
ingentes qui das adimisque dolores, Matter ait pueri menses jam quinque
cubantis, Frigida si puerum quartana reliquerit illo Mane die, quo tuindicis
jejunia, nudus in Tiberi stabit. Casus medicusve levarit Aegrum ex praecipiti
Matter delira necabit, In gelida fixum ripa, febrimque reducet. Quone malo
mentem concussa? Timore Deorum. Hor. Sat. l. 2.
Superstitious Observances that their own depraved Imaginations, or the Craft
of Priests persuades them to be the Methods of rendering him Propitious. On this
Head they expatiate with pleasure. The perversion of true Religion by
Priestcraft affords them (God knows) too great an Advantage. They find it
easy to discover the Abuses of this, or that, or the other particular Way; And
by that means too plausibly, and too prevalently, insinuate unto the Unwary
that all Religion, alike, is nothing else but a Holy Cheat.

But let us, I beseech you, Gentlemen, that are Deists in reality, and not in
Name only, examine the reality of these Pretensions. If there be a God, an
intelligent Being, infinitely Powerful, and Wise, and Good, (all which he must
of necessity be, if he be at all) I say, if there be such a God, it is
impossible that these Affirmations or Inferences (of these pretended Deists)
can be true. The Knowledge of such a God, and those consequences of Love and
Reverence and Duty, which naturally arise from that knowledge, can by no means
be insignificant, and much less prejudicial to his Creatures.

If Humane Laws alone are sufficient for the Weal of Mankind in Societies, then
it is true that any thing further is superfluous and impertinent, with respect
to that End. But are they indeed so? I desire the Assertors of that Position,
to give me some Instance of a Nation, or considerable Body of People, since the
World began, that ever formed themselves into a Society, and lived in any
Degree, (I will not say of Happiness, but) even of such Misery as we can count
tolerable; Who, at the same time, denied absolutely the Existence of a powerful
Being, presiding over the Universe by his Providence here; And thought
themselves perfectly secure against all danger of being called to account by
him hereafter. When they have done that, they will have some seeming ground for
their Assertion: But if that can not be done, the Authority of all Nations, in
all Ages, will be so strong a Prejudice against it, as others will not easily
overcome; And (if they have any Degree of Modesty) ought to make them forbear
insisting upon it.

But (that I may not seem captiously to put them upon an insuperable
Difficulty) if they can not find a Nation of absolute Atheists, let them
examine the condition of those that come nearest to it. Philosophical, thinking
Men are too thin sown in the World, for us to expect to find any Number of
them, that, upon examination of Argument, deliberately concluded there is no
God, and instituted a Form of Government amongst themselves upon that
Principle. We must be content therefore to consider the condition of those
People, not that deny a God, but that are ignorant of one. And of them we have
many Instances: Whether perfect or no, is not worth enquiring, but certainly to
a very great Degree. Africa and America abound with them. I will not trouble
you with the Relations of Travelers, of this kind, which are in ever body's
hands. But I desire you, upon the view of all or any of those Relations, to
examine whether the Brutality of those Nations do not hold exact proportion
with the Degrees of their Irreligion. Those that have no sense at all of a
Deity, nor any expectation of a Future Life, have no such thing as Government
amongst them, nay, nor any Rule for their private Conduct. Now without
Government, Combination into Societies, and mutual Assistance, it is impossible
that any manner of Conveniences can be provided for the comfortable Sustenance
of Humane Life. In every thing that we make use of, we stand in need of one
another's Quo alio tuti sumus quam quod mutuis juvamur Officiis? -- Fac nos
singulos, quid sumus? Praeda animalium and Victima: ac vilissimus and
facillimus sanguis. -- Hominem imbecillit as cingit: Non unguium vis, non
dentium, terribilem caeteris fecit. Nudum and infirmum Societ as sunit. Seneca
de Ben. l. 4. c. 18.
help. Those that enjoy not that benefit, are left to the condition of Beasts:
Nay, much worse than those Beasts that live upon the Fruits of the Earth;
Because of the real want, or lustful Appetite, that all Mankind have after
Flesh. They therefore are reduced to the Condition of Beasts of Prey: But yet
much morse than them too; Because Nature has not provided Men with any such
competent Defense against the Injuries of the Air as are the Skins of Bears and
Lions; Nor with such Arms as are their Teeth and Claws. Which, by the way, is a
manifest proof that Nature never intended Men for that kind of Life: For we
find unexceptionably throughout all the Species of Animals, that every one is
by Nature provided with Members, or Instruments, directly suited to that kind
of Prey which Nature designed for their support. But naked Man, unassisted with
Tools, (which are the Products of Arts and Society) is the worst provided of
them all.

It may indeed be said, that instead of these, we have hands, wherewith we can
employ every thing that we find about us, to our purpose; And a Genius capable
to improve all things to our best Advantage. It Is true. But the same Capacity
inables us also, at the same time, to do so much the more Mischief. And this is
the most deplorable Circumstance of all, in the state of those Savages; who
having neither any manner of Government amongst them here, nor sense of a
Superintending Deity, with expectation of Rewards or Punishments hereafter, can
have no other Rule of their private Conduct, than the present Impulse of every
unruly Appetite. By this means (I say) it comes to pass, that, as the Capacity
of their Mind is greater than that of Bears, their condition also comes to be
so much the more miserable. For admitting that a Bear or a Lion were less
fitted by Nature for procuring the Prey that they stand in need of, than is one
of these Unassociated Savages; Yet it must (in the first place) be acknowledged
that they are less exposed to be preyed upon themselves. They reign Sovereigns
over the inferior Herds of Animals, in the Countries where they inhabit; And
are at perfect -- Parcit Cognatis maculis similis fera. Quando Leoni Fortior
eripuit vitam leo? Quo nemore unquam Expiravit aper majoris dentibus apri?
Indica tigris agit rabida cum tigride pacem Perpetuam. Savis inter se convenit
ursis. Juv. Sat. 15.
Amity with those of their own kinds: Whereas with Man it is wholly otherwise.
For He (in the next place) is not only liable to the Surprises and Assaults of
many sorts of ravenous Beasts; But most of all to those of his own Species. No
Man, in this Estate, can be secure from his Neighbor. The Capacity of Mind
that every one is endowed with, suggests to him many Advantages to be made of
his Brethren. And hereupon, every Man designing his own private Advantage,
becomes his Neighbor's Enemy; And they mutually put each other into the most
deplorable State of War imaginable. Thus, in some places, the strongest sell
the weakest; nay, Parents many times their Children, into Captivity; For a
Bracelet, a Looking-glass, or any other little Bauble that their foolish
Fancies are delighted with: And, in other places, they hunt and destroy one
another, as we do Hares, directly to satisfy either their hungry or luxurious
Aspicimus populus quorum non sufficit irae Occidisse aliquem, sed pectora,
brachia, vultum Crediderint genuesse cibi. Juv. Sat. 15.
Appetites.

This is the plain Matter of Fact. There is no instance to be found, from the
beginning of the World to this day, of any People wholly void of all sense of
Religion, whose way of living did not expose them to more Miseries than even
the Beasts of the Field or Forest. But it will be said, this is for want of
Government: Good Laws would have made their Condition more happy. I grant it,
in some Degree. But then I desire the Objectors to show me an instance of any
Government, instituted and established by good Laws, without a mixture of some
Religion in it. They can not do it. We have seen the Opinion of Cicero already
upon that Point. I will here add that of Plut. Contr. Colot.
Plutarch. He said, That he would sooner believe a City might be built without
any Foundation, than that a Government could either be framed or supported
without the Belief of a Deity. Thus, the Effect itself proves that Mankind is
incapable of Government, without Religion. And since these Men themselves are
forced to allow Government and Laws to be necessary to any competent degree of
Happiness; They must, upon the Evidence of Matter of Fact, allow Religion to be
of the same Necessity: Because, the one has never been without the other.

Nay, further yet; If enquiry were made into all particular Histories of the
World, and especially into all Religions, I do not doubt but it would be found
that the more or less easy and comfortable way of subsisting in any Nation,
has always held and does still hold proportion, with the greater or less sense
of true Religion, (unmixt with superstition) that has been spread amongst them.
I say, Religion, unmixt with Superstition: Because it is not improbable that
some Sorts and Degrees of Superstition may be of as evil Tendency, if not
worse, than absolute Irreligion; Of which the Religio peperit scelerosa atque
impia facta, Aulide, quo pacto Triviai virginis aram Iphianassai turparunt
sanguine foede Ductores Danaum -- Lucr. l. 1. Mos fuit in populis quos condidit
advena Dido Poscere caede Deos veniam, ac flagrantibus Aris (Infandum dictu!)
parvos imponere Natos. Sil. Ital. l. 4.
Sacrifices that have been anciently made of Mankind, and the Modern
Persecutions amongst Sects (to the Destruction of Men's Bodies, as is
pretended, for the Salvation of their Souls) seems to be a strong Argument. And
therefore, without pretending to define for any body else, I think my self
obliged (in this place) to explain what I my self understand by both. True
Religion I take to be an Acknowledgment of a Deity (infinitely Powerful, Wise,
and Good) superintending the Actions of Mankind, in order to retribute unto
every one, either here or hereafter, according to their Doing; Together with
the Sense of an Obligation to all our Duties both to God and our Neighbor,
resulting from that Belief. Superstition, on the other side, is an
Acknowledgment and Dread of God's super-intending Power; Accompanied with a
wrong Opinion of the Ways of pleasing him, resulting from false Ideas,
unsuitable to his forementioned Perfections. And let me here add, that
Irreligion I understand to be an utter insensibility of any Obligation or Duty
arising from the Idea of a God; Or perhaps (according as the Idol may be framed
which they set up instead of the Idea of the true God) a positive persuasion
that no such Obligation at all can arise. Now I must needs say that, so far as
I have had opportunity of observing, I have always found that the more any
People have had of True Religion, with less mixture of Superstition, they have
always formed themselves unto so much more orderly Societies, and lived so much
the more comfortably. So that I am persuaded, whoever takes the pains to
examine, will find that the Rule holds true throughout, in exact Proportion.

But leaving now this Appeal to History, to every one's Examination and
Judgment; I am desirous to weigh a little the Reason of the thing itself. Let
us inspect the Nature of Mankind as it is, and see what probability there is
that any considerable Number of Men, (A Nation, as England, for Example) wholly
void of all sense of Religion, should be able to establish and maintain such
Laws and Methods of Government amongst themselves, as could give them any
tolerable Degree of mutual Security, Peace and Happiness. In the first place, I
am apt to think it very difficult, if not impossible, that such a People should
ever agree upon any Terms at all. The Natural Impetuosity of their Passions,
must needs make them very untractable. It can not be supposed that those who
found their Advantage over others, in strength of Body, would easily submit
their Necks to the Yoke of Laws. They would find themselves secure and easy in
that natural Superiority, and always endeavor to maintain it: So that it
would, at least, be very difficult to bring them to any Terms of Composition
with their Inferiors.

But let the thing be never so difficult, if it be but possible, I am willing
to admit it. We may imagine that a Combination of a great Number of weaker
Persons may have been able to force a less Number of those that are stronger
into a Compliance: From whence something like a Commonwealth might in the end
result. Therefore, without more ado, let us suppose a Solon, a Lycurgus, or a
Numa, sprung out of the Earth, to give this People the most excellent Form of
Government imaginable. The Supposition, indeed, is absurd; Because those wise
Legislators, all of them, did interweave Religion with their Politics: And I
want the Name of any Legislator that ever did otherwise. But supposing, any
way, an Excellent Form contrived: Let Chance, if they please, the Epicurean
God, be the Author of it: Where shall we find fit Magistrates to put this
Excellent Contrivance in Execution? It will not be supposed that every
particular Member of this Society will be so exactly Virtuous, as to need no
Inspection into their Actions. That is too contrary to all Experience; And
would be occasion of dissolving the Government it self, as frivolous and
useless. We must therefore look out for Senators, to deliberate in Ten thousand
Exigencies that will arise from without, (though we should imagine our Frame
never so perfect within) what Methods may be most conducive to our Common
Defense and Public Welfare. We must have Judges too, undoubtedly, to determine
impartially the differences that may happen between Man and Man. And (to cut
short) we must have Officers of all kinds, both Civil and Military, to execute
faithfully and carefully whatever is resolved upon by these Senators and
Judges: Amongst which sort of Business, the Administration of the Public
Revenue is neither the least nor easiest Task.

For these things, we must of necessity have Men of Integrity. Any failure in
That, begets Inconveniences: And the total want of it brings on inevitable
Ruin. For nothing can be done, great or small, without Trust: And the Breach of
Trust is always mischievous to the thing in which it happens. For Example; What
can hinder but a Senator that deliberates upon the weighty Affairs of War or
Peace with Neighboring Princes, may have Overtures made to him of more
considerable Advantage from some such Prince, than he can receive in his own
Country; And may thereupon, without any Danger of Discovery, reveal and betray
the Secrets of a State? What can hinder but a Judge, biassed by Affection, or
bribed by Interest, may, in many Cases, so order the Circumstances of things
(at least the Methods of his own Proceedings) as to condemn the Innocent,
absolve the Guilty, and dispose of the Property of Goods or Land contrary to
all Right and Equity; And yet cover his Corruption with a very specious
Appearance of Justice? What can hinder but a Commander of Fleets or Armies, by
Debauchery growing Supine, or by Covetousness growing intent only on Profit,
may sacrifice the Public to his Luxury or Gain? And what can hinder, in the
last place, (for 'twould be too tedious to go through all particulars) but
Public Receivers, Treasurers, and the like, may, by Consent and Intelligence
with one another, falsify Accounts, and divert great Branches of the Common
Income into their own private Pockets; without any possibility of being
detected? Without Integrity in the management of these, and such like affairs,
all must needs go wrong; and Ruin follow.

But I doubt my Reader is tired with these Instances; And thinks them frivolous
in the particular Case that I now examine; Because they are so very frequent,
as every Day's Experience tells us, in all Governments whatsoever. Are they so,
indeed? Then let that Government where they are most prevalent, know that it is
nearest to utter Destruction. For no body can doubt but where the principal and
ruling Functions of a Body (either Civil or Natural) are perverted, and made to
operate contrary to the Interest of the whole, That Whole is in a very
desperate condition. Let the Application be made where it will.

And if we may look a little home to our own Case; it must be acknowledged that
we have amongst us too many Instances of such like Miscarriages as I have
represented. What is the Reason of it? Is it the too deep sense and Awe of an
All-seeing Deity that causes this want of Integrity, and makes Men not fear to
transgress the Ties of any Duty, wheresoever they can be secure, that He alone
is Witness of their Actions? This cannot be pretended: Both Experience and
Reason contradict it. The Men I write of, and the spreading progress of their
Principles, are too apparent Proofs that we are not at this time in such like
Circumstances. But if, abstracting from our own Case, we reflect only upon the
Mischiefs that attend Bigottry, and wrong Notions about Religion, I readily own
them to be very great. For not only, some of those Mistakes may be apt to make
Men presume upon an easy way of attoning an offended Deity, by Ceremonious or
Devotional Tricks, and therefore less fearful of the Consequences of each
single Transgression; But Superstition (generally speaking) has often been, and
will be, the occasion of very general Mischiefs and Outrages in the World; Though
this especially, when it is managed by the cunning of lawless, and designing
irreligious Men in Power. So that Irreligion is, very frequently, the ground
even of those Disorders which Superstition produces. For without that, the
mistaken Notions about a Deity, will serve indifferent well to preserve Society
and maintain Government, amongst those of this or that particular way. The Fear
and Dread (at least) of Invisible Powers will not make Men more bold in the
Contempt of those Powers, than they would be without it. But the total Absence
of that Fear (which is Irreligion) dissolves entirely the Ties of Conscience,
which are the strongest Bonds of Society, and thereby turns Men loose from the
Restraint and Protection of Laws, into all the Disorders of unrestrained Fraud
and Rapine.

Let us return therefore to our general Enquiry. We have supposed that a
Nation, wholly void of all Sense of Religion, may, peradventure, hit upon the
most excellent Form of Government and Laws imaginable: And now in looking after
fit Magistrates, to put these Rules and Laws in Execution, we have seen in some
measure what kind of Officers are necessary, and what sort of Failures those
Officers are obnoxious to. In short, whatever other Virtues may be useful, in
the Discharge of those Trusts; That, without which all the rest would become
not only useless, but hurtful, is Integrity. A Man that has not a Principle
known and acknowledged by others to be capable of influencing him in the Quid
faciet is homo in tenebris qui nihil timet nisi Testem? Quid in deserto loco,
nactus quem multo auro spoliare possit imbecillum atque solum? Cic. de Leg. l.
1.
Dark, is not fit to be entrusted with any thing capable of being hid from
Witnesses: That is, in plain Terms, not with any thing at all, of Moment. For
throughout all the parts of the Administration of any Government, there occur
frequent Opportunities of perverting the Ends of it, secretly, to evil
purposes. Now what security can that Man, who makes open Profession of the
Principles of Irreligion, give unto the Public, of his Fidelity in any Trust,
where there is a possibility of perverting the Ends of it without Discovery? An
Oath is the most usual and highest Pledge of this kind, that Mankind are yet
acquainted withal. But will this Man, who proclaims his Disbelief of the
Animadversion of a Deity, pretend to deserve any Degree of Credit upon account
of his attesting a Name, (God) which in his Mouth is an empty Sound, without
any signification? It would be ridiculous either for him to offer himself, or
for a Government to receive him, to the Solemnity of an Oath. Thus he makes
himself an useless Member of the Society he is in: And if the whole Society
entertained the same Principles, it must unavoidably dissolve and fall into
Confusion. For, let us examine further; What is it that can influence any Man
in secure Secrecy? Honor, and Shame, and Humane Laws of any kind, have there
no place: Because no body sees. Only Interest sticks close to every Man, every
where. Whatsoever is advantageous, or any way delightful to any one, operates
constantly upon every one; And (when nothing intervenes to check it)
irresistibly. Thus then, a Man secure of absolute Secrecy from all other Men,
and having no Apprehension of any Invisible Being super-intending him, must of
necessity pursue his own private Satisfaction. Natural Appetite, and present
Interest, prompt him to it: No Prospect of any Repugnant Interest, at a
Distance, makes him hesitate: No inward sense of Law or Duty restrains him:
(For what can be called either Law or Duty, where no Superior animadverts with
Punishment; Nor does any Natural Advantage, as a Reward, attend the Action
itself?) Nothing from without interposes: (For all Humane Animadversion is
excluded:) He must therefore pursue it: He can do no otherwise. At least, if in
those circumstances he neglect to do it; He in that acts not only Nullum est
jus natural. Itaque omnes animantes, ipsa ducente natura, commoda sua
defendunt: Et ideo Justitia, si alienis utilitatibus consulat, suas negligat,
Stultitia est dicenda. Lact. ex Cic. de Rep. l. 3,
foolishly, but contrary to that general Inclination (the Desire of our own
Good) which is by Nature made the Spring that moves all Mankind.

And thus (I say) the Observation of all civil Governments may convince any
one, that is not wilfully blind, that the Decay of Integrity, and the Reason of
that Decay, Irreligion, is the true and never failing Cause of Ruin in all
Societies. I say again, Integrity: For that is the Virtue that I lay the stress
upon. The Neglect, the Fraud, the Corruption, the Treachery, that any where run
through all the course of a mis-managed State, proceed evidently, from want of
Integrity. And the Consequence of that is so fatal, that neither Courage nor
Skill can bear up under it. Where no body, or but very few, make Conscience of
their Ways; Where a superficial specious show is all that is endeavored after
toward the Public, whilst Private Interest (uncheck't by any inward Remorse)
is the Private Measure of every Man's Conduct; What can follow but utter
Destruction? It is apparent that every where, by the same Degrees that a sense
of the Essential Grounds of Religion decay, Men's Virtue vanishes, their Morals
corrupt, their very Natures degenerate, and their Government tends inevitably
to Dissolution.

If this Decay of Religion (mistake me not, I do not mean blind Devotion, or
superstitious Ceremony, but) if the little sense of the Super-intendency of a
Deity, which is the general ground of all Religion, be not the occasion of the
Decay of Integrity, I desire any one to show me what is. Or rather, if the
Cause of this Effect be too perplex't or hidden, I desire them to show me what
is capable of curing it. That would be a Work worthy not only of a true
Patriot, but of a Genuine Citizen of the World. Let any one that goes about it,
examine the Principles of Humane Nature, and (removing that sense of Religion
which I require) tell me what Notion, what Thing it is, that can be of Force
enough to sway all Mankind, in absolutely secure Privacy, to deny themselves
the enjoyment of any offered Satisfaction. Good Nature, and the Love of our
Brethren, is the plausiblest Offer toward it that I can imagine. Some few,
perhaps, having been educated from their Insancy in good-natured Principles,
may find such an habitual force of that Love in their own Breasts as may seem
natural to them. But if they will say those Principles have the same Strength
in all Men, they deny manifest Experience, and deserve no Answer. The savage
Africans and Americans, who have been otherwise educated, (Or rather who, for
want of Education, would be the only proper Instances in our Enquiry,) are
undeniable Demonstrations of the Contrary. And if these few Good-natured
Persons should go about to destroy the Belief of those things which are only
capable to maintain the Societies of Mankind in any tolerable Degree of
Happiness, without substituting any thing at all, either more or less, in the
place of it; What shall we say of them? Do they not evidently contradict the
Character they pretend to? Is That Good Nature, which is charitable perhaps to
some few Persons in distress, who lie within the narrow Sphere of this or that
Man's Acquaintance; And at the same time, breaking the only Reins that are
capable to restrain the ill Nature of others, let loose the whole Herd of
Mankind, to an unbridled freedom of destroying and devouring one another? I
blush to think, that so high a Degree of Good Nature, as I have here supposed
some may be endowed withal, should be the occasion of producing such
ill-natured Consequences. What Tyrant, what Nimrod, what Caligula, did ever the
Ten-thousandth part of Mischief to Mankind, as would be the rooting out of that
only Principle which is capable of maintaining any sure Amity amongst them?
There is no proportion between these Mischiefs. Let these Pretenders therefore
to Goodnature either be content with that Principle of Religion, which has
hitherto produced whatever is to be found of lasting Union and Constancy in the
Societies of the World; Or let them furnish us with something better instead of
it; Or let us, at least, beware of their Principles, as the most pernicious
Venom that could possibly be instilled into any Society, even by direct Enemies
of Mankind.

If now, upon this whole Enquiry, we observe, That where ever the Principles of
Irreligion are spread, in proportion to their increase, Integrity has decayed;
How for want of Integrity the strength of any Constitution of State is weakened;
What a disorderly and uneasy Estate Men grow into; And what further Confusion
and even Ruin constantly attends it; I say if this be every where observable;
And we need not go far to be convinced of it, even in Countries where the
general Principles of Religion (though decaying) are not yet quite extinguished;
What can we conclude must be the Condition of a People that is wholly, in every
particular Member and Part, devoid of any such Principle at all? For that is
the Supposition we are to take along with us: And our Enquiry is, how a People
that believe no Super-intendency of an invisible Power, nor think themselves
accountable (either here or hereafter) to any Judge but the Magistrate, can
maintain any such order of Government amongst themselves, as is capable in any
moderate Degree to make their Lives Secure, Easy, and Comfortable. Amongst
this People, it is plain, there can not be one single virtuous Person, that is
so upon a Principle suited to the general Nature of Mankind. And those that are
so only by some peculiar Excellency of their own Natural inclination, not
common to others, are not to be taken into Consideration: Because Their number
is every where too small to be of any weight. Their personal Qualifications may
be what they will, and deserve very high personal Esteem: But I think nothing
can properly be called Social Virtue (which is the thing we now enquire after)
that the main Body of a Society is incapable of having any sense of. I conclude
therefore that such a People must needs be very unfit to maintain any Rules of
Society with one another. What? Where there is not one honest, one virtuous Man
in a Government; (For I count none so, nor will any be found so at a stress,
that have not a Principle which all Men own to be capable of making them so in
the Dark; And that I am sure Those have not, who are utterly void of all
Religion) Can, There, be any Consistency or Stability in that Government?
Methinks there should not. But, especially, can a Government, amongst such Men,
be more equal, and more secure, than amongst those who act upon a Principle
capable (if followed) to make all Men Virtuous? This is an Absurdity
unsufferable. Yet this the Men that I write of, those that say Religion is
useless, and that Humane Laws alone suffice to maintain Order and Peace and
Security in Humane Societies, This (I say) they must assert; Or else
acknowledge, that in undermining the Grounds of all Religion, they themselves
act more contrary to the general Interest of all Mankind, than any thing that
humane Imagination can compare them to.

If, now, I have given any competent Evidence, both from Reason and Experience,
that Religion is (not only) no indifferent thing, insignificant and useless to
the Ends of Government; But that (in Effect) it is so highly necessary and
useful, that it is impossible any Government should subsist without it; And
that whatever Motives may force Men into Societies (Convenience, Protection, or
whatsoever else they be) it is only the Belief of a Deity, and the consequence
of that Belief, Religion, that makes a Ciment capable of uniting those
Societies in any manner of Stability; (Which, I hope, I have in good measure
performed) Then, methinks, I need say very little in answer to those that
pretend Religion is not only useless, but hurtful. If it be useful, as I have
proved; It can not be hurtful: For those Terms are contradictory; And cannot be
said, in the same respect, of the same thing. Let us examine therefore if in
any Respect whatsoever, we can find this prejudicial Tendency of Religion to
the Interest of Society. It is apt (the Objectors say) to fill Men's Minds with
Anxieties, Doubts, and Fears; Which debase their Spirits, perplex their
Thoughts, and render them unfit for Business. But whoever considers
impartially, will find that whatsoever there is of Ill, in all these Anxieties,
Doubts, Fears, Lowness of Spirit, and Perplexity of Thoughts, it proceeds
wholly from the neglect of Religion, and by no means from the strict Observance
of the Duties that it requires: And on the other side, that whatsoever
Confidence, Boldness, and Security of Mind, springs from Atheism or Irreligion,
it is only a Boldness in doing Evil; Which at the highest is subject to many
Qualms; Or, though it were perfect in its kind, That surely cannot be pleaded by
any one in favor of those Principles. But, however, He that discharges
faithfully the Duties that are incumbent upon him, cannot possibly, in that,
have any Anxiety at all. His whole Care is Nihil Opinionis causa, omnia
Conscientia faciam, Populo spectante sieri credam, quicquid me conscio faciam.
-- Patriam meam esse Mundum sciam, and prasides Deos supra me circaque me
stare, Factorum Dictorumque Censores. Senec. de Beata Vita, c. 20.
Conscientiously employed in doing the thing that is required of him, with the
same exactness as if it were before a Multitude of Witnesses: Because he knows
he is continually under the Magna vobis necessitas incumbit Probitatis, cum
degatis sub cculis Judicis omnia cernentis. Boet. de Consol. Ph.
Inspection of an All-seeing God. And having done that, he has -- Hic murus
aheneus esto, Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa. Hor. Epist. l. 1.
Boldness both toward God and toward Man. There may happen indeed many
Occasions, in the ordinary Course of Humane Affairs, in which this Man may be
fearful, and unwilling to proceed. But what are those Occasions? From whence
comes this Fear? The Occasions are, when he is required by Unreasonable and
Tyrannical Superiors, to be the Instrument of Violence and Wrong. In those
Occasions, indeed, he fears: He fears to offend God: And therefore he
hesitates; draws back; and is altogether unfit for this sort of Business. But
employ him in any thing that makes for the true Welfare of his Country; (and
much more, if for the Welfare of Mankind) And see with what Resolution and
Intrepidity he will face the Opposers of it. No Lion more bold than He, in a
Righteous Cause. Or if yet it should be objected, that Lowness of Spirit,
Meekness, and Humility, which are the Consequences of a Religious Temper, are
too contrary to this Martial Courage that I now hint at; Then however I reply:
So much the rather let us study to improve that Temper. What will be the Effect
of it; suppose the whole World should become thus religious? No body would
injure, no body would hurt one another: We should all live together, as
Brethren, in Peace and Friendship. And what is the Harm? Is it for fear of this
Mischief, that Men endeavor to destroy the Seeds, and extirpate the Roots of
all Religion? God forbid.

Another Objection against Religion (the last that I intimated before, and all
of any moment that I can yet think of) is, That the Dread of an Avenging Deity
inclines Men to Superstition: And Superstition, of some Kinds and in some
Degrees, I have allowed may produce as ill, or even worse consequences than
absolute Irreligion. How shall we answer this? Very easily. The Root of
Superstition lies in the false Ideas that Men frame to themselves of God: Not
in the true ones. Those that consider his Power, may indeed think it reasonable
to fear him: But those that consider also his Wisdom and Goodness, must of
necessity love him. From the mixture of these two Effects, proceed Respect,
Reverence, and Adoration. And when the grounds of all (infinite Wisdom,
Goodness, and Power) are steadfastly kept in mind, it is impossible that those
who are deeply penetrated with that sense, can condescend to any way of
expressing it (which is outward Worship) unsuitable to his Excellencies; And
much less, to any Practice toward their Neighbors (wherein lies the danger of
Society) directly contrary to his Laws. Thus, true Religion secures all. It is
false Religion only that breeds any Danger. And even that Danger too, though it
may be very great in some particular Instances, yet it does not often extend it
self (as Irreligion) to the extirpating and utter Ruin of Society, in the
Nations of the World. I have hinted already at the dreadfullest Effects of
Superstition that I could think of: Humane Sacrifices, and Persecution. It Is
the last of these that, in this Age of the World, it most concerns us to
enquire into: And I am far from going about to extenuate the Heinousness of
that Practice. But yet I think I may truly say, that the Root of Persecution
does not lie very much in bare Superstition. Take away the Interest, I mean the
worldly Interest, that Irreligious Men have in persecuting others; Let not
those Incendiaries blow up the Zeal of Bigots into a Flame, against those that
differ from them either in Opinion or Practice, and their Heats will be
tempered without coming to Fire and Faggot. Superstition alone, if ill-natured
irreligious Interest were not interwoven with it, would no more disturb the
Peace of Societies, at this Day, than it did in the Days of Ancient Paganism.
Not at all. That is too obvious to need any further Illustration. But take it
at the worst; That Superstition is the sole Cause of Persecution, and of all
the Mischiefs attending it: What is the Cure of this Evil? Certainly not to
root up the Grounds of all Religion; But to cultivate the true ones.

If therefore it should be found that any Set of Men, even though they were
Priests, (of whatsoever Form) industriously applied themselves to delude
Mankind, with Notions suitable to their own particular Interest; but contrary
to the general Welfare of Societies; Let those that have the Talent declaim
against their Villainy, expose their Hypocrisy, and by all imaginable Arts
render those that are guilty as contemptible, ignominious, and even odious in
the Eyes of the World, as such combined Enemies of Mankind deserve to be. In
this, my Heart, and Hand too (if it were able) should go along with them. Only
let no body involve the Innocent with the Guilty. In that, there ought to be
great scrupulosity, and exact Care. For such Transgressions are heinous
Immoralities. But, within this Restriction, of not involving the Innocent with
the Guilty; Nothing can be too strong, nor too severe, against such Doctrines
and Practices as tend to the Corruption of Men's Minds, the Inslaving of their
Persons, and the Ruin of Societies. And when I allow this Liberty, in these
Bounds; I not only confine it strictly to these Bounds, but extend it
indifferently to whatsoever exceeds them. And, that no body may mistake my
meaning, I further add, in the first place, that (considering the Frailty of
Humane Nature, and the Shortness of our Capacities) it seems to me highly
reasonable, that All manner of Opinions, even though Mistakes, about Religion,
which spring from Weakness, Tenderness, and Simplicity of Heart, and have
nothing in them of that Evil Tendency which I have now hinted at, should be
indulged and treated with all the sweetness imaginable. For what conceivable
Right can any one have, to treat those otherwise, who are really within the
Bounds of this Restriction? None at all. And, in the next place, I would have
our Nominal Deists (on the other side) understand, that whilst they continue to
undermine the Grounds of all Religion, They themselves deserve all that
Severity, which they will think I have with Justice allowed them against the
Perverters of the True; And which they are always ready to take, even in too
great a Latitude.

I think I have now succinctly answered the Substance of all that is most
commonly, and most plausibly, objected against Religion in general; And may
from hence conclude, that the Ideas we entertain of a Deity (and which, if we
allow the use of our Reason, every thing will enforce upon us) are no
indifferent thing, even to the Welfare of Mankind in this World. A God that
either does not, or can not, interpose in our Concerns, is to us an Empty Name,
and signifies nothing. And without the Belief of an interposing or
animadverting God, it is impossible that any Model of Government can be
supported. This the wise Athenians were so sensible of, that they banished
Protagoras, as dangerous to their State, not for denying, but for doubting of
it. And the Reason (as has been discoursed already) is plain. For Interest
undeniably governs the main course of Humane Actions. We are so framed by
Nature, that it can not be otherwise. And without that Belief, no Man has any
Interest to be virtuous, further than in outward Appearance only. The Show
alone, of Benignity and Good Will to Mankind, not only avoids the Reach of
Humane Laws, but suffices to procure the Good Will of those who see nothing but
that Show. Where a private Advantage can be gained, without hazard of
Discovery, if Religion be removed, nothing hinders. And is that Man virtuous,
who is so only in Appearance, either for fear of the Law, or for the sake of
his Reputation? I can not call him so. But call him what we will, I think I
have made it evident that no Government can subsist, where no Member of it has
any more powerful Principle of Virtue than this: And that without Government no
tolerable Degree of Security, Peace, and Happiness in this World can be
attained.

After this, methinks I should need few words to persuade you, Gentlemen, (who
are Deists indeed) to renounce the Fraternity of those who (lurking under the
Cover of that Name) go about secretly undermining the Welfare of all Mankind.
Whatever Humanity may be shown to their Persons (as That indeed ought in no
occasion whatsoever to be omitted) there is no Indulgence due to their
Opinions. To smile at, and take complacence, in the bold strokes, which in
daily Conversation they give at the Root of all Religion, is to be delighted
with the Ruin of all Humane Society. How barbarous! I am sure, none that in
reality believes a God can endure it. Let us therefore be always upon our
Guard, and in all occasions discountenance and oppose their pernicious
Principles.

The Task of opposing them is not difficult. Examine but the ground of any one
of their Systems, and it will be found to be built upon such intolerable
Presumption, as one would think they themselves should blush to own. Is it
because of any Disorders they observe in the Universe, that they conclude it
not to have been formed by an Intelligent Workman? What! His bungling, perhaps,
is observable (as one said) in placing the Calves of our Legs behind; Whereas
they ought rather to have been before, for the Defense of our Shins. Frothy
Impertinence! Anatomists will tell them the indispensible Use of those Muscles
which compose our Calves, in that very place. But, how dare Men be so bold to
carp at what they are not able to mend; nay, nor in the least degree to
imitate? O, but, say they, an infinitely Wise and Powerful God (as we suppose
him) could have framed a more perfect Creature than Man is. And who has told
them that he has not done it? Nay, numberless Varieties of such Creatures,
suited to the various Disposition of those Parts of the Universe where he has
placed them? We have no reason, I am sure, to think our selves in the highest
Stage of Nature. But whatever be our Natural Condition; Our Moral Circumstances
(upon the supposition of the Grounds of Religion) they will say, ought to have
been much otherwise. He ought to have given us a greater strength of Mind, to
bridle those Appetites, for the Disorders of which it is pretended he will
judge us. But if he thought fit, amongst the great variety of Creatures that
fill the Universe, to create us in a state of Indifferency and Freedom, not so
strongly swayed any way, as to be necessarily and unavoidably either Happy or
Miserable; What Irregularity is there in this? What Breach of Symmetry do we
make in the Universe? Especially, if he have given us a strength sufficient for
the working out of our own happiness (which is the Case) and we apply not our
selves to make use of it; What reason have we to complain of his Judgment? Yes;
The Judgment ordinarily believed, is too severe. Let us suspend our Judgment of
That, till we come to it. Our ordinary Ideas of a Deity are, that he is both
Just and Merciful: And the temperature that must result from the combination of
those two Dispositions, will undoubtedly be such as we shall be forced to own
proper and suitable to our Circumstances. No, say they again, all manner of
Punishment will be then unsuitable: Because it will neither tend to our
Reformation, nor serve for Example to others: Without which it is no better
than mere Revenge, and would be unjustifiable even amongst Men. All of a piece
still. Who told them that we shall not be capable of any degrees of
Purification in another Life; Or that none of the Inhabitants of those Regions,
whither we shall be transported, will be capable of receiving any Benefit by
our Example? The same Thread of Presumption runs through the whole Series of
these Objections. The Offer of any (even the least) of them implies a pretense
to a full and comprehensive knowledge of the whole Universe. For That is
visibly one entire Frame, knit together, without the least Chasm, by continual
Relations and Dependencies. And whoever objects against any part, if he really
pretend to understand the whole, ought to blush at his own Presumption: Or if
he object, without pretending to it, He must needs (in the Judgment of all Men)
incur the Censure of great Extravagance.

I said in the beginning, that I intended not to oppose these Opinions, in this
Paper, by any Philosophical Arguments: Because that has been sufficiently done,
over and over again, by many others. It is sufficient to me, that I show the
groundlesness of all of them, by the impossibility of any Man's being able to
have a due competency of Knowledge whereon to build them. And the same
Presumption that runs through all the Objections drawn up against the Wisdom of
God, from the imperfections and disorders that are pretended to be observed in
the World, will be sound in like manner to be the root of all those that are
brought against his Providence. That Great One, drawn from the Prosperity of
Ill Men, and the Adversity, which often times attends the Good, in this Life, is
visibly of the same Nature. For who has assured the Objectors that This is not
a probationary State; And that all such irregularities will be set even
hereafter? They must be very presumptuous, to say, that a Future state for
Humane Souls is impossible. And yet That they must say, or else their Objection
is vain, The improbability and doubtfulness of any thing is not a sufficient
Ground for a Positive Conclusion. They must talk no less than of perfect
Knowledge in the Matter, or they talk very impertinently. I know not whether
they do so or no; But I am sure their Confidence is as great as if they did.
What Presumption!

Methinks those that on all occasions extol so much the Ancients, who were
unacquainted with Revelation, should not think a thing so very impossible which
They all believed (at least) to be highly probable. For this I could easily
bring numerous Authorities: But they are so commonly known, that I count it
needless. Only one, though Modern, may not be improper; Because it asserts (as I
do) the general authority of the Ancients; And more especially because of the
Character of the Person who writes it. It Is the Lord Herbert of Cherbury, whom,
I think, we may reckon a Deist, of our own number. In his Treatise, De
Religione Gentilium, Chap. 15. under the Title, Spes; After a large Quotation
out of Plato to the same purpose, he adds these words. Quemadmodum igitur haut
alius Deus, haut alia virtus, ab Gentilibus quam ab nostris olim colebatur, it
a certe communis utrisque Spes immortalitatis fuit. Desertim Cicero 2. de Leg.
ait: Animi hominum sunt immortales, sed fortium Bonorum divini. Et alibi, in
lib. de Senect. ait: Non est lugenda Mors, quum Immortalitas consequitur. Vt
ideo inter complurima Gentilium religiosa dogmata hoc solidum axioma obtinuisse
videatur: Ex virtute, nempe, homines in Spem Immortalitatis venire. Herb. de
Reg. Genesis c. 15.
As therefore the Gentiles worshipped the same God, and had the same esteem of
Virtue, that we have; So it is certain that the same Hope of Immortality was
common both to them and us. Cicero, l. 2. de Leg. says expressly, The Souls of
all men are immortal, but those of the steddily Good are Divine: And, lib. de
Senect. Death ought not to be grieved at, since Immortality follows it. So that
(says the Lord Herbert again) amongst many religious Doctrines of the Gentiles,
This seems to have been esteemed by them as a solid uncontestable Axiom, viz.
That by the practice of Virtue, Men attain to the hope of Immortality. Thus I
say, if either Reason or Authority have any weight, we must needs conclude,
that intolerable Presumption lies at the Root of this Objection.

And if we consider yet another, to the same purpose, we shall still find the
same thing. When they tell us, That it is suitable to the Perfections of the
Deity, to have made all things at first so complete, as never to need his
interposition afterward; And that it is below his Dignity, or that it would
Omnis enim per se Divum natura necesse est,
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur,
Semota ab nostris rebus, sejunctaque long:
Nam privata dolor omni, privata periclis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nil indiga nostri,
Nec been promeritis capitur nec tangitur ira.
Lucr. l. I. Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Iovi.
Ovid.
disturb his present Felicity, to intermeddle with our Affairs; What does this
signify, but that they think themselves capable of determining whatsoever may
be suitable to Infinite Perfection? If in any thing they plainly saw a
Necessity, well and good: But from their loose and groundless imaginations, to
draw such a Conclusion, argues extreme Arrogance. Does it argue a Perfection in
the Divine Nature, to have excluded himself (by the perfection of his
Workmanship) from any possibility of ever more intermeddling with it? Can they
be certain of this? I think not. And if it be possible for him to intermeddle,
whenever he sees convenient, how will they prove he does not? O, it would
discompose him, and disturb his perfect Happiness. At this rate, he must be of
a very delicate Constitution. His Head, perhaps, would ache, if he applied his
Mind to such perplexing Cares. Ridiculous! Yet, admit it: What hinders but he
may be discharged of much of that trouble, by the Ministry of Myriads of
intellectual Beings, who may have ways of influencing us imperceptibly, which
we conceive not? Is this also impossible? They must either show their
Presumption (as I said before) in pronouncing it so; Or own their Temerity, in
raising Objections without knowledge.

As impossible as the Doctrine of Providence may seem to them, This also is
what all the wise and virtuous Heathens constantly believed; And upon which (as
I have shown already) they founded both their Morality and Politics. Yet since
I am saln again upon the Subject, I have a Mind to add one Passage more out of
Cicero, and to join with That the Authority of Socrates, and of Antoninus; Two
Names that (if any) deserve high Veneration. Concerning Socrates, Xenophon his
Disciple, tells us, in the First Book of his Memoirs, that He called those
Madmen, who could imagine that all humane affairs depended entirely upon our
Conduct, without any interposition of Divine Providence. This is the Spirit
that runs through all his Philosophy, and with which he tinctured every thing.
Xenophon has given us several Argumentations of his, expressly to this purpose,
which are much too long to be here transcribed. And these remarkable Words, in
his Fourth Book, show us the improvement he made of it for the benefit of
Humane Life. What Man in his Wits (says he) can, any other way, hope for
greater Advantages, than from the Gods; in whose power it is to bestow on us
the greatest? But he only has Right to expect such things from them who pleases
them: And He chiefly pleases them who most perfectly obeys them. Thus (says
Xenophon) whilst he both taught and practiced these things, he made his Hearers
more Pious and Moderate: And, consequently (all Men must own) more fit for the
Duties of Society. I wish We, in following his Example, could work the same
Effect upon our Nominal Brethren. The Passage of Cicero that I think worthy to
be observed, is this. Etenim quis tam vecors, qui Aut cum suspexerit in coelum
Deos esse non sentiat, and ea, quae tant^ mente fiunt ut vix quisquam art ulla
ordinem rerum ac vicissitudinem persequi possit, casu fieri putet; Aut cum Deos
esse intellexerit, non intelligat eorum Numine hoc tantum Imperium esse natum,
and auctum, and retentum? Quam volumus, licet, P. C. nos amemus; Tamen nec
numero Hispanos, nec robore Gallos, nec callidate Poenos, nec artibus Graecos,
nec denique hoc ipso hujus gentis ac terra domestico nativoque sensu Italos
ipsos ac Latins, sed pietate ac religione, atque hac una sapientia quod Deorum
immortalium Numine omnia regi gubernarique perspeximus, omnes gentes
nationesque superavimus. Cicero. Orat. de Arusp. Resp.
Who can be so void of all Understanding (says he) as Either, when he looks up
into the Heavens, does not conclude that there are Gods; But imagines those
things, which are contrived with so great Wisdom that scarce any Man is able
with all his Art to attain to a knowledge of the Regular Vicissitudes of their
Motions, to be all the Products of blind Chance; Or when he does perceive that
there are Gods, does not understand that the very Origin, Growth, and Support
of this Mighty Empire are to be ascribed to their Providence and Protection? He
goes on, strenuously asserting that, However they might flatter themselves, All
their Successes, even the Conquest of the whole World, were not to be
attributed either to their Number or Strength, etc. Nor even to their
Understanding and Wisdom; except it were in this one Point, that they excelled
all other Nations in Piety and Religion, and in a sensible Conviction of the
Superintendency of the Immortal Gods, and of their own entire Dependence upon
them. But I will conclude these Authorities, with that of Antoninus. He
positively affirms (l. 2.. 8.) both that there are Gods, and that they do
concern themselves in the Administration of Humane Affairs: And upon that
ground, every where, maintains that they ought to be Prayed to, and Worshipped.
And accordingly (l. 3.. 11.) in addressing his Reflections to himself (as his
style runs) He has these excellent words: Prepare and furnish thy self with
Rules, that may be useful to thee in the Intelligence both of Divine and Humane
things: And in all thy Transactions, even the least, remember the Connection
that is between those two. For neither can any Humane Affair be performed as it
ought, unless respect be had to the Gods, in the doing of it: Nor the Contrary.
By which Contrary, according to the Current stream of his Philosophy, it is
probable he intended to intimate; That as all Humane Affairs must be allowed to
be very irregular, where respect was not had to the Gods in the Conduct of
them; So all religious performances toward the Gods ought to be accounted as
improper, which did not tend to the advantage of Humane Society. I say, this I
conclude from the Current Stream of his Philosophy; Because he professes often
(l. 9.. 17. and l. 10.. 6.) that he had no other sense of Duty, nor even of any
particular happiness to himself, than in the Tendency of every thing he either
said or did, to the Welfare of that General Community of Mankind, unto which
every particular Man is inseparably united, as a constituent part of the great
Whole. And therefore also (l. 2.. 14.) he calls that Man an impostumous Boil,
and Excrescence in the World, who was capable of the consideration of any
separate Interest. Which the Propagators of Opinions so ruinous to Society, as
those I write against, would do well to take notice of.

It Is true, indeed, Epicurus (in his Doctrine of Providence) was of another
Opinion. His business was to destroy all sense of any Dependence upon the Gods,
in any case whatsoever. But I beg these Gentlemen's Pardon, if I did not reckon
upon him, when I mentioned all the wise and virtuous Heathens as agreeing in
this Belief. Not that I would detract from his Reputation of personal
Moderation and Temperance, or any other Excellency that is reported of him. But
the voluptuous and dissolute Lives of the main Body of his Followers, proving
evidently the tendency of his Principles, makes me look upon him (if you
please) as a Virtuous Monster; If he were so, in consequence of a Belief which
did, and naturally must, make the Generality of Men, who embrace it, extremely
vicious.

Now, if the manifest Immodesty of those Objections, (founded upon vain
Presumption, and contrary to the weight of all virtuous Authority) be not
sufficient to check the Spreaders of them in our days; Yet, methinks, the ill
Consequences that attend such like Doctrines, should not only do it, but also
make them a little doubtful of their Truth. And if they were once got so far as
to admit the Mischief of those Consequences, and thereupon to hesitate upon the
Truth of the Notions which produced them, I cannot yet think so ill of my
Countrymen, as to suppose they would continue their Industry in making
Proselytes. The Consequences I have represented already: The Ruin of Societies.
Now suppose the Disquisition into the Truth of these Matters were intricate;
(for that is the most that can be said in favor of the Incredulous) Which way
ought we to incline? He must have little Humanity in him that does not find
even his Judgment swayed by the Welfare of all Mankind. For my part, who do
believe a God and Providence, I cannot conceive it consistent with his
Goodness, to have put us into such Circumstances, that any Opinion which is
absolutely necessary to our Being or Well-being (so that we could not possibly
either be at all, or enjoy any competent happiness without it) should not be
True; Or that the contrary should. This would be to suppose the Scheme of the
Universe very ill drawn, and the Parts of it ill suited to each other; If any
real and necessary Effect were made dependent upon an imaginary and false
Cause. For Instance: If our Being, (the Sustenance of our Life) or the End of
our Being, (Happiness, in any moderate degree) could not be attained without
this or that particular Persuasion, which should move us to act in this or that
particular manner; It would seem to me (I confess) very absurd, and
inconsistent with my Idea of a God, that such Opinion or Persuasion should have
no real Ground in the Nature of Things, but depend only upon our lucky hitting
on so useful an Error. That is as much as to say: If the Belief of God's
Superintendency be absolutely necessary to our attaining any competent Degree
of Happiness (which he has evidently designed us for) it seems to me very
absurd, to think that such a Belief can possibly be groundless and false. This
would give me a strange Idea both of God and of my self. If every thing that I
can observe in my own Nature, shows me that I am designed for Society; And if
Society can not possibly be maintained without those Principles that I have
been pleading for; I must needs think it a very fantastical Contrivance in my
Nature, if the Author of it should have no way to lead me into the Belief of
them, but by Delusion: Especially if that Delusion be such, (which is the Case
in the System of those I now dispute against) as I my self may be able to
detect, and thereby frustrate the End of him that made me. This (I must needs
say) would make so strange a jumble in my Brains, that, rather than admit it, I
should fly to direct Skepticism, and believe nothing at all. Yet nevertheless,
I confess, All this does not amount to a Demonstration, to those who do not
believe a God, or not such a God as I do; Though to me it be not much less. At
least, I must profess that, admitting the Matter of Fact (in respect of the
Consequences of Irreligion) as I have endeavored to prove it; The grounds of
Religion do, by this very Argument, appear to me so probable, that though I had
no other, I should not scruple to venture my All upon them. Nature her self
repugns at the Thought of the Contrary. Who is it, that would not abhor any
thing that tends to the Ruin of his whole Species? Methinks, therefore, it
should create in all Men's Minds a prejudice strong enough to resist even very
specious Arguments; But surely, to hinder the Belief of so ill a thing, without
any Argument at all. And, as even now, I called him a Monster of Virtue, who
could be virtuous in spite of the strongest vicious Principles; So I would
fain know by what Style those Men will decipher their own Inhumanity, who can
(without any reluctance) entertain and take Delight in propagating Opinions
which strike at the Foundation of all Humane Happiness.

Let this suffice to be said concerning the Nominal Deists. I would now add a
few words to you, Gentlemen, that are Real ones; And to my self, in that
number. We do believe, That there is an infinitely Powerful, Wise, and Good
God; Who superintends the Actions of Mankind, in order to retribute unto every
one, either here or hereafter, according to their Deserts. Let no body boggle
at this Creed: For if we do not stick to it, I have proved already that we ruin
the Foundation of all Humane Happiness, and are in effect no better than mere
Atheists: And, in the end of the Consequence shall become Canibals. If we do
stick to it, let us consider what further it leads us to. The Retribution that
we have concluded to be necessary, is not made with any manner of exactness in
this Life: And therefore it is to be expected in another. This, indeed, is a
common Argument: But admitting the Premises, I do not see how it can be
resisted. Those that will oppose it, must begin with denying the
Superintendency of God; And thereby declare themselves Enemies of Mankind. But
let us go on. If God superintend the Actions of Men, he does it by some Rule.
That Rule must of necessity be Uniform. That is; All Men in the same
Circumstances must be obliged to the same thing, under the same Penalty. For
Partiality, Favor, and Dispensation, to one person more than another, are
wholly inconsistent with our Ideas of his Perfections. But when Circumstances
alter, though the Rule itself be always the same, God's Judgment of particular
Actions alters accordingly. It may then be enquired, how shall we do to know
what this Uniform Rule is? I answer; It must of necessity be suitable to the
Relation that is between him and us. If that will not teach us what it is, I
shall be at a loss where to look for it. But let us consider what appears most
obvious in the General Relation wherein God stands to Men; Or Men to God.
Whether we call him Creator, Benefactor, Governor, or whatever it be, it is
one and the same thing to All: He is not the God of this or that particular
Country only, but of the whole World. This General Relation, therefore, implies
a General Care. His Design must of necessity be the Good of the whole. And as
we are Instruments in his hand, it must certainly be in order to that End.
Whatsoever tends to the Good of the whole, is therefore (in every change of
Circumstance) the Constant, Uniform, and Unalterable Duty that God requires
from every Man; And according to which he will judge every Man. Thus we both
find what our Duty is; And that his Animadversion, to be expected in a Future
State, gives it the Strength of a Law.

I say, therefore, Gentlemen, let us that believe and see these things, be
careful to conform our Lives according thereunto. This is no small Advance. If
we keep fast hold of this Thread, there can happen very few Difficulties that
it will not guide us through. The Awe of a super-intending God, if attended to,
will make us Sincere. For where is the Man, that whilst he is under that Sense,
dares transgress the Laws that he understands himself to be in this manner
obliged to observe? And if we are Sincere, there is no Man of moderate
Capacity, but by asking himself the Question, on occasion of any thing that he
is going about (Which way would it be for the Advantage of all Mankind, that
all Men in this Circumstance, should act?) will be able to see, which way lies
the General Interest of Mankind; And in that, His own particular Duty.

This would furnish Matter for a large Discourse: But that I fear it would be
called Preaching. Yet what is obvious, and necessary, must not be omitted. Let
us open our Eyes, and consider what a World we should have, if all Men were
thoroughly sensible but of this one thing, that I have now Illustrated. This one
Law, if every Man carried it in his Breast, would very much supersede the Use
of all other. But without that which is the Ground of This, all other Laws are
of very little significancy. What the state of the World would be, in that
case, we have seen already. Let us not therefore delude our selves, or others,
with Talk of Reformation. Till this Principle be spread, has taken root, and is
got in Vogue, it is altogether in vain to go about it. This, and this alone,
will reach the Decay of Trade and Wealth, (not to mention the higher effects of
it) and reform the Miscarriages that are complained of in Public Affairs, and
Establish the Government of this Nation. I speak of Government, because I
believe many of us do (I am sure all should) heartily love our Country; The
Welfare of which depends entirely upon the Constitution and Administration of
our Government. What Reformation; What Patchings of our shattered Frame, can we
expect? Nay, What will any Patchings Quid Leges, sine Moribus, vanae
proficiunt? Hor. Carm. l. 9. Ode 24.
signify, whilst our Manners are thus corrupted? Till a Principle of True
Virtue begin to take Root in Men's Minds, there is nothing more Chimerical than
the Expectation of any manner of Public Good. And I think I may well add, that
there is hardly any Cant more fulsom, than the Talk of Virtue, where there is
not a Principle that all Men must own capable to produce it. For our Country's
sake therefore, Gentlemen, let us make it our first Business, to establish this
Principle in the Minds of all our Acquaintance. We may do it in a thousand
Ways, more effectual than the Pedantick forms of Pulpit-speeches; And which
will disbebecome no body. This were an excellent means indeed of tricking the
Priests out of their Trade (which we so much exclaim against) and would leave
them no ground of Complaint. When we have done this, (and not till then) we may
set up for Patriots; And with Assurance of Success. One that was no more Bigot
than the best of us, saw many Ages ago, and told his Countrymen, the Romans,
that all their Diis te minorem quod geris imperas: Huc omne Principium, huc
refer exitum. Dii multa neglecti dederunt Hesperiae mala luctuosae. Hor. Car.
lib. 3. Ode 6.
Successes were to be attributed to their Religious Reverence of the Gods, and
their Miscarriages, to the neglect and decay of it. And whether we seek the
reason of this Observation in the Natural Efficacy of the grand Principle of
Religion, or in the Blessing of Providence that attends the observance of it,
we shall find it both ways strong. Let us then make it our Business to
Quamborem, ut Religio propaganda est qua est juncta cum cognitione Natura, sic
Superstitionis stirpes omnes ^lidendae sunt. Cic. de Divin. l. 2.
Propagate the Establishment of True Religion; And we shall by that means, not
only root up the Weeds of Superstition (wherever we meet with any such) but lay
a solid Foundation of Prosperity to our Country, for which Posterity will
pronounce us Blessed.

Now if what I have offered, toward the Establishment of a General Rule of
Conduct, be of any use; I would very earnestly -- Fungar vice cotis, acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet exsors ipsa secandi. Hor. de Art. Po.
beg of those that are more able than my self, to improve it further; and to
give us a System of particular Duties that Rise naturally from the Fountain of
True Deism. Grotius indeed, and Pufendorf, and many other Moralists and
Politicians, have done something toward it; but either so brokenly, or so
diffusedly, that it is hard for a Reader to perceive always the Thread of
Consequences which ought to run through the whole. Something more easy and
more evident is yet wanting. It has been hinted by a Look, concerning Humane
Understanding, l. 3. cap. 4.
Worthy Gentleman, that Morality is capable of Demonstration. And all that have
read that Work of his, will allow that none can be more capable of doing it
than himself. If I had the honor, therefore, of his Acquaintance, I would
certainly solicit him to perform what he proposes. But since we see it not yet
done, and must therefore suppose that some other thing of no less moment
imploys his Thoughts (for he has both there, and His Thoughts concerning
Education.
else where, expressed too true a Concern for the Welfare of Mankind, to leave
us any mistrust that he would otherwise omit it) I cannot refrain from offering
to all Men's consideration the Usefulness of the Design; That so whoever finds
his Strength equal to the Task, may take it upon him.

But if the Difficulty of this Work be any Obstacle to others, as well as to
me; And if my General Rule be too succinct, for the Variety of Cases that occur
in Humane Affairs; Then I am sure we must all conclude that the generality of
Mankind stand in great need of some further Assistance, than that general
Capacity which they are naturally endowed with: And that wheresoever that
Assistance can be found, it is not below the most elevated Capacity to make use
of it. Now this, at least, is pretended, amongst Christians, to have been done
by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. The Precepts of the Gospel are plain, suited
to the meanest Capacities: And, if the History of it be true, the Divine
Authority of it can not be questioned. Those two things, therefore, joined
together, ease us at once of the trouble of enquiring into the Foundation of
the Law of Nature, and into the Particularities of it. For admitting them; We
have a fair Transcript, in our hands, of the most essential Points of that Law,
and the Authority of the Lawgiver stamped upon it. This therefore, besides the
Doctrine of Deism that we agree in, it highly concerns us to enquire into. For
if the pretenses of Christianity be well grounded, it can not be an indifferent
or frivolous Matter.

The general Advice that I will presume to offer upon this account, is only
this. Let us be very careful not to block up our own way to the Discovery of
any useful Truth, by that sort of Presumption which I have but even now --
Eheu, Quam temere in nosmet legem sancimus iniquam! Hor. Sat. l, 1.
condemned in those whose Brotherhood I would disclaim. I hope none that really
believes a God, will offer to say it is impossible for him to communicate the
knowledge of his Will to his Creatures, by any other way than that which we are
ordinarily acquainted withal: Or that it is impossible for Him to empower any
one, whom he thinks fit to fill with any extraordinary either Degree or Kind of
Knowledge, to work things so wonderful as may justly be esteemed an adequate
proof of his extraordinary Mission. To pronounce either of these, dogmatically,
impossible, implies a presumption of so comprehensive and universal a
knowledge, as I am sure it is impossible for any Man to attain to. Impossible
for God! Is the thing inconsistent with the Scheme of the Universe? Who knows
it? If it be not; Or that we are ignorant; Who dares say it? But if we can not
reasonably pronounce all manner of extraordinary Revelation of God's Will to be
impossible; And can not deny some extraordinary Help (considering the many
frailties of Humane Nature) to be highly useful; We are certainly bound to
examine without prejudice, and very impartially, any thing that has but a
plausible pretense to that Extraordinary Character.

It will not be denied, I suppose, but Christianity has the fairest Pretensions
to this, of any Religion now in the World. Yet even here, immediately, we
renconter a Cloud of Objections: Superstitious Practices; Absurd and
unconceivable Tenets; Disputes; Uncertainties; and Endless Difficulties. What
shall we do? Think not, Gentlemen, that I am going to advise you to enter into
all the Controversial Disquisitions that amuze our several Sects. No: If you
are desirous to know the Truth, avoid them all, and enquire without prejudice
into the Root of the Matter. The Root I call the plain History of Matter of
Fact. See what Proofs there are, for or against the Truth of what is recorded
to have been said and done by Jesus Christ. If you can not deny the Truth of
the History (which I suppose is hardly possible) then observe the Tendency of
his Doctrines and Precepts; And if you find them all entirely conducing to the
Welfare of Mankind; (which is the same End with that of the Natural Law of God)
Believe them not the less; (I beseech you) But think your selves a little the
more obliged to obey them, because (which you must own, if the History be true)
he was immediately sent from God to teach and give them. In this Examination,
the Use of our Reason is not only Lawful, but Necessary. God has given it to
us, as Men, for our Use: And where we apply it to necessary Uses, not to vain
Curiosities, it will not deceive us. In that manner we act according to Nature,
and ought not to do otherwise. And if we examine thus, I am persuaded we shall
find that Christianity is the highest Improvement of Deism: So that we may
embrace it, without forsaking our first Principles. It must needs be so, if
true. For the Principles of Deism are the Eternal and Unalterable Law of God to
all Men. He may give further Helps (as I suppose we shall find Christianity is)
to some: But he can not Abrogate or Suspend the Universal Law, which he has
given us by Nature, with respect to any. My Counsel therefore terminates, in
sticking constantly close to That; And at the same time, in making Use of all
the Assistance we can find, for the Improvement of it, any where else. In this
manner we not only avoid, but answer all the Objections that I now hinted at,
or that can possibly rise against Christianity. The Practice of Superstitions
is unsuitable to the true Idea of a God. The Belief of Absurdities is
impopossible to the Nature of Man. And the Enquiry into Useless Niceties, is a
very ill Employment of that precious time, of which (amongst other things) God
will certainly require an account at our hands.

How! Will some Sectaries, that may chance to see this Letter, be apt to say;
Are no Systems, no Articles, no Creeds, worth enquiring into? This is to set up
a New Christianity, and to Undermine what is ordinarily called by that Name,
instead of establishing it: The very Fault that you condemned in those who,
under the Veil of Deism, made it their Business to propagate the Principles of
Atheism. I beg their Pardon. The Difference is great. In the first place: It Is
to Deists I write. And if upon that account, I use a Latitude in some
Expressions, not suited to the Genius of a Sectary, it is no more than the
nature of the thing requires. But I will answer them more directly. They may
wrangle about Names as much as they please: It Is the thing only that I enquire
into. Christianity. That Christianity which Jesus Christ and his Apostles
taught: Not that which Sects and Parties have so deformed, or disguised, that
it is not at all knowable in their Writings, nor much in their Practice. What!
Shall I set my self to seek out a System of Christianity, amongst their endless
Disputes? Let them first agree upon it amongst themselves. When that is done,
it will be time enough for me to consider what they say. But if, in the mean
while, I can find out any particular wherein they all agree, I sincerely
promise them that I will stick to it.

Now one particular, I bless God, I have lately found, in a Book, Entitled,
The Reasonableness of Christianity, as delivered in the Scriptures; And there
demonstrated with an Evidence, that I am not able to resist. Yet let no body
imagine, by this, that I am the Old Acquaintance of the Author of the Growth of
Deism, who (he tells us) was convinced of the Reality of Revealed Religion, by
the reading of that Book, and of The Five Letters concerning the Inspiration of
the Holy Scriptures. For I neither know him, nor He me. Yet nevertheless, I own
that I esteem That Book, and the last of those Letters, no less than he seems
to do. Now, I say, the thing which I find in that Book, wherein all Sectaries
agree, is, That Jesus Christ is the Messiah, the Son of God, the King; Whom
all, that believe him to be so, are obliged to obey. And the General Agreement
of all Sects in this, gives me, I confess, a strong presumption of its Truth:
But the particular Evidence of it, in that Book, is irresistible. The Evidence,
I mean, both that the Thing asserted is true; And that (whatever else may be
true and useful) nothing but that alone is required, absolutely, to denote and
Characterise a Man a Christian.

Since therefore I am forced to own that, for my part, I know no better; And
now despair of any help from particular Sects; I hope I may, without the
Censure of those Sects, resume the Advice I was presuming to offer to those to
whom I address this Letter; To Deists, I mean. I would fain persuade them to
look into the True Grounds of Christianity. What do I talk of persuading them
to it? They do it already. Deism itself is the first Ground and Foundation of
Christianity. Let them observe the Superstructure: And if any part of That be
not so fitted as to lie even and smooth upon this Foundation, let them, in
God's Name, reject it. Such ill-hewn Stuff cannot be from him. His Works are
all of a piece; And will be always found consistent. But if all Genuine
Christianity, All that Jesus Christ himself made essential to it, be evidently
an improvement of Natural Religion (which I call Deism) built upon it, fitted
to it, compacted with it; So that the whole together makes one entire Body, or
System of Laws; Just and Reasonable, Worthy of the Supreme Legislator from whom
they proceed, and all calculated and apparently contrived for the Benefit of
Man; Then, methinks, I should not need to use many words to persuade any one to
embrace it. Neither is that my intention. I only propound, that those who have
not yet examined into the Matter, would please to do it, by that Draught of
Christianity which the forementioned Book presents us withal: And let them
resist it if they can. For if they can do it, it is reasonable they should.
Nay, as we are men, it is impossible for any one to do otherwise; That is, to
refuse Assent upon Conviction, or to believe contrary to it. After that
Examination, I referr it to themselves to enter into more particular Enquiries,
or desist, as they shall then judge necessary. But if, contrary to my
expectation, any one of you, Gentlemen, to whom I have addressed this too
tedious Letter, disagree with me (after such Examination) in what I have now at
last particularly insisted upon; I beg of you, by the Bonds of Humanity, in
which we are all united, to assist me in shaking off what you esteem to be
Delusion; And to furnish me at the same time, instead of it, with some other
more perfect Scheme of things; More agreeable to the Ideas we have of God, and
more conducive to the Happiness of Man. Take only those two Considerations
along with you, and in doing it effectually, you will oblige, not only me, but
all Mankind. I am,

Your affectionate Friend.

ERRATA.
Page 36. line 19. read que.

P. 104. l. 8. r. vain.

P. 117. l. 19. r. this.

FINIS.

