THE Primitive Christians Bearing their Testimony for God in Times of
PERSECUTION: BEING Some Sentences of Tertullian and others, taken out of a
Book, called, The Mirror of the Martyrs: How that the Crimes which of Old were
objected against the Christians, were, That they frequented Seditious Meetings
and Conventicles, and that they would Rebel against their Superiors: And the
Judges and Justices grew incenst against them, and would not hear their just
Pleas; therefore Tertullian complained, saying:
THus are our Adversarys affected toward us, that they condemn our cause
before it be heard; which if it were equally heard, could not be condemned by
them: But is there any thing more unjust, then to hate that which is not known,
seeing then Men hate what they know not, why should it not be granted us to
follow that we know, and being known could not be so maligned as it is? It is
not permitted to Christians to have their cause publicly heard, wherein (he
said) their Blindness appeared that accused us as Evildoers, but the cause of
Malefactors is heard, sifted and pleaded, only to Christians it is denied, not
being suffered to utter that which would make their cause understood, nor to
defend the Truth, which hinders the Judge from showing himself just. But seeing
the truth condemns that, which Men impose upon us their last refuge is (see
Tertu.) to blear our Eyes with the Authority of their Laws, which say they,
must not be repealed, (says he) As touching the Law they speak of, may not Men
fail in framing Laws, and therefore correct and repeal what they have Enacted?
does not experience daily manifest so much that ancient Laws are abrogated by
Enacting of new? Thence it follows (says he) that neither length of time, nor
Authority of the Law makes Laws to be good, but only such as are grounded upon
Justice and Equity; justly then (says he) may that Law be suspected for bad,
if it will not suffer it self to be tried; and is unjust, if not being
examined, it yet takes place.

As for Antiquity, against which you tell us we Christians transgress; as there
was a complaint against the Christians, That such Fantastical singularity was
amongst them, that those things which their Elders had received and allowed,
they rejected and disallowed, devising every man such Laws as they thought
good, and observe the Same, Assembling together great multitudes of people.
"Says Tertullian you make Antiquity "your God, and yet you your selves from
day to day Live as you list holding "that fast which you ought to forgo,
forsaking that which you ought to retain. And as for those Crimes that were
Objected Against them, that they did frequent Seditions Meetings and
Conventicles, and that they would rebel against their Superiors, and that
their Assemblies were unseemly in secret. And they reflected upon them as to
their Poverty, And that they offended the Majesty of Princes because they did
not give them honors which were vain flatterings or rash; And therefore they
Accounted them as unfit members of their common wealth, being Angry with them
because their number Increased, upbrading the Christians, saying, now we shall
have every Age, Sex and condition and estate take unto them the title of a
Christian, and they grew so angry that the Emperor was stired up, who did
Appear somewhat favorable to the Christians a while, but afterward Altered and
sent forth so terrible an Edict that according to the forewarning of the Lord
the Elect (if it had been possible) might have been Subverted; And upon this
Edict (see Ter.) Came such fear over us all, that many there were especially of
the Richer sort came running and some were drawn by their neighbors being
Cited by name to their Idollitrous worship: and other some came shaking and
trembling as men not which should do sacrifice, but that should be sacrificed
themselves (being smote by the witness of the Lord in their hearts, for so
doing) the multitude laughing them to scorn; And others Came boldly with a lie
in their Mouths, declaring that they never were of that profession, of whom it
was said that they should hardly ever be saved; of the Residue some followed
one part, some another, some ran away and some were taken, of whom certain
continued to bands and torments constant; others again after long imprisonment
before they should come before the Judge Renounced their faith, some also after
they had suffered torments, yet after revolted but others being as strong as
blessed and valient pillars of the Lord, fortified with constancy, Agreeing to
their faith, were made faithful Martyrs of the Kingdom of God.

And Arnobius says, that in less then 30 days were Martyred in diverse
provinces about 20000 Persons, Chiefly because of their Assemblies. And the
Emperor Valeranus put forth a Proclamation forbiding the Meetings of the
Christians: And commanded all good Christians to be banished out of the Land,
whereof there were exceeding many, yet it is said those that did remain met in
troops, which the Emperor hearing sent for the Provost, and struck him for not
quite ridding the Country of them, and gave him a strict order, To go to their
Assemblies and put them all to the Sword. So the Provost went at the time and
place where the Christians Assembled (sending to the Christians secretly to
give them notice Aforehand that they might forbear meeting, being loath to
Execute such a bloody command, but the Christians were so far from forsaking
the Assembling themselves together (although it was at such a perilous time)
that they came flocking from all parts, fearing lest their brethren should
suffer without them, amongst the rest a woman posted very fast through the
soldiers, with her Little Child in her Arms, which the Provost perceiveing
spoke to her saying, Woman whither postest thou so fast? I am going said the
woman to the place where the multitude of Christians meet: But know thou not
(said the Provost) that I am to put them all to the Sword? I know it well (said
the woman) which makes me post thitherward so fast, that I may also partake
with them of their Martyredom: which the Provost perceiving their zeal to God
and Love one to another could not be broken, Like a wise and modest man, in
whom tenderness had taken place, gave over, and went to the Emperor, relating
the matter, saying to him, take Away my life, thou may; but to Execute thy
Commands herein, I dare not. And the Lord so ordered it, by this means the
Emperor's wrath was appeased, and the Christians had their Liberty.

And as for the Objections against the Christian Meetings, as aforsaid, they
Answered, our Religion or religious exercises are neither hidden nor unknown,
Albeit (said they) we have neither Temples nor Altars, we worship our God in
spirit, we adore him in our hearts, our care is to exercise our selves in
innocence, Justice and continual Supplications; we fly and abhor wickedness
and these are our sacrifices we are sufficiently known to our selves, and the
badge whereby we are Known each to other is Innocence and modesty; thus we Love
one another and know not what it is to hate, thus we acknowledge our selves
brethren, the Children of one Father, followers together of the same Faith, and
Inheriters of the same hope. In our meetings we Affect neither Ambition nor
vain Glory; But when we meet it is to call upon God with one heart in our
Prayers we pray for Princes and those that govern under them, for
principalityes, for Kingdoms that in all things tranquillity may be Enjoyed.

Our Meetings are for the nourishing of our Faith by holy Admonitions for the
Increase of our hope, to Confirm us yet more therein to teach and Learn the
Doctrine of Gods Commandments; we use exhortations, correction with divine
sensures; if any man have failed that they be excluded from the unity of our
Assemblies; there are Approved Elders to reprove and Admonish, etc. All who are
of Ability contribute something monthly or when they will, for none are
constrained, this so gathered is kept for the Churches stock, for we Lavish
forth nothing thereof upon merry Meetings, but the whole is Employed for the
Cherishing the Poor and needy, for the burial of the Dead, for maintaining of
Poor Orphans, to breed scholars with, to relieve the Aged that are Impotent.
And is bestowed upon those who are in Prison, for maintaining the Truth of God.

Ought these Assemblies of Christians (said Ter.) to be styled a Conventicle?
in which none have cause to complain? do we ever come together to wrong any?
this title of a factious meeting (says he) Appertains to those that conspire
against the Godly, who shed Innocent Blood; And notwithstanding be sure your
rigor shall increase our number. And as for our patient suffering, which you
term obstinacy, shall sufficiently declare that the Cause for which we suffer
is so condemned by man that in the mean time it is approved of God. And
although Persecution Increase, yet still our number Increased, which showed
(said Tertu.) that they which moved them so to do was not Justly weighed of
them which found fault with them. O ye Judges or Justices (then said he) who
glory in killing of the Christians, condemn and crush us to pieces, for seeing
our God suffers us to be thus evil entreated, your Injustice shall set forth
our Innocence; and be it known (said they) that God does not condemn us for our
sufferings, nor is he unable to relieve us, but Gods true soldier is not
forsaken though he suffer; nor in dying perishes, or is overcome. And that
nothing can terrify or remove us which believe, by this it daily appears,
for when we are persecuted, put into prison, banished, etc? yet we go not from
our confession, but on the contrary the more cruelty is wrought against us, the
more be they that come to piety and faith by the Name of Jesus.

Moreover, How should we Rebel against our Superiors, seeing we patiently
suffer the wrongs offered us on all Hands? How often have the mad Multitude
invaded us? only by their own Authority, assailing us, now with Fire, then with
Stones. And not only the Blind Multitude rejoice at the Cruelties which are
exercised against us, but even the Principal in Authority, who rule over them;
but where is the Vengeance that has been taken by us for all this? God forbid
(said they) that a little Fire kindled by Men should take Vengeance, for the
contempt of the Doctrine of God. Alas! do you think (said they) that Multitudes
of Men are wanting to us? Strange Nations that War against you have their
Territories limited; but we Christians are dispersed your Citys, Villages,
yea, your Houses are replenished with those of our Profession, only your
Temples we leave to your selves, so that unless we were taught rather to be
killed then to kill, we might, and that without Armies assail you: but the true
Christian is Enemy to no Man living, much less to his Prince, whom he knows to
be ordained of his God, in which respect, he Loves, Reverenceth, and Honors
him, we give honor to our King, then (said they) so far as is Lawful for us,
and Expedient for him.

More Notes taken out of the Mirror of the Martyrs of the Sayings of others.
Page 320. WIlliam Thorp said, Truth has these Properties, that wherever it
is Opposed, yet it gives a sweet Smell; and the more the Enemies Resist, the
greater sweet Savor comes thereof; which Heavenly Smell will not vanish away
like Smoke in the Wind, but will descend and rest in some Clean Soul that
thirsts thereafter.

Page 317.] Kilian, a Dutch Schoolmaster (to such as asked him, if he loved not
his Wife and Children) said, Yes; if all the World were Gold, I would give it
to live with them, though it were but in a Prison; yet is my Soul and my Lord
Christ Dearer to me than all things whatsoever.

P. 315.] (...) thank^ God that his broken Leg suffered him not to flee
Sufferings.

Page 313.] George Carpenter said, A Town was not so dear to him as his Wife
and Children; yet for Christ's sake (said he) I will forsake them all Clearfully.

Page 310.] Chr. Marshall said, From Eternal he was a Sheep destinated to the
Slaughter; and now I am going to the Shambles; Gold must be tried.

Page 310.] Said one, You may throw my Body down, but my Soul mounts upwards.
Your Blasphemtes more offend my Soul, than your Torments do my Body.

Peter Berger being at the Stake, said, I see the Heavens opened: and beholding
the Multitude, said, Great is the Harvest; Lord, send thy Laborers.

Page 302. Cyprian being solicited by certain Courtiers to consider
deliberately and to spair his Life, and dissemble his Religion; answered, In so
holy a cause there need no such Deliberation.

Page 258.] Tho. Spurdame said, God must have his due, and Caesar his. He said,
He must give his, Sold to God, and all that belongs thereunto.

Page 318.] Fra. Cullver being to suffer Death with his two Sons, said these
words, Sheep we are for the Slaughter this is (...) New Thing.

Page 304.] Saluptus, whom the Emperor Julian employed to persecute the
Christians, saw how they were carried through their Sufferings, and that their
Cruelty nothing prevailed, he gave ^is Report to the Emperor, That if he dealt
thus with them, it would turn to their Glory, but his Shame.

Page 194.] Brown ( said Bonnet) You have been before me many a time and often,
and I have traveled with thee to win^ thee fr^ thine Errors, yet thou and such
like have and do report, that I ^nt to seek thy Bloo^ Yea, my Lord ( said
Brown) ye be a Bloodsucker indeed.

Page 226.] Bonner said to one, (...) call me BLOODY BONNER; Avenge^ on you
all, I would fain be rid o(...) but you have a Delight in Burning; but if I
(...) Will I would (...), and (...) you

Page 23.] Roger Clark said, Eight for your God; for he has not long to
continue.

Page 263.] Robert Coe being demanded by the Bishop of Norwich, Whether he
would Obey the King's Laws? Answered, As far as they agree with God's Word I
will Obey them. The Bishop said, Whether they Agree or not Agree with God's
Word, we be bound to Obey them, though the King were an Infidel. Coe said, If
Shedrech, Meshech and Abednego had so done; Nebuchadnezzer had not Confessed
the True God.

Roger Holand spoke in the Spirit of Prophecy concerning the Powers in his Age,
tells them, Their Authority was from God; and that by his Sufferings they did
Persecute them; but this (says he) I dare be bold to say, which by his Spirit
I am MOVED to speak, God will shorter you Hand of Cruelty. Which did so come to
pass.

Cardinal Woolsey's Testimony about PRINTING, and his Lamentation to the POPE
THe very Art of PRINTING was at the first thought Dangerous, because it was
looked on as a thing like to introduce several Opinions in Religion; Cardinal
Woolsey, in a Letter of his to the Pope, has this Passage about it. That his
Holiness could not be ignorant what diverse Effects the New Invention of
Printing had produced; for as it had brought in and vostored Books and
Learning, so together it has been the Occasion of these Sects and Schisms,
which daily appeared in the World, but chiefly in Germany, where men begin now
to call in question the present Faith and Tenants of the Church, and to examine
how far Religion is departed from its primitive Institution; and that which
particularly was most to be lamented, they had exhorted Lay and Ordinary Men to
Rend the Scriptures, and to Pray in their vulgar Tongue; that if this were
suffered, besides all other Dangers the common People at last might come to
believe, that there was not so much use of the Clergy; for if men were
persuaded once they could make their own way to God, and that Prayers in their
Native and Ordinary Language might pierce Heaven as well as in Latin, how much
would the Authority of the Mass fall! how prejudicial might this prove unto all
our Ecclesiastical Orders loved! Harbert, Hist. of Hen. 8.

THE END.

