A Letter to a Friend Relating to the present CONVOCATION AT Westminster.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. MDCXC.

A LETTER to a FRIEND, Relating to the Present Convocation at Westminster.
SIR,
I Have fully considered what you have been pleased to offer to me in yours
concerning the Convocation now met at Westminster, and the Alterations intended
to be made therein in the present Offices, Rites and Constitutions of our
Church, and all what you say I apprehend to be reducible to these three heads:
1. That no alterations ought at all to be made in things pertaining to Religion
but when there is a very great necessity for it. 2. That at present there is no
such necessity for the alterations intended. And, 3. That, if there were, this
is no time for it, when so many of the Fathers of our Church, and other eminent
persons of the Clergy do now by their suspension stand incapacitated to act
with us in this matter.

As to the first, I readily grant what you say, That nothing is more dangerous
to Religion, than frequently to make alterations in the things pertaining
thereto, because an unsteadiness as to these, although in outward
circumstantials only, which are always alterable, may to many become an
argument against the whole. For there being multitudes among us who are not
able to distinguish between what is circumstantial and what is essential in our
Worship, what is in the power of the Church to alter, and what is not, and are
apt to call every alteration though in things merely indifferent, and which the
variation of times have made totally insignificant to the first end of their
establishment, to be a change of the Religion it self; and therefore concluding
that we have no firm bottom at all for that which they see us so often vary
from, may from hence be induced to cast off all regard both for our Church and
the Worship of God established therein, and become Apostates from us either to
Popery or Atheism all their life after. For the prevention whereof I readily
grant what you say, That such alterations ought not to be attempted but when
there is an absolute necessity for them. And therefore the Church of England
may be justified in her Proceedings hitherto, that she has not been forward on
every demand of the Dissenters to unhinge those of her Communion from her long
received establishments, but has to the utmost resisted all alterations from
them, hoping by other less dangerous methods to cure the distractions and heal
the divisions that are among us. But when after her utmost trial of all other
ways they have all proved ineffectual to attain the end proposed, and the
Church has still grown weaker and weaker, and those that dissent from it still
stronger and stronger under all those attempts which have been made use of for
the reuniting them to us, so that now we are brought to that pass, that without
coming to a temper with them, and abating something on our side for the sake of
peace and union with them, we cannot have that prospect as formerly of
supporting the Church of God and maintaining the Honor of his Worship with
success among us. I think now to make such alterations as are proposed a thing
so absolutely necessary as ought not any longer to be deferred. And this I hope
I shall be able clearly to convince you of in answer to your second head of
objection, from these following reasons.

For, first, There lies an indispensable obligation upon us to do the utmost
we are able to remove this mischievous Schism, from among us, which has so
long disturbed the Church of Christ in this Land. How prejudicial this has
been to the Honor of God and the Salvation of Men, and how advantageous to the
increase of Popery and Atheism, and the propagating also of all manner of
iniquity among us, is that which by woeful experience is too well known unto
you to need a description: And all this evil most certainly must lie at our
doors as far as we do not the utmost that in us lies to remove it, and what
other way is there now left of attempting it but by coming to some terms of
moderation and temper with those that dissent from us. We have already tried
all methods of persuasion to mollify them, all force of argumentation to
convince them; we have tried also Church Censures and Penal Laws, and inflicted
them too with a severity perchance beyond what we can justify; and what have
we availed our selves of all this, but only to heighten the divisions and
increase the mischief which we endeavored to remove; and therefore what other
remedy is now left us, what other means for us to have recourse to for the
curing of this prevailing evil among us, but that, as far as we are able we
abate of that which has given the whole origin thereto; those excepted
passages in our Liturgy, and those ceremonies in our Worship which our
dissenting Brethren cannot conform with us in. And for this the late Act of
Toleration has added a very pressing necessity. For when our divisions ran so
high, and our animosities against each other so far increased as that
Dissenters were driven by them to take shelter from us in the Camp of our
common Enemy, and join with the Papists against us to the endangering both of
Church and State to utter ruin. The Parliament then thought it time to provide
for the public Safety by reconciling those men thereto by an Act of Toleration
and Indulgence, whereby they being now put upon as good a bottom of legal right
and protection as we our selves, there is no other way left us of coming to a
union with them but by following the same steps which the State has gone in
before us, and by condescension and abatements to reconcile those men unto us:
For they are now no more in our power to force them to a conformity with us
than we are in theirs, and therefore they being on equal terms with us of right
and protection from the Government under which we live, treaty and mutual
abatement is the only method now whereby we can be brought to a union with
each other; and why we should not abate for the sake of this which carries
with it a promise of so great good and benefit to the Church of Christ among
us, I would desire a reason from him that is able to give it. For what are
those things which we differ about, that we must for ever sacrifice to them the
peace both of Church and State without abating the least tittle for so great a
good as that of the common union of Christians among us? are a few excepted
passages in our Liturgy, and two or three ceremonies in our Worship things of
so great value that we must for the sake of them still maintain those discords
and divisions both in Church and State which have so long harassed both almost
to utter ruin? Is it not enough that we have had already a twenty years War
about them? and, is it not enough, that ever since our deliverance from that,
for the sake of those trifles, we have for these thirty years last past driven
up our divisions and animosities against each other to that height as that we
had almost totally given up our Church to Popery and our Government to Tyranny
thereby? Certainly, after all this, it is time to sit down and consider whether
those things are of such great value for the sake of which we bring so much
mischief to this poor distressed Church and Nation, that nothing must be abated
of that unreasonable rigor whereby we have hitherto maintained them. And if the
consideration of things past cannot move us, I beseech you, consider a little
the present posture of our affairs; we have a formidable Enemy in our
neighborhood now engaged in War against us, who thinks of nothing less than
subjugating these three Kingdoms to his absolute Tyranny, and imposing Popish
Idolatry and Superstition upon all the Inhabitants of them; and that which
gives him the greatest advantage against us, and the greatest hopes for our
destruction is, our divisions among our selves at home which enfeeble both our
hearts and hands for the battle, and make us unable to resist him with that
success which formerly used to attend most of our other expeditions against
Enemies altogether as potent; and what remedy have we left to prevent this
terrible ruin that now so formidably threatens us, but to come to as firm a
union among our selves as we are able? and could but this be once happily
effected, we need not fear all the power of France and Rome in the firmest
union against us; but should be strong enough to resist all their efforts for
our ruin; and, by the blessing of God, still continue in safety, in spite of
all the endeavors of both to the contrary. And since it has pleased God to
move the King to call us together in Convocation in this conjuncture, I hope we
shall not let slip this opportunity of doing the utmost we are able to unite
the Nation now our affairs do so much require it for the public safety
thereof. For the expectations of all men are now upon us for this purpose, and
the hopes of preserving Church and State in the great dangers under which they
are now both involved, do in a great measure depend upon what we shall do for
our common Peace now met together and put in a way to remove those obstacles
which have so long disturbed it. Have we not already lost our reputation with
the people of the Land by insisting too rigorously on those things? And now we
have in a great measure again retrieved it by our firm and successful
engagement against the Popish cause, shall we be so far infatuated as again to
run the same risk? will we but now come to that temper and moderation in our
establishments as may remove that bone of contention which has so long
disturbed us, and think of such abatements as may tend to the settling of Peace
and Union among us, the mouths of all this people shall bless us, and we shall
acquire thereby that veneration and regard among them that they shall all look
on us as the only faithful Shepherds whose voice they are to hear, and we
thereby be enabled to discharge the duties of our Ministry among them with that
comfort to our selves and benefit to them as shall soon fix our Church upon a
foundation never more to be shaken by any of its Enemies. But if on the
contrary we still persist in our old rigor, and abate no expression in our
Liturgy, nor ceremony in our Worship, for the sake of so great a good; for my
part, I can expect nothing less than that we become abhorred of the whole
Nation, as the common Enemies of its peace, and be treated accordingly in every
Parish where we live among them. Were those matters in which abatements are
desired of us by our dissenting Brethren things of that moment that they either
carried with them the force of a divine Institution, or were of their own
nature so necessary to our Worship that either the Honor of God or the
Interest of man's Salvation should suffer the least prejudice by their
omission, it would become us then, whatever the Consequences should be, to
stick to them to the utmost, and with the same constancy as formerly the
ancient Christians did against the Arrians, not yield a letter to them to end
the whole controversy between us. But notwithstanding what our learned
Prolocutor has been pleased in his Latin Speech to the Convocation to suggest,
this is by no means our present case. For what Article of Faith, what necessary
requisite of our Worship is it in which any alterations are at all intended to
be proposed in this present Convocation? if he knows of any such, he would do
well to discover them, and when they come to be offered, oppose them to the
utmosh But, alas, the alterations intended, how great oppositions soever they
may meet with, are so far from touching upon any thing of this nature, that I
can assure him, and he himself well knows it, as being one of the Commission,
where they are prepared, that they are only in those indifferent things, which
have through all ages of the Church from the beginning been ever allowed to be
alterable, whenever the good of the Church should require it. And therefore
since at present (as I have shown) not only the good of the Church in order to
the establishment of its peace among us, but also the public interest of the
State too in order to its preservation in its present exigencies do so much
require that those alterations should be made, why do we so obstinately stick
at those matters, whereby not only the cause of God in the welfare of his
Church, but our own also in the public interest of the Nation, is so greatly
prejudiced by us? As it is a great error in some of our dissenting Brethren to
allow nothing lawful to be made use of in our public Worship but what they
find particular warrant for in Scripture, so is it no less a mistake in us to
hold any thing of this nature not prescribed there to be unalterable. For our
Savior having given us his divine Law, and therein among other Precepts,
commanded in the Worship of God, the Celebration of his Sacraments, and the
Government of his Church for the better influencing of every member of it to
all the duties enjoined, for this very reason descended not to prescribe the
particular manner, rites and constitutions which his Church afterward made use
of in the performance of all this, because it was impossible that any
unalterable rule could at all be given of those matters. For the reason of
these being only decency and order in the Church of God, and to be as helps
therein the better to influence the minds of men to the performance of the
Divine Commands must necessarily be of their own nature variable, according as
to the different variations of times, circumstances and the customs of men they
more or less become capable of answering the end designed, and therefore have
ever been in the power of the Church to constitute, alter and abolish them
according as the honor of God, the good of his Church and the interest of
Religion might be best promoted thereby. As long therefore as these Forms of
Prayer which are used in our Church, and those Rites and Constitutions which
are received therein do answer the end of their first establishment in being
useful to the promoting the honor of God and the edification of his people,
so long they ought with constancy always to be retained; but when either the
infirmity or the wickedness of men, or any other cause has made that
alteration in the Times, and in the humors and customs of those that live in
them, that these things instead of conducing any longer to that good end
proposed, do on the contrary administer only to Schism and Division in the
Church, and to distraction and discord in the State, whereby the peace of both
is miserably disturbed, as is too manifestly our case; from hence there arises
a reason altogether as strong for their alteration, as ever there was at first
for their institution. Were they become only useless and no longer answered
their end, this would be a sufficient reason alone for an alteration in them,
but when over and above they become mischievous too in the evils that they
bring both upon Church and State this adds an obligation, which cannot I think
without guilt be resisted, of coming to a change in these matters.

And to come to the particular things controverted between us, I readily assent
that the Cross in Baptism had a very good reason for its first institution: For
when in the primitive times the Heathens made it a matter of constant reproach
to the Christians, that they worshipped a crucified God, they for this reason
appointed the Cross after Baptism to be thenceforth put as a Badge upon all
whom they received into the Church, to let them know, that they ought not to be
ashamed hereof. And I doubt not but that it was of excellent use in those times
to fortify the minds of Christians with that constancy and resolution as was
requisite to bear them up against the scoffs and reproaches of their Heathen
Adversaries amongst whom they lived. But now Heathenism has so many Ages since
been totally extinguished in those parts of the World, and we live in a State
which is totally Christian, so that the Cross of Christ is no longer liable of
being objected to us as a reproach by any, it cannot be denied but that this
Ceremony has now totally lost its use, and although it might innocently enough
be still retained, yet may it with as much innocence also be totally laid aside
now the alterations of times have made it wholly useless to the end for which
it was first designed. But in our present circumstances, when it is become not
only useless but also mischievous to the cause of Christ by reason of the
Dissensions and Schisms which it occasions in his Church, and is thereby
instead of a badge of Union and Christian constancy under the banner of the
Captain of our Salvation, as was first intended, become an Ensign of war to
make us fight against each other, and a Cross of torment thereon again to
crucify the Lord of life in his body the Church, and rent its bowels asunder
by those lamentable divisions which it causes among us; in this case I think
we have an obligation upon us not to be resisted from the absolute necessity of
the thing, either totally to lay this Ceremony aside, or else make such
abatements concerning its use, as may allay all these heats of contention and
mischiefs of separation which have been caused in the Church of Christ thereby.
And I here plainly aver that the Church of England cannot be guiltless in this
matter, if she does not on this opportunity, now put into her hands by this
present meeting of the Convocation, do something herein, and that especially
since by an unwary expression in her Canons, wherein she has explained this
Ceremony to be that whereby the person baptized is dedicated to the service of
Jesus Christ, she has wrongfully attributed thereto the sacramental effect
which belongs to Baptism only, and thereby administered a great part of the
occasion to all the divisions which have been risen about it.

2. As to the Surplice I am sufficiently satisfied that nothing is more
unreasonable than those Cavils which are risen against it. For it is only an
habit of distinction, which the Minister for the sake of order and decency
makes use of in the execution of his Function in the same manner as is
practiced in all other Offices and Professions of men, and those that except
against it may as well except against the Robes of a Judge on the Bench, or the
Gown of a Mayor when he presides in his Corporation, it being altogether as
reasonable that a Minister should be distinguished by a proper habit in the
execution of his Office, as they in theirs. But when through the malice of some
in working strange objections against it into the minds of men, and the
weakness of others in receiving and believing them, it is now become so great a
stumbling block of offense as to drive multitudes to forsake our Churches, and
be disaffected to the Worship of God which is performed in them; whatsoever was
the reason of its first appointment, sure I am that from hence there is a much
greater totally to lay it aside, and appoint another that may be less offensive
in its stead. The Union of the Church and the Benefit which the Souls of men
may receive thereby being certainly things of far greater moment than to be
sacrificed to so trivial a matter as that of a Garment.

3. Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is a posture so proper to
that Holy Ordinance, that of all the Constitutions of our Church, this is the
last I should be willing to part with; because I think the highest posture of
Devotion is that which is always most natural for us to be in when we are
receiving from Christ so great and inestimable Benefits as those which are
reached out unto us in that Holy Mystery. But since the weakness of many who
are good and well meaning men have been so far imposed on by several fallacious
arguments which they have not skill enough to see through, as to think it
sinful to receive in this posture, and hereby the Table of the Lord becomes
deserted, and the Souls of many deprived of the benefit of that Spiritual Food
which is administered thereon, contrary to the intention of our Savior, who
has by no means empowered us on any such account as this to debar men from
Communion, and deprive them thereby of those Benefits of Salvation which we are
sent to administer unto them, it is time for us now to abate of our rigor in
this matter; and when we are not able to bring men up by reason of their
weakness to the Constitutions of the Church, be so far indulgent as to descend
to them, and give them the Sacrament in their own way, rather than for the sake
of a posture only debar them of the Benefits which their Souls may receive
thereby; and to do otherwise I doubt will not only be a Sin against Christian
Charity, in prejudicing the Salvation of many, but also be an abuse of the
Commission entrusted with us. For I can by no means be persuaded that Christ
has given us the power of the Keys to shut out those from the Benefits of this
Sacrament who in all other respects being good and righteous men, have only
this weakness, that they cannot comply with us in receiving thereof in that
posture which the Church prescribes, and for which it has no other warrant but
its own Constitutions. For how fitting a posture soever Kneeling may be for the
receiving of this Sacrament, this must undeniably be allowed, that neither
Scripture directs it, nor Antiquity ever used it; it having been for several
ages after Christ the constant practice of all the Churches in the World to
communicate Standing, and why this may not again by a particular dispensation
from the present establishment be allowed to weak and scrupulous persons for
the sake of peace and union with them, I can see no reason that savours either
of a Christian temper or Christian Charity that can be said to the contrary.

4. As to the Liturgy of our Church I freely acknowledge, and I think no man
can contradict me herein, that it i^ the best which was ever yet used in any
Christian Church, but that it should therefore be so perfect as not to be
capable of amendments or alterations for the better does by no means follow.
For nothing of humane composure can be such, especially in a thing of this
nature, where process of time and alteration of circumstances frequently
produce a necessity for correction, as most certainly in our Liturgy they very
often do. For the language in which it is wrote being constantly in fluxu, as
all other living languages are, in every age some words that were in use in the
former grow obsolete, and some phrases and expressions formerly in grace and
fashion through difuse become uncouth and ridiculous, and always to continue
these in our Liturgy without correction would be to bring a disparagement upon
the whole, and expose to contempt the worship of God among us. Besides there
are several things which in one age may conduce to devotion, which through
variation of times and circumstances may not be born in another; several things
which may be the proper matter of Prayer at one time which may not be so in
another, and all those things call for alterations and amendments whenever they
happen. And therefore I am so far from assenting with some of our Brethren in
this particular, that our Liturgy ought not to be altered, that I think it
absolutely necessary from the abovementioned particulars that it be always at
least once in 30 years brought to a review for this purpose. And I am sure this
has been the judgment of the whole Christian Church from the beginning till
this time. The Greek Church has so often altered as to this, and made so many
different forms of their Liturgies, that a Collection of them in a late Auction
amounted to twenty Volumes; and the Latin Church who brag most of their
constancy in these matters have rather exceeded than come behind them herein,
as in the old Manuscripts of their Liturgies will sufficiently appear to any
that will take the pains to look into them. Nay they were so far from
continuing one age in conformity with another herein, that they observed none
at all in this matter, but almost every Province had its different Liturgy, and
it is well known that there were five different forms of them in this Kingdom
till the Reformation, and the like was also practiced in other parts of the
Latin or Romish Church, and a general Agreement as to this was then so far from
being thought necessary, That the Act of King Edward the VIth was the first Law
for a uniform Liturgy in any Church that was ever enacted from the beginning of
Christianity to that time. But neither did that exclude all varying from it in
after times. The Liturgy that was first established in that King's reign,
within a very little while after underwent a review, which produced very
considerable alterations in it. And when Q. Eliz. came to the Crown many others
were made therein. And those who compute the late alterations decreed in the
Convocation of 1662. tell us they amount to the number of 400. And why we only
of this present time should be debarred the privilege of bettering our selves
in this matter, which all other times of the Church before us have enjoyed, I
would fain know a reason. Thus far sure I am that no time had ever more need to
make use of it for the public good than this in which we now live. For the
Exigences of the State call loudly upon us to do that herein which may tend to
its safety, and the peace of the Church and the interest of Religion plead as
hard on the other hand to the same purpose, for the removing of animosities and
divisions, and the restoring of Union and Charity among us. And what can we say
for our selves if we continue deaf as to all this? But to come to the Liturgy
it self; are there not many things in it which with some show of reason our
dissenting Brethren except against? and are there not many more which we our
selves heartily wish might be amended and improved? certainly, were there no
other reason to induce us to comply with our Brethren that dissent from us, in
making such alterations as would satisfy them, I should think this a very
sufficient one, that that we have an opportunity given us at the same time also
to gratify our selves in such further alterations and improvements which we
our selves desire. For must the Story of Tobit and his Dog and that of Bell and
the Dragon always supplant Canonical Scripture in our Churches, and we be
forced to read such ridiculous things to our people instead of the Word of God?
must we always be forced to read the old Translation of the Psalms, and impose
that on the people for true Scripture, which in so great a number of places
quite differs from it? must we always be forced in our addresses to God
Almighty with a flattery not to be warranted, to call every King that reigns
over us most Religious, though the whole tenor of his life may be quite the
contrary; and pray that he may be kept and strengthened in the true worshipping
of God, though openly professing so false a worship as that of Popery? And must
we also be forced still to put that abuse upon the power of the Keys committed
to our charge, as to excommunicate, and thereby thrust out of our Churches
sometimes the best of our people for being right or wrong overthrown in some
penny or twopenny Cause in our Ecclesiastical Courts? And must we always be
necessitated to pronounce all damned that do not believe every tittle in
Athanasius's Creed which so few do understand; and on the contrary to declare
every man saved at his burial how wickedly soever he lived all his life before?
And must we always be bound to many other grievances and defects of this
nature, which I could tell you of, and still deny our selves all redress under
the burden of them, by refusing all those desirable alterations and
improvements which are now in our own power to effect, because some of our
Brethren are obstinately bent to do nothing for the satisfaction of those that
dissent from us? In sum, it cannot be denied, but that there are many things
in our Liturgy which may be amended and improved, many defects in our
Discipline and Constitutions which may be supplied, and abundance of other
particulars in our Church which may receive a great advance for the better
enabling us to promote Religion and Piety, and suppress sin and iniquity among
us. And since the King and Parliament are now so well inclined to comply with
us in all these particulars, which we have so often labored for in vain in
other times, provided that we will on our side do what justly we may to
satisfy our dissenting Brethren for the sake of peace and union among us,
which the necessities of our present circumstances do so much require for our
common safety; it is a barter of that advantage on our side, that none I think
can refuse that have any regard to the honor of God, the good of his Church,
or the true interest of Religion among us.

But to all what I have said I very well know many objections will be made,
which I daily hear from those who are of your opinion in this matter. The first
is, That altering any thing in this now constituted Church will be like the
plucking of a Beam out of a well built House, and that it cannot be done
without endangering the whole Fabric. To this I answer, If all had been of
this mind we could never have reformed from Popery, because this Argument would
have been as strong against all alterations then as now; but I thank God we
altered for the better then, and still preserved our Church, and therefore I
hope we may be able to do so still without any prejudice thereto.

2. It is objected, If we once begin to alter, where shall we stop? To this I
answer, Whenever any thing is proposed to us which is not fit to be done.

3. It Is objected, If we yield now, they will still be craving more, and never
rest till at last they have taken all from us. To which I answer, When they do
this, then it will be time enough to resist them; in the interim let us not
refuse them what is just and sitting for us to grant them, lest thereby we make
good the old Saying, Omnia dat qui justa negat; and we give them an advantage
against us, by our obstinate rigor against yielding any thing, to get that
power on their side which may deprive us of all.

4. It Is objected, That some of those alterations which they require are in
things as ancient as the Primitive Church, from which we ought not to vary, as
may be instanced in the Cross in Baptism. To which I answer, That we are not
bound to retain all things that were used in the Primitive Church. For if so,
why have we not still their Love Feasts and their Deaconesses, which have been
long since disused in all Christian Churches, and yet the mention of them is as
ancient as the Scriptures themselves. For in truth it is not ancient usage, but
the necessities and exigencies of the Church that are the reasons of all its
constitutions and establishments, which are to be framed in every Age as will
best suit with the promoting of the honor of God, and the edification of his
People, to which abundance of things might very well serve in the primitive
times, which will not now; and therefore to say, that what was in use, in the
primitive times must be retained now for this reason only without any other to
enforce it is just the same as if we were bound to revive all the old Saxon and
British Laws, because they were the ancient Constitutions of this Land, without
considering whether they are useful to us or no.

5. The fifth Objection is, That it will be a reproach to change. To which I
answer, That it will be a much greater reproach obstinately to resist a change
when there is good reason for it. And therefore I cannot approve the confidence
of that Gentleman, who has lift up his banner against the whole intent and
design of this Convocation, with a Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare. For does he
think we are bound never to make any new Constitutions in our Church, or
abolish old ones, according as the exigencies of it do require? If so, why
have we any Convocations at all? for is not the whole intent and reason of
these assemblies of the Clergy of this Church, to consider its grievances and
corruptions in the same manner as the Parliament does those of the State, and
from time to time, in like manner, provide remedies for them, and that by
abolishing old Constitutions, as well as by decreeing new ones? and has not
the Church ever asserted this power as one of the most essential things which
belong to its Constitution? and must it now renounce all this for the sake of
this Gentleman's motto? and now, in this critical time, when its safety does so
much depend upon what it shall do for it self, rather sit quietly down and
languish to death, than make the least motion of effort to save it self. If
this be it which this Gentleman would have, we have no reason to thank him
either for his Speech or his Motto, the last of which, I suppose, pleased him
best, because it carried a double stab with it, the one against the Church, and
the other against him that was his greatest benefactor to promote him in it.

6. The sixth Objection is, That we have no reason to alter any thing for the
sake of Dissenters, because the fault of our divisions is not from any
Constitutions of ours, but from their obstinacy and perverseness in
unreasonably dissenting from them. To which I answer, That I acknowledge all
this to be true, that it is not the Church which is the Cause of our divisions
by any of its constitutions or impositions, which are all rational and good,
but they only who refuse to conform to them. But it does not follow therefore,
that when nothing else will remove the divisions now raised among us on the
account of these things, or again reduce Dissenters to the Unity of the Church,
but some alterations in them, (which without the least prejudice to our Church,
or the Worship of God therein we may lawfully make) it may not be a great fault
in us now to be over obstinate in these matters, and that we ought not rather
when there is before us so great a good, as the Peace of the Church and the
Salvation of so many therein (which it is to be feared may be too much
obstructed by these divisions) be ready to comply with them as far as lawfully
we may for the sake hereof. For they being the (...)k and the infirm whom we
are sent to heal, our part to them must be that of a Physician, who, when he
finds his Patient, through that peevishness which is commonly incident to the
sick, obstinately refuse an wholesome medicine which he prescribes him, does not
for this reason immediately cast off all care of him, but thinks of something
else more agreeable to his palate and humor, that may do as well.

7. The seventh Objection is, If we make those alterations and so often change,
how shall we answer the Papists, who will upbraid us with it? To this I answer,
As well as we did in the first of Queen Elizabeth, and in 1662. or, if this be
an Objection, as well as they can us for their alterations by the Council of
Trent, the late reformation of their Mass-books at Paris, and the last Pope's
abolishing several Offices concerning the Virgin Mary.

8. The eighth Objection is, We shall by these alterations dissatisfie our own
People. To which I answer, Why more now than in 1662. when all readily complied
with and approved the like alterations? but I believe more noise is made of
this Objection, than there is truth or reason in it; perchance there may be
some few ignorant and weak People, that may be over zealously affected to these
matters among us, but they being our own, I hope are capable of being better
instructed by us; than to think any of those things in which the alterations
are desired so sacred as not to be meddled with: For this is to attribute that
to the appointments of men, which is due only to the Divine institutions, and
is a sinful superstition, in which they ought by no means to be indulged, but
are as to this to be corrected, and better informed by us, under whose care
they are.

And thu^ far having shown you what necessity is upon us to c(...)ent to the
alterations that will be proposed in this present Convocation, from the great
obligation we have to remove the Scisms and heal the Divisions that are among
us, I shall in the second place show you another reason of this necssity from
the promise, whereby we have obliged our selves so to do. For the Bishops, in
their Petition to King James, promised that they would come to a temper with
the Dissenters, whenever put in a legal way, and this promise all the Clergy in
the Land have seemed to approve of by owning that Petition in which it was
contained, as they all plainly did who refused to read that King's Declaration
in compliance therewith; and therefore now we are put in a legal way by being
called together in Convocation, we are bound to make this Promise good. For
hereby we have not only raised the expectations of the Dissenters, but also of
the whole Nation too, who are earnest for the sake of the public good and
peace of the Kingdom, that the differences between us should be composed; and
if we do nothing in compliance herewith, what can we expect, but that the
general clamor of the People will be raised against us hereon, as a base and
false sort of men, who can promise fair in times of adversity, and forget all
performances when they are over, and we become the reproach of every man
hereon, I know the answer hereto is, that the Dissenters will do nothing on
their part toward this temper, and that after all that we can do on ours we
cannot have assurance that any one of them will come over to us thereon, and
therefore it will be in vain for us to proceed any further on this Project. To
which I reply, First, That it is by no means true that all Dissenters are so
averse to a reconciliation with us, as this answer suggests, for I know
multitudes that on granting the alterations proposed would most gladly come in
and unite themselves to us. That their Ministers are not so forward as to this
I believe to be true, because they having many of them very beneficial
Conventicles, where they have a more plentiful Income, greater respects, and a
larger power than they can hope for in a Church Benefice, would rather for the
sake of self interest continue as they are, and have no Comprehension at all,
than to be brought into the Church thereby to their loss. But with the People I
know it will be otherwise, who will in large numbers come in to us as soon as
those alterations shall be in our Churches; and when they are once come off, it
will not be long ere their Ministers also will be forced to follow. But,
Secondly, suppose it true, That no Dissenter at all would be brought over to us
by the Concessions proposed, yet I say that we are still bound as well by
interest as duty to perform what we have promised: For by doing our part
herein, first, we shall leave them without excuse, if they be not satisfied
thereon, and deliver our selves from abundance of their clamor, which we are
now continually vexed with by them on this account. Secondly, we shall thereby
give satisfaction to the Nation, who expect this from us, and fix them thereby
the more firmly to us. For say we what we will of the strength and number of
those that are for us, let us not deceive our selves, As they that are zealous
for the Dissenters are no great number, neither are they that are zealous for
us. The main body of the Nation I look on to stand indifferently affected both
to them and us, and although they now come to our Churches, yet are they as
ready to join also with them were they in the public Ministry, as in the times
of Cromwell has been sufficiently made appear. For they think not the
Controversy between us of that moment, and therefore cry loudly to us to
agree, and take it very ill that such discords and divisions should be still
maintained in the Nation so much to the prejudice of the public peace and
safety about such trifling matters as they think them to be which we contend
with each other about. And at present I must tell you they are readier to cast
the blame of all this rather on us than them because they are now the suffering
party. But if we do our part on this occasion, and make all those steps to
peace and agreement which are proposed, we shall not only set our selves right
with them as to this, but if the Dissenters do not hereon come in and comply
with us, they will so plainly manifest themselves thereby to be a sort of
obstinate and unreasonable people, that the whole Nation shall condemn them and
justify us, and be thereby firmly fixed on our side ever after. But on the
contrary if we do not our part, but break our promises, and reject the present
opportunity put into our hands of doing our best toward the restoring peace to
this poor divided Church and Nation, which all now so earnestly desire, and the
exigency of our present affairs do make so necessary for our safety, we shall
so far lose the people of the Land, and give our Adversaries that advantage
over us thereby, as I fear may become our total ruin.

But, Thirdly, another reason there is which shows the necessity of our doing
what is proposed, because if we do not do it most certainly the Parliament
will. For it may be very well remembered, that in the last Sessions the Bill
past the House of Lords in order hereto, and when it came down into the House
of Commons it was by their desire that the matter was referred to us, and if we
now do nothing in it, you may assure your self the Parliament will resume it
again, and do it their own way, and they have the whole thanks for it, and we
only the odium of the whole Nation for refusing it. To prevent which let us
not cast the present opportunity out of our hands of doing the thing our
selves: for we as Divines are best able to do it as it ought without prejudice
to the Church, whereas if we cast it into the hands of Laymen, they may instead
of altering Circumstantials strike at Essentials, and so make a breach upon the
Religion it self to the undoing of all. And although this should be avoided, as
I fear it will not in some particulars I could instance, as particularly in
that of our Orders, yet the least mischief we can expect will be totally to
extinguish all Convocations for the future, and resolve the whole power of the
Church into the two Houses of Parliament, and thereby perpetually fix that
reproach of the Papists upon us, that our Religion is a Parliamentary Religion.
And whether the Church of England is now met together only to be felo de se is
that which the Members of this present Convocation are earnestly desired to
consider.

But in answer to all this your third head of Objection tells us, That how
necessary soever this may be from the abovementioned Reasons, yet this is no
proper time for it, when so many of the Fathers of our Church, and other
eminent persons of the Clergy by their Suspension stand incapacitated to act
with us in this matter, and that because if this be now done, when their
consent cannot be had in the doing of it, they will renounce it all, and by
sticking to the present Form create a new Schism among us, and thereby as great
a breach be made in the Church on the one hand, as possibly can be made up on
the other. And this I hear is a reason much insisted on to defeat the whole
design and intent of this Convocation But in answer hereto I must tell you
those excellent persons are very little beholding to them that talk of them at
this rate, there being nothing that can be a more bitter Libel against them.
For is it possible to imagine that those who have so eminently signallized
themselves in the defense of the Church, and so readily yielded themselves to
be Confessors for it (as all well know in the late Reign) should now on a
sudden turn their hands against it to wound and destroy it, and all this only
out of a desperate peevishness, because they have some infelicities at present
upon them which none of us can help. Far be it from those eminent Fathers of
the Church to become guilty of so great a wickedness against it, and I must
tell you it is impossible they ever should, whatsoever some men may talk hereof
to serve their own purpose. For how can they who have so long^ preached and
wrote against Schism and the wickedness of it in separating from the Church
without a just cause, now become guilty hereof themselves, when there is no
cause at all to drive them to it? Should we indeed put any thing either into
our Liturgy or Constitutions, which is contrary either to the Doctrine or the
Precepts of our Religion, I must confess then there would be reason for them to
separate, and I my self would make one of their number; but those that are most
hot against the design of this present Convocation do not tell us that any
thing of this is likely to be done therein, and therefore we may suppose the
Liturgy after its present review will have nothing of this therein, and that
any then should separate from us in that where they can find no fault to object
is a thing that cannot be imagined, but of such only as are most perversely
bent against Reason and Conscience to do all the wickedness they can to
gratify a peevish humor. And therefore those that talk after this rate of
those excellent and most Religious persons have a great deal to answer for to
them for the injury which they do them by this slanderous and vile imputation.
But since they will have it so we will for once (begging their pardon for doing
so) suppose what they suggest to be true, that those who are now of so tender a
Conscience in reference to the Oaths, will have none at all as to this which is
a much plainer case, but go on in opposition to all which we shall do in this
present Convocation to make that Schism which they would fright us with, the
hurt will be so little which they will be able to do us thereby, as that it
will not need either to be feared or regarded by us. For their number is so
small, and the Proselytes they are like to get so few, and the resentments of
the State will be so heavy upon them, as being enemies to them as well as us in
this opposition, that they can no sooner appear in the Schism which is talked
so much of, but they must immediately be crushed and fall to nothing, and
therefore to talk of this as some do, in so formidable a manner for the
obstructing all the good intentions of this present Convocation, is a
Scarecrow which Knaves may lift up, but none but Fools can be frighted
therewith.

And thus far having shown you the necessity which urges us to do what may
become us in this present Convocation, methinks the case is so plain, that I
cannot imagine from whence it is that the present opposition may arise, unless
it be that some, when they hear of Reformation, are afraid of their Church
power and Church promotions. If this be the matter, as I doubt it is, that
makes so many hang off from the public good of the Church at this time, I
desire they would consider whether they do not take the most effectual course
to bring that about which they fear. If by such moderate abatements as are
required we give satisfaction to the Nation, they will be the better inclined
to bear with us in all things else, and make the continuance of our
establishments more lasting among them. But if on the contrary, by our refusal,
we provoke them against us, I know not but that, instead of that moderate and
just reformation which they will now be contented with, they may take the
matter into their own hands, and bring us to that of Scotland, which we are so
much afraid of, and deprive us of all. And of this we have a plain instance in
the Case of the Council of Trent. Had they granted any moderate Concessions to
the just demands of the Germans, and yielded them but some of those things
which are now a burden to them, and which they would be gladly rid of, if they
could with reputation, I doubt not the Church of Rome might have retained its
power over the whole Latin Church till this time; but their jealousy of this
power making them rigorous to yield nothing, has put them in the direct way to
lose all. And if we follow the same course, I doubt the same effect will ensue.
In sum, such bye ends are always most unjustifiable in Ecclesiastical
Councils, in which no considerations of secular interest, but those only which
may best tend to the Honor of God and the Salvation of men ought to influence
all our determinations, and could we but all come together with this mind, I
should think our selves so sure of the blessing of God upon all our endeavors,
that I durst promise you all the good success from this Convocation that can be
desired, whatever appearance there may at present be to the contrary.

As to the account which you desire of our Proceedings hitherto, I can only
tell you, that on Monday last we chose our Prolocutor, and adjourned to this
day, and are now again adjourned till Monday next, and then we expect to have
our Commission to act and fall to business. The first thing to be brought
before us will be the reformation of the Calendar, that is, whether the
Apocryphal Lessons shall be struck out or no; and here I apprehend the main
Question will come to the debate, whether Alterations, or no Alterations: If
the latter be carried, you will have your desire, and I my liberty again to
return home, where the old saying, Quos Deus perdet dementat, must necessarily
have that influence upon my mind, as to make me fear our total ruin cannot be
long behind after so great an infatuation; if it must be so, I am sure our sins
have deserved it, and God endue us with Patience to submit thereto. I am,

Sir, Your affectionate humble servant, A. B.
Nov. 27. 1689.
FINIS.

