THE CASE OF Clandestine Marriages STATED, WHEREIN Are shown the CAUSES from
whence this Corruption arises, and the true METHODS whereby it may be remedied.

IN A LETTER TO A Person of Honor.

London, printed in the Year, 1691.

THE CASE OF Clandestine Marriages Stated, etc.
BY the Sixty Second Canon of King James the First, as well as by the
Constitutions of John Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Reign of King
Edward the Third, it is ordained, That no Persons shall be married, but in the
Parishes where one of the Parties dwell. And in the Hundred and second Canon it
is further provided, That when a License is granted, the Person that grants it
shall take good Caution and Security, as for other things in the Canon
mentioned, so lastly for this, That they shall celebrate the Marriage publicly
in the Parish Church or Chapel where one of them dwells, and in no other
place, and that between the Hours of Eight and Twelve in the Morning.

Most Clandestine Marriages that have happened, have proceeded from the Breach
of these Canons. For were they punctually observed, and all Marriages
solemnized only in the Parish Church or Chapel where one of the Parties dwell,
and no where else, no Clandestine Design this way could be carried so closely,
but that the Friends must know of it: at least a stop must be put thereto when
it comes to the Minister. For when a Minister celebrates a Marriage that is
Clandestine, he does it either out of ignorance, or ill Design. As to the
Ignorance of the Minister, in this particular (and many Clandestine Marriages
proceed only from their being imposed on this way) the Method prescribed by the
Canon must be a very effectual way, because when all are married in their own
Parishes, the Ministers cannot be supposed to be ignorant whether they have
Consent of Friends, or no, (unless perchance in some of the larger Parishes in
London, where other Care may be taken by requiring the Friends of both Parties
to be actually present) and therefore though a License should be fraudulently
obtained, yet if directed to him, it can be of no Effect, because all Licenses
go with a Proviso of Nullity, in Case of Fraud; and therefore to him that knows
the Fraud (as it is scarce possible but every Minister must in his own Parish)
it can be no License at all, but he will be as much liable to the Penalty of
the Law, if he marries with a License in this Case, as if he had no License at
all. And as to a Minister's being Party to the ill Design of a Clandestine
Marriage, you shall scarce ever find this to happen, when People are married by
their own Minister. For the Penalty being Suspension per Triennium, none that
have Benefices which are worth any thing, and are sensible of the Fraud (as all
Ministers must be in the Parishes where they live) will expose themselves to be
deprived of them so long for the sake of a Marriage-Fee. But most an end they
are not Ministers of Parishes, but indigent Curates, or unpreferr'd Chaplains,
that wilfully engage themselves in this matter; who having nothing to lose, on
this Account are out of the Reach of the Penalty; and therefore if there be but
one or two such in a County, usually the whole Trade of Clandestine Marriages
goes to them; and therefore the best way to prevent such Marriages, will be to
confine all according to the Canon to be married at home in their own Parishes
by the Minister of the Place that has an Interest there, wherein to suffer if
he does amiss. Because if this be done, the Minister can neither be imposed on
by a fraudulent License, where the Persons are so well known unto him (as those
of his own Parish must be) or will he dare to marry without one. It may, I
confess, be possible, that a Minister, to gratify some Gentleman of his
Parish, who, he thinks, is able to protect him from the Penalty, or else make
him amends for what he suffers by it, may be prevailed with to celebrate a
Clandestine Marriage for his sake, and thereby put an Obligation upon him, and
all his Family and Friends on the Account of the Advantage usually gotten to
the man by such stolen Matches. But in the Parish where the Woman lives, it
will be quite otherwise. For it being for the most part the Man that steals the
Woman, and not the Woman the Man, there instead of obliging he will injure, and
that in so high a degree, that the Family which suffers, with all their Friends
and Relations (which perchance may make the major part of the Parish) will be
sure to fall upon him with their utmost Resentments; and in this case a
Minister will have but little Comfort of his Life among them afterward, though
he should escape the Penalty of the Law; and scarce any being so weak as not to
foresee it must be so where so just a Provocation is given: This alone will be
a sufficient Tie, were there none other to keep any Minister from betraying any
of his own Parish. And therefore were one small Alteration made in the Canon,
and instead of the Parish Church or Chapel where one of the Parties dwells, it
were ordered, That all Marriages should be celebrated in the Parish Church or
Chapel only where the Woman dwells (as indeed common Custom has already
ordered it in most Marriages that are not Clandestine) I apprehend it would be
a thorough-Remedy to the whole Abuse. However, were the Canons, as they now
stand, punctually observed, this alone would go so far toward it, that there
would not be so frequent Instances of this injurious Practice, as to alarm the
Nation against us, as now we find they do, and provoke them to bring Sanguinary
Laws upon us to prevent it.

But the Mischief is, that when the Church makes good Laws, our Courts, when
they find them against their Interest, will not put them in Execution. For were
all obliged to be married in their own Parishes, it would cut off above half
the Trade of granting Licenses, which would very considerably deminish from the
Profit which Chancellors, Commissaries and Registers make of their Places. And
therefore instead of executing the Canons abovementioned (as is their Duty)
they make it their whole Endeavor to baffle them, and make them of none Effect
by all the Tricks they are able. For,

1. They never take any such Caution or Security, as the Hundred and second
Canon injoyns in their Licenses, but on the contrary scarce ever direct any
that they grant to the Parishes where the Parties dwell, but put in any other
Parishes which the Parties to be married, shall desire, at what distance soever
they may be from the Places of their usual Habitation, without any regard at
all had to the Canon which enjoins the contrary. Whereby occasion is given to
abundance of Frauds in this Particular, which otherwise might be prevented.

2. Whereas the Hundred and first Canon enjoins, That none shall grant any
Licenses, but such as have Episcopal Authority, or the Commissary of the
Faculties, Vicars-general of the Archbishops, and Bishops, sede plena, or the
Guardian of the Spiritualties, sede vacant, or Ordinaries exercising Right of
Episcopal Jurisdiction in their several Jurisdictions: And whereas the Law is,
That those Grants are only to be made before themselves, and not before any
Substitute whom they shall appoint, that all the matters requisite to the
granting of a License, may be first well enquired into, as Whether there be any
Precontract? Whether there be Consent of Friends? Whether the Parties to be
married are within the prohibited Degrees of Relation, or no? etc. which often
require the Skill of the Judge himself to determine in them. The good Orders of
the Church have been so far neglected in all these Particulars, and the
Corruption of Officers in our Ecclesiastical Courts, for the sake of Gain, has
run so high, that every thing is done contrary to them in this matter. For
instead of Chancellors and Commissaries taking any Pains in the Particulars
above mentioned, or making any previous Examinations requisite to prevent
either Fraud, or illegal Copulations, they leave the whole matter to their
Registers, who regarding nothing else but to make the most of this Trade by
dispersing and vending as many of those Licenses as they can, as often as they
have occasion of them, seal them by Heaps, with Blanks reserved to insert the
Names of any such as shall afterward come for them; and as Customers come in,
fill them up without any other Enquiry of the Persons concerned, than for their
Money to pay for them. And when this Stock is spent, then they go to sealing
again; and for the better advancing of this unlawful Gain, they are not content
to break all the good Orders of the Church concerning this matter, themselves,
but also involve a great many of the Clergy, with them, in the Guilt and
Scandal of this Corruption, by making some of them their Factors in every
Deanery for the dispersing of those Licenses, who under the Name of Surrogates,
are drawn in to be their Under-agents in so scandalous a Work, which is to the
great Damage of the Church, as well as against all Right and Law. For,

1. No Chancellor or Commissary has Power to make any such Surrogates to act
out of their respective Courts. For although they now take upon them thus to
do, it is only founded on a Clause in their Patents, which give them the Office
to be executed aut per se, aut per sufficientes Deputatos. The meaning of
which, only is, That in case of Sickness, Absence on just Occasions, or any
other lawful Impediment, they may appoint others to hold their Courts for them,
and expedite all other Acts usually done out of Court; but not that they should
erect inferior Courts under them, as they do now by their Surrogates in every
Deanery, to draw the more Grist to their Mills; which is directly contrary to
Law, and of infinite Prejudice to the Church, in corrupting and depraving all
the good Orders and Discipline of it, and drawing thereby the Odium of the
People upon the Governors thereof, by the frequent Acts of Unjustice, which by
Clandestine Marriages are done unto them.

2. It is a very great Snare to Clergymen, in being thus made the Tools of
those men's Knaveries, and may expose them to one of the most disgraceful
Punishments of the Law, that is, the Pillory. For to fill up a blank Instrument
after the Seal is put to it is Forgery by the Law of the Land; and I had once
the Curiosity to advise with one of the ablest Lawyers in England about it, who
assured me it was so; and although I urged the constant Practice of every
Diocese in England, against it, he answered, That would not alter the Law, but
whosoever shall insert any thing into an Instrument, after the Seal is put to
it, will certainly be found guilty of Forgery in Westminster Hall, whenever
prosecuted there for it. And if a Clergyman once undergoes the Disgraceful
Punishment due to that Crime, the Blot may be sufficient to make his Ministry
ineffectual all his Life after.

3. It is making Clergymen Parties to Knavery and Fraud, and putting the blame
of the unjust Practices of Chancellors, Commissaries and Registers, upon those,
who for the Reputation of the Church, as well as of themselves, are most
concerned to prevent them. And thereby a great deal of Clamor is drawn upon
us, which we can never prevent, as long as any of the Clergy are thus permitted
in so mean and base a manner to be subservient to the Knavery and unjustifiable
Practices of these men. For they, regarding nothing else but their Gain in the
Choice of those whom they appoint to be their Surrogates, choose only such as
are properest for their purpose this way, who being of the poorer and meaner
sort, make their Advantage of the Employment, by marrying themselves all those
that come to them for Licenses, and thereby advancing their own Gain as well as
that of their Masters, become the more diligent Agents for them. And I am told
of some that keep Markets weekly for this purpose, there exposing their blank
Licenses to sale, as Tradesmen do their Wares, which they fill up for any that
will pay for them, without any other Reserve, but that of the Marriage to
themselves, by putting in only those Churches for the solemnizing of it, where
they themselves are Ministers. But at best, though all Surrogates do not thus
carry their blank Licenses to Market, yet all keep Shops of them at home, and
seldom or never refuse any Customer that comes on how unjustifiable an Account
soever. And therefore when a Wedding comes to them, and a Marriage Fee is to be
gotten, without any further Enquiry, the blank License is brought forth, the
Names of the Persons to be married, are inserted into it, and then the
Surrogate thinks himself safe, and away he goes to the Church with them, and
there marries them by Virtue of a License from himself, without regarding how
they come together, so he has a Fee to his Masters for the License, and
another to himself for the marrying of them. And if it happens that any such
are afterward questioned for these Marriages, the License is produced for their
Justification, which being under the Seal of the Office, and in the Name of the
Chancellor or Commissary that grants it, the matter is usually shuffl'd off,
and no Justice at all done to any that complain of the Injuries, that they
suffer in this kind. For the Truth is, were the thing brought to an
Examination, the Law would excuse the Minister, who produces the License
(unless his being Party to the Fraud, were proved upon him, which he usually
takes care to provide against in the manner of transacting it) and lay the
whole Blame upon the Chancellor or Commissary, in whose Name it is granted, who
usually know ways enough to baffle all Prosecution, that shall be made against
them on this Account; and therefore no Examples being made of those that offend
in this kind, they are the more bold still to go on in the same illegal
Practices, and the Church infinitely suffers in its Reputation thereby; and in
truth, no Excuse can be made in this Particular, while our Governors, who have
Officers under them for the putting the Laws of the Church in Execution, permit
them thus in so scandalous a manner to corrupt them all for their own Advantage.

Of which scandalous Corruption being abundantly sensible, by what I found of
it, where concerned, about two Years since I set my self to reform it, and drew
up a Monitory to be sent to all the Clergy of my Jurisdiction, wherein I
inhibited them to marry any either by License or otherwise, unless one of the
Parties lived in their Parish, according as it is enjoined in the Canon
abovementioned. But hereon the Commissary and Register came to me with open
Mouths, complaining, That this would totally spoil their Places. To which I
answered, That my Business was not to take care of their Places, but that the
Canons be kept; and if they would make Gain by what was inconsistent herewith,
they were not to be tolerated in it. Whereon the Commissary told me, That
although the Canon was as I said, yet he could assure me, that the Practice was
quite the contrary through the whole Kingdom; and that since the Archbishops,
and all their Suffragans thought fit to tolerate it, he thought it would not
become me to contradict it. And on Inquiry, finding it really to be so as he
told me, I was forced to let the matter fall, because I thought it would appear
a ridiculous Singularity in me to attempt a Reformation in that which the
Archbishop and Bishops of our Church thought fit in all parts of the Nation
besides, to allow. And besides, I had an Account given me, That the late Bishop
of Norwich miscarried in the same Attempt. For, on his first coming to his
Diocese, finding great Clamor about Clandestine Marriages, he made his
Chancellor and Commissaries call in all their Surrogations, and suppress all
blank Licenses, and ordered, that no Minister should marry any, but whereof one
of the Parties dwell in his Parish: And by this means, for a while, things were
kept in good order, but they had not been long so, but the Master of the
Faculties, and the Vicar General to the Archbishop, took the Advantage to send
their Licenses into the Diocese; which the Bishop perceiving, and having no
Authority to control them herein, he thought it better, since he saw there was
no Remedy, to suffer the Corruption to be still continued by his own Officers,
over whom he had some Awe, then by those Interlopers, with whom he had nothing
to do; and therefore relaxed all his former Orders, and left his Officers to
proceed in the same Course as they did before; and the Mischiefs which have
since followed hereon, are too many to relate; but two very signal ones in my
Neighborhood, I cannot pass over; the one of a Man that has married his
Father's Wife, and the other of one that married a Woman, whose Husband was
alive in the next Parish, by Virtue of those Licenses. And this Course can
never be remedied, unless the two Archbishops will be pleased to undertake it,
and send their Orders to all their Suffragans, that the Canons be punctually
observed in these following Particulars.

1. That all Surrogates, with blank Licenses, be suppressed, and no License for
Marriage at all granted, but by the Person himself that has Authority in this
Particular, or that Deputy only who keeps his Seals, and presides in his Court
in his absence.

2. That all previous Examinations be made, and all Cautions and Securities
carefully taken, which are by Law required, before any License be granted.

3. That no Parish Church or Chapel be put into the License* for the Place of
celebrating the Marriage, but those only where one of the Parties that are to
be married, dwell. And if the Archbishops have Authority so to do (which, I
think, they have, all Licenses in this kind, being only ex Gratia) that they
limit it to the Parish Church or Chapel where the Woman dwells.

4. That a severe Prosecution be enjoined against all those that transgress in
any of the Premises.

If the Bill pass against Clandestine Marriages, which I hear is now before the
Parliament, I confess it will be too late for the Church to meddle with this
matter; but in case the Bill be cast out (as perhaps it may) I think it will
then be very proper for the Church to undertake the Business, and employ all
the Authority it has to reform so great an Abuse. And if the Archbishops and
Bishops will be pleased so to do, to whom the cognizance of this matter does
most properly belong, I know no way can be more effectual for it, than the
putting the Canons in execution in the Particulars I have mentioned. And if
this be done as soon as the Bill is cast out, by a public Order from the two
Archbishops, to their Respective Provinces, and the Bishops be hearty and
zealous in the executing of it, I doubt not, there will be these following good
Effects thereof.

1. A speedy Remedy will thereby be put to this great Abuse, which has raised
the Clamor of the Nation so loud against us, and made so many disaffected to
the Church by reason of the Injuries that some of their Families have suffered
by our tolerating so unjustifiable a Practice among us.

2. Full Satisfaction will be given to those who so earnestly call for a
Reformation in this Particular; which will be the most effectual Method of
preventing the ill Designs of those who endeavor the bringing of Sanguinary
Laws upon us for this purpose; which, if effected, will be a great Severity,
and may prove a constant Snare to their Lives, whenever the People have Malice
enough to raise a Prosecution against them.

3. It will stop the Mouths of those who are too often heard to reproach the
Bishops with this whole Abuse, as if the whole Reason of it were from this,
That they sold their Chancellors, Commissaries, and Registers Places, and
therefore were bound to tolerate those Officers under them in all their illegal
Practices, that they may thereby the better raise the Money that they exacted
from them, for their Admission to those Employments.

And thus far having stated to your Lordship this whole Case, and shown you
therein from whence the great Abuse of Clandestine Marriages arises, the
Manner how the Practice of it is grown so frequent, and the Means whereby it
may be prevented, I earnestly beseech your Lordship to make use of that
Opportunity which God has given you, in putting to your helping hand for the
Reformation of this Corruption, that the Reputation of our Church, and the
Interest of so many Families that are Members of it, may not thus continually
be sacrificed to the illegal Gain, which Chancellors, Commissaries and
Registers reap to themselves, from the Practice of it. In order whereto, I wish
your Lordship would be pleased to lay the State of this whole Matter before my
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, that if the Parliament puts not that severe Act
upon us for the Reformation of this Abuse (as I hope they will not) his Grace
may do herein, what in his great Wisdom he shall see may be most conducing to
the Good of the Church.

I am, My LORD, Your Lordships most Humble Servant. December. 11. 1691.
FINIS.

