THE Primitive Cavalerism REVIVED: OR A RECOGNITION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE
OLD CAVALEERS. Published on occasion of some late PAMPHLETS and PAPERS,
Reviving and Justifying the Pretentions of the Long Parliament, Begun in 1641.
By an Old Loyal Cavaleer.

LONDON, Printed By George Croom, at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's Castle, 1684.

THE Primitive Cavalerism REVIVED: OR A RECOGNITION OF THE PRINCIPLES OF THE
OLD CAVALEERS.
WHEN the unhappy quarrel betwixt King Charles the First of Blessed Memory and
the two Houses of Parliament broke out, I thought my self obliged for the
conduct of my own Conscience to endeavor to understand clearly the grounds,
which each side insisted on for their own Vindication; And having observed of
late some Papers and Pamphlets to be dispersed abroad, containing the
principles by which that long Parliament did seek to justify their taking up
Arms against his Sacred Majesty; I have endeavored to refute them by
contraposition of the principles of the Old Loyal Cavaleers; Lest those
State-heresys should be imbibed again by some of the people, to the prejudice
of the public Peace.

First therefore, We Royalists judged, that the people were not the original of
Government, and that it was little less than blasphemy to assert it, seeing God
himself has asserted in Scripture ( To. 13.1. and otherwhere) that Government
is his Ordinance. Nor did we judge Government to be his Ordinance singly on the
account of his revelation of his will in the Scripture, but that as the other
parts of the Moral Law are seminally contained in that, (...), or inward
dignoscitive power of man's Souls, by which he has a natural, distinctive sense
of what is just or unjust, comely or uncomely, so was also that Principle (at
First Aeconomical, afterward Political) That men ought to Honor their Parents
and to obey them injoining things just and comely, or submit to them punishing
them for the contrary.

For seeing God brought none into the World Independent from Progenitors,
saving the first Man and Woman, and of that one blood made all the Nations of
Men to dwell upon the face of the Earth, Acts. 17.26. Reason tells men, they
are to obey their Progenitors who are instrumental under God to give being and
birth to them and their brethren, in all things enjoined by them, as which are
just and comely, and conducing to the common good of the Family (for reason
tells us also that it is just to prefer the common good before that of a
private or particular Member.) It is true where the things required by the
Progenitor did bona fide appear to the conscience of the Descendent, to be a
sin, the Descendent was bound to obey God the Supreme Lawgiver rather than Man;
but in bare prudentials and expedients for the common good, no Descendent had a
right to vie judgment and discretion with his Superior, tho he might humbly
advertise his Superior of the inexpediency of the thing required as he judged.

From hence it follows (as reasonable to be supposed) that God had deposited in
the Progenitor a power to compel his Descendents to do just and comely things,
and things conducing to the Common interest of the family.

And tho a Progenitor might wilfully or ignorantly abuse his power, enjoining
things unjust or detrimental to the public good of the Family, yet was his
person to be sacred and inviolable, and he was not to be accountable by way of
suffering (as formal Administration) to his Descendents, nor was he to be
resisted by them by force; for reason tells us, that to reserve such a liberty
in the Inferiors, to resist or animadvert on their Progenitor, gives a License
to any Rebellious person, and furnishes him with a pretense to overthrow all,
both Domestic and Civil Societys, by pretending a violation of Justice and
Equity, or a detrimenting of the public good by the Superior. The Apostle
therefore may well be supposed to expound the common sentiments of Mankind in
what they thought comely and just toward Progenitors, Heb. 12.9, 10. Though
the Fathers of our flesh corrected us (according to their own pleasure or
passions many times) yet we gave them reverence and thought our selves obliged
so to do. This therefore being a fixed Principle to us, that the Patriark, or
Father of the Family was by Gods appointment Supreme Governor over his Family,
we thought our selves Warranted to make these deductions from it:

1. That where a Descendent committed wickedness, there not only his immediate
Father, but also this Grandfather, or great Grandfather (and so upwards in
the right ascendent Line) might and ought (if the Father was either Dead or
negligent) to inflict punishment on him. And we have if not an instance, yet an
intimation of this in holy Scripture, Genesis 27.45. Where Rebekah advises Jacob
to fly from the Murderus design of his Brother Esau, (who had resolved to kill
him after his Father Isaacs Death) which Esau, v. 41. thought to be at hand,
Why, says she, should I also be deprived of you both in one day? Which
intimates there was some Ancestors alive who might judge Esau for Fratricide
tho Isaac was dead.

And so indeed the Sacred Chronology assures us there was, at the time of Esaus
threatening Jacob, for Shem, died not till the year of the World. 2158. And Esau
is supposed by Chronologers to have Married his Cananitish Wives. 214. (who
probably might instigate him to revenge) Ten years before Shems, Death. And
Heber died not till the year of the World 2187. Which was long after Jacobs
fleeing into Mesopotamia. So that tho Isaac did not really die till 2228. Yet
Esau and Rebekah, supposing he might have died sooner, she concludes that one
of the surviving Ancestors might and ought to have executed Vengeance on Esau,
for Fratricide, the like inference may be made from the Parable of the Widow
woman of Tekoah, 2. Sam. 14.6, 7.

2. A second inference is, That Women translated out of their Fathers Family by
Marriage ( forisfamiliatae, as the Civilians speak) were subjected to the
Jurisdiction of the Father of the Family into which they were Married, thus
Judah, doomed Tamar, his Daughter in Law, to the Fire for supposed Adultery,
Genesis 38.24.

3. A Third inference very probably deduced from the former Principle is, That
the Father or Patriark Dying the Regal power descended on the Eldest Son, who
was to Rule over the Family, even over his Brethren, so long as they continued
to reside in the Society of the Clan, and claimed the Protection of that
Society, and did not transmigrate to make a new Colony. We have an instance in
Scripture which seems to be of this significancy, namely, when Abraham took Lot
his Brother Harans Son, and carried him with him into Canaan, Genesis 12.5. Which
looks more like an Exercise of Authority than of trust; and that thus it is
amongst the Clans of some Indians is reported by Travellors. And there are some
Footsteps of it amongst the Clans of the Irish and Highlanders.

4. The Fourth Inference is this, That seeing no Man ( Adam, the first only
excepted) came into the World in a state of Independent Liberty free from
Government, but was subject to his Parents, therefore no man was born in a
state of War, but in a Political subjection according to the Fifth Commandment,
Honor thy Father, etc.

All this of Patriarchal Jurisdiction I collect from the sacred story after the
Flood, for before the Flood Cains escaping punishment from Adam, for Abels
Murder, in all probability encouraged his Offspring the Giants and other men of
Renown, to shake off all Patriarchal Government, and fill the Earth with
violence, Genesis 6.11. So that want of the exercise of the Patriarchal Government
was one meritorious cause of the bringing the Flood upon the Old World. The
like defect ruined Elies family. 1 Samuel 3.13.

But to return to our Principle, and give some reasons why we Cavalcers
believed the Original of Government thus to be from God, not from the People;

First, No man has a right to dispose of his own Life to the pleasure of
another: only God the Author of Being could give a Power to the Progenitor,
(the instrument of the being of his Descendents) to dispose of the Life of an
offending Descendent in the prosecution of Justice, according to Genesis 9.6.
Whosoever sheddeth man's Blood by man shall his Blood be shed. So that if the
people were the Original of Government the Magistrate had been a Murderer in
executing Vengeance even on a Murderer; And the Murderer had been Felo de se, a
self Murderer in submitting to the Sentence.

Secondly We believed Government to be from God, because the Laws made by
Governors were generally for the encouragement of Virtue and Piety and for the
suppression of Vice, so that the fruit showed that Government was a Plant of
our heavenly Fathers planting, whereas people being generally Wicked, would, if
they had been the original of Government, have set up such Governors as should
have Established iniquity by a Law.

Thirdly, Add, That that Spirit of Government poured out upon Governors
showed, that God who alone can so indow them does commissionate them as his
Vicegerents. Therefore it is said, Pro. 16.10. A divine sentence, or a judgment
from God is in the lips of the King: And the essential wisdom of God, says
Pro. 8.15. By me Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice. The art of Government
or King-craft is from the Lord.

Fourthly It is observed in all History, that Rebels were ordinarily followed
with divine Vengeance: But we Cavaleers, could not think that God would engage
his Power and Justice to vindicate an Idol of the peoples setting up.

So that Fifthly, Had not God said of Magistrates, Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye
are Gods, obedience in the people to them had been Idolatry, in setting up a
Creature of their own as a God, and worshipping it.

Sixthly But our chief reason was, because Scripture so peremptorily asserts
it, To. 13.1. That Magistrates are Gods Ministers, and Gods Ordinance.

After this first Position was thus established to us, That God and not the
people, was the Original of Government, we proceeded to inquire, how the
Patriarchal Government over single Clans or Familys and the Descendents in
them, passed into a more ample Government over many distinct Familys (before
independent from one another) And we thought it reasonable to conclude, that
this change came into the World either by a forced or voluntary Compact.

A forced compact was, when the King or Patriark of one Family or Clan overcame
the Patriark of another Family, and his Family, and forced them to consent to
obey him, as did those of his own Family, or, it may be, he imposed worse
conditions of Servitude, Transportation, Tribute or other hardships upon them,
as the Babylonish Monarchs did, 2 Kings 18.32. And so does the Turk at this
day, setting the conquered under his Timuriots. But in this case of Conquest
two things are observable: Namely first, That the Conquering Patriark might
happen to abate something of his own Dominion over his own Clan, on account of
his own Wars against the other Family, having before the expedition promised
his own Subjects and their Posterity some Immunities if they would be Faithful
and Courageous. And probably many of the Immunitys which Subjects claim, own
their rise to such promises, which being once made they ought to be observed by
the Prince or Patriark, Thus King Saul promised, 1. Sam. 17.25. That whosoever
would combat and kill Goliath, he would enrich him, and make his Fathers house
free in Israel.

Secondly, it is undeniable, that Conquest in it self is no obligation to
subjection to the Conqueror, for no man can pretend by Conquest a right to
seize my Liberty and to abridge my Allegiance to my Natural Prince, but I can
more justly pretend my right (when ever I am able) to recover my Liberty and
free Exercise of Allegiance to my natural Liege Lord; So that till compact
confirm Conquest, submission to the Conqueror is only a taking Quarter, which
implys, I will do nothing against the Life of him that gives me Quarter, till
by redemption or reprizal (by my Prince or his Allys) I recover my liberty.
Only therefore Compact after Conquest can lay an obligation to Subjection to
the Conqueror, and how long it is before such a Compact becomes Valid and
obliging, whilst our natural Prince continues in Arms and yields not, is
something difficult to determine, for my part I think that for so long it is
not a valid compact, but only a taking Quarter.

But tho Conquest, and the Compacts issuing upon them, was the ordinary way of
imbodying many Familys under one Governor yet undoubtedly voluntary Compacts
also did the same in many times and places, many Patriarks and their Clans
Associating together for mutual defense against potent Enemies, and subjecting
themselves to some one Patriark or famous man amongst them, who was to go in
and out before them, and Fight their Battles: Thus the Gileadites chose Jephtah
and the Israelites desired in Samuels time such a King, and obtained Saul.

But then we are to observe that those Compacts were chiefly, if not only,
ratified by the consent of the Patriarks combining; So that the inferior
members of the Familys had little or no Vote in the making the Compact, and the
setting the conditions of it. So that the Israelites, who assembled for Saul's
election and inauguration, were the Elders of the People of Israel, 1 Samuel 8.4.
These voluntary Compacts between Patriarks were sometimes with Reservation of a
share in the Government, amongst all the Patriarks, one only presiding in
Council, so that the Major Vote was to overruled for the making municipal Laws,
and War, or Leagues with Foraigners, and for appointing Officers Military or
Civil, and this is properly an Aristocratical Government, or States.

When the Compacts of the combining Patriarks carried over all their
Sovereignty to some one person, whom they chose to preside over them only
personally, during his Life, this was an Elective Kingdom; when they devoled it
on any one Patriark and his Successors, this was also an elective Kingdom in
the origination of it, but became in process and Succession, an Hereditary
Monarchy or Kingdom: And such are most of the Kingdoms of the World at this day.

As for Democracy wherein the whole body of the People, meeting in their
Comitial or General Assemblys did make Plebiscita or popular Decrees, it is
hard for me to guess how Patriarchal power ever came to be so ravilled out into
that form, unless the Multitude forced their Patriarks to yield them a share in
the Government, either by Tumults or Secessions, and departing from their
Nobles or Patricii, of which there are many instances in the Roman
Commonwealth, for that any People whether the heads of several Familys, or the
whole body of the People should only conditionally entrust the Government in
the hands of a Sovereign or a Senate, with power of revocation of their trust
upon Maladministration, is such an unpolitical fancy as deserves to be
exploded by all who wish well to the Peace of the World, and of the Nations in
it, for such a constitution carrys self-destroying principles in it, seeing
every ambitious or discontented person making himself Popular might easily
persuade the multitude (who are generally prone to Change, and Querulous
against their Governors) that their Superiors had forfeited their trust and
they might resume their Power betrusted, and commit it into better hands.

And to be sure when an Army was on Foot, whose Commanders were prompted by
their interest in the Soldiery to aspire, this pretense would be ready at hand,
that the Sovereign or the Senate had failed in their trust, and that the People
might reassume the Government, and withal, that Populus Armatus is est Populus,
that those who had the Arms of the Nation in their hands were the People.

This was the very Plea which the Phanatick Army under Cromwell, did make, and
it pleased us Old Cavaleers well, when we saw Cromwell, turn the point of this
Principle upon his Masters, and turn the Rump out of doors, alleging, and with
truth enough, that they had failed in the trust reposed in them by the good
People of England.

On the same account we Old Cavaleers, detested as unpolitical, and laying the
Foundation for perpetual civil jars, the swearing of Allegiance to the Supreme
Power with limitation; as it was in that called the Solemn-League and Covenant,
Pagragraph the 2d, wherein they promised to preserve the Kings Person and
Authority in the preservation of the true Religion and Libertys of the
Kingdoms. When therefore the Scotch Commissioners Pleaded their Engagement by
Covenant to appear against the Execrable Murdering of our late Sovereign the
Royal Martyr, I well remember that the Rump, in their Declaration and answer to
the Papers of the Scotch Commissioners, Pleaded that the Covenant only obliged
them to endeavor the Preservation of the Kings Person in the Preservation of
the true Religion, and the Libertys of the Kingdoms, and that in limited
Propositions Limitatio est pars potior, the Limitation is the predominant part.
And that therefore seeing it was apparent to them, that the King had violated
the true Religion and the Libertys of the Kingdoms, they (who had taken the
Covenant as well as the Scots) looked on themselves as obliged by Covenant to
depose the King and bring him to condign Punishment.

But our Contemplations in prosecution of this Subject about the Original and
exercise of Power ran yet on further, for we observed that there were two parts
of the Patriarchal Governing Power appointed by God, namely the Legislative
Power, to enact wholesome constitutions for the good of the Clan or Family ( He
is the Minister of God to us for good, Romans 13.)

And the executive Power to put those Laws in Execution, as also to compel his
Descendents to obey the Divine Laws, both Moral and Positive, and this also was
part of the executive Power. For where human Powers command what God has
commanded before, their Laws are not constitutive, but only declarative of the
duty, only they may be constitutive of the Penalty and Sanction. Both these
Powers the Legislative and executive (under which is comprised the Power to
Levy moneys, for this cause pay you Tribute, Romans 13.) were entirely in every
Patriark.

But when many Patriarchates or Clans were imbodied into a larger Regality or
Kingdom by voluntary compact, it is easy to conceive that these Powers might be
diversely betrusted: And the former (the Legislative Power) might only be
entrusted to the elected King and his Successors, in concomitancy with the
other Patriarks. But still we are to observe, that if the Elected King and his
Successors had only a Vote, in the making Laws, with the other Patriarks, so
that the Majority of Votes over ruled, against his Vote, then tho he had the
name King, he was indeed no King, nor Supreme Governor, but only the chief
Magistrate, such were the Kings of Sparta; the Lacedemonian Government
therefore is reckoned truly an Aristocracy or Democracy. But some Nations might
perhaps find out a better way, namely, that the Legislative Power was betrusted
to the elected Patriark and his Successors, yet so that it should not be
exerted without the consent of the combining Patriarks, but still the
Legislative was so in the King, that the Votes of all the combining Patriarks
could not constitute Law without a Le Roy Le Voult, the King consents and
commands it to be: And this Government undoubtedly is a Monarchy not deprived
of any part of the Power Patriarchal, but only restrained in the exercise of
one part of it, namely, the Legislative without the concurrence of others.

But we observed further, that though in a Monarch there might be a restriction
of the exercise of the Patriarchal, Legislative power, there could be none in
the exercise of the Executive power, for if that could not be exerted but with
the consent of others, such a Nominal King was no Monarch or Supreme Governor,
but only the chief Magistrates, as we said before. And no man can reasonably
suppose, that a Patriark who had the plenary power (both Legislative and
Executive) over his own Clan, and probably was the chief in puissance amongst
the Patriarks combining (as the Hethites told Abraham, Genesis 23.6. My Lord thou
art a mighty Prince amongst us) would ever consent to abate any thing of his
Regalia over his own Clan as to the Legislative, and suffer others to have a
restraint upon the exercise of it, unless upon the terms premised, (viz.) That
the exerting his Legislative should not indeed be without the Concurence of the
other Patriarks, but withal, that all they Voting together should not be able
to make a Law without his Royal Authority and consent; and that also the
entire, executive Power not only over his own Clan, but even over the Combining
Patriarks, and their Clans, should be his, without Compere or Coordinate: Thus
Samuel expounds to the Israelites (amongst whom God himself seemed to reserve
the Legislative to himself, having given them a body of Laws necessary to
conserve Peace, or do Justice about Inheritances, Injurys Marriages, etc.) the
manner of the King whom they would have to go in and out before them after the
manner of other Nations, 1 Samuel 8.11.

We find indeed, that in most of the Eastern Empires, yea and in the Roman
Empire (after the Lex Regia was past) both Legislative and executive Powers
were without restraint in the Emperor. And the Placita Principum, or Edicta
Imperatoria were perfect Laws after the promulgation of them. It was a mistake
therefore in him who writ the Life of Julian the Apostate, to call Christianity
the Religion of the Empire, when Julian had declared by his Royal Edicts for
Paganism: And probably such absolute Monarchys were all which arose out of
Conquest, and Compacts issuing from Conquest.

But in many of the Northern Nations (the Offspring of Japhet, the Elder) we
have reason to believe there was a restraint upon the Legislative till the
Nobles Majorum and Minorum Gentium, did at least legem petere and eligere,
request and choose, or propose a Bill to be enacted a Law.

And the Power to deny a proposed Bill, was in the Prince, and the Power to
execute Laws wholly in him, and both without Power in the combining Patriarks
to call him to account for Administration of either, or to reassume the Power
or any part of it, without the Princes Voluntary consent, these speculations
about the passing of the Patriarchal Monarchy into larger Governments gave us
Royalists light enough, to discover that the pretensions of the
Parliament-Party and the maxims they had espoused were both unpolitical and
unpeaceable: Such as those before mentioned; That the People are the original
Power, that men are born in a state of Independent Liberty, and consequently in
a State of War: That the Power of the Supreme Governor is but a revocable
trust, and he liable to censure for Maladministration. And that the King, tho
singulis Major, is universis Minor; for how can he be less than all who has
the Power of all concentring in him?

Another suggestion also by that side in the late times I will here take notice
of, tho it lie not in the direct run and way of my Discourse. And it was this,
that a Republic or Aristocracy was more eligible than a Monarchy. In the
manage of which their Writers dealt very deceitfully, for they usually compared
a King misgoverning, with a Republic Governing well, whereas if they had
stated the comparison (as of right it should have been) betwixt a King and a
Commonwealth both Ruling well, or both Ruling ill, it would be most evident
both from reason and History (to which adds also the experience of the English
Nation in the late Confusions) that less evils did arise to the People from a
King misgoverning, and gratifying the Lust of his Minions, than from an
Aristocracy misgoverning, and every one of them preying for himself and his
Dependents, upon the Poor oppressed People; and contrarily, that more good
comes to a People by the Government of a wise and good King, then by the
Government of even wise and good Nobilissimo's (as at Venice.)

But that which especially prevailed upon us Cavaleers conscientiously, to
engage for our Sovereign, was the consideration of the Government under which
we were Born. For we knew it from our Fathers, and their Tradition, and from
our Old Historians writing in the Ages past; That this Government was an
hereditary Monarchy immemorially; whence we inferred, That all the rights of
Monarchy were inherent in our Kings.

It is true we found the Royal, Legislative Authority by Ancient Custom was not
put in exercise without the consent of the two Houses of Parliament: And Custom
is Common Law in England. And that thus it was we had no reason to be
displeased; nor did we sollicitously inquire into the Original of that usage
whether in the Primitive coalition of the Government the several Patriarks of
Angels, Jutes and Saxons had so compacted with him whom they consented should
be the Universal Monarch over them and their Clans, or rather whether our Kings
had granted that high Privilege to our Fathers the Valiant Angles, Jutes and
Saxons to engage their Valor and fidelity in their warlike expeditions, and
after extended the same Privilege in a great measure to the Britains growing
up into one People, with us; or whether any other way this came about we could
not tell; thus we found it, and found the Government the best tempered
Government in the World. And we bless God for it, and rejoiced under the shadow
of it.

Only this we judged from the preambles of ancient Statutes, and from the Kings
Coronation Oath, That the two Houses did Legem petere and eligere, but the King
did Legem far and jubere, the Privilege of the two Houses of Parliament was
to choose and desire such a Bill to be a Law, and the Prerogative of the King to
enact and will it. If herein we were mistaken, we were mistaken.

But be it as it will, we Primitive Cavaleers were far from designing to remove
the Ancient Landmarks which our Fathers had set: Nor did we ever think it
agreeable to modesty, for us private Men to set bounds to the Power of the
Parliament, during its Session, further than that they could do nothing to any
Effect without the Royal Assent. We believed therefore they could call any
Subject to account for ill behavior in any Office, Military or Civil, by Bill
of Attainder or otherwise, according to the Usages of Parliament, they could
change Tenures, put down some Courts of Justice, erect new ones, and what not?
If the King Consented; and we found that our Kings seldom denied the desires
and Requests of their Parliaments in matters fit and just. But we detested the
contrivance of some Factious Men, who brought the Rout to call for Justice
against the Earl of Strafford and Archbishop Laud. And tho there have been often
Factions in Parliaments since that unhappy Distinction of a Court-Party and a
Country-Party, and tho the Rump Parliament had cast us into horrid Confusions,
and robbed us of the best of Kings, yet were we not weary of Parliaments, or
forward to inslave our selves or our Posterity: We therefore with thankfulness
to God above all, and to our good Kings, and Parliaments under them, remembered
that Parliaments were the great Conservers of the English Libertys against all
unjust Judges and Officers, and how they often attempted, even in Popery times,
and at last Effected the deliverance of the Kingdom and Church of England from
the Usurpation of the Bishop of Rome, and secured the People from the crueltys
of the Bloody Clergy thereof.

But tho we owned thus, that our Kings had not exercised the Legislative Power
immemorially without the proposal and consent of the two Houses, yet we easily
discovered the cheat of that Parliament comment on the Political maxim,
Coordinata se invicem supplent (tho the proper words are Coordinata se invicem
Complent;) whence they of that side argued, That seeing Coordinates do mutually
supply and complete one another, and that the King withdraw from his
Parliament, the two Houses (whom they judged Coordinate with the King in the
Legislative) might supply by an ordinance his absence or dissent: which is an
inference contrary to all reason and sense; for the true sense of that Maxim is
this, That Coordinate, (suppose three) do so mutually supply force to, and
complete on another, that the concurrence of no two of them is Efficacious to
the intent for which they are Coordinate, without the Concurrence of the third:
Thus if we should yield a Coordination as to the Legislative Power betwixt the
King and two Houses; yet the Votes of the two Houses are no Law in England
without the Royal Assent.

Obj. It was then usually objected, That this Doctrine puts the King and either
House, into a capacity to hinder a good and wholesome Law.

Sol. To this it is answered, that the Laws in being are to be supposed
sufficient in the Judgment of our Fathers of the last Age, to conserve the
State in its being; and whether the Bill proposed be conducing to the better
being of it or no, must be submitted to the judgment of the King.

But still we looked upon the executive Power of Law as wholly and entirely
Inherent in our Sovereign without Compere or Coordinate: who could at his
pleasure derive that Power to others Legally Commissioned by him, to put the
Laws in Execution. And that therefore the Power of the Militia, of making
Judges and Officers, of conferring Honors, of making War, or Peace, or Leagues
with Forreiners, was wholly in the King. But if any of the Kings Officers
violate our Rights and Privileges, either Civil or Ecclesiastical, which are
by Acts of Parliament or Immemorial Custom instated on the Subject, the Subject
might sue the violaters in the Kings Courts.

So that greater security for the Rights of any People, I think cannot, by any
human Wisdom be invented, then what we Englishmen enjoy. For First, we have
the protection of the Kings Royal Authority, whose interest it is (seeing the
Throne is Established by Justice) to make his Officers Peace, and his Exactors
Righteousness, Isai. 60.17. Next we have the security of the Laws in being, and
of the Reverend and Learned Judges, Commissioned for the execution of them; who
we may think will be very unwilling to infringe our Rights by Law Established;
both because they are for the same accountable at all times to the King, and
also to a Parliament when it shall sit; and likewise because they cannot
inslave us by denying us the just protection of the Laws, at a cheaper rate
then inslaving their own Posterity also. And lastly, We have the security of
Parliaments, who cannot only propose and enact with the Royal Assent new Laws
for our future defense against unjust Officers, but can also call them to
account for the breach of the Laws already made: this was the Political Creed
of the old Cavaleers: and we triumphed in the Victory of Truth, (when any being
convinced of the agreeableness of our Principles both to Scripture, Reason and
the Constitution we were under) came over and Espoused our cause: Thus it
appears from what we have said, that we Cavaleers had the better cause; but our
Sins ruined us and it, and deprived us of the best Earthly King in the World,
who was Murdered by Bloody Men; our high provocations drawing God into the
quarrel against us: Though after he had Scourged us, he was pleased in infinite
Mercy, and by Miraculous Providence, to make up our breaches in the happy
Restoration of his Sacred Majesty who now Reigns; and long may he Reign over us
and our Children.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed By George Croom, at the Blew-Ball in Thames Street, over
against Baynard's Castle, 1684.


