THE True Nature of Imposture Fully Displayed in the Life of MAHOMET.

THE TRUE Nature of Imposture Fully DISPLAYED IN THE LIFE OF MAHOMET.

WITH A Discourse annexed, for the Vindicating of Christianity from this
Charge; Offered to the Consideration of the Deists of the present Age.

By HUMPHREY PRIDEAUX, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church,
in Fleetstreet. MDCXCVII.

TO THE READER.
THE great prevailing of Infidelity in the present Age, making it the duty of
every one of us, that have undertaken the Ministry of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, to endeavor to put a stop thereto; that I may in some measure do my
part herein, is a sufficient reason to justify the present publication. But
besides, the Poison having, I fear, reached some places, where it is my
particular duty to prevent its Mischiefs; and infected some Persons, for whose
eternal welfare, as well as temporal, I have reason to be nearly concerned; I
have hereby been more especially engaged to set forth the ensuing History, with
the Tract subjoined thereto, for an Antidote against it. And if I can hereby
avail any thing with those who have cast off Christianity as an Imposture, to
make them see the error of their Apostasy, I shall then obtain the full end I
propose; If not, at least I shall discharge my Conscience, and my Duty, in
doing the best I can in order thereto.

That which at present seems mostly to carry men away into this Infidelity, is
the giddy humor, which too many among us, especially of the younger fort,
areliable unto, in following whatsoever has gotten into fashion and vogue. For
these, looking no further than what prevails most among such they converse
with, of course fall (...) with it, whatsoever it be, without any other
consideration, but that they think it the Dress which is most fashionable and
genteel for them to appear in, and the Mode wherein they may make the most
acceptable figure among the Company they keep. And therefore that kind of
Infidelity, which is called Deism, being of late impiously patronized by too
many of those who govern the Humors of the Times, abundance of this sort of
unthinking People have merely, out of compliance with them, run in thereto, and
confidently take upon them to call Christianity a Cheat, and an Imposture,
without ever having considered what an Imposture is, or whether any of the
Marks and Properties thereof can possibly agree with this Holy Religion, or no.

That therefore these may see what it is they charge Christianity with, and how
far all the Marks and Properties thereof are from having any agreement with it;
I have in the ensuing History, which contains the Life of that famous Impostor,
who is on both sides equally acknowledged to be such, fully laid open what an
Imposture is, and in the Discourse subjoined thereto, shown, That none of those
Marks and Properties, which are so visible in the Imposture of Mahomet, and
must be also in all other Impostures in Religion, can possibly be charged upon
that holy Religion which we profess. And an History being that which gives the
most lively and sensible representations of a Matter; and Books of this nature
being such as most obtain the favor of being read, I hope I have taken the
properest method of coming home to the Consciences of those to whom I write.

And that I may not be thought to draw this Life of Mahomet with design to set
forth his Imposture in the foulest Colors I am able, the better to make it
serve my present purpose; I have been careful to set down all my Authorities in
the Margin, and at the end of the Book have given an Account of all the Authors
from whom I collected them.

And that I may the more remove all suspicion of this matter, I think it
requisite to acquaint you, That although at present I have adapted the Life of
Mahomet to this purpose; yet it was not originally designed for it, it being
when I first wrote it, only the interspersed Parts of one Chapter of a much
larger Work, which I intended for the Public, viz. The History of the Ruin of
the Eastern Church; which beginning from the Death of the Emperor Mauricius,
Anno Dom. 602. was designed to have been brought down to the fall of the
Saracen Empire, which happened Anno Dom. 936. when the Governors of Provinces
under the Caliph, usurping the Sovereign Authority, each in their several
Districts, did put an end to that large and formidable Empire, by dividing it
among them.

An Instance fit for our Considerations* For notwithstanding those earnest
Expectations and strong Hopes, which we entertained in the beginning of This
Government, of having our Divisions healed, and all those Breaches which they
have caused in the Church, again made up; finding those of the Separation still
to retain the same Spirit on the one side, and some others to be so violently
bent on the other, against every thing that might tend to mollify and allay it,
as to frustrate all those excellent Designs, which have been laid in order
thereto; I thought I could not better let those Men see; what mischief they
Both do hereby to the Common Interest of Christianity; than by laying before
them the grievous Ruin and Desolation, which from the like Cause happened to the
Churches of the East, once the most flourishing of the whole Earth. For they
having drawn the abstrusest. Niceties into Controversy, which were of little or
no moment to that which is the chief end of our Holy Christian Religion, and
divided and subdivided about them into endless Schisms and Contentions; did
thereby so destroy that Peace, Love, and Charity from among them, which the
Gospel was given to promote, and instead thereof continually provoked each
other to that Malice, Rancour, and every evil Work, that they lost the whole
Substance of their Religion, while they thus eagerly contended for their own
Imaginations concerning it, and in a manner drove Christianity quite out of the
World by those very Controversies in which they disputed with each other about
it. So that at length having wearied the patience and long-suffering of God, in
thus turning this Holy Religion into a Firebrand of Hell for Contention,
Strife, and Violence among them, which was given them out of his infinite Mercy
to the quite contrary end for the Salvation of their Souls, by living Holily,
Righteously, and Justly in this present World, he raised up the Saracens to be
the Instruments of his Wrath to punish them for it; who taking advantage of the
Weakness of Power, and the Distractions of Councils, which these Divisions had
caused among them, soon overrun with a terrible Devastation all the Eastern
Provinces of the Roman Empire. And having fixed that Tyranny over them, which
has ever since afflicted those Parts of the World, turned every where their
Churches into Mosques, and their Worship into an horrid Superstition; and
instead of that Holy Religion which they had thus abused, forced on them that
abominable Imposture of Mahometism, which dictating War, Bloodshed and Violence
in matters of Religion, as one of its chiefest Virtues, was in truth the most
proper for those, who had before by their Schisms and Contentions resolved all
the Religion they had thereinto. And when the matter came to this trial, some
of those who were the hottest Contenders about Christianity, became the first
Apostates from it; and they, who would not before part with a Nicety, an
abstruse Notion, or an unreasonable Scruple, for the Peace of the Church, were
soon brought by the Sword at their throats to give up the whole in compliance
to the pleasure of a Barbarous and Savage Conqueror. And no wonder that such,
who had before wrangled away the substance of their Religion in contention and
strife against each other, and eat out the very heart of it by that malice and
rancour which they showed in their Controversy about it, became easily content,
when under this force, to part with the Name also. Thus those once glorious and
most flourishing Churches, for a punishment of their wickedness, being given up
to the insult, ravage and scorn of the worst of Enemies, were on a sudden
overwhelmed by them with so terrible a destruction, as brought them to that low
and miserable state, under the pressures of which they have ever since groaned;
wherein they, retaining no more than some few and lamentable ruins of what they
once were, seem thus to be continued even unto this day by the Alwise
Providence of God in the same miserable Condition under the Pride and
Persecution of Mohammedan Tyranny, for no other end, but to be an Example and
Warning unto others against that wickedness of Separation and Division, by
which they were brought thereto. A sad Memento to us; for of all Christian
Churches now remaining in the World, Which is there that has more reason than
we at this present, to learn instruction from this Example, and take warning
therefrom? For are not our Divisions now brought to much the same height with
theirs, which drew down from the just hand of God this terrible destruction
upon them; when men making no conscience of breaking the public peace of the
Church, divide and subdivide from it into endless Factions, Schisms, and
Contentions, about their own Imaginations? When they durst reject the Ancient
and Primitive Government of the Church, which was by the direction of God's
holy Spirit established in it from the beginning, to make way for new Schemes
of their own invention; and are content to ruin all, rather than not obtain
their humor herein? When they will have the Decency and Order of our outward
Worship condemned as Crimes, and for the privilege of praying in public,
according to their own unpremeditated Conceptions, without Method or Sense,
advance such Arguments against our Liturgies and Forms of Prayer, as have in a
manner totally destroyed the Devotion of the Nation? When they scruple more at
the kneeling to God in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, while they are
receiving from Him one of His greatest Mercies, and ought to be rendering to him
their highest Thanksgiving in return thereto, than in breaking the chiefest of
his Commandments; and thus in a manner resolve all Religion into contending
against our Just and Legal Establishments about it? And when others on the
other hand, whose duty it is to labor for our Peace, would rather have this
devouring flame of Strife and Division still continued among us, than throw in
one Bucket of Water to cool and allay it? I say, when matters are brought to
this pass, Do we not equal, or rather excel that Wickedness for Contentioin,
Strife and Division, for which God poured out his fierce wrath upon those once
most flourishing Churches of the East, and in so fearful a manner brought them
to destruction thereby? And have we not reason then to be warned by The
Example? Have we not reason to fear, that God may in the same manner raise up
some Mahomet against us for our utter confusion; and when we cannot be
contented with that blessed Establishment of Divine Worship and Truth, which he
has in so great purity given unto us, permit the Wicked One by some other such
Instrument to overwhelm us instead thereof with his foulest Delusions? And by
what the Socinian, the Quaker, and the Deist begin to advance in this Land, we
may have reason to fear, that Wrath has some time since gone forth from the
Lord for the punishment of these our Iniquities and Gainsayings, and that the
Plague is already begun among us.

That therefore we may fully see to what these Mischiefs among us lead, and be
influenced thereby to such an amendment, as might divert the Judgment from us,
was the reason that made me design the publication of the History I have
mentioned; wherein my purpose was to give an account, first of the
Controversies which miserably divided those Eastern Churches, and then of that
grievous Calamity and Ruin which happened to them thereupon through that deluge
of Mohammedan Tyranny and Delusion which overwhelmed all those Provinces in
which they were planted, and has continued there to the afflicting of the poor
remainders of them with misery and persecution ever since. For men's minds being
usually more influenced by Example, than by Precept or Exhortation; and easier
convinced of the mischief which any evil leads to, by seeing the Sufferings of
others herein, than by the greatest strength of Reason and Argument that can be
pressed upon them in order hereto; I hoped that perchance by laying open before
the Contending Parties here among us what mischief those Eastern Churches
suffered in the like case through that dismal Ruin which was by their Divisions
brought upon them, I might awaken them with this affrighting Example to think
of those things which might tend to their Peace, and hereby prevail with them
to set some steps toward the happy re-establishing of it among us, which as
yet no Reason or Argument has been able to induce them to.

But when I had made my Collections, and gone a great way in putting my last
hand to the Composure, those Disturbances that happened about the Doctrine of the
Holy Trinity among us, gave me a reflection which put a stop to my Pen, and
made me resolve to surcease the whole Work. For perceiving what advantage the
unwary stirring of this Controversy did give the Atheist, the Deist, and the
Socinian, for the advancing of their Impieties, by confounding and distracting
the minds of men with their Cavils and Objections against what we hold in this
Mystery to be above our Understandings fully to comprehend, and how several of
them did in a manner so licentious, as was scarce ever before allowed in a
Christian State, exercise their Wits in this matter, I durst not, considering
the Subject of this Book, venture it abroad in so wanton and lewd an Age. For
the two great Mysteries of Christianity (and which will be always such unto us
while in this state of Ignorance and Infirmity) being the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and that of the Hypostatical Union; and this latter being the Subject
about which all those Divisions were, which occasioned that ruin of those
Churches, of which in this History an Account was purposed to be given; and
this necessarily leading me therein, not only to unravel all those
Controversies which they made about it, but also to unfold all the Niceties and
subtle Notions which each Sect did hold concerning it; I had reason to fear,
that those who made such work with one of the Mysteries of our Holy Religion,
would not be less bold with the other, which is altogether as great, were it in
that manner laid open unto them, as it is in this History contained; and
therefore I rather chose totally to suppress my Labors, than run the hazard in
their publication of doing more hurt than good thereby. Only that part which
relates to the Life of Mahomet, after having gathered it together out of that
Chapter of this History, where it lay interspersed with other matters, I have
here published to answer that Design which I have already given an account of.

As to the Discourse annexed, I have directed it only to those Deists, who
according to Mr. Blunt's Description of them, hold a Providence, and future
Rewards and Punishments. For such seeming to retain the Common Principles of
Natural Religion and Reason, allow a sufficient foundation whereon to be
discoursed with. But as to the Atheist, who denies the being of a God, which
all things else prove; and the Epicurean Deist, who allowing his Being, denies
his Providence, and his Government over us, which all the Occurrences of our
Life become constant arguments for, they being such as must necessarily reject
first Principles, and bid defiance to all manner of Reason, before they can so
far blind themselves as to arrive hereto, do leave no room for any Argument,
but that of the Whip and Lash to convince them of those impious Absurdities,
and therefore deserve not by any other method to be dealt with. Besides, if you
will know the true Reason which induces the Atheist to deny the Being of God,
and the Epicurean Deist his Government over us; it is that they may give
themselves up, without fear of future Judgment, to all those Bestial Enjoyments
of Lust and Sensuality which their corrupt Hearts carry them after; and
therefore it not being the Reason of the Man, but the Brutal Appetite of the
Beast that makes them such, they deserve no otherwise than as Beasts to be
treated by us; and for this Reason, as I write not to them, so I desire to be
understood to have nothing to do with them.

For the clearer understanding of the History, I desire you to take notice,
That in the proper Names, Al is a Particle which signifies in Arabic the same
with the English The, or the Greek (...), as in All Abbas; Ebn, or with the
Particle Al after it Ebno'l is the Son, and Abu, or with the Particle Al after
it Abu'l is the Father, and thus Mahomet is called Ebn Abdollah Abu Casem, that
is, the Son of Abdollah, the Father of Casem. For it was usual with the Arabs
to take their Names of distinction from their Sons as well as from their
Fathers; and thus Ebno'l Athir is the Son of Al Athir, and Abu'l Abbas is the
Father of Al Abbas; Abd, or with the Particle Al after it, Abdo 'l, signifies
Servant; and thus Abdo 'llah signifies the Servant of God, and Abdo 'l Shems,
the Servant of the Sun. In these and all other Arabic Names I exactly follow
the Arabic Pronunciation, without regarding how they have been written or spelt
by any other Western Author that has treated of them; and that the rather,
because of the great agreement which the Arabic has with the English both in
the power of its Letters, and the pronunciation of its Words; there being no
Language in the World more akin to ours, than the Arabic is in these
particulars; Only as to the Name of the Impostor himself, I rather choose to
make use of the vulgar manner of writing it, because of the notoriety of it,
than make any change, although to the truth, from that which has been
generally received, and therefore I call him everywhere Mahomet, although
Mohammed be the alone true and proper pronunciation of the Name.

As to the Errata which have escaped the Press at my great distance from it
when these Papers were printed, I desire thou would correct them from the
Table, in which they are marked, before thou read the Book; and then on thy
perusal of it, as far as thou have need of what is designed thereby, either for
the restoration of thy Faith, or the confirmation of it; so far I pray God it
may be useful to thee, and I am

Norwich, March 15. 1696-97. The hearty wisher of thy Peace and Everlasting
Salvation, Humphrey Prideaux.

N. B. The Catalogue of Authors contain such as are quoted in the Letter to the
Deists, as well as in the Life of Mahomet, and was intended to have been set at
the end of the whole Book; but the Mistake of the Printer did put it out of its
due place.

Errata in the Life of Mahomet, and in the Catalogue of Authors.
Page 2. lin. 2. read Chalid Ebn Walid without the Comma's, p. 37. l. 2. r.
from them, p. 49. l. 23. r. Abu Taleb, and l. 26. r. Abu Sophian, p. 1 r. l.
14. r. Tayif, and l. 15. r. Hagiaz, p. 52. l. 4. r. Abu Beker, p. 71. l. 14. r.
were forced. p. 72. l. 5. r. Hagiaz, p. 74 l. 2. r. Rabia, and l. 26. r.
Religious, p. 84. l. 1. r. Abu Taleb, p. 88. l. 21. r. head them, p. 90. l. 23.
r. Yamama. p. 102. l. 23. r. Telha, p. 105. l. 6. r. Nadirites, and l. 10. r.
Chaibar, p. 112. l. 26. r demand, p. 120. l. ult. r. Hareth, p. 121. l 7. r.
discovered. p. 122. l. 14. r. Omar, p. 124. l. 8. r. Taal. and l. ult. r. Melec
Ebn Auf, p. 127. l. 11. r. Dauma, p. 129. l. 27. r. Taliha, p 139. l. 1. r.
Zama, and l. 2. after Hasheth add Juweira, the Daughter of Hareth, and l. 4. r.
Maimuna, p. 160. l. 24. blot out of before God, and l. 29. r. Eclilan, p 172.
l. 23. r. Hosain, p. 174. l. ult. r. Zamachshari. p. 178. l. 32. r. Ketab
Roger, p. 179. l. 8. r. Amiro'l Muminin, and l 31. r. Al Osynti. p. 180. l. 6.
r. Zamachshari, p. 183. l. 3. r. Edesseni. p. 186. r. Bocharti Hierozoicon, and
l. 29. the Eminentest.

Errata in the Margin of the Life of Mahomet.
Page 10. lit. (t) r. Radericus. Toletanus, p. 36. lit. (e) r. Ebnol Athir, p.
37. lit. k) r. Edessenus. p. 70. lit. (g) r. Ebnol Kassai. p. 82. lit. (e) r.
Zamachshari, and r. Jelalani, p. 102. lit. (g) r. Telha, p. 106. lit. (m) r.
Zamachshari, p. 125. lit. (p) r. Zamachshari, p 141. lit. (y) r. Bochartus in
Hirozoico, part. 1. lib. 2. c. 1.

Errata in the Letter to the Deists.
Page 16. lin 16. r. with him, p. 53. l. 16. r. admired, p. 54. l. 11. r. as
ready, p. 126. l. 3. r. the things; p. 118. l. 29. r. in transient. p. 129. l.
4. r. can we, p. 132. l. 9. r. this inquiry, p. 144. l. 23. r. as we had
fallen, p. 152. l. 9 r. of us.

The General CONTENTS of the BOOK.
I. THE Preface to the Reader, showing the Design and Reason of its
Publication. II. The True Nature of Imposture fully displayed in the Life of
Mahomet, from his Birth, An. Dom. 571. to his Death, An. Dom. 632. III. A
Letter to the Deists, showing that the Gospel of Jesus Christ is no Imposture,
but the Sacred Truth of God.
The Contents of the Life of Mahomet.
OF the Family of Mahomet, and his Marriage with Cadigha. Page 1 Of his first
pretending to be a Prophet. 14 Of the Alchoran. 17 The Proofs of his pretended
Mission. 31 The Framers of the Alchoran. 40 Mahomet's Marriage with three
Wives. 52 His Night-Journey to Heaven. 53 His Oral Law. 68 The beginning of the
Hegira, and the Computation of their Year. 76 His Robberies. 90 Of Mecca, and
the Temple there. 94 The Month of Ramadam their yearly Fast. 97 Mahomet' s
Intimacy with the Jew Caab. 99 The Occasion of his forbidding Wines and Games
of Chance. 106 Of Pilgrimages to Mecca. 113 Mahomet' s Poisoning at Chaibar.
121 His Death and Burial at Medina. 130 General Reflections on the Life of
Mahomet. 135 Of the Contradictions in the Alchoran. 155 The Texts of Holy
Scripture Mahomet urges for his Religion. 159 An Account of the Authors quoted
in this Work. 165
The Contents of the Letter to the Deists.
INtroduction, 1. What an Imposture is, 2. What are the Marks and Properties of
an Imposture, 3. That all those Marks must belong to every Imposture, and all
particularly did so to Mahometism; and that none of them can be charged upon
Christianity; is proposed to be the Design of the Ensuing Discourse. Sect. 1.
The first Mark of an Imposture, That it must always have for its End some
Carnal Interest; not chargeable on Christianity. 8 Sect. 2. The second Mark of
an Imposture, That it can have none but Wicked men for the Authors of it; not
chargeable on Christianity. 36 Sect. 3. The third Mark of an Imposture, That
both these two last Marks must appear in the very Contexture of the Imposture
it self; not chargeable on Christianity. 45 Sect. 4. The fourth Mark of an
Imposture, That it can never be so framed, but that it must contain some
palpable Falsities, which will discover the falsity of all the rest; not
chargeable on Christianity. 81 Sect. 5. The fifth Mark of an Imposture, That
wherever it is first propagated, it must be done by Craft and Fraud; not
chargeable on Christianity. 100 Sect. 6. The sixth Mark of an Imposture,, That
when entrusted with many Conspirators, it can never be long concealed; not
chargeable on Christianity. 127 Sect. 7. The seventh Mark of an Imposture, That
it can never be established, unless backed with Force and Violence; not
chargeable on Christianity. 130 The Conclusion. 137
THE LIFE OF MAHOMET.
MAhomet (or according to the true pronunciation of the word Mohammed) was Born
Abul Faraghius. Abul Feda. Elmacin. Alkodai, etc.
at Mecca, a City of Arabia, of the Tribe of the Korashites, Hottingeri Hist.
Orient. lib. 1. c. 4.
which was reckoned the Noblest in all that Country, and was descended in a
direct Line of Primogeniture from Pher-Koraish, the first Founder of it, from
whom they derive his Pedigree in this manner; Abul Feda. Pocockii Spec. Hist.
Arab. p. 50, and 51. Ecchelensis Hist. Arab. Part 1. c. 3. Liber de Generatione
and N^tritura Mahometis.
The Son of Pher Koraish was Galeb, the Son of Galeb, Lawa, the Son of Lawa,
Caab, the Son of Caab, Morrah, whose younger Brother was Ada; from whom was
descended Omar Ebno'l Chattab, that was Calif. The Sons of Morrah were Chelab,
Tayem, and Tokdah: From Tayem, Abu-Beker and Telha; and from Yokdah, Chalid,
Ebn, Walid, had their Descent. Chelab was he who first gave the Months of the
Year those Names by which the Arabs ever since have called them, even to this
day. They had formerly other Names, Golii notae ad Alfraganum, p. 4.
but Chelab having given them these new ones, they first grew into use among
the Korashites, and after, by the authority of Mahomet, when he had brought all
the rest of the Tribes of the Arabs under his Power, obtained every where else,
and the old ones became totally Abolished. The eldest Son of Chelab, was Cosa;
and the younger, Zahrah, from whom was Amena, the Mother of Mahomet. Abul Feda,
Pocockii, Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 42, 50. and 342. Ecchelensis Hist. Arab. p. 1.
c. 3.
Cosa was very famous among the Korashites, for gaining to his Family the
keeping of the Keys of the Caaba, and with them the Presidency of that Temple,
which is the same to which the Mahometans now make their Pilgrimage at Mecca,
and was then as much celebrated for the Heathen Worship among the Arabs, as it
has since been for the Mohammedan; and therefore the Presidency of it was a
matter of great moment, as being a Station which rendered him that was in it
Honorable through all Arabia. It was before in the Possession of Abu Gabshan,
of the Tribe of the Cozaites, who were of the ancient Race of the Arabs,
descended from Joktan, and formerly had their dwelling in Yaman, or Arabia
Felix, till being driven thence by an Inundation from the breaking down of the
Banks of the Lake Aram, which destroyed their Country, they came and settled in
the Valley of Marry, not far from Mecca, and from thence they were called
Cozaites, which signifies the cutting off, because by this remove, they were
separated, and as it were cut off from the rest of their Kindred. They had not
long lived at Marry, till they grew so Powerful, as to make themselves Masters
of Mecca, and also of the Caaba, or Temple which stood there, and held both the
Government of the one, and the Presidency of the other for many Ages after;
till at length the latter falling into the Hands of Abu Gabshan, a weak and
silly Man, Cosa circumvented him while in a drunken humor, and brought of him
the Keys of the Temple, and with them the Presidency of it for a Bottle of
Wine. But Abu Gabshan being gotten out of his drunken fit, sufficiently
repented of his foolish Bargain; from whence grew these Proverbs among the
Arabs, More vexed with late Repentance than Abu Gabshan; and more silly than
Abu Gabshan; Which are usually said of those who part with a thing of great
Moment for a small matter. However, he was not so silly, but when he came to
himself, he understood the value of what he had parted with, and would fain
have retrieved it again; to which purpose he gave Cosa some disturbance in the
possession of his Purchase; and the rest of the Cozaites joined with him
herein, as not liking that he should be thus deprived of his Right by a Trick,
and thereby the Presidency of the Temple go out of their Tribe into that of the
Korashites. But Cosa being aware hereof, sent privately to all the Korashites,
who were dispersed abroad among the Neighboring Tribes, to meet him at Mecca
on a day appointed; with whose help, falling on the Cozaites, he expelled them
all out of the City, and from that time the whole possession of Mecca remained
to the Korashites; and Cosa and his Posterity in a right Line down to Mahomet,
had the Presidency of the Temple, and the chief Government of the City ever
after.

The eldest Son of Cosa was Abd Menaph, and the younger Abdol Vzza, Names taken
from the Idols of the Temple, of which Cosa had now got the Presidency. For Abd
Menaph in the Arab Language signifies the Servant or Worshipper of Menaph; and
Abdol Vzza, the Servant or Worshipper of Vzza, which were Heathen Deities then
worshipped by the Arabians. Of the Posterity of Abdol Vzza, were Zobair, and
Cadigha the Wife of Mahomet.

The eldest Son of Abul Feda. Pocock. Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 51. Ecchelensis
Hist. Arab. Part 1. c. 3. Liber de Generatione and Nutritura Mahometis.
Abd Menaph was Hashem, and the younger Abdshems, whose Son was Ommia, from
whom the Ommiadae, who for so many Descents governed the Saracen Empire. Hashem
as well as his Father and Grandfather, was Prince of his Tribe, and Person of
great Note in his time through all Arabia. From him the Kindred of Mahomet are
called Hashemites; and he who governs at Mecca and Medina, (who must always be
of the Race of Mahomet) is called in their Language, Sionita in Append. ad
Geographiam Nubiensem, c. 7.
Al Emamo'l Hashem, that is, the Prince of the Hashemites, even unto this day.

The Son of Hashem was Abul Feda. Pocock. Ecchelensis, ib.
Abdol Motallab, who succeeded his Father in the Government of his Tribe at
Mecca, and had to do with two very formidable Enemies in his time Hottinger,
Hist. Orient. lib. 1. c. 3.
; Chosroes, the first of that Name, King of Persia, and Abraham King of the
Ethiopians. The first having extended his Empire a great way into Arabia on the
North of Mecca; and the other possessed himself of the Kingdom of the Homerites
on the South, became very dangerous Neighbors unto him; but he defended
himself against both, and forced the latter to a very shameful Retreat, when he
came with a numerous Army to Besiege the City, as shall be hereafter more fully
related. He lived to a very great Age, being Elmacin. lib. 1. c. 1.
an Hundred and ten years old at his Death. He had thirteen Sons, their Names
were as follows; Abdollah, Hamzah, Al-Abbas, Abu Taleb, Abu Laheb, Al-Gidak,
Al-Hareth, Jahel, Al-Mokawam, Dorar, Al-Zobair, Ketham, and Abdal Caaba. The
eldest of them, Abdollah, having married Amena, the Daughter of Waheb, was by
her the Father of Mahomet Abul Feda. Alkodai. Abul Faraghius. page 101.
Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1. Pocock. Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 170. Hottinger, Hist.
Orient. lib. 1. c. 6.
, who was born at Mecca, in the Month of May, in the Year of our Lord, 571.
Justin the Second being then Emperor of Constantinople, and Chosroes the first
King of Persia.

By this it appears, Mahomet was not of such mean and vile Parentage as some
have asserted. For being a Korashite, he was of the noblest Tribe of all
Arabia, and the Family he was born of was the most considerable of that Tribe,
as being that which for several Descents together had born the chief Rule over
it. However, in the beginning of his Life he was in Abul Feda. Abunazar. Abul
Faraghius, p. 101. Elmacin, l. 1. c. 1. Hottinger, Hist. Orient. l. 2. c. 1.
Guadagnol. Tract. 2. c. 10.
a very poor and despicable Condition. For his Father dying before he was two
years old, and while his Grandfather, Abdol Motallab, was still living, all the
Power and Wealth of his Family became derived to his Uncles, especially to Abu
Taleb, who after the Death of Abdol Motallab his Father, bore the chief sway in
Mecca as long as he lived, which was to a very great Age; and under his
Protection chiefly was it, that Mahomet, when he first broached his Imposture,
was supported against all his Opposers, and grew up to that height thereby, as
to be able after his Death to carry it on, and also establish it through all
Arabia by his own Power.

After his Father's Death, he continued under the Tuition of his Mother till
the eighth year of his Age; when Abul Feda Abul Faraghius, p. 101. Elmacin,
lib. 1. c. 1.
she also dying, he was taken home to his Grandfather, Abdol Motallab, who at
his Death, which happened the next year after, committed him to the care of his
Uncle, Abu Taleb, to be educated by him out of Charity, who carrying on a Trade
of Merchandise, took him into this Employment, and bred him up in the business
of it. For Mecca Geographia Nubiensis. Sionita in Append. ad eandem, c. 7.
Pocockii Spe. Hist. Arab. p. 127. Golii notae ad Alfraganum, p. 98.
being situated in a very barren Soil, could not of it self subsist; and
therefore the Inhabitants were forced to betake themselves to Merchandise for
their Support; and the best Men among them had scarce any other Estate but in
their Stock where with they did Traffic; and therefore they all betook
themselves to this Course of Life, which they seem to have received down from
the Ismaelites, from whom they were descended, and in the same manner as they
carried on a Trade into Syria, Persia, and Egypt, on Camels backs, furnishing
those Countries with such Commodities as came to them from India, Ethiopia, and
other Southern parts, for which commerce they were very advantageously
situated, as lying near the Red Sea, where they had the Port Geographia
Nubiensis clim. 2. Part 5. Golii notae ad Alfraganum, p. 100.
Jodda, the most convenient for Shipping in all those Streights.

And in this Course of Life Mahomet was bred up under his Uncle; and as soon as
he was of a fit Age, he was sent with his Camels into Syria. On his coming to
Bostra, a City on the Confines of that Country, while he was attending his
Unkle's Factors in the vending of his Wares in the Public Marketplace Abul
Feda-Alkodai. Al-Jannabi. Abul Faraghius, p. 101. Pocock. Spec. Hist. Arab p.
170. Gentii notae ad Musladinum Sadum, p. 536.
, he was there seen (say the Mahometans) by Bahira, a Learned Monk of that
place, who immediately knowing him to be the great Prophet that was to come,
pressed with great earnestness thorough the Crowd unto him, and taking him by
the Hand, there foretold of him all those great things which afterward came to
pass. The Mark whereby he knew him (say they) was the Prophetic Light which
shun on his Face. This Prophetic Sherestani.Liber de Generatione Mahometis.
Pocockii Spec Hist. Arab. p. 53. and p. 168.
Light, they tell us, God first placed on Adam, to be a sign of the Prophets
that were to be born of him; That this Light descending down to Abraham, was
from him divided into two; one on the Face of Isaac, and the other on the Face
of Ismael; that Isaac's Light was soon after manifested in the many Prophets
which appeared of his Posterity among the Children of Israel; but that which
was placed on Ismael, was suppressed, and lay hid till the coming of Mahomet,
on whom it first appeared; and that Bahira seeing it on him, thereby knew him
(say they) to be a great Prophet sent of God, who was ere long to manifest
himself. But others Gentii notae ad Musladinum. Sadum, p. 536. Vide etiam
librum de Generatione and nutritura Mahometis.
say, the Mark by which he knew him, was the Seal of his Prophetic Mission
stamped with a wonderful impress between his Shoulders. But the truth is,
Mahomet did not become acquainted with this Bahira, till many Years after, when
he traded for Cadigha into those Parts, as shall in its proper place be
hereafter related.

Till the Twenty fifth year of his Age he continued in this Employment under
his Uncle; but Abul. Feda. Abul Faraghius, p. 102. Rodericus Totetanus, c. 2.
Johannes Andreas, c. 1. Pocock. Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 171.
then one of the Chief men of the City dying, and his Widow, whose name was
Cadigha (to whom he left all his Stock, which was of considerable value)
wanting a Factor to manage it for her, she invited Mahomet into her Service;
and having offered him such advantageous Conditions as he thought fit to accept
of, he undertook this Employment under her, and for three years traded for her
at Damascus, and other places; and in the management of this Charge gave her
that content, and so far insinuated himself into her Favor and good Opinion
thereby, that about the For she died in the 50th year of the Life of Mahomet.
Elmacen. lib. 1. c. 1. when she had lived with him 22 years. Abul Faraghius, p.
102.
28th year of his Age she gave her self to him in marriage, being then forty
years old; and from being her Servant, thus advanced him to be the Master both
of her Person and Estate, which having rendered him equal in Wealth to the best
men of the City, his ambitious Mind began to entertain thoughts of Disputatio
Christiani contra Saracenum, c. 3. Cusani Cribatio Alcorani, lib. 3. c. 8.
Ricardi Confutatio Legis Saracenicae, cap. 13.
possessing himself of the Sovereignty over it. His Ancestors had for several
Descents been Chiefs of the Tribe; and his Great Grandfather Hashem had made
himself very considerable, not only at home, but also among his Neighbors
abroad; and had his Father lived, the Power and Wealth of his Family, after the
death of his Grandfather, would have descended to him, as being the eldest Son;
and after his decease, to himself; and it was only his misfortune in being left
an Orphan during the life of his Grandfather, that deprived him of all this.
These Considerations meeting with an Ambitious, Aspiring Mind, soon put him
upon Designs of raising himself to the Supreme Government of his Country; and
being a very Subtle, Crafty man, after having maturely weighed all ways and
means whereby to bring this to pass, concluded none so likely to effect it, as
the framing of that Imposture, which he afterward vented with so much mischief
to the World. For the course of Trade which he drove into Egypt, Palestine, and
Syria, having made him well acquainted both Disputatio Christiani, c. 1.
with Christians and Jews, and observing with what eagerness, as well they, as
the several Sects into which the Christians of the East were then miserably
divided, did engage against each other; he from thence concluded, That nothing
would be more likely to gain a Party firm to him for the compassing of his
Ambitious Ends, than the making of a New Religion. And for such a Change he
judged his Citizens might be well disposed, because their Traffic and frequent
converse with Christians having much taken off their affection and zeal for
that gross Idolatry which they had hitherto been addicted to, they were at that
time from Heathenism generally fallen Liber Almostatraf. Pocockii Spec. Hist.
Arab. p. 136. And Mahomet upbraids them of it in the 6th Chapter of his
Alcoran, and elsewhere in that Book.
into Zendicism, an Error among the Arabs near of kin to the Sadducism of the
Jews, as denying Providence, the Resurrection, and a Future State; which being
in reality to be without any Religion at all, they were the better fitted,
while thus void of all other impressions of God, and his Worship, to receive
any he should impose upon them; and therefore betaking himself to frame such a
Religion as he thought might best go down with them, he drew up a Scheme of
that Imposture he afterward deluded them with, which being a medley made up of
Judaism, the sveral Heresies of the Christians then in the East, and the old
Pagan Rites of the Arabs, with an Indulgence to all Sensual Delights, it did
too well answer his Design in drawing men of all sorts to the embracing of it.

But that he might not immediately from that Idolatry, which he had hitherto
practiced with the rest of his Citizens, commence a Preacher against it; and
from his present course of life, which was very licentious and wicked, take
upon him a Character so unsuteably to it, as that of a Prophet, without some
previous Change; in the 38th year of his Age Liber Agar. Joannes Andreas de
Confusione sectae Mahometanae, c. 1. Bartholomaeus Edessenus. Bellonius, lib.
3. c. 1. Guadagnol. Tract. 2. c. 10. sect. 1.
he withdrew himself from his former Conversation, and affecting an Eremetical
life, used every morning to withdraw himself into a Solitary Cave near Mecca,
called the Cave of Hira, and there continue all day, exercising himself, as he
pretended, in Prayers, Fastings, and holy Meditations; and there it is supposed
he first had his Consults with those Accomplices by whose help he made his
Alcoran. On his return home at night, he used to tell his Wife Cadigha of
Visions which he had seen, and strange Voices which he had heard in his
retirement. For he aimed first of all to draw her into the Imposture, knowing
that thereby he should secure his own Family to his Design (without which it
would be dangerous for him to venture on it) and also gain in her an able
Partisan for him among the Women. But she rejecting these Stories as vain
Fancies of his own disturbed Imagination, or else Delusions of the Devil; at
length he opened himself further unto her, and feigned a Converse with the
Angel Gabriel, which she was also as backward to believe, till after several
repeated Stories to her of his Revelations from the said Angel, she Theophanes.
Cedrenus. Miscella Historia. Zonaras.
consulted with a fugitive Monk, then in their House, (of whom I shall
hereafter speak) who being in the Plot, helped to confirm her in the belief of
what Mahomet had communicated unto her, whereby being totally persuaded that
Mahomet was really called to that Prophetic Office which he pretended to, from
thenceforth gave up her Faith totally to him, and became his first Proselite in
this Imposture.

After he had carried this Point, having now by two years constantly practicing
a retired and austere Life, gained, as he thought, a sufficient reputation of
Sanctity for his Design; in the 40th year of his Age Abul Feda. Abul Faraghius,
p. 102. Elmacin, lib. 1. c* 1.
he began to take upon him the Style of the Apostle of God, and under that
Character to propagate the Imposture which he had been so long a projecting.
But for four years he did it only in private among such as he had most
confidence in, clancularly insinuating his Delusions into them. His first
Proselite, as has been said, was Cadigha his Wife; his second was Zayd Ebn
Hareth his Servant; and the third his Cousin Ali, the Son of Abu Taleb his
Uncle, who from hence was Sionita in Append. ad Geographiam Nubiensem, c. 8.
used to style himself the first of Believers, not making any reckonings of the
other two. He tempted his Servant Zayd by promising him his Freedom; Johannes
Andreas, c. 1. Bellonius, lib. 3. c. 10. Guadagnol. Tract. 2. cap. 10. sect. 1.
and accordingly, on his receiving his Religion, he manumised him. And from
hence it has become a Law among the Mahometans ever since, to make their
Slaves free, whenever they turn to their Religion.

It is to be observed, that Mahomet began this Imposture about the same time
that Phocas made this Grant A. D. 606. which was the very year that Mahomet
retired to his Cave to forge that Imposture there, which two years after, A. D.
608. he began to propagate at Mecca.
the Bishop of Rome, by virtue of a Grant from the wicked Tyrant Phocas, first
assumed the Title of Universal Pastor, and thereon claimed to himself that
Supremacy, which he has been ever since endeavoring to usurp over the Church
of Christ. And from this time Both having conspired to found themselves an
Empire in Imposture, their Followers have been ever since endeavoring by the
same Methods, that is, those of Fire and Sword, to propagate it among Mankind;
so that Antichrist seems at this time to have set both his Feet upon
Christendom together, the one in the East, and the other in the West; and how
much each has trampled upon the Church of Christ, the Ages ever since
succeeding have abundantly experienced.

Mahomet's fourth Disciple was Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1. Abul Feda.
Abu Beker, who being one of the Sionita in Append. ad Geographiam Nubiensem,
c. 8.
Richest men of Mecca, and a person of great Wisdom and Experience, brought
with him no small help and reputation to his Cause, and his Example was soon
followed by five others, Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1.
Othman Ebn Affan, Zobair Ebno'l Awam, Saad Ebu Abu Waccas, Abdorrahman Ebn
Auf, and Abu Obeida Ebno'l Jerah, who were afterward the principal Generals of
his Armies, and the chief Instruments under him, by whose help he established
both his Empire, and his Imposture together in those parts of the World.

After he had gotten these nine Disciples, some of which were the principal men
of the City, he began Abul Feda. Abul F^raghius, p. 102. Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1.
openly to publish his Imposture to the People of Mecca in the 44th year of his
Age, and publicly to declare himself a Prophet sent by God to reduce them from
the Error of Paganism, and to teach them the true Religion. The first Doctrine
that he propagated among them was, Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1. Alcoran, c. 2, 3, 4,
5, etc.
That there was but one God, and that he only is to be worshipped, and that
Elmacin, ib. and Alc. passim.
all Idols were to be taken away, and their Worship utterly abolished; and that
those who say God has Alc. c. 4* etc.
Sons or Daughters, or that there are any other Gods Alc. c 4, 5. etc.
associated with him, are impious, and ought to be abhorred. By denying him
Sons and Associats, he reflected on the Christians for holding the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; the belief of both which
he does in many places in his Alcoran vehemently forbid. By denying him
Daughters, he condemned the Idolatrous Practice of the Arabians, Pocockii Spec.
Hist. Arab. p. 89, 90. Hottingeri Hist. Orient. lib. 1. c. 7.
who worshipped Allat, Menah, and Al Vzza, Female Deities, which they held to
be the Daughters of God, whose Idols and Temples he afterward everywhere
destroyed.

He did not pretend to deliver to them any new Religion, but to revive the old
one, which God first gave unto Adam; and when lost in the corruption of the Old
World, restored it again by Revelation Pocockii Spec. Arab. p. 53. Alc. c. 3,
etc.
to Abraham, who taught it his Son Ismael their Forefather; and that he, when
he first planted himself in Arabia, instructed men in the same Religion which
he had received from Abraham, but their Posterity afterward corrupted it into
Idolatry, and that God had now sent him to destroy this Idolatry, and again
restore the Religion of Ismael their Forefather. And therefore, according to
his own Doctrine, it is not unfitly called Ismaelisme by the Jews, although they
call it so only out of contempt by transposition of the Letters from Islamisme,
the Name whereby the Mahometans themselves most love to call it, from the
Arabic Golii Lex. in voce Salama, and Pocockius ubi supra.
word Salama, which in the Fourth Conjugation is Aslama, to enter into the
state of Salvation; hence Eslam, the Saving Religion, and Muslimon, or as we
call it, Musleman, he that believes therein.

He Alc. c. 3, 4, 5, etc.
allowed both the Old and the New Testament, and that Moses and Jesus Christ
were Prophets sent from God; but that the Jews and Christians had corrupted
these holy Writings, and that he was sent to purge them from those Corruptions,
and restore the Law of God to that purity in which it was first delivered; and
therefore most of those Passages which he takes out of the Old and New
Testament are related otherwise by him in his Alcoran, than we have them in
those Sacred Books. And in this certainly he acted much wiser than our
Socinians, who with him denying the Holy Trinity and the Divinity of our
Savior, yet still allow the holy Scriptures, as now in our hands, to be
genuine and uncorrupted, with which their Doctrine is in the most manifest
manner totally inconsistent. If they had with this their The Socinians say just
the same, and no more of Jesus Christ than Mahomet did before them, excepting
only that he makes himself the greater of the two; and how many other things
they agree in with him, and seem to have taken from him, may be seen in
Hottinger's Historia Orientalis, lib. 2. c. 3. where he fully compares the
Doctrins of both together.
Master denied the Scriptures which we now have, as well as the Trinity and the
Divinity of our Savior, which are so evidently proved by them, and forged
others in their stead, they might have made their impious Hypothesis look much
more plausible, than now it can possibly appear to be.

He pretended to receive all his Revelations Alc. c. 2. Johannes Andreas, c. 2.
Guadagnol Tract. 2. c. 10. sect. 1. libr. Agar.
from the Angel Gabriel, and that he was sent from God of purpose to deliver
them unto him. And whereas he was subject to the Falling Sickness, Rodericus
Toletanus, c. 6. Richardi confutatio. c. 13. Theophanes Zonoras. Miscella
Historia. Ho^tingeri Hist. Orient. lib. 1. c. 2.
whenever the Fit was upon him, he pretended it to be a Trance, and that then
and Angel Gabriel was come from God with some new Revelations unto him, the
splendor of whose appearance not being able to bear, this caused him to fall
into those Trances, in which the Angel conversed with him, and delivered to him
those Messages from God, which he was sent to reveal unto him.

His pretended Revelations he put into several Chapters, the collection of
which make up his Alcoran, which is the Bible of the Mahometans. The Original
of this Book he taught them Alc. c. 6. etc. 80.
was laid up in the Archives of Heaven, and that the Angel Gabriel brought him
Alc. c. 25.
the Copy of it Chapter by Chapter, according as occasion required they should
be published to the People. Part of these he published at Mecca, before his
flight from thence; and the other part at Medina, which he did after this
manner. Joannes Andreas, c. 2.
When he had forged a new Chapter, which he intended to publish he first
dictated it to his Secretary, and then delivered the written Paper to be read
to his Followers will they had learnt it by heart; which being done, he had the
Paper brought to him again, which he laid up in a Chest, which he called the
Chest of his Apostleship. This he did, I suppose, in imitation of the Ark or
holy Chest among the Jews, in which the Authentic Copy of their Law was
reposited. This Chest he left in the keeping of one of his Wives, and out of
it, after his death, was the Alcoran compiled in the same manner as Homer's
Rapsodies were out of the loose Poems of that Poet. Elmacin. lib. 1. c. 2, etc.
4.
Abu Beker first made the Collection, but Othman afterward revising and new
modelling it, licked it into that shape in which we now have it.

On his first appearing publicly as a Prophet Johannes Andereas, c. 1.
the People laughed at him for the ridiculousness of his Pretense; some called
him a Alc. c. 15, 25, 37, 81, etc.
Sorcerer, and a Magician, others a Liar, an Impostor, and a teller of old
Fables; of which he often complains in his Alcoran; so that for the first year
he prevailed nothing among them, or got any thing else by his publishing those
Chapters of his Alcoran which he had then composed, or his preaching to them
the Doctrine of them, but Scorn and Contempt. But this did not discourage him
from still proceeding in his Design, which he managed with great art. For he
was a Man of a Elmacin, ib. 1. c. 1. Abunazar. Hottinger. Hist. Orient. lib. 2.
c. 4.
ready Wit, and a very acceptable Address; he bore all Affronts, without
seeming to resent any; and applied himself to all sorts of people, without
contemning the meanest; was very courteous both in giving and receiving Visits;
the Great men he soothed with flattering Praises, and the Poor he relieved with
Gifts and Alms; and toward all men managed himself with that art of
insinuation (in which he exceeded all men living) that at length he surmounted
all the Difficulties which so bold an Imposture in the first venting of it must
necessarily be liable unto, and several other new Proselytes joined themselves
unto him, among whom was Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1. Johannes Andreas, c. 1.
Omar Ebno'l Chattab, who was one of his Successors, and then a considerable
Man in the City. His Example was soon followed by several others, so that in
the fifth year of his pretended Mission he had increased his Party to the
number of Nine and thirty, and himself made the Fortieth.

On his having made this progress, Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1. Johannes Andreas, c.
1.
several began to be alarmed at it. Those that were addicted to the Idolatry
of their Forefathers stood up to oppose him as an Enemy of their Gods, and a
dangerous Innovator in their Religion. But others, who saw further into his
Designs, thought it time to put a stop thereto for the sake of the public
safety of the Government, which it manifestly tended to undermine for the
establishing of Tyranny over them, and therefore they combining together
against him, intended to have cut him off with the Sword. But Elmacin. lib.
Abu Taleb his Uncle getting notice hereof defeated the Design, and by his
Power, as being Chief of the Tribe, preserved him from all other like Attempts
as were afterward framed against him. For although he himself persisted in the
Paganism of his Ancestors, yet he had that affection for the Impostor, as being
his Kinsman, and one that was bred up in his House, that he firmly stood by him
against all his Enemies, and would suffer no one to do him any hurt as long as
he lived. And therefore being safe under so powerful a Protection, he boldly
went on to preach to the People in all public places of the City where they
used to assemble, and published unto them more Chapters of his Alcoran in the
order, as he pretended, they were brought him by the Angel Gabriel. The chief
Subject of which was to press upon them the observance of some moral Duties,
the Belief of the Unity of God, and the Dignity of his own pretended
Apostleship, in which indeed, besides some Heathen and Jewish Rites which he
retained, consisted the whole of his new forged Religion.

The main Arguments he made use of to delude men into this Imposture, were his
Promises and his Threats, as being those which easiest work on the Affections
of the Vulgar. His Promises were chiefly of Paradise, which he so cunningly
framed to the gust of the Arabians, as to make it totally consist in those
Pleasures which they were most delighted with. For they being within the Torrid
Zone, were, through the nature of the Clime, as well as the excessive
corruption of their Manners, Ammianus Marcellinus de Saracenis, lib. 14. c. 4.
Incredibile est quo ardore apud eos in venerem uterque dissolvitur sexus.
exceedingly given to the love of Women; and the scorching heat and dryness of
the Country making Rivers of Water, cooling Drinks, shaded Gardens, and
pleasant Fruits, most refreshing and delightful unto them, they were from hence
apt to place their highest Enjoyment in things of this nature. And therefore to
answer the height of their Carnal Desires he made the Joys of Heaven, which he
proposed for a reward to all those that should believe in him, to consist
totally in these particulars. For he tells them in many places in his Alcoran,
That they shall enter into pleasant Gardens, Alcoran, c. 3. c. 4. c. 36. c. 37.
c. 43. c. 47. c. 78. c. 90. etc. Johannes Andreas, c. 9. Richardi Confutatio,
c. 8. Conticuzenus Orat. 2. sect. 11. Hortingeri Hist. Orient. lib. 2. c. 4.
Pocockii Miscellanea, c. 7. Disputatio Christiani, c. 26. and 28. Bellonius,
lib. 3. c. 9.
where many Rivers flow, and many curious Fountains continually send forth most
pleasing Streams, nigh which they shall repose themselves on most delicate Beds
adorned with Gold and precious Stones under the shadow of the Trees of
Paradise, which shall continually yield them all manner of delicious Fruits,
and that there they shall enjoy most beautiful Women pure and clean, having
black Eyes and Countenances always fresh and white as polished Pearls, who
shall not cast an Eye on any other but themselves, with whom they shall enjoy
the continual pleasures of Love, and solace themselves in their company with
amorous Delights to all Eternity, drinking with them most delicious Liquors,
and most savoury and pleasant Wines, without being ever intoxicated or
overcharged by them, which shall be administered to them by beautiful Boys, who
shall be continually running round their Beds to serve them up unto them in
Cups of Gold, and Glasses fixed on Diamonds. And as thus he framed his Promises
of Reward in the Life hereafter as might best suit with the sensual Appetites
and Desires of those to whom he proposed them; so on the contrary, he described
the Punishment of Hell, which he threatened to all that would not believe in
him, to consist of such Torments as would appear to them the most afflicting
and grievous to be born. As Alcoran, c. 7. c. 37. c. 43. c. 44. c. 47. c. 50.
c. 74. c. 77. c. 78. c. 90, etc.
that they should drink nothing but boiling and stinking Water, or breath any
thing else but exceeding hot Winds, (things most terrible in Arabia;) that they
should dwell for ever in continual Fire excessively burning, and be surrounded
with a black hot and salt Smoke as with a Coverlid; that they should eat
nothing but Briers, and Thorns, and the Fruit of the Tree Zacon, which should
be in their Bellies like burning Pitch. In the proposing of these Promises and
Threats to the People he was very frequent and sedulous, making them to ring in
their Ears on all occasions, whereby he failed not of his end in alluring some,
and affrighting others into the Snare he laid for them.

And that he might omit nothing whereby to work on their Fear, which is usually
the most prevalent Passion of the Ignorant, he terrified them with the Threats
of grievous Punishments in this Life, as well as in that which is to come, if
they would not hearken unto him. And to this end Alcoran. c. 6. c. 7. c. 11,
etc. Johannes Andreas, c. 12.
he did set forth unto them on all occasion, what terrible Destructions had
fallen upon the Heads of such as would not be instructed by the Prophets, that
were sent before him. How the Old World was destroyed by Water, for not being
reformed at the preaching of Noah; and Sodom by Fire from Heaven, for not
harkening to Lot when sent unto them. How the Egyptians were plagued for
despising Moses; and how Ad and Thamod two Ancient Tribes of the Arabs, were
totally extirpated for the same reason. His Stories of the two last were Fables
of his own Invention, which he related unto them after this manner. That
Alcoran, c. 7. c. 11, etc. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 37.
Ad the Grandson of Aram, the Son of Sem, planted himself after the Confusion
of Languages in the Southern Parts of Arabia, where his Posterity falling into
Idolatry, the Prophet Hud (whom the Commentators on the Alcoran will have to be
Heber) was sent unto them to reclaim them unto the true Worship, but they not
harkening unto him, God sent a violent hot Wind, which in seven days time
destroyed them all excepting only the Prophet, and some few who were reformed
by him. As to Thamod, his Alcoran, c. 7. c. 11. c. 26. etc. Pocockii Spec.
Hist. Arab. p. 37. Hott. Hist. Orient. lib. 1. c. 3.
Story was, that they were an Ancient Tribe of the Arabs dwelling on the
Consines of Syria, and that on their Revolt to Idolatry, God sent to them the
Prophet Saleh; that on their demand of a Miracle to testify his Mission, he
caused a Rock to bring forth a Camel in the sight of them all; that they
notwithstanding in contempt wounded the Camel, and that thereupon God sent
terrible Thunders, which in three days time destroyed them all, excepting
Saleh, and some few who believed on him. And the like Fable he also told them
of Alcoran, c. 7. c. 11. c. 26, etc.
Chaib, another Prophet of the ancient Arabs, sent to the Tribe of Madian, and
how that Tribe was in like manner destroyed by Thunder for not harkening unto
him. For the sake of these Stories, (which he was very frequent in inculcating
into the People, and very often repeats in his Alcoran) those who believed not
on him, called him Alcoran, c. 25, etc.
a Teller of old Fables; but notwithstanding they wrought upon the Fears of
others, and by this and other such Artifices, he still went on to increase his
Party, to which two of his Uncles, Johannes Andreas, c. 1.
Hamza and Al Abbas, at length joined themselves. But the rest of his Uncles
approved not of his designs, and although Abu Taleb still continued to befriend
him, because of the affection which he bore him, the other nine had not this
regard to him, but joined with his Enemies, and opposed him all they could, as
a Man that under the false Mask, which he had put on, carried on dangerous
Designs to the prejudice of his Country.

But that which gravelled him most, was that his Opposers demanded to see a
Miracle from him. For said they Alcoran, c. 2. c. 6. etc. Bidawi ad Alcorani
cap. 12.
, Moses and Jesus, and the rest of the Prophets, according to thy own Doctrine,
worked Miracles to prove their Mission from God; and therefore if thou be a
Prophet, and greater than any that were sent before thee, as thou boastest thy
self to be Alcoran, c. 17, etc.
, do thou work the like Miracles to manifest it unto us. Do thou make the Dead
to rise, the Dumb to speak, and the Deaf to hear, or else do thou cause
Fountains to spring out of the Earth, and make this place a Garden adorned with
Vines and Palm Trees, and watered with Rivers running through it in diverse
Channels, or else let us see come down from Heaven some of those Punishments
which thou threatnest us with. Or do thou make thee an House of Gold, adorned
with Jewels and costly Furniture; or let us see the Book thou would bave us
believe to come from Heaven, descend down to us from thence legible in our
Eyes, or the Angel which thou tellest us does bring it unto thee, and then we
will believe in thy Word. This Objection he endeavored to evade by several
answers. One Alcoran, c. 17.
while he tells them, he is only a Man sent to Preach to them the rewards of
Paradise, and the Punishments of Hell. At another time, Alcoran, c. 17.
That their Predecessors contemned the Miracles of Saleh, and the other
Prophets, and that for this reason God would work no more among them. And a
while after, that those Alcoran, c. 6.
whom God had ordained to believe, should believe without Miracles, and those
whom he had not ordained to believe should not be convinced, though all those
Miracles should be wrought in their sight, which they required; and that
therefore they were totally needless. But this not satisfying, as being a plain
Confession that he wanted that Power of Miracles, which all other Prophets had
to prove their Mission, several of those that were his Followers departed from
him, of which he much complains in his Alcoran. And therefore finding that this
would not do on his coming to Medina, and having there taken the Sword in hand,
and gotten an Army to back his Cause, he began to sing another Note. For his
Doctrine then was Richardi Confutatio, c. 7. Cantacuzeni Apologia 4. and Orat.
1. Sect. 11. Alcoran c. 2. c. 3. c. 4 etc.
that God had sent Moses and Jesus with Miracles, and yet Men would not be
obedient to their Word, and therefore he had now sent him in the last place
without Miracles to force them by the Power of the Sword to do his Will. And
persuant hereto Alcoran c. 4. Cantacuzeni Orat. 1a. Sect. 12.
he forbad his Disciples to enter into any further Disputes about his Religion,
but instead thereof he commanded them to fight for it, and destroy all those
who should contradict his Law, promising great Rewards in the Life to come, to
such as should take up the Sword in this Cause, and the Crown of Martyrdom to
all those who should dye fighting for it. And upon this Head, some of the
Mohammedan Doctors argue very subtly. For Ahmed Ebn Zin. Guadagnal, Tract. 2.
c. 10. Sect. 11.
say they, The Prophets of God are of diverse sorts according to the diverse
Attributes of his Divine Nature, which they are sent to show forth. That Jesus
Christ was sent to manifest the Righteousness, the Power, and Knowledge of God;
That he showed forth the Righteousness of God in being impeccable, his Knowledge
in that he knew the Secrets of Men's hearts, and foretold things to come; and
his Power in doing those miraculous Works, which none else but God could. That
Solomon was sent to manifest the Wisdom, the Glory, and the Majesty of God; and
Moses his Providence, and his Clemency; none of which carrying with them a
Power to force Men to believe, Miracles were necessary in their Missions to
induce them thereunto. But Mahomet was a Prophet, sent principally to show
forth the Fortitude of God by the Power of the Sword, which being of it self
alone sufficient to compel all Men into the Faith without any other Power
accompanying it, for this reason (say they) Mahomet wrought no Miracles,
because he had no need of them, the Power of the Sword, with which he was sent,
of it self alone sufficiently enabling him to accomplish his Mission by forcing
Men to believe therein. And from hence it has become the Universal Doctrine of
the Mahometans, that their Religion is to be propagated by the Sword, and that
all of them are bound to fight for it. And for this reason Cantacuzen. Orat.
Sect. 11. Guadagnol Tract. 2. c. 5. Sect. 3.
it has been a Custom among them for their Preachers, while they deliver their
Sermons, to have a Drawn Sword placed by them to denote thereby, that the
Doctrine which they teach them, was with the Sword to be defended and
propagated by them.

However it is not to be denied, but that there are several Miracles reckoned
up, which Mahomet Abul Faraghius, p. 104. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 187 and
188. Hottinger. Hist. Orient. lib. 2. c. 6. Guadagnol Tract. 2. c. 2. Sect. 2.
is said to have wrought; as that he did cleave the Moon in two; that Trees
went forth to meet him; that Water flowed from between his Fingers; that the
Stones saluted him; that he fed a great Company with a little Food; that a Beam
groaned at him; that a Camel complained to him; that a Shoulder of Mutton told
him of its being poisoned; and several others. But those who relate them, are
only such who are reckoned among them their Fabulous and Legendary Writers.
Their Learned Abul Faraghius, p. 104. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 191, 192,
etc. Hottinger. Hist. Orient. lib. 2. c. 6.
Doctors renounce them all, as does Mahomet himself, who in several places in
his Alcoran, c. 6, etc.
Alcoran owns that he wrought no Miracles. But when they are pressed how
without Miracles they can prove his Mission; their common answer is, that
instead of all Miracles is the Alcoran. For All Gezali Sepher Cozri. Bidawi
Ahmed Ebn Edris. Hottinger. Hist. Orient. lib. 2. c. 6. Pocock. Spec. Hist.
Arab. p. 191, 192, etc.
that Mahomet, who was an Illiterate Person, that could neither write nor read,
or that any Man else by human Wisdom alone should be able to compose a Book so
excellent in Eloquence, and so excellent in Doctrine, as they will have that to
be, is what they will not admit to be possible, and therefore they allege the
excellency of the Book for the truth of all contained therein, and will have
that to be a proof equivalent to the Miracles of all the Prophets that went
before him, to manifest that it came from God. And on this Alcoran, c. 2. c.
10. c. 17. etc.
the Impostor himself often insists in his Alcoran, challenging in several
places of it all Men and Devils by their united Skill to compose another Book
like that in Eloquence and Instruction, or else any one Chapter that can be
compared in Excellency with the meanest Chapter therein: Which they taking for
granted, that both together cannot do, will have this to be a most clear
manifestation beyond all contradiction, that this Book could come from none
other but God himself, and that Mahomet from whom they received it, was his
Messenger to bring it unto them.

As to the particulars in this Argument alleged, it must be allowed that the
Alcoran, bating the Folly, the Confusedness and Incoherency of the Matter
contained therein, is as to the Style and Language the Standard of Elegancy in
the Arab Tongue; and as to Mahomet, that he was in truth, what they say, an
Illiterate Barbarian Alcoran, c. 7. Johannes Andreas, c. 2. Pocockii Spec.
Hist. Arab. 156. Disputatio Christiani, c. 12 Richardi Confutatio, c. 3.
that could neither write nor read. But this was not so much a defect in him,
as in the Tribe of which he was, with whom it was the Custom as to all manner
of literature to continue Ebnal Athi^. Sharestani. Al Motairezi in libro
Mogreb. Pocock. Spec. Hist. Arab. p 157.
in the same Ignorance with which they came out of their Mothers Bellies unto
their Lives end. And therefore at the time when Mohomet first set up for a
Prophet, there was not any one Man of Mecca that could either write or read,
excepting only Al Bochari Pocock. ib.
Warakah, a Kinsman of Cadigha's, who having first turned Jew, and afterward
Christian, had learned to write Arabic in Hebrew Letters. And for this reason,
The Men of Mecca were called Sharestani. Pocock. Spec. Arab. Hist. p. 156.
the Illiterate, in opposition to the People of Medina, who being the one half
Christians, and the other half Jews, were able both to write and read; and
therefore were Sharestani and Pocock ib Hotting. Hist Orient. lib. 1. c. 1.
called the People of the Book. And from thence, several of Mahomet's
Followers, after he came to Medina, learnt to read and write also, which some
of them had begun to learn before of Bashar the Cendian Pocockii Spec. Hist.
Arab. p. 157.
, who having sojourned at Anbar, a City of Erac, near Euphrates, there learnt
the Art, from whence coming to Mecca, and marrying the Sister of Abusophian, he
settled there, and from him the Men of Mecca are first said to have received the
Art of Letters. Among the Followers of Mahomet, Othman was the greatest
Proficient herein, which advanced him afterward to Elmacin. lib. 1. c. 1.
Bartholomaeus Edislenus.
be Secretary to the Impostor. But for want of Paper at first, as in a place
where there was never before any occasion for it, they were forced to make use
Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 157.
of the Spade-bones of Shoulders of Mutton to write on, which was a device
anciently made use of by other Tribes of the Arabs, who had Letters, but wanted
Trafick to accommodate them with more convenient Materials for this purpose,
and therefore their Books, in which their Poems, and other Matters they
delighted in were written, Ebnol Athir. Pocock. ib.
were only so many of those Spadebones tied together upon a String. This Bashar
afterward became one of Mahomet's Disciples, and followed him in his Wars,
till poisoned at Chaibar, as shall be hereafter related.

But these Particulars being thus allowed, That the Alcoran of the Mahometans
is of so elegant a Style, and the supposed Author thereof such a Rude and
Illiterate Barbarian; it will be here asked, who were the Assistants by whose
help this Book was compiled, and the Imposture framed? And there will be the
more reason to ask this, because the Book it self contains so many particulars
of the Jewish and Christian Religion, as necessarily imply the Authors of it to
be well-skill'd in both, which Mahomet, who was bred an Idolater, and lived so
for the first forty Years of his Life among a People totally Illiterate, cannot
be supposed to be. But this is a Question not so easily to be answered, because
the nature of the thing required it should be concealed. The Mohammedan Writers,
who believe in the Imposture, as they will allow nothing of this, so to be sure
will say little of it; and the Christians, who abhorred his Wickedness, are apt
to say too much. For it was usual with them, as it is with all other contending
Parties, to snatch at every Story which would disparage the Religion they were
against, and believe it right or wrong, if it would serve their purpose this
way. And from hence it has proceeded, that we have so many fabulous and
ridiculous Accounts both of Mahomet and his Imposture, go current among us,
which serve only to the exposing of us to the laughter of the Mahometans, when
related among them. And besides the Scene of this Imposture, being at least six
hundred Miles within the Country of Arabia, amidst those Barbarous Nations, who
all immediately embraced it, and would not afterward permit any of another
Religion, as much as to live among them; it could not at that distance be so
well searched into by those, who were most concerned to discover the Frauds of
it, and therefore an exact account cannot be expected in this particular.
However, that I may give all the satisfaction herein, that I am able, I shall
here lay together whatsoever I can find in any credible Author concerning it,
and give the best Judgment hereof, that the matter will admit.

That Mahomet composed his Alcoran by the help of others, was a thing well
known at Mecca, when he first broached his Imposture there, and it was often
flung in his Teeth by his Opposers, as he himself more than once complains In
the 25th Chapter of the Alcoran, his words are, They say, That the Alcorn is
nothing but a Lie of thy own Invention, and others have been assisting to thee
herein. Where the Commentators say the Persons here meant Liber Agar Guadagnol,
Tract. c. 10. Sect. 1. Johannes Andreas de Confusione Sectae Mahometanae, cap.
1.
, were the Servants of a certain Sword-Smith at Mecca, who were Christians,
with whom Mahomet was used often to converse for the better informing of
himself from them in the Old and New Testament. And from hence it is, That Lib.
3. c. 2.
Bellonius tells us, that Mahomet found at Mecca two Christians, who had with
them Copies of the Old and New Testament, and that he was much helped by them
in the Composing of his Alcoran. But this is too open work for so secret a
Design. They that upbraided him with his being assisted by others, meant not
those whom he publicly coversed with, but the private Confederates, whom he
secretly made use of at home in the framing of the whole Imposture, and the
writing for him that Book, which he pretended was brought to him from Heaven by
the Angel Gabriel. And what he has in another place of his Alcoran, does
particularly point at one of those, who was then looked upon to have had a
principal hand in this matter. For in the Sixteenth Chapter his words are, I
know they will say, That a Man has taught him the Alcoran; but whom they
presume to have taught him is a Persian by Nation, and speaks the Persian
Language. But the Alcoran is in the Arabic Tongue full of Instruction and
Eloquence. Now, who this Persian was, Friar Richard in his Confutation of the
Mohammedan Law, helps us to understand. For in his Thirteenth Chapter of that
Tract he tells us, That Mahomet being an Illiterate Person, he had for his
helper in the forging of his Imposture among others, one Abdia Ben Salon, a
Persian Jew, whose Name he afterward changed to make it correspond with the
Arabic Dialect into Abdiah is the same in Hebrew that Abdollah is in Arabic, i.
e. the Servant of God, and Ben the same with Ebn, i. e. the Son.
Abdollah Ebn Salem; and Cantacuzenus, and Cardinal Cusa say the same thing.
And Schikardi Tarry in Procemio. p. 54. Forbesius Instruct. Hist. Theolog. lib.
4. c. 3. Spanhemius in Introductione and Hist. Ecclesiast. ad Sec. 7. c. 6.
most others that write of this Imposture make mention of him, as the chief
Architect made use of by Mahomet in the framing of it. And that he was the
Persian pointed at in this Passage of the Alcoran, I have last mentioned, the
same Friar Richard in the Sixth Chapter of the same Tract, expressly tells us.
And he is the same Person whom Elmacinus calls Bidawi, an Eminent Commentator
on the Alcoran, says, The Persian meant in the place abovementioned to have
helped Mahomet, was Salman.
Salman the Persian, who by his skill in drawing an Intrenchment at the Battle
of the Ditch, saved Mahomet and all his Army, where otherwise he must
necessarily have been over-powred by the number of his Enemies, and totally
ruined. For he was a very cunning crafty Fellow, and so thoroughly skilled in
all the Learning of the Jews, that he had commenced Dialogus inter Mahometem
and Abdollam.
Rabbi among them. And therefore, from him Mahomet seems to have received,
whatsoever of the Rites and Customs of the Jews, he has ingrafted into his
Religion. For this making a very considerable part of it, and many of the
particulars being drawn from the abstruser parts of the Talmudic Learning, this
necessarily shows so able an helper to have been in the whole contrivance. And
what Johannes Andreas, an Alfacki, or a Doctor of the Mohammedan Law, turned
Christian, writes of him, further clears this matter. De Confusione Sect^
Mahometanae, c. 2.
For he tells us from Authentic Testimonies of the Arab Writers, in which he
was thoroughly versed, that this Abdollah Ebn Salem, (whom he, or rather his
Interpreter corruptly calls Abdala Celen) was for ten Years together the
Person, by whose Hand all the pretended Revelations of the Impostor were first
written, and therefore no doubt he was also a principal contriver in the
forging of them. There is extant in the end of the Latin Alcoran, published by
Bibliander, a Tract translated out of Arabic into Latin by Hermannus Dalmata,
which by way of Dialogue between Mahomet and his Abdollah, lays before us a
great many of the Fooleries of the Mohammedan Religion, which Tract helps us to
correct the Name, which is in Friar Richard's Tract very corruptly written, as
being only a Translation at the third Hand. For that Tract of Friar Richard's,
which we now have, is no other than a Translation from the Greek Copy of
Demetrius Cydonius, who translated it into that Language for the use of the
Emperor Cantacuzenus, from the Original Latin which is now lost.

Besides this Jew, the Impostor had also a Christian Monk for his Assistant:
And the many particulars in his Alcoran relating to the Christian Religion,
plainly prove him to have had such an helper. Theophanes, Zonaras, Cedrenus,
Anastasius, and the Author of the Historia Miscella, tell us of him, without
giving him any other Name than that of a Nestorian Monk. But the Author of the
Disputation against a Mohammedan, which is epitomized in Vincentius
Bellovacensis's Speculum Historicum, and from thence printed at the end of
Bibliander's Latin Alcoran, C. 13.
calls him Sergius; and from thence is it, that he has been ever since so
often spoken of by that Name among the Western Writers. But in the East he is
totally unknown by it, he being never, as much as I can find, made mention of
by that Name by any of their Writers. For all there that speak of his Monk,
call him Bahira; and Friar Richard Cantacuzeni Orat. 1ma contra Mahometem.
, who in the Year of our Lord 1210. went to Bagdad of purpose to search into
the Mystery of Mahometism by reading their Books, and on his return wrote that
judicious Confutation of it, which I have aforementioned, Cap. 6. and Cap. 13.
tells us of this Bahira, as an Assistant to Mahomet in the forging of his
Imposture, and so does also Orat. 1ma contra Mahometem.
Cantacuzenus, Bartholomaeus Edessenus, and the other Greek Author of the
Confutation of Mahomet, published by Le Moyne: But not one of them says any
thing of Sergius; so that it is plain Ecchelensis Hist. Arab. Part. 1. c. 6.
that Sergius and Bahira are only two different names of the same person. He
was a Monk of Syria, of the Sect of the Nestorians. The Mahometans will have
it, that he first took notice of Mahomet, while a Boy, after that Prophetic
manner as is before related; but according to that Account he would have been
too old to act his part in this Imposture so many years after. The truth of the
matter is, Mahomet did not fall acquainted with him till a long while after,
when he was projecting his wicked Design in his head; in order to the better
forming of which, being very desirous to acquaint himself with the Jewish and
Christian Religions, he was very inquisitive in examining into them, as he met
with those that could inform him. And in one of his Journeys into Syria, either
at Bostra Abul Faraghius Abul Feda Al Kodai Al Jannabi.
as some say, or Georgius Monachus in Disputatione cum Abusalama.
at Jerusalem as others, lighting on this Bahira, and receiving great
satisfaction from him in many of those Points, which he desired to be informed
in, did thereon contract a particular friendship with him. And therefore not
long after Theophanes, Zonaras, Richardi confutatio c. 13.
this Monk for some great Crime being excommunicated and expelled his
Monastery, fled to Mecca to him; and being there entertained in his House,
became his Assistant in the framing of that Imposture, which he afterward
vented, and continued with him ever after; till at length the Impostor having
no farther occasion of him, to secure the Secret, Richardi Confutatio. c. 13.
Confutatio Mahometis Gr. Edita per Le Moyne.
put him to death. If Sergius were the name which he had in his Monastery,
Bahira was that which he afterward assumed in Arabia, and by which he has
ever since been mentioned in those Eastern-parts by all that there write or
speak of him. The Golii Lexicon Arab. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 330.
Hottingeri Historia Oriental. lib. 1. c. 7.
word in the Arabic Language signifies a Camel, which after some extraordinary
merit, according to the usage of the ancient Arabs, had his Ears slit, and was
turned forth from the rest of the Herd at free pasture to work no more. And no
doubt this Monk having told the Tale of his Expulsion from his Monastery so
much to his advantage, as to make it believed at Mecca to be drawn upon him by
that, which was reckoned there as meritorious, had from thence this Name given
him, as suiting that Notion which they had of his Condition among them.

As to his other Helpers, if he had any such, what is said of them is so
uncertain, and that so little, as is not material here to relate. We may
suppose from the very nature of the design (it being to impose a Cheat upon
Mankind) that he made as few as possible conscious to it; and the two
abovementioned being sufficient for his purpose, it does not appear likely that
he admitted any more into the Secret of it. Neither indeed is there any more
room in it for another to act. For his Religion being made up of three parts,
whereof one was borrowed from the Jews, another from the Christians, and the
third from the Heathen Arabs, Abdollah furnished the first of them, Bahira the
second, and Mahomet himself the last; so that there was no need of any other
help to complete the Imposture.

I know there are many other particulars go current of this matter, both as to
the coining of the Forgery, and also the manner of the first propagating of it;
as that the Impostor In praefatione ad Disputationem Christiani. Purchase
Pilgrimage Book 3. chap. 3.
taught a Bull to bring him the Alcoran on his Horns in a public Assembly, as
if it had this way been sent to him from God; that he bred up Pigeons to come
to his Ears to make show thereby, as if the Holy Ghost conversed with him, and
many other such Stories, which being without any foundation or likelihood of
truth, I pass them over as idle Fables not to be credited, although I find some
very great Men have been too easy to swallow them, as particularly In notis ad
Sphaeram Manilii.
Scaliger, De veritate Christianae Religionis lib. 6. c. 5.
Grotius, and In Appendice ad Geographiam Nubiensem c. 7.
Sionita, have that of the Pigeons. Such tricks as these would have been easily
seen thorough by the Arabians, they being Men naturally of as subtle and acute
Parts as any in the World. And therefore Mahomet never as much as offered at
any thing of this nature among them; but disclaiming all Miracles, thereby
avoided the necessity of hazarding his design upon any such open Cheats, where
it would be so liable to be totally blasted by a discovery. The whole of this
Imposture was a thing of extraordinary Craft, carried on with all the Cunning
and Caution imaginable. The framing of the Alcoran (wherein lay the main of the
Cheat) was all contrived at home in as secret manner as possible, and nothing
hazarded abroad, but the success of preaching it to the People. And in doing of
this, no art or cunning was wanting to make it as effectual to the end designed
as possible: And therefore whatever Stories are told of this matter that are
inconsistent with such a management, we may assure our selves are nothing else
but Fables foolishly invented by some zealous Christians to blast the
Imposture, which needed no such means for its Confutation.

But to go on with the Series of our History, in the eighth Year of his
pretended Mission, his Party growing formidable at Mecca, the Elmacin. lib. 1.
c. 1.
City passed a Decree, whereby they forbad any more to join themselves unto
him. But this availed nothing to his hurt as long as his Uncle Abn Taleb lived.
But Elmacin. lib. 1. c. 1.
he dying within two Years after, and the chief Government of the City, on his
Death, falling into the Hands of Abn Sophian, of the House of Ommia, then one
of his most violent Opposers, his Enemies laid hold of this advantage to renew
their Opposition against him, and prosecuted it with that success that they
soon put a stop to the further progress of his Imposture at Mecca. For their
Party, after he had now lost his Protector, and they became thus headed against
him, soon grew to that strength, and appeared with that violence on all
occasions to oppose his designs, that for fear of them no more new Proselytes
durst join themselves unto him; and many of those who had before declared for
him, having done it for no other end, but to join with a Party where they
thought they might best make their Interest, as soon as they saw the hopes
which they had of his prevailing to be again blasted by this Opposition, which
they judged too strong for him to weather, again drew back and appeared no more
with him. And therefore Mahomet seeing his hopes of carrying his Design at
Mecca, thus in a manner totally crushed, began to look abroad where else he
might fix. That which he drove at was to have gained such a Party there, as
might be strong enough to overpower the rest, and subject the whole City to
him; and then, after having possessed himself of such a Post, from thence to
have armed his Disciples for the gaining him that Empire over the rest of the
Arabs, which he projected. And to this purpose was it, that he so often
inculcated it into them, that his Doctrine was to be propagated by the Sword,
and that all that would receive the Faith which he preached, must fight for it.
But now seeing no likelihood of accomplishing this at Mecca, he set his
Thoughts on work how to gain some other Town, where to arm his Party for this
Design. And therefore his Uncle Abbas living most an end at For which reason it
has been ever since even to this day called Abbas Beladi, i. e. the Town of
Abbas, Golii notae ad Alfraganum, p. 100.
Tagif, (another Town of Haegiaz, at sixty Miles distance from Mecca toward
the East) and having a great Interest there Elmacin* lib. 1. c. 1.
, he took a Journey thither under his Wing to propagate his Imposture in that
place, in order to the making of himself Master of it. But after a Months stay,
having not been able with all his endeavor to gain as much as one Proselyte
among them, he again returned to Mecca to make the best of his Party there, and
wait such further advantages as Time and Opportunity might offer him for the
accomplishing of what he designed. And now Cadigha, his Wife, being Elmacin
Abul Faraghius Abul Feda, etc;
dead after she had lived Two and twenty Years with him; to strengthen himself
the more, he took two other Wives in her stead, Elmacin, ib.
Ayesha, the Daughter of Abn Beker; and Sewda, the Daughter of Zama; and a
while after he added to them Gentii notae ad Musladinum Sadium, p. 568.
Haphsa, the Daughter of Omar; whereby making himself Son-in-law to three of
the Principal Men of his Party, he did by that Alliance the more firmly tie
them to his Interest. Ayesha was then Johannes Andreas, c. 12. Sionia in
Appendice ad Geographiam Nubiensem, c. 8. Guadagnol, Tract. 2. Cap. 10. Sect.
12.
but six Years old, and therefore he did not Bed her till two Years after, when
she was full eight Years old. For it is usual in those hot Countries Thevenot's
Travels, Part 3. lib. 1. c. 49.
, as it is in all India over, which is in the same Clime with Arabia, for Women
to be ripe for Marriage at that Age, and also bear Children the year following.

In the twelfth Year of his pretended Mission, is placed the Mesra, that is,
his famous* Night-journey from Mecca to Jerusalem, and from thence to Heaven,
of which he tells us in the 17th Chapter of his Alcoran. For the People calling
on him for Miracles to prove his Mission, and he being able to work none, to
salve the matter, he invents this Story of his Journey to Heaven, which must be
acknowledged to have Miracle enough in it by all those who have Faith to
believe it. And yet it being believed by all that profess the Mohammedan
Religion, as a main Article of their Faith, and as such set down in all the
Books of their Authentic Traditions, how absurd soever it be, since my design
is to give as full an account as I can of this Man's Imposture, it obliges me
to relate it. His Relation of it is as follows,

Rodoricus Toletanus, c. 5. Johannes Andreas, c. 8. Richardi Confutatio Legis
Saracenicae, c. 1. etc. 7. Cantacuzen. Orat. 4. Guadagnol, Tract. 2. c. 2.
Sect. 2. Bellonius, lib 3. c. 7. Bocharti Hierozoic, Part 2. Lib. 6. c. 13.
Liber Agar Zamachshari and Bidawi in Commentariis, ad cap. 17. and cap. 53.
Alcorani.
At Night, as he lay in his Bed with his best beloved Wife, Ayesha, he heard a
knocking at his Door, whereon arising he found there the Angel Gabriel, with
Seventy pair of Wings expanded from his Sides, whiter than Snow, and clearer
than Crystal, and the Beast Alborak standing by him, which they say is the
Beast on which the Prophets used to ride, when they were carried from one place
to another upon the Execution of any Divine Command. Mahomet describes it to be
a Beast as white as Milk, and of a mixed Nature between an Ass and a Mule, and
also of a Size between both, and of that extraordinary swiftness, that his
passing from one place to another, was as quick as that of Lightning; and from
hence it is that he has the name of Alborak, that word signifying Lightning in
the Arabic Tongue. As soon as Mahomet appeared at the Door, the Angel Gabriel
most kindly embracing him, did with a very sweet and pleasing Countenance
salute him in the Name of God, and told him that he was sent to bring him unto
God into Heaven, where he should see strange Mysteries, which were not lawful
to be seen by any other Man, and then bid him get upon the Alborak. But the
Beast, it seems having long lain idle from the time of Christ till Mahomet
(there having been no Prophet in all that Interval to employ him) was grown so
resty and skittish, that he would not stand still for Mahomet to get up upon
him, till at length he was forced to bribe him to it by promising him a place
in Paradise; whereon having quietly taken him on his back, the Angel Gabriel
leading the way with the Bridle of the Beast in his Hand, he carried him from
Mecca to Jerusalem in the twinkling of an Eye. On his coming thither all the
Prophets and Saints departed appeared at the Gate of the Temple to salute him,
and from thence attending him into the Chief Oratory, desired him to pray for
them, and then departed. Whereon Mahomet with the Angel Gabriel going out of
the Temple, found there a Ladder of Light ready fixed for them, which they
immediately ascended leaving the Alborak there tied at a Rock till their return.

On their arrival at the First Heaven the Angel Gabriel knocked at the Gate,
and having informed the Porter who he was, and that he brought Mahomet the
Friend of God with him by the Divine Command, the Gates were immediately
opened, which he describes to be of a prodigious largeness. This first Heaven
he tells us, was all of pure Silver, and that he there saw the Stars hanging
from it by Chains of Gold, each being of the bigness of Mount Noho, near Mecca
in Arabia; and that in these Stars Angels kept watch and ward for the Guard of
Heaven, to keep off the Devils from approaching near it, lest they should
over-hear and know what was there done. On his first entering into this Heaven,
he says, he met an old decrepit Man, and this was our first Father Adam, who
immediately embraced him giving God thanks for so great a Son, and the
recommended himself to his Prayers. As he entered further, he saw a multitude of
Angels of all manner of Shapes; some in that of Men, others in that of Birds,
and others in that of Beasts of all manner of sorts. And among those who
appeared in the several Shapes of Birds, he there saw a Cock of Color as white
as Snow, and of so prodigious a bigness, that his Feet standing upon the first
Heaven, his Head reached up to the second, which was at the distance of five
hundred Years journey from it, according to the rate as we usually Travel here
on Earth. But others among them, as they relate this matter from their Prophet,
Hyperbolize much higher concerning it, telling us that the Head of this Cock
reaches up through all the Seven Heavens as far as the Throne of God, which is
above seven times higher; and in the Description of him, say, that his Wings
are all over decked with Carbuncles and Pearls, and that he extends the one of
them to the East, and the other to the West, at a distance proportionable to
his height. Concerning all these, the Impostor tells us, the Angel Gabriel
informed him, that they were Angels which did from thence intercede with God
for all Living Creatures on the Earth. That those who interceded for Men, had
there the shape of Men; that those who interceded for Beasts, the shape of
Beasts; and those who interceded for Birds, the shape of Birds, according to
their several kinds. And that as to the great Cock, that he was the chief Angel
of the Cocks; that every morning God singing an holy Hymn, this Cock constantly
joineth with him in it by his crowing, which is so loud, that all hear it that
are in Heaven and Earth, except Men and Fairies, and then all the other Cocks
that are in Heaven and Earth crow also. But when the Day of Judgment draws
near, then God shall command him to draw in his Wings, and crow no more, which
shall be a sign, that that Day is at hand to all that are in Heaven and Earth,
excepting still Men and Fairies, who being before deaf to his crowing, shall not
then be sensible of his silence from it. And this Cock the Mahometans look on
to be in that great favor with God, that whereas it is a common Saying among
them, that there are three Voices which God always hears, they reckon the first
the Voice of him that is constant in reading the Alcoran; the second, the Voice
of him that early every morning prays for the pardon of his Sins; and the
third, the Voice of this Cock when he croweth, which they say is ever most
acceptable unto him.

All this stuff of the Cock Abdollah helped Mahomet to out of the Talmudists.
For it is all borrowed from them, with some little variation only to make it
look not totally the same. For in the Tract Bava Bathra of the Babylonish
Talmud, we have a Story of such a prodigious Bird, called Buxtorfii Lexicon
Rabbinicum in voce (...)
Ziz, which standing with his Feet upon the Earth, reaches up unto the Heavens
with his Head, and with the spreading of his Wings darkneth the whole Orb of
the Sun, and causes a total Eclipse thereof. This Bird the Chaldee Paraphrast
on Psalm 50. v. 11. and Psalm 80. v. 14.
the Psalms says, is a Cock, which he describes of the same bigness, and tells
us that he crows before the Lord. And the Chaldee Paraphrast on Ad cap. 3. v.
7. and ad cap. 38. v. 36. and ad cap. 39. v. 16.
Job also tells us of him, and of his crowing every morning before the Lord,
and that God gives him Wisdom for this purpose. What is farther said of this
Bird of the Talmudists, may be seen in Buxtof's Synagoga Judaica cap. 50. and
in Purchas's Pilgrimage lib. 2. c. 20.

From this First Heaven, the Impostor tells us, he ascended up into the Second,
which was at the distance of five hundred years journey above it, and this he
makes to be the distance of every one of the Seven Heavens each above the
other. Here the Gates being opened unto him, as in the First Heaven, at his
entrance he met Noah, who rejoicing much at the sight of him, recommended
himself to his Prayers. In this Heaven, which was all made of pure Gold, the
Impostor tells us, he saw twice as many Angels as in the former, and among them
one of a prodigious greatness. For his Feet being placed on this Second Heaven,
his Head reached to the Third.

From this Second Heaven he ascended up into the Third, which was made of
Precious Stones; where at the entrance he met Abraham, who also recommended
himself to his Prayers. And there he saw a vast many more Angels than in the
former Heaven, and among them another great one of so prodigious a size, that
the distance between his two Eyes were as much as Seventy thousand days
journey, according to our rate of traveling here on Earth. But here Mahomet
was out in his Mathematics, for the distance between a man's Eyes being in
proportion to his height but as one to seventy two, according to this rate the
height of this Angel must have been near fourteen thousand years journey,
which is four times as much as the height of all his Seven Heavens together,
and therefore it is impossible such an Angel could ever stand within any one of
them. But notwithstanding this, here he places him, and in his description of
him tells us, that he had before him a large Table, in which he was continually
writing in, and blotting out; and that having asked the Angel Gabriel of him,
he was informed by him that this was the Angel of death, who continually writes
into the Table, which he had before him, the Names of all that are to be born,
and there computes the days of their life; and as he finds they have completed
the number assigned them, again blots them out, and that whoever has his Name
thus blotted out by him, immediately dies.

From hence he ascended up into the Fourth Heaven, which was all of Emerald;
where at the Entrance he met Joseph the Son of Jacob, who recommended himself
to his Prayers. And in this Heaven he after saw a vastly larger number of
Angels than in the former, and among them another great Angel, as high as from
this Fourth Heaven to the Fifth, who was continually weeping, and making great
lamentation, and mourning, and this, the Angel Gabriel told him, was for the
Sins of men, and the destruction which they did thereby bring upon themselves.

From hence he ascended up into the Fifth Heaven, which was made of Adamant,
where he found Moses, who recommended himself to his Prayers, and there also he
saw a much greater number of Angels than in the former Heaven.

From hence he ascended up into the Sixth Heaven, which was all of Carbuncle,
where he found John the Baptist, who recommended himself to his Prayers. And
here he also saw the number of Angels much increased beyond what he had seen in
any of the former Heavens.

From hence he ascended up into the Seventh Heaven, which was all made of
Divine Light, and here he found Jesus Christ, where it is to be observed he
alters his Style. For he says not, that Jesus Christ recommended himself to
his Prayers, but that he recommended himself to Jesus Christ, desiring him to
pray for him; whereby he acknowledges him certainly to be the greater. But it
was his usage through the whole scene of his Imposture thus to flatter the
Christians on all occasions. Here he says he found a much greater number of
Angels than in all the other Heavens besides, and among them one Extraordinary
Angel having seventy thousand Heads, and in every Head seventy thousand
Tongues, and every Tongue uttering seventy thousand distinct Voices at the same
time, with which he continued Day and Night incessantly praising God.

The Angel Gabriel having brought him thus far, told him, that it was not
permitted to him to go any further, and therefore directed him to ascend up the
rest of the way to the Throne of God by himself, which he says he performed
with great difficulty, passing through Waters and Snow, and many other such
difficult Passages, till he came where he heard a Voice saying unto him, O
Mahomet, salute thy Creator; from whence ascending higher, he came into a
place, where he saw a vast extension of Light of that exceeding brightness,
that his Eyes could not bear it, and this was the Habitation of the Almighty,
where his Throne was placed; on the right side of which, he says, God's Name
and his own were written in these Arabic words, La ellah ellallah Mohammed
resul ollah, i. e there is no God but God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. Which is
the Creed of the Mahometans, which words also he says, he found written upon
all the Gates of the Seven Heavens, which he passed thorough. Being approached
to the presence of God, as Alcoran c. 53.
near as within two Bow-shots; he tells us he saw him sitting on his Throne
with a covering of seventy thousand Vails before his Face; that on his drawing
thus near, in sign of his favor, he put forth his Hand, and laid it upon him,
which was of that exceeding coldness, that it pierced to the very Marrow of his
Back, and he could not bear it. That after this God entering into a very
familiar Converse with him, revealed unto him a great many hidden Mysteries,
made him understand the whole of his Law, and gave him many things in charge
concerning his instructing Men in the knowledge of it; and in conclusion,
bestowed on him several Privileges above the rest of Mankind. As that he should
be the perfectest of all Creatures; that at the Day of Judgment he should be
honored and advanced above all the rest of Mankind; that he should be the
Redeemer of all that believe in him; that he should have the knowledge of all
Languages; and lastly, that the Spoils of all, whom he should conquer in War,
should belong to him alone. And then returning, he sound the Angel Gabriel
arrying for him in the place where he left him, who conducting him back again
through all the Seven Heavens the same way that he brought him, did set him
again upon the Alborak, which he left tied at Jerusalem; and then taking the
Bridle in his Hand, conducted him back to Mecca in the same manner as he
brought him thence, and all this within the space of the tenth part of one
Night.

On his relating this Extravagant Fiction to the People, the next Morning after
he pretended the thing happened, it was received by them as it deserved, with a
general hoot; Cantacuzen Orat. 4a. Richardi confutatio legis Saracenicae c. 14.
Hottingeri Hist. Orient. lib. 2. c. 6.
some laughed at the ridiculousness of the Story, and others taking indignation
at it, cried out shame upon him for telling them such an abominable lie, and by
way of reproach, bid him ascend up to Heaven by daylight there immediately
before them all, that they might see it with their Eyes, and then they would
believe him. And even of his Disciples a great many were so ashamed of him for
this Story, that Johannes Andreas c. 8. Hottinger ib. Friar Richard and
Cantacuzenus say, they were a thousand that left him on this occasion.
they left him thereon; and more would have followed their Example, but that
Hottingeri Hist. Orient. Iib. 2. c. 6.
Abu Beker came in to put a stop to the defection, by vouching the truth of all
that Mahomet had related, and professed his firm belief to the whole of it, for
which reason he had ever after the Title Elmacinus lib. 1. c. 2. dicit eum sic
vocatum esse propter verificationem Mesrae.
of Assadik, that is, the Just, because of the extraordinary merit of his Faith
in this particular. And whoever becomes a Mohammedan, must have the same Faith
also; this Story being as firmly believed by all of that Religion, as any thing
in the Gospel is by us Christians. Only there has been this Question moved
among them, whether it Hottingeri Hist. Orient. lib. 2. c. 6.
were only a Vision of the Night, or a real Journey. Those that would salve the
Absurdity of it, would have it only be a Vision, and that most of the
particulars of it are to be resolved into Figure and Allegory, but the major
Vote has carried it for a real Journey; and to this sense it being now pinned
down, there is no one among them that dares in the least to doubt thereof.

The Imposture was never in greater danger of being totally blasted, than by
this ridiculous Fable, such a stumbling block did it lay even before those of
his own Party, and therefore he needed to interpose the utmost of his Art to
support the Credit of it; for which purpose he not only got his Friend Abu
Beker to be a Voucher to it, but also brings in God himself in two places of
his Alcoran bearing witness thereto, that is, in the Chapter of the Children of
Israel, and in the Chapter of the Star; in the last of which he makes God to
swear by the Star to the truth of it, that Mahomet related nothing in this
Story but what he had seen; that he was admitted to approach him in the Highest
Heavens within the length of two Bow-shoots; and had seen the great Wonders of
the Lord, and had many hidden Mysteries there revealed unto him, and that
therefore Men ought not to dispute any more against him concerning it.

But how ridiculous sover the Story may appear, Mahomet had his Design therein
beyond barely telling such a miraculous Adventure of himself to the People.
Hitherto he had only given them the Alcoran, which was his written Law, and had
owned himself no farther than barely the Messenger of God to deliver it unto
them, telling them that it was brought to him by the Angel Gabriel; and that as
he received it, so he published it unto them, without offering at any Comment,
Explication, or additional Interpretation of his own concerning it; and
therefore when gravelled with any Objection from his Adversaries against it (as
he often was while at Mecca, where he was continually teased and perplexed with
some or other of them) his usual refuge was in this saying; That the Alcoran
was Alcoran c. 3. etc. Richardi confutatio, c. 17. Cantacuzeni Oration 1a. sect.
3. and 5. Ecchelensis Eutych vindicat. p. 383.
God's Book, and that he only could explain the meaning of it: And it was
Wisdom in him at first not to assume any farther. But now learning from his
Friend Abdollah that the Jews, besides the written Law dictated by God himself,
had also another Law called the Oral Law, and given with it (as they pretend)
to Moses himself while in the Mount, and from him delivered to the Elders of
the People, and from them down to after Ages by Oral Tradition; and
understanding also that this Law was in as great Authority with them as the
other, and that it had its whole foundation in the Sayings and Dictates, which
were pretended to be from Moses, and preserved by the Memories of those who
conversed with him; He had a desire for the future to advance his Authority to
the same pitch, and make all his Sayings and Dictates go for Oracles among his
Musslemans, as well as those, which were pretended to be from Moses, did among
the Jews. And for this end chiefly was it that he intended this Story of his
Journey to Heaven. For could he once make it believed among his Followers, that
he had there such a Converse with God, as Moses had with him in the Mount, and
was there fully instructed by him in the knowledge of all Divine Truths, as
this Story pretends he was, he thought he should therein have a sufficient
foundation to build this Pretense upon, and might by a just consequence from
it, claim the whole which he aimed at; and he was not mistaken herein. For how
ridiculous soever the thing at first appeared, yet in the result he carried his
Point, and obtained all that by the Project which he proposed to himself from
it. For the whole of it at length going down with those who had swallowed the
rest of his Imposture, from that time all his Sayings became looked on as
Sacred Truths brought down from Heaven, and every word which at any time
dropped from so enlightened a Person (as this Story supposes him to be) as well
as every Action which he did any way relating to his Religion, were all
carefully observed by them, which being after his death all Pocockii Spec.
Hist. Arab p. 298, and 299. Johannes Andreas c. 3. Bellonius lib. 3. c. 4.
Hottingeri Bibliotheca Orientalis c. 2. Ecchelensis Eutych. vindicat. c. 27.
Gentii Notae ad Musladinum Sadum P. 578.
collected together from the Memories of those who conversed with him, make up
those Volumes of Traditions from him, which they call the Sonnah, which are
with the Mahometans the same in respect of the Alcoran, that the Oral Law among
the Jews is in respect of the Written. And as among the Jews there are many
Books, in which this Oral Law is recited, explained, and digested under several
Heads and Chapters by many different Authors among their Rabbis, who have
employed their Pains and Studies in this matter; so also are there the like
number of Books among the Mahometans concerning their Sonnah Ebnol Athir Ebol
Kahai Pocock. ib.
in which all the Sayings and Doings of Mahomet, relating to his Religion, as
also the Constitutions of the Seniors (that is, of the first Califs that
succeeded him, especially the four first) concerning the same, are collected,
explained, and digested under several Heads, or Common Places by the Compilers
of them, which Books make up the Sum of their Theology, as well Speculative as
Practical; and in them indeed is contained the whole of their Religion as now
practiced among them. And therefore so much of the Imposture, which I now
undertake to give an account of, being in these Traditions, and they all
founded upon this Journey of Mahomet to Heaven, where he pretended to have been
instructed in them by God himself; this sufficiently justifies my being thus
long in relating his fabulous Story of it.

After his publishing this Fiction, and the revolt of so many of his Disciples,
as happened thereon, his Adversaries grew in strength so fast upon him, that he
could no longer protect those who adhered to him, as he had hitherto done; but
some of them, to the number of about an hundred persons, having made themselves
more than ordinary obnoxious to the Government by some practices against it
Abul. Feda Ebnol Athir Kamus. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 172. Ecchelensis
Eutych. Vindicat. c. 27. Golii notae ad Alfraganum p. 53.
here, forced to fly from Mecca to Nagash, King of Aethiopia, where Mahomet's
Letters, which they carried with them, obtained their protection, though the
Men of Mecca sent two of their principal Citizens after them in an Embassy to
that King, to demand them to be delivered unto them. And Mahomet, with the rest
that tarried behind, found it very difficult for them to subsist any longer
there. For after the departure of so many of his faithfullest Adherents into
this Exile, this farther diminution of his number made him still less able to
withstand those Insults, which his Adversaries were continually on all
occasions making upon him. But what he lost at Mecca he got at Medina, then
called Yathreb, Geographia Nubiensis Clim. 2. Part. 5. Golii notae ad
Alfraganum p. 98.
a City lying at the Northern end of Hagiuz, two hundred and seventy miles
distant from Mecca, which being inhabited, Sharestani Disputatio Christiani c.
4. Johannes Andreas c. 1. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 137.
the one part by Jews, and the other part by Heretical Christians, it seems,
these two different Parties not well agreeing in the same City, the Factions
and Feuds that arose between them, drove one of the Parties to Mahomet; and on
the Thirteenth Year Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1.
of his pretended Mission there came to him from thence Seventy three Men, and
two Women, who embraced his Imposture, and swore Fealty unto him, whereon he
chose twelve out of them, whom he retained awhile with him at Mecca to
instruct them in his New Religion, and then sent them back again to Yathreb to
be as his Twelve Apostles, there to propagate it in that Town, in which they
labored with that success, that in a short time they drew over a great Party
of the Inhabitants to embrace the Imposture, of which Mahomet receiving an
account, resolved to retire thither, as finding Mecca now grown too hot for
him. For the chief Men of the City finding that Mahomet's indefatigable
industry and cunning still kept up his Party, do what they could to suppress
it, resolved without further delay to strike at the Root, and prevent the
further spreading of the mischief Alcoran c. 8. Johannes Andreas c. 1. Bidawi
Comment. ad Alcorani c. 8. Abunazar Hottingeri Historia Orientalis lib. 2. c. 5.
by cutting off him that was the chief Author of it. Of which he having
received full and early Intelligence, and finding no other way to avoid the
Blow but to fly from it; ordered all his Party, whom he could prevail with to
accompany him in his Banishment Elmacin ib. Abul Faraghius Abul Feda, etc.
, secretly in the Evening to withdraw out of the City, and retire to Yathreb.
And when he had seen them all gone, he and Elmacin ib. Clenardi Epist. lib. 1.
p. 52.
Abu Beker followed after, leaving only Ali behind, who having set in order
some Affairs that detained him, came to them on the third day after. As soon as
his Flight was publicly known, Parties were sent out to pursue after him, and
he difficultly escaped them Alcoran, c. 9. Bidawi in Comment. ad illud Caput.
and ad cap. 16. Hottingeri Hist. Orient. lib. 2. c. 5.
by hiding himself for some time in a Cave, till the heat of the pursuit was
over.

On the Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Golii notae ad Alfraganum p. 55. Ahmed Ebn
Yuseph. Pocock. Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 174.
12th day of the Month, which the Arabs call the former Relia, that is, on the
24th of our September, he came to Yathreb, and was there received with great
Acclamation by the Party which called him thither. But whether this Party were
of the Jews, or the Christians, I find not said in any Author, only if we may
conjecture from the great kindness, which at this time he expressed toward the
Christians, and the implacable hatred which he ever after bore the Jews, it
will from hence appear, that the former were the Friends that invited him
thither, and the later the opposite Party that were Enemies unto him. And what
he says of each of them in the fifth Chapter of his Alcoran, which was one of
the first which he published after his coming to Yathreb, may seem fully to
clear the matter. For his words there are, Thou shall find the Jews to be very
great Enemies to the true Believers; and the Christians to have great
Inclination and Amity toward them. For they have Priests and Religions, that
are humble, who have Eyes full of Tears when they hear mention of the Doctrine
which God has inspired into thee, because of their knowledge of the Truth, and
say, Lord, we believe in thy Law, write us in the number of them who profess
thy Unity. Who shall hinder us from believing in God, and the Truth wherein we
have been instructed? We desire with Passion, O Lord, to be in the number of
the Just. by this we may see what a deplorable decay the many Divisions and
Distractions, which then reigned in the Eastern Church, had there brought the
Christian Religion into, when its Professors could so easily desert it for that
gross Imposture, which an Illiterate Barbarian proposed unto them. And indeed
it is no strange thing for Men, when once they have deserted the Orthodox
Profession of the Christian Faith, to fleet from one Error to another, till at
length by several Changes in Religion, they change the whole of it away, and
give themselves up to total Impiety. For we see it daily practiced among us.

On Mahomet's first coming to Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Abul Feda, etc.
Yathreb, he lodged in the House of Chalid Abu Job, one of the chief Men of the
Party that called him thither, till he had built himself an House of his own,
which he immediately set about, and adjoining thereto also erected a Mosque at
the same time for the exercise of his new invented Religion; and it is recorded
as an instance of his Injustice, that he Disputatio Christiani c. 4.
violently dispossessed certain poor Orphans, the Children of an Inferior
Artificer a little before deceased, of the Ground on which it stood, and so
founded this first Fabric for his Worship with the like wickedness as he did
his Religion. And having thus settled himself in this Town, he continued there
ever after to the time of his Death. For which reason it thenceforth losing the
Name of Yathreb, became called Geographia Nubiensis Clim. 2. part. 5. Append.
ad eandem cap. 8. Golii notae ad Alfraganum p. 98. Abul Feda Alkamus, etc.
Medinato 'l nabi, i. e. The City of the Prophet, and simply Medina, by which
Name it has been ever since called even unto this day.

From this flight of Mahomet, the Alfraganus cap. 1. Golii notae ad eundem p.
53. Elmacin. lib. c. 1. etc. 3. Eutychius. Abul Faraghius Abul Feda, etc.
Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 172, 173.
Hegira, which is the Era of the Mahometans, begins its Computation. It was
first appointed by Omar the Third Emperor of the Saracens on this Ecchelensis
Hist. Arab. Part. 1. c. 10.
occasion. There happened a contest before him about a Debt of Money. The
Creditor had from his Debtor a Bill, wherein he acknowledged the Debt, and
obliged himself to pay it on such a day of such a Month. The Day and the Month
being passed, the Creditor sues his Debtor before Omar for the Money. The
Debtor acknowledged the Debt, but denied the day of Payment to be yet come,
alleging the Month in the Bill mentioned to be that Month next ensuing; but
the Creditor contended that it was that Month last past, and for want of a Date
to the Bill, it being impossible to decide this Controversy, Omar called his
Council together, to consider of a method how to prevent this difficulty for
the future; where it was decreed, That all Bills and other Instruments should
ever after have inserted into them the date both of the day of the Month, and
also of the Year, in which they were signed. And as to the Year, he having
consulted with Harmuzan, a Learned Persian then with him, by his advice
ordained all Computations to be made for the future from the Flight of Mahomet
from Mecca to Medina. And for this reason, this Era was called the Hegira,
which in the Arabic Language, signifies a Flight. It takes its beginning from
the sixteenth day of July, in the Year of our Lord, Six hundred twenty and two.
And ever since this Decree of Omar (which happened in the eighteenth Year of it)
it has constantly been used among the Mahometans in the same manner, as the
Computation from the Incarnation of our Lord Christ is with us Christians. The
day that Mahomet left Mecca, was on Golii notae ad Alfraganum p. 52, and 55.
the first of the Former Rebia, and he came to Medina on the E^macin lib. 1. c.
1.
twelfth of the same Month. But the Hegira begins two Months before, from the
first of Moharram. For that being the first Month of the Arabian Year, Omar
would make no alteration as to that, but anticipated the Computation fifty nine
days, that he might begin his Era from the beginning of that Year in which
this Flight of the Impostor happened, which gave Name thereto. Till the
appointing of this Era, it was usual with the Arabians to compute from the
last great War they were engaged in. And at Mecca and Era of the Elephant, and
the Era of the Impious War, being those which they computed by all the time of
Mahomet, I shall give an account of them.

The Era of the Elephant had its beginning from Al Kodai Golii notae ad
Alfraganum p. 54. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 173, and 174.
a War which the Inhabitants of Mecca had with the Ethiopians. It happened on
that very year in which Mahomet was born, on this occasion. About Seventy years
before the time of Mahomet, there reigned over the Homerites an ancient Nation
of the Arabs, lying to the South of Mecca, a certain King called Abul. Feda Al
Masudi. Ecchelensis Hist. Arab. part. 1. c. 10. Pocockii Spec Hist. Arab. p. 62.
Du Nawas, who having embraced the Jewish Religion, persecuted the Christian,
which had been planted there for at least Three hundred years before, and did
the utmost he was able to extirpate it out of his Dominions. For which purpose
he made him a deep Ditch or Furnace in the Earth, and after having heated it
with Fire, caused all those of the Christian Religion to be thrown thereinto,
who would not renounce their Faith, and turn to Judaism. During which
Persecution the Al Masudi Ecchelensis ib.
Arabian Writers tell a very memorable Story of a Christian Woman, who being
brought to the Furnace with a Son of hers very young, whom she carried in her
Arms, was at the sight of the Fire so afrighted, that she drew back as if she
would rather choose to comply with the Persecutors, and renounce her Faith, than
thus perish for it; at which the Child cried out, Fear not Mother to dye for
your Religion, for then after this Fire you shall never feel any other. Whereon
the Mother being again encouraged, went on and completed her Martyrdom. This
Persecution drove several of the Homerite Christians to fly into Ethiopia for
safety, where making their Complaints to the King, who was a Christian, of the
cruel Persecution of Du Nawas against them, prevailed with him to send Aryat
his Uncle, with an Army of Seventy thousand Men for their Relief; Al Jannabi
Ahmed Ebn Yusef Ecchelensis Hist. Arab. part. 2. c. 1. Pocockii Spec. Hist.
Arab. p. 63.
who having overthrown Du Nawas in Battle, persued him so hard, that he forced
him into the Sea, where he perished. Whereon the Kingdom of the Homerites fell
into the Hands of the Ethiopians, and Aryat governed it twenty years. After him
succeeded Abraham Al Ashram, who having built a famous Abul Feda Al Jannabi
Ahmed Ebn Yusef Zemachshati Bidawi and Jallalani in Commentariis ad cap. 105.
Alcorani. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 64. Golii notae ad Alfraganum p. 54.
Church at Sanaa, the chief City of the Homerites, abundance of Arabians
resorted thither to the Christian Worship, so that the Temple of Mecca began to
be neglected, and the Heathen Worship there hitherto performed with so great
Concourse from all Parts of Arabia to grow into decay: At which the Men of
Mecca were exceedingly disturbed. For they had the chief of their support from
the great resort of Pilgrims, who came thither every year from all Parts of
Arabia to Worship their Heathen Deities, and perform their annual solemn
Ceremonies unto them. And therefore to express their Indignation against this
Church, which so much threatened their main Interest with total ruin, some of
them went to Sanaa, and getting privately into the Church, did in a most
contumelious manner defile it all over with their Excrements. At which Abraham
was so incensed, that to revenge the Affront, he swore the Destruction of the
Temple of Mecca: And accordingly to effect it marched thither with a great
Army, and besieged the City. But not being able to compass his end, (I suppose
for want of Provisions for his numerous Forces in so desert and barren a
Country) he was forced to march back again with Loss and Disgrace; and because
he had several Elephants in his Army, for that reason this was called, The War
of the Elephant; and the Era by which they reckoned from it, The Era of the
Elephant. And to this War is it, that the 105th Chapter of the Alcoran, called
the Chapter of the Elephant, does relate, where Mahomet tells us, How the Lord
treated them that came mounted upon Elephants to ruin the Temple of Mecca, and
that he defeated their treacherous Design, and sent against them great Armies
of Birds, which threw down Stones upon their Heads, and made them like Corn in
the Field, which is destroyed and trodden down by the Beasts. Where Zamach Shari
Bidawi Jallulani, etc.
the Commentators of the Alcoran tell us, That to preserve the Temple of Mecca
from the intended Destruction, God sent against the Ethiopians great Armies of
Birds, each of which carried three Stones, the one in the Mouth, and the other
two in the two Feet, which they threw down upon their Heads, and that those
Stones, although not much bigger than Pease, were yet of that weight, that
falling upon the Helmet, they pierced that and the Man thorough, and that on
each of them was written the Name of him that was to be slain by it; and that
the Army of the Ethiopians being thus destroyed, the Temple of Mecca was saved.
For Mahomet having resolved to continue that Temple in its former Reputation,
and make it the chief place of his new invented Worship, as it had been before
of the Heathen; coined this Miracle among many others of purpose to gain it the
greater Veneration in the minds of his deluded Followers, although there might
be several then alive, who were able to give him the lie thereto, it being but
fifty four Years before the beginning of the Hegira that this War happened. For
it was the very Year Golii notae ad Alfraganum, p. 54. Pocockii Spec. Hist.
Arab. p. 64.
in which Mahomet was born. But perchance this Chapter came not forth in
public, till Othman's Edition of the Alcoran, which was many years after, when
all might be dead that could remember any thing of this War, and the Fable
thereby out of danger of being contradicted by any of those who knew the
contrary.

The Era of the Impious War began from the twentieth Year of the Era of the
Elephant, and had its Name from a terrible War, which was then waged between
Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 174. Golii notae ad Alfraganum* p. 54.
the Korashites and Kaisailanites, in which Mahomet first Al Kodai Al Kamus,
etc. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 174. in Magine.
entered the School of War under his Uncle Abn Taleb, being then twenty Years
old. It was called the Impious War, because it proceeded to that heat and fury,
that they carried it on even in those Months, when it was reckoned impious
among them to wage War. For it was Al Jauhari Al Sharestani Al Kamus Cazwini.
Golius in notis ad Alfraganum, p. 4, 5, and 9. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p.
174, and 176.
an Ancient Constitution through all Arabia to hold four Months of the Year
sacred, in which all War was to cease. And these were the Months of Moharram,
Rajeb, Dulkaada, and Dulhagha; the First, the Seventh, the Eleventh, and the
Twelfth of the Year, in which it was observed with the greatest Religion among
all their Tribes to use no Act of Hostility against each other, but with how
great Fury soever one Tribe might be engaged against another (as was usual
among them), as soon as any of those Sacred Months began, they all immediately
desisted, and taking off the heads from their Spears, and laying aside all
other Weapons of War, had intercourse, and intermingled together, as if there
had been perfect Peace and Friendship between them, without any fear of each
other; so that if a Man should meet on those Months him that had slain his
Father, or his Brother, he durst not meddle with him, how violently soever his
Hatred or Revenge might prompt him to it. And this was constantly observed
among all the Ancient Arabs, till broken in this War, which from hence was
called the Impious War. And in this Impious War, Al Kodai Al Kamus. Pocockii
Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 174.
Mahomet having first taken Arms, gave a presage thereby, to what impious
purpose he would use them all his Life after.

But the Hegira being that, which all of the Mohammedan Religion have ever since
the Constitution of Omar computed by; the subject Matter of the History which I
now write, obliges me henceforth to make use of this Era through the
remaining part of it. But because it computeth by Lunary Years only, and not by
Solary; its requisite that I here inform the Reader of the Nature of those
Years, and the manner how the Hegira computeth by them. Anciently the Arabs,
although Al Jauhari Ebnol Athir. Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 177.
they always used Lunary Years, yet by intercalating Seven Months in Nineteen
Years, in the manner as do the Jews, reduced them to Solary Years; and
consequently had their Months always fixed to the same Season of the year. But
this growing out of use about the time of Mahomet, their year has ever since
been strictly Lunary, consisting only of Three hundred fifty four Days, eight
Hours, and forty eight Minutes, Golii notae ad Alfraganum, p. 11. Scaliger de
Emendatione temporum, lib. 2. Cap de Anno Hegerae.
which odd Hours and Minutes in thirty Years, making eleven Days exactly, they
do intercalate a Day on the 2d, 5th, 7th, 10th, 13th, 15th, 18th, 21st, 24th,
26th, and 29th, years of this Period. So that their year in those years of this
Period, consists of three hundred fifty five Days, by reason of the
intercalated Day, which they then add to the last Month of the Year. And this
Year, all that profess the Mohammedan Religion have ever made use of, and there
is a Passage in the Alcoran Alcoran. c. 9.
, whereby they are confined to it. For the Impostor there calls it an Impiety
to prolong the Year, that is, by adding an Intercalary Month thereto. So that
according to this Account, the Mohammedan Year falling eleven Days short of the
Solary; it hence comes to pass, that the beginning of the Year of the Hegera is
unfixed and ambulatory; (the next year always beginning eleven days sooner than
the former) and therefore sometimes it happens in Summer, sometimes in Spring,
sometimes in Winter, and sometimes in Autumn; and in thirty three Years compass
goes thorough all the different Seasons of the Year, and comes about again to
the same time of the Solary Year, although not exactly to the same Day. Which
being like to create some Confusion to us who are used to the Solary Year; to
prevent this, after the Year of the Hegera, in the Margin I add the day of the
Month in the Year of our Lord in which it begins. The Months of the Arab Year
are as follows: 1. Moharram, 2. Saphar, 3. The former Rabia, 4. The later
Rabia, 5. The former Jomada, 6. The later Jomada, 7. Rajeb, 8. Shaban, 9.
Ramadan, 10. Shawall, 11. Dulkaada, 12. Dulhagha. The first has thirty Days,
and the second twenty nine, and so alternatively to the end of the Year, only
on the Intercalary Years, Dulhagha has thirty Days, because of the Day added;
but on all other Years only twenty nine.

The first thing that Mahomet did after his having settled himself at Medina,
Heg. 1. July 16. A. D. 622.
was to Marry his Daughter Fatima to his Cousin Ali. Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Abul
Feda, etc.
She was the only Child then living of six, which were Born to him to Cadigha,
his first Wife; and indeed the only one which he had notwithstanding the
multitude of his Wives Abul Faraghius, p. 103.
that survived him, whom he exceedingly loved, and was used to give great
Commendations of her, reckoning her among the perfectest of Women. For he was
Abul Feda. Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 183.
used to say, that among Men there were many perfect, but of Women he would
allow only four to be such, and these were Asiah, the Wife of Pharaoh; Mary,
the Mother of Christ; Chadigha his Wife; and Fatima his Daughter. From her all
that pretend to be of the Race of Mahomet derive their descent.

And now the Impostor having obtained the end he had been long driving at, that
is, a Town at his command, where to arm his Party, and lead them with security
for the further prosecution of his Design, he here enters on a new Scene.
Hitherto he had been preaching up his Imposture for thirteen years together;
for the remaining ten years of his Life he takes the Sword and fights for it.
He had long been teased and perplexed at Mecca with Questions and Objections,
and Disputes about what he preached, whereby being often gravelled and
nonplus'd, to the laughter of his Auditors, and his own Shame and Confusion,
out of hatred to this way Alcoran, c. 4. Cantacuzen. Orat, 1a. Sect. 12.
Johannes Andreas, c. 12.
he hanceforth forbids all manner of disputing about his Religion; and that he
might be sure to have no more of it, makes it for the future to be no less than
death for any one in the least to contradict or oppose any of the Doctrines
which he had taught. The way that his Religion was to be propagated, he now
tells his Disciples was not by Disputing, but Alcoran, c. 2, 3, 4, 9, etc.
Johannes Andreas, c. 12. Disputatio Christiani, c. 8. Cantacuzeni Orat. 1a.
Apolog. 4. Richardi Confutatio, c. 10.
by Fighting, and therefore commands them all to arm themselves, and slay with
the Sword all those that would not embrace it, unless they submitted to pay an
Annual Tribute for the redemption of their Lives. And according to this his
Injunction, even unto this day, all who live under any Mohammedan Government,
and are not of their Religion, Thevenot, Part. 1. lib. 1. c. 55.
pay an Annual Tax for a constant Mulct of their Infidelity (which in Turkey
Thevenot, Part 1. Book 1. c. 28.
is called the Carradge) and are sure to be punished with Cantacuzen. Orat. 2.
Sect. 5. Thevenot, Part. 1. lib. 1. c. 28.
death, if in the least they contradict, or oppose any Doctrine that is
received among them to have been taught by Mahomet. And certainly there could
not be a wiser way devised for the upholding of so absurd an Imposture, than by
thus silencing under so severe a penalty all manner of Opposition and Disputes
against it.

After the Impostor had sufficiently infused this Doctrine into his Disciples,
he next proceeds to put it in practice; and having erected his Standard, calls
them all to come armed thereto, where having enrolled them all for the War,
Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1.
he gave his Standard to his Uncle Hamza, consitituting him thereby his
Standardbearer; and out of the special confidence he had in him, sent him out
on the first Expedition which was undertaken in his Cause. For understanding
that Elmacin ib. Disputat. Christiani, c. 4.
the Caravan of Mecca was not on the Road in their return from Syria, he
ordered out Hamza with a Party of Thirty Horse to way-lay and plunder them, and
he having accordingly posted himself in a Wood in the Country of Yamara, by
which they were to pass there, tarried their coming; but on their approach,
finding them guarded with Three hundred men, sent from Mecca to convoy them
safe home, he durst not set upon them, but fled, and returned to Medina,
without effecting any thing. And several other Expeditions which were this Year
undertaken of the same nature, had no better success.

The next Year a very rich Caravan going from Mecca toward Syria, Heg. 2. July
5. A. D. 623.
and carrying a great quantity both of Goods and Money which belonged to the
Merchants of Mecca, that traded into that Country, he went out with Three
hundred and nineteen men to intercept it. But Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Abul
Faraghius, p. 102. Alcoran, c. 3. and Commentatores in illud caput.
coming up with them at a place called Beder, he found them guarded by a Convoy
of a Thousand men, under the Command of Abu Sophian, whereon a fierce Battle
ensued between them; but Mahomet gaining the Victory, Abu Sophian made as good
a Retreat as he could back again to Mecca, saving most of the Caravan with him,
at which Mahomet's Men much Alcoran, c. 3.
repined. However great Spoils were gained by them in this Battle, which had
like to have made a Quarrel among them about the division. For the Army
consisting of two Parties, the Men of Medina, who were called the Ansars, that
is, Mahomet's Helpers; and the Men of Mecca, who were called the Mohagerins,
that is, the Companions of his flight; the Hottingeri Bibliotheca Orientalis,
c. 2. ad Suratam Octavam Alcorani.
former would have had a larger share than the latter. To salve this
Controversy, Mahomet composed the Eighth Chapter of his Alcoran, wherein he
adjudgeth the fifth part to himself, and the rest to be equally divided between
them.

The Success of this Battle gave great encouragement to the Impostor, and his
party. He frequently brags of it in his Alcoran, and would have it believed
that Alcoran, c. 3. Bidawi.
two Miracles were wrought for his obtaining of it; the first, That God made
his Enemies see his Army as double to what it was, which helped to dismay them;
and the second, That he sent Troops of Angels to his assistance, which helped
to overcome them. They were to the number of Three thousand (as Alcoran, c. 3.
he himself tells us); but being invisible to every one's Eyes but his alone,
the credit of it stands upon no better foundation, than the rest of his
Imposture, his own single Testimony only.

This Year he altered the Abul Faraghius, p. 102. Al Kodai. Abul Feda. Johannes
Andreas, c. 6.
Kebla, that is the place toward which they directed their Prayers. For it was
usual among the People of the East of all Religions, to observe one particular
point of the Heavens, toward which they all turned their Faces when they
prayed. The Jews, in what part of the World soever they were, prayed with their
Faces Daniel, c. 6. v. 10. Buxtorsii Synagoga Judaica, cap. 10. Maimonides in
Halachoth Tephillah, c. 1. Sect. 3.
toward Jerusalem, because there was their Temple; the Arabians Abul
Faraghius, p. 102.
toward Mecca, because there was the Caaba, the chief place of their Heathen
Worship; the Sabians Abul Faraghius, p. 184.
toward the North Star; and the Persian Idolaters, who held Fire and Light to
be their chief Gods, Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 148.
toward the East, because from thence the Sun did arise, which they held to be
the chief Fountain of both. Mahomet from the beginning of his Imposture had
directed his Disciples to pray Abul Feda. Abul Faraghius, p. 102. Johannes
Andreas, c. 6. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 175.
with their Faces toward Jerusalem, which he was used to call the holy City,
and the City of the Prophets, and intended to have ordered his Pilgrimages
thither, and to have made it the chief place where all his Sect were to
worship. But now finding that his Followers still bore a superstitious
veneration to the Temple of Mecca, which had for many Ages before been the
chief place of the Idolatrous Worship of the Arabians, and that it would be a
very prevalent Argument to reconcile his Fellow Citizens to him, if he still
preserved their Temple in its former honor, he changed his former Law to serve
his present purpose, and henceforth directed his Disciples to pray with their
Faces toward Alcoran, c. 2. Johannes Andreas, c. 2. etc. 6.
Mecca, and ordained the Temple of that place, which from its square form was
called the Caaba (that word signifying a square in the Arabic Tongue) to be the
chief place of worship for all of his Religion, to which they were still to
perform their Pilgrimages as in former times. And to this Change he was the
more inclined out of his aversion to the Jews, against whom having about this
time contracted an irreconcilable hatred, he liked not any longer to conform
with them in this Rite. And that his Followers might be distinguished from them
in this particular, is the reason Alcoran, c. 2.
which he himself gives for this change. However, Johannes Andreas, c. 6.
many of his Disciples were much scandalized hereat, judging no truth nor
stability in that Religion, which was so often given to change, and several
left him thereon.

From this time, the more to magnify the Temple of Mecca, and to give the
greater honor and reputation thereto, have we all those Fabulous Stories
invented, which the Impostor tells us concerning it. As that it was Sharestani
Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 115. Sionitae Appendix ad Geographiam Nubiensem
c. 7.
first built in Heaven to be the place where the Angels were to worship, and
that Adam worshipped at it while in Paradise; but being cast down from thence
(for they place Paradise in Heaven) he prayed God, that he might have such a
Temple on Earth, toward which he might pray, and go round it in holy worship
unto him in the same manner as the Angels went round that which he had seen in
Heaven: That thereon God sent down the similitude of that Temple in Courtains
of Light, and pitched it at Mecca in the place where the Caaba now stands,
which is, say they exactly under the Original, which is in Heaven: That there,
after the death of Adam, Seth built it with Stones and Clay; and that all the
People of God there worshipped till the Flood, by which it being overthrown,
God commanded Abraham again to rebuild it, having shown him the form of the
Fabric in a Vision, and directed him to the place by his visible Shecinah
residing on it: That accordingly Alcoran, c. 2, 3, and 22. Al Jannabi in vita
Abrahami Sharestani Zamach Shari ad cap. 2dum Alcorani Sharisol. Edrisi. Liber
Agar. Johannes Andreas, c. 1.
Abraham and Ismael rebuilt it in the place where it now stands: And that
Ismael ever after, living at Mecca, there worshipped God with the true Worship;
but his Posterity afterward corrupted it with Idolatry, and profaned this
holy Temple with Idols, from which he was now to purge it, and consecrate it
anew to the true Worship of God, to which it was primitively intended. And he
did not only thus retain the Temple of Mecca, but also the Pilgrimages thither,
and all the absurd Rites which were performed at them in the times of Idolatry.
For these being the things which long use had created a great veneration for in
the minds of the Arabians, by adopting them all into his new Religion he made
it go down the easier with them. And indeed this was the principal piece of his
Craft, so to frame his new Religion in every particular, as would best take
with those, to whom he proposed it.

As to this Temple of Mecca, and what it was before Mahomet, all that is true
of it, is this. It was an Heathen Temple in the same veneration among the Arabs
that the Temple of Delphos was among the Greeks, whither all their Sharestani
Golii notae ad Alfraganum, p. 8, and 9. Makrisi Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p.
177, and 311.
Tribes for many Ages came once a year to perform their Idolatrous Ceremonies
to their Gods, till at length Mahomet having forced them to exchange their
Idolatry for another Religion altogether as bad, made this Temple also undergo
the same change, by appointing it thenceforth to be the chief place for the
performing of that false Worship, which he imposed, in the same manner, as it
was before of that which he abolished, and so it has continued ever since.

This same Year he also appointed the Month of Abul Faraghius p. 102. Alkodai.
Ramadan to be a Month of Fast. At his first coming to Medina, Al Kazwini
Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 309.
finding the Jews observing the celebration of their great Fast of the
Expiation on the Tenth of their First Month, which is Tisri, he asked what it
meant? and being told it was a Fast appointed by Moses, he replied, that he had
more to do with Moses than they, and therefore ordained the Tenth day of
Moharram, the First Month of the Arab Year, to be a solemn Fast with his
Musslemans in imitation hereof, which by a name also borrowed from the Jews, he
called Ashura, which is the same with the Hebrew Ashor, that is, the Tenth, it
being the Leviticus c. 16. v. 29. Misna in Tract. Yoma and Maimonides in Tract
Yom. Kippur.
Tenth day of the Month Tisri on which this Fast of the Expiation was kept
among them. And he did also at first adopt other of their Fasts into his
Religion, hoping by these means to win them over unto him. But finding them
still to oppose him all they could, and on all occasions to perplex him and his
Followers with Questions and Difficulties about his Religion, which he could
not find Answers for, and on the account hereof to disparage and deride him and
his Imposture, he contracted that aversion and hatred against them, that he
resolved to differ from them Ebnol Athir.
in this too, as well as in the particular last mentioned; and therefore
abolishing the said Fasts, which he had taken from them, in imitation of the
Christian way, with whom about this time (it seems) he was very desirous to
ingratiate himself, he appointed the whole Month of Ramadan to be as it were
his Lent, or a continued time of solemn fasting. And this Year the Month of
Ramadan beginning in the Month of March, it did now exactly fall in with the
time of the Christian Lent. But the reason which he himself gives for his
appointing of it was, because Alcoran c. 2.
on this Month, as he pretends, the Alcoran first came down from Heaven to him,
that is, that Chapter of it which he first published. Before it was a Month
usually Ebn Ahmed Al Makrizi Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 175.
dedicated to Jollity and good Cheer among the Arabs, and while they
intercalated the Year, always fell in the heat of Summer; and therefore it was
called Ramadan, Al Jauhari Ebnol Athir. Golii notae ad Alfraganum p. 7.
Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 176.
because of the Ramado'l Har, i. e. the vehemence of the heat, which then
happened.

The rest of this Year Elmacin. Abul Faragius.
he spent in Predatory Excursions upon his Neighbors, robbing, plundering, and
destroying all those that lived near Medina, who would not come in and embrace
his Religion.

The next Year he made War Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1.
upon those Tribes of the Arabs, Heg. 3. June 24. A. D. 624.
which were of the Jewish Religion near him; and having taken their Castles,
and reduced them under his Power, sold them all for Slaves, and divided their
Goods among his Followers. He being exceedingly exasperated against Caab, one
of their Rabbis, this War was principally undertaken for his sake, that he
might take him Elmacin. ^^.
and put him to death; but not being able to light on him in any of those
Places which he had taken, he sent out Parties to search after him, ordering
them to kill him wherever they should find him. The reason Ecchelensis Hist.
Arab. part. 1. c. 1. and Eutych. Vindicat p. 303, and 304.
of his bitter hatred against him was this. Caab was a very eminent Poet among
the Arabians, and having a Brother called Bejair, that had turned Mohammedan, he
made a very Satirical Poem upon him for this Change, wherein he so terribly
galled the Impostor, that he could not bear it, but resolved to revenge the
Affront with his destruction, if ever he could get him into his hands. For some
time Caab escaped all the Snares which he laid for him; but after his power had
increased so far, that the greater part of Arabia had submitted to him, he
found he could be no longer safe, but by making his peace with him, and
therefore to purchase it, came in unto him, and professed himself a Mohammedan
also. Hereon Mahomet bad him repeat that Poem which had so much offended him,
which had did, putting the name of Abu Beker in every Verse, where formerly was
the name of Mahomet; but this not doing, Mahomet would not give him his pardon,
although at that time he did not take any advantage of his voluntary coming in
unto him. Whereon putting his Wits to work, he had recourse to this farther
Device for the obtaining of his security from him. For being informed that
Mahomet had lately gotten a new Mistress, whom he exceedingly doted upon, and
much regretted her absence from him while then abroad upon the Wars; the crafty
Jew struck in with this Passion for the mollifying of him, and composed an
excellent Poem in her commendation, which having repeated before him, he so
took the heart of the old Lecher thereby, that he not only pardoned him, but
also received him into the number of his particular Favorites, and made him
one of his chief Confidents ever after. And as a mark of his Favor then
bestowed on him the Cloak which he wore, which being kept by him out of an
affected veneration to the Impostor, as an holy Relict, was afterward bought
by Moawias, when he came to the Empire, for Thirty thousand pieces of Gold, and
was made the Robe which he and all his Successors of the House of Ommia
constantly wore on all Solemn Occasions. And it is said of this Caab, that he
afterward became so intimate with the Impostor, that he took him into his
greatest Secrets, even to that of the Imposture it self, in composing the
Alcoran, for which his great Skill in the Arabic Language, and all other
Learning then in use among them, exceedingly qualified him.

Toward the end of this year happened the Battle of Ohud, which had like to have
proved fatal to the Impostor. For Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Abul Faraghius p. 102.
Abu Sophian, to revenge the last Year's Affront, marched against him with an
Army of Three thousand Foot, and Two hundred Horse; and having seized the
Mountain of Ohud, Geographia Nubiensis Clim. 2. part. 5.
which was only four miles distant from Medina, he so distressed that place
from thence, that Mahomet was forced to hazard Battle to dislodge him from that
Post, although he could make no more than a Thousand men to lead out against
him. However, in the first Conflict he had the better, but at last being
overborn by the number of the Enemy, he lost many of his men, and among them
Hamza his Uncle, who bore the Standard, and was himself grievously wounded in
several places, and had been slain, but that Tilhah, one of his Companions, and
Nephew to Abu Beker, came in to his rescue, in which Action Disputatio
Christiani c. 5. with which compare Abul Faraghius p. 117. For there it is said
Tilha had a lame Hand.
he received a wound in his Hand, which deprived him of the use of some of his
Fingers ever after.

To salve the Objections which were raised against him on this Defeat, he was
much put to it. Some Alcoran c. 3.
argued against him, How he that was a Prophet of God, and so much in his
favor, as he pretended, could be overthrown in Battle by the Infidels. And
others murmured as much for the loss of their Friends and Relations, who were
slain in the Battle. To satisfy the former, he laid the cause of the overthrow
on the Sins of some that followed him; and said, that for this reason God
suffered them to be overthrown, that so the Good might be distinguished from
the Bad, and those who were true Believers might on this occasion be discerned
from those who were not. And to still the Complaints and Clamours of the
latter, he invented his Doctrine of Fate and Destiny, telling them, that those
who were slain in the Battle, though they had tarried at home in their Houses,
must have died notwithstanding when they did, the time of every man's Life
being predestined and determined by God, beyond which no caution is able in
the least to prolong it; That the Destiny of all is stated to an hour, which
cannot be altered; and therefore those who were slain in the Battle, died no
sooner than they must otherwise have done; but in that they died fighting for
the Faith, they gained the advantage of the Crown of Martyrdom, and the Rewards
which were due thereto in Paradise, where he told them they were alive with God
in Everlasting Bliss, which was of greater advantage than all the Treasures in
the world could in this Life have been unto them: That they were there
rejoicing very much, that they had laid down their Life so happily, as by thus
fighting in the Cause of God, and his Law, and were expressing among themselves
exceeding gladness, that those who ran to hinder them from going to the Battle,
met them not. Both which Doctrines he found so well to serve his turn, that he
propagated them on all occasions after. And they have been the darling Ricaut's
History of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire Book 2. Chap. 8.
Notions of all this Sect ever since, especially in their Wars, where certainly
nothing can be more conducive to make them fight valiantly, than a settled
Opinion, That whatever Dangers they expose themselves to, they cannot die
either sooner or later than is otherwise unalterably predetermined that they
must; and that, in case this predetermined time be come, in dying fighting for
their Religion, they shall obtain that happiness, as to become Martyrs thereby,
and immediately enter into Paradise for the reward hereof.

In the fourth Year of the Hegira he waged War Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Abul
Faraghius p. 102.
with the Nadorites, Heg. 4. June 13. A. D. 625.
a Tribe of the Jewish Arabs in his Neighbor hood, whom he pressed so hard,
that he forced them to leave their Castles; part of them retiring to Chaibor, a
City belonging to those of their Religion; and part flying into Syria. Those
later that fled into Syria, Mundir Ebn Omar with a party of the Men of Medina
persued after, and having overtaken them near the Borders of that Country, put
them all to the Sword, excepting only one Man that escaped. With such Cruelty
did those Barbarians first set up to fight for that Imposture, they had been
deluded into. This same Year he fought the second Battle of Beder, and had many
other Skirmishes with those who refused to submit to him, in which he had
sometimes prosperous, and sometimes dubious Success.

But while his Army was abroad on these Expeditions, some of his Principal Men
engaging at Play and Drink, in the heat of their Cups fell a quarrelling, which
raised such a disturbance among the rest of his Men, that they had like to have
fallen all together by the Ears, to the confounding of him and all his designs;
and therefore for the preventing of the like mischief for the future Al Kodai
Pocockii Specim Hist. Arab. p. 175. Alcoran, cap. 5.
he forbad the use of Wine, and all Games of Chance ever after. And to make his
Prohibition the more influential, he backs it with a Alcoran, cap. 2. Zamach
Shori and Bidawi alii Commentatores ad illud caput. Dialogus Mahometis cum
Abdollah. Richardi Confutatio Legis Saracenicae, c. 4. Cantacuzen. Orat. 2.
Sect. 15. Bellonius, lib. 3. c. 6. Guadagnol. Tract 2. c. 4. E libro Agar.
Fable of two Angels, called Arut and Marut, who he tells us were in times past
sent down from Heaven to administer Justice, and teach men Righteousness in the
Province of Babylon; That while they were there, a certain Woman coming to them
for Justice, invited them home to Dinner, and set Wine before them, which God
had forbidden them to drink; but being tempted by the pleasantness of the
Liquor to transgress the Divine Command, they became so Drunk, that they
tempted the Woman to lewdness; who promised to consent on condition that the
one of them should first carry her to Heaven, and the other bring her back
again. But the Woman being got to Heaven would not come back again, but
declared to God the whole matter. Whereon for reward of her Chastity, she was
made the Morning Star. And the Angels having this Option given them, whether
they would be punished for their wickedness either now or hereafter, chose the
former; whereon they were hung up by the Feet by an Iron-chain in a certain
`Pit near Babylon, where they are to continue suffering the Punishment of their
Transgression till the Day of Judgment. And that for this reason, God forbad
the use of Wine to all his Servants ever after. But Epist. 3.
Busbequius, and out of him History of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire,
Book 2. Chap. 25.
Ricaut give the reason of his forbidding the use of Wine from another
occasion, which they thus relate, Mahomet making a Journey to a Friend of his,
at Noon entered into his House, where there was a Marriage Feast, and sitting
down with the Guests, he observed them to be very merry and jovial, kissing and
embracing one another, which was attributed to the cheerfulness of their
Spirits raised by the Wine, so that he blessed it as a sacred thing in being
thus an Instrument of much Love among Men. But returning to the same House the
next day, he beheld another face of things, as Goreblood blood on the Ground,
an Hand cut off, an Arm, Foot, and other Limbs dismembered; which he was told
was the effect of the Brawls and Fighting, occasioned by the Wine, which made
them Mad, and inflamed them into a Fury thus to destroy one another. Whereon he
changed his mind, and turned his former Blessing into a Curse, and forbad it
ever after to all his Disciples. But he himself seems totally to refer the
reason of the Prohibition to the Quarrel, which Wine and play at Games of
Chance had caused among them. For in the 5th Chapter of the Alcoran, where he
gives his Law concerning this matter; his words are, The Devil desires to sow
Dissension and Hatred among you through Wine, and Games of Chance, to divert
you from remembering God, and praying unto him. Abandon Wine and Games of
Chance. Be obedient to God, and the Prophet his Apostle, and take heed to your
selves. The truth of the matter is, the Arabians Ecchelensis, Hist. Arab. Part.
1. c. 5. Richardi Confutatio, c. 8.
were given to drink Wine to great excess, when they could come by it, and
being of an hot Temper, as living most of them within the Torrid Zone, were
liable to be inflamed by it into the highest Disorders; and this Mahomet having
had sufficient experience of, particularly in the dangerous Instance I have
mentioned, did in respect of his Arabians, prudently enough provide against the
like mischief for the future by thus taking away the Cause from whence it did
flow.

The next Year was the War of the Ditch, Heg. 5. June 2. A. D. 627.
where Mahomet was in great danger of being totally ruined. For the Men of
Mecca having entered into Confederacy with several of the Tribes of the Jewish
Arabians, to whom he had declared himself a mortal Enemy Elmacin. lib. 1. c. 1.
Abul Faraghius, p. 102.
, marched against him under the Command of Joseph, the Brother of Abu Sophian,
with an Army of ten thousand Men. Mahomet marched forth to meet them, but being
terrified with their number by the advice of Abdollah Ebn Salem, the Persian
Jew abovementioned, (whom Elmacinus calls Salman) fortified himself with a Deep
Ditch, within which Intrenchment the Enemy besieged him many days, which time
the crafty Impostor employed to corrupt over to his Interest their Leading-men.
In which attempt having succeeded with some of them, he did by their means sow
such Dissentions among the rest, as soon extricated him from all this danger he
was fallen into, which happened on this occasion. There was then in the Enemies
Camp, Ecchelensis, Hist. Arab. Part 1. c. 3. Abul Faraghius, p. 102.
Amrus Ebn Abdud, an Eminent Korashite, and Uncle to Ali, who having the
Reputation of being the best Horseman in Arabia, to show his Manhood while the
two Armies lay thus idle against each other, rode up to Mahomet's Trenches, and
challenged any of his Army to fight with him in a single Combat. Ali, although
his Nephew, accepts the Challenge, and having slain Amrus, and also another
that came to his assistance, those whom Mahomet's Instruments had wrought into
a Dissension from the rest took this opportunity Abul Faraghius, p. 102.
Elmacin. lib. 1. c. 1.
to desert the Camp, and march home. Whose Example the rest in this
Consternation following, the whole Army broke up and separated. And so this
War, from which so much was expected, ended in nothing, but the loss of six Men
on Mahomet's side, and three on the other.

But though the Enemy could make no use of the advantage they had, yet Elmacin,
lib. 1. c. 1.
Mahomet knew how to make the best of that which they gave him by this Retreat.
And therefore immediately marching after the Cozaites, one of the Jewish Tribes
confederated against him, besieged them in their Fortresses, and forced them to
surrender at Mercy to Saad Ebn Maad, one of his chief Commanders. But he being
sore of a Wound he had received at the War of the Ditch, in revenge thereof
caused the Men, and among them Hahib Ebn Atab, their chief Commander, to be put
to the Sword, and the Women and Children to be sold for Slaves, and all their
Goods to be given for a Prey unto his Soldiers; and as soon as this was
executed, died himself of the Wound, which he had thus cruelly revenged.

In the sixth Year he subdued Abul Faraghius, p. 102. Elmacin. lib. 1. c. 1.
the Lahianites, Heg. 6. May 23. A. D. 627.
the Mustalachites, and several other Tribes of the Arabs. The Mustalachites
were of the Posterity of the Chozaites, whom Cosa expelled out of Mecca. Abul
Feda Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 42.
Mahomet having overthrown them in Battle, slew most of the Men according to
his bloody manner, and took their Wives and Children Captives, among whom
finding Juweira, the Daughter of Hareth, a Woman of excellent Beauty, Elmacin,
lib. 1. c. 1.
he fell in Love with her, and took her to him to Wife, and for her sake
released all of her Kindred that were found among the Captives.

And now the Impostor after so many advantages obtained in his Wars, being much
increased in strength Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1.
, marched his Army against Mecca, and at Hadibia, a place near that City, on
the Road from thence to Jodda, a Battle was fought between them, the
consequence of which was, that neither side gaining any advantage over the
other, they there agreed on a Truce for ten Years. The Conditions of which
were, That all within Mecca, who were for Mahomet might have liberty to join
themselves to him; and on the other side, Those with Mahomet, who had a mind to
leave him, and return to their Houses in Mecca, might also have the same
liberty. But for the future, if any of the Citizens of Mecca should go over to
Mahomet without the Consent of the Governor of the City, he should be bound on
remand to render them unto him. And that if Mahomet, or any of his Party had a
mind to come into the City, they might have liberty so to do at any time during
the Truce, provided they came unarmed in a peaceable way, and tarried not above
three days at a time.

By this Truce, Mahomet being very much confirmed in his Power, took on him
Elmacin, ib.
thenceforth the Authority of a King, and was inaugurated by the Chief Men of
his Army under a Tree near Medina, which immediately (it seems cursed by the
Authority given so wicked an Impostor under it) withered away and perished,
which the Mahometans themselves relate, but make another Interpretation of it.

On Mahomet's having thus made Truce with the Men of Mecca, and thereby
obtained free access for any of his Party to come into that City; he
thenceforth ordained them to make their Al Kodai. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p.
175.
Pilgrimages thither, which have ever since with so much Religion been observed
by all of his Sect once every Year. This was an Ancient Rite of the Heathen
Arabs, it having been a constant Usage Vide supra ad Annum Hegerae secundum.
among them for many Ages foregoing to come once a Year to the Temple of Mecca,
there to worship their Heathen Deities. The time of this their Pilgrimage
Sharestani Makrizi Golii notae ad Alfraganum, p. 8 and 9. Pocockii Spec. Hist.
Arab. p. 177.
was in the Month of Dulhagha; and on the tenth Day of that Month was their
great Festival, in which the chiefest Solemnities of their Pilgrimage were
performed, and therefore it was called Aid al Cabir, i. e. the great Feast; and
also, because these Solemnities did chiefly consist in offering up Sacrifices
and Oblations, Aid al Korban, that is, The Feast of Oblation; and the whole
Solemnity, Al Hagha, i. e. The Solemn Festival, in the same Sense as the Hebrew
word Chag, from which it is derived, signifies any of the three Solemn
Festivals, on which the Jews were thrice every Year to appear before the Lord
at the Temple of Jerusalem. And from hence the Month in which this Festival
falls, is called among them Dulhagha, which is as much as to say, The Month of
the Solemn Festival. And that all might have free liberty safely to come to
this Festival from all Parts of Arabia, and again safely return, was the reason
that not only this Month, but also the preceding and following were held Sacred
among them, in which it was not lawful to use any Act of Hostility against any
Man, as I have before shown. And therefore this Solemn Pilgrimage to Mecca
having been a Religious Usage, which all the Tribes of the Arabs had long been
devoted to, and was had in great Veneration among them, Mahomet thought not fit
to ruffle them with any Innovation in this matter, but adopting it into his
Religion, retained it just in the same manner as he found it practiced among
them with all the ridiculous Rites appendant thereto, and so it is observed
even unto this day by all of that Religion, as one of the Fundamental Duties of
it. For the Crafty Impostor taught them concerning it (as he did of all the
other Heathen Rites of the Arabs, which he found necessary to retain) that it
was a Command from God to Abraham and Ismael, annually to observe this
Pilgrimage to Mecca; and that it was given unto them on their rebuilding the
Caaba; and that at first it was only used to the Honor of God, in the coming
of all the Arabs thither once every Year, there to worship together before him
in one Holy Assembly, in the same manner as the Jews were after commanded
thrice every Year to worship before him in their three Solemn Festivals at
Jerusalem: But that in process of time it became perverted to Idolatry, from
which he was now commanded again to restore it to its primitive use. And in the
making of this Establishment, he had no small respect to his Native City, that
he might preserve to it the same benefit of this Pilgrimage, which it had
before so long enjoyed. And in thus providing for the Interest of that People
in the very Religion, which he was a framing, he thought he might the easier
prevail to draw them over unto it. And in this he was not mistaken. For had he
totally abolished this Pilgrimage, it being the greatest Honor and Benefit
which that place enjoyed, and by which indeed it did mostly subsist; their
Interest would have engaged them to that vigorous Opposition against him, that
in all likelihood he would never have become Master of that City, and for want
thereof have miscarried in the whole Design.

And now being thus established in the Sovereignty, Heg. 7. May 11. A. D. 628.
which he had been so long driving at, he took to him all the Insignia
belonging thereto; but so that still he retained the Sacred Character of Chief
Pontiff of his Religion as well as the Royal, which he had now invested himself
with, and transmitted them both together to all his Successors, who by the
Title of Caliph's reigned after him; so that they were in the same manner as
the Jewish Princes of the Race of the Maccabees, Kings and Chief Priests of
their People at the same time. Their Pontifical Authority chiefly consisted in
giving the Interpretation of the Mohammedan Law, in ordering all Matters of
Religion, and also in officiating in the Duties of it themselves, as well in
Praying as Preaching in their Public Mosques, as on all more Solemn Occasions
they were used to do. And at length this was all the Authority the Caliph's
were left possessed of, they being totally stripped of all the rest, first by the
Governors of the Provinces, Elmacin, lib. 3. cap. 1. Abul Faraghius, etc.
, (who about the Year of the Hegera, 325. assumed the Regal Authority to
themselves, and made themselves Kings each in their particular Governments) and
after by others, who rose up on this Distraction of the Empire to usurp upon
them, till at last they left them nothing else but that Name and Shadow of what
they had before been. For although those Princes still paid some Deference to
the Caliph, as to a Sacred Person, (in the same manner as is now paid to the
Pope of Rome by the Princes of his Communion) and suffered him to be prayed for
through all the Mosques of their Dominions, and his Name to be inserted in the
Public Offices, even before their own, as if they had still been no more than
his Lieutenants in the Government, as in former times; yet as to all things
relating to the Government of their particular States they disowned all manner
of Obedience unto him, and often deposed him, and put another in his stead, as
they thought would best suit with their Interest, which was usually done
according as this Prince or that Prince made themselves Masters of Bagdat, the
City where the Caliph resided, till at length the Tartars came in, and in that
Deluge of Destruction, with which they did overrun all the East, put a total
end to their Abul Faraghius, p* 339.
very Name and Being, as well as their Authority. Ever since that time, most
Mohammedan Princes have a particular Officer appointed in their Respective
Dominions, who sustains this Sacred Authority formerly invested in the
Caliph's, who in Turkey is called the Mufti, and in Persia the Sadre; but they
being under the Power of the Princes that appoint them, are most an end made
use of for no other purpose, but as Tools of State to serve their Interest, and
make the Law speak what at any time they shall judge most agreeable to it, how
wicked and unjust soever it be.

As soon as Mahomet had finished his Mosque at Medina; he always, if on the
place, officiated in it himself both in Praying, and also in Preaching to the
People; for which he had no other convenience at first than a piece of a Beam,
or the Stump of a Palm Tree droven into the Ground, on the top of which he
leaned when he did officiate. But being now invested with the Supreme
Authority, he thought this too mean an accommodation for his Dignity; and
therefore by the advice of one of his Wives caused a Pulpit to be built for
him, which had two Steps up into it, and a Seat within to sit on; and this the
Impostor ever after made use of, leaving his Beam. And those, who writing of
Mahomet's Miracles, tell us among others, That a Beam groaned at him Al Gazal^,
Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 188.
, mean this Beam which they say groaned at Mahomet's leaving of it, thereby
expressing its grief for being thus deserted. Othman Ebn Affan, when he came to
be Caliph, hung his Pulpit with Tapistry, and Moawias advanced it higher adding
six Steps more to it. For being Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 7. Eutychius, Tom. 2. p.
360. Abul Faraghius, p. 124.
so exceeding Fat that he could not stand while he officiated, as all his
Predecessors had done, he was forced to sit when he preached to the People; and
therefore that he might be the better heard, he raised the Pulpit to this
height, and so it now remains in that Mosque at Medina even to this day.

This Year he lead forth his Army Abul Faraghius, p. 102. Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 1.
against Chaibar, a City inhabited by Arabs of the Jewish Religion, who being
overthrown by him in Battle, he besieged their City and took it by Storm. And
here those, who are the magnifiers of Ali, tell this Miracle of him, that in
the Assault, Sampson-like, he plucked up one of the Gates of the City, (which
was of that weight, says Abul Feda, that eight other Men could not move it)
and held it before him for a Shield to defend himself against the besieged,
till the City was taken. On Mahomet's entering the Town, he took up his Quarters
in the House of Horeth, one of the Principal Inhabitants of the Place, whose
Daughter Abul Feda. Al Kodai. Al Jannabi. Disputatio Christiani, c. 8. Richardi
Confutatio, c. 13. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 189, 190.
Zainab making ready a Shoulder of Mutton for his Supper, poisoned it. And here
those, who are for ascribing Miracles to Mahomet, tell us, That the Shoulder of
Mutton spoke to him, and discoursed that it was poisoned; but it seems, if it
did so, it was too late to do him any good. For Basher, one of his Companions
falling on too greedily to eat of it, fell down dead on the place. And although
Mahomet had not immediately the same fate; because not likeing the taste, he
spit out again what he had taken into his Mouth, yet he let down enough to do
his business. For he was never well after this Supper, and at three Years end
died of it. The Maid being asked, Why she did this; answered, That she had a
mind to make trial, whether he were a Prophet or no. For were he a Prophet,
said she, he would certainly know that the Meat was poisoned; and therefore
would receive no harm from it; but if he were not a Prophet, she thought she
should do the World good Service in ridding it of so wicked a Tyrant.

After this Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1.
he reduced under his subjection Beder, Watiha, and Selalima, which were also
Towns belonging to the Jewish Arabs, who rendered to him on Articles; and these
were that they should continue in their former Habitations, paying for Tribute
one half of the income of their Date-trees every year; but to be at his
discretion to expel them when he should think fit. Under the protection of
which Agreement they still retained their former Possessions, and dwelt in them
without any disturbance till the Reign of Omer, who pretending that Mahomet had
given charge in his last Sickness not to permit two Religions in Arabia, drove
them all out.

The Impostor by those many Acquisitions having now increased his strength to
an Army of Ten thousand men, Heg. 8. April 30. A. D. 629.
resolved to make himself Master of Mecca, and therefore pretending they had
broken the Truce, Abul Faraghius p. 103. Elmacinus lib. 1. c. 1.
marched suddenly upon them, before they were aware of his Design; and therefore
being totally unprovided in that Surprise to put themselves into a posture of
defense against him, they found themselves necessitated to yield unto him.
Whereon Abu Sophian taking with him Al Abbas, one of the Unkles of the Impostor
(who although of his Religion, had it seems tarried still at Mecca) went out
unto him, and by turning Mohammedan, saved his life; and the City, without any
opposition, was rendered to him at discretion. On his entry into it having put
to death such as had been most violent against him, all the rest, without any
further opposition, submitted unto him, and embraced his Religion. And
therefore having thus made himself absolute Master of the place, he immediately
set himself to purge the Caaba of its Idols, and consecrate that Temple anew to
his Religion, as having resolved still to continue it in its pristine honor,
by making it the chief place of Worship for all of his Sect. There Pocockii
Spec. Hist. Arab. page 95, 96, 97, 98.
were a multitude of Idols within the Temple, and as many without, standing
round its Area, all which Mahomet caused to be pulled down and destroyed, and
the place to be totally cleared of them. The chief among those Idols were those
of Abraham and Ismael within the Temple, and that of Hoball without. The rest
were of Angels and Prophets, and others of their principal Saints departed,
whom they worshipped only as Mediators, in the same manner as the Romanists now
do their Saints, and the Images which they erect unto them. For the Arabians
always held that there was Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. page 107, and 108.
but one only God the Creator and Governor of all things, whom they called
Allah Tuall, i. e. the Supreme God, and God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, whom
they durst never represent by any Image. But being (as they held) so great and
high, as not to be approached to by men while here on Earth, but through the
mediation of Advocates or Intercessors interposing for them unto him in Heaven;
That Angels and Holy men beatified might perform this Office for them, was the
reason that they set up their Images, and built them Temples, and directed
their Worship and Devotions unto them. And in this did consist the whole of the
Arabian Idolatry, which Mahomet now by destroying these Idols put a total end
unto.

As soon as it was heard among the Neighboring Arabs, that Mahomet had made
himself Master of Mecca, the Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1.
Hawazins, the Thakifians, and several other Tribes, immediately gathered
together under the Command of Mehi Ebn Auf, to fall upon him, before he should
increase his Power any further. Hereon Mahomet appointing Gayat Ebn Asad to be
Governor of Mecca, marched out against them with Twelve thousand men. In the
Valley of Honaina, which lies between Mecca and Tayif, both Armies met, and in
the first Encounter Mahomet Zamach Shari and Bidawi on the 9th Chapter of the
Alcoran.
was beaten, though much superior to the Enemy in number, and driven back to
the Walls of Mecca, Alcoran chap. 9.
which he ascribes to the overconfidence of his men in their numbers; which
causing them to neglect their Enemy, did thereby give them this advantage over
them. But the Impostor Bidawi and Zamach Shari ib.
having gathered up his scattered Forces, and rallied them again into a Body,
acted more cautiously in the second Conflict, and then, Alcoran c. 9.
as he says, by the help of invisible Troops of Angels (which are reckoned by
some Commentators on the Alcoran, to be Eight thousand), and by others to be
Sixteen thousand) gave his Enemies such a total defeat, Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1.
that he took from them their Baggage, with their Wives and Children, and all
their Substance, which consisted mostly of great Flocks of Sheep, and Herds of
Cattle. For these being of the Nomad Arabs, it was their Custom to carry their
Wives and Children, and all that they had with them, wherever they moved.
After this Battle, these People sent Ambassadors unto him to pray the
restoration of their Wives and Children, to whom Mahomet gave this Option, to
choose which they would have again restored unto them, either their Wives and
Children, or their Goods: Whereon they having chosen their Wives and Children,
Mahomet divided all their Goods which he had taken from them among his
Soldiers. Only Melic Ebn Auf, their General, now he saw his Power was such as
no more to be resisted, came in and embraced his Religion, and thereon had all
his Goods again restored unto him.

The remaining part of the Year Pocockii Hist. Arab. p. 91, and 92.
was spent in demolishing the Heathen Temples, and destroying their Idols in
all places through Arabia, where his Power reached. To which purpose several of
his Commanders being sent out with Parties, Saad destroyed the Idol of Menah,
Chalid that of Al Vzza, and the Temple of Bossa built thereto, and others the
rest of them. So that this Year proved very fatal to the Idols of the Arabs,
they being most of them now destroyed, and the former Worshippers of them
forced to submit to Mahomet, and embrace his Imposture.

And now having brought most parts of Arabia under his Power, Heg. 9. April 20.
A. D. 630.
the ensuing Year Abul Faraghius, p. 103. Elmacinus lib. 1. c. 1.
he turned his Arms toward Syria, and possessed himself of Tabuc, a Town
belonging to the Greek Empire, and from thence falling on the Princes of Dauman
and Eyla, forced them to become Tributaries unto him, and then returned to
Medina in the Month Rajeb. While he was absent on this Expedition, the
Tayifians, whom he had begun to besiege the former Year, being much pressed by
some of his Lieutenants, whom he had committed the prosecution of that War
unto, were forced to submit and embrace his Imposture, which they had before
been so averse unto; of which he having received an account on his return, he
sent thither Abu Sophian to disarm them of all their Weapons and Instruments of
War, and appointed Othman Ebn Abulas to be their Governor. And this was the
last Year in which he went to the War.

And now the Power of the Impostor being much increased, Heg. 10. April 9. A.
D. 631.
the fame of it so terrified the rest of the Arabs, which had not yet felt his
Arms, Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Abul Feda.
that they all came in and submitted to him, and embraced his Imposture. So
that this Year his Empire and his Religion became established together through
all Arabia, and he sent his Lieutenants into all parts of it to govern in his
Name, who destroying the Idol Temples, and all other the remains of the Arabian
Idolatry wherever they came, set up his new-invented Religion in its stead,
and forced all men by the power of the Sword to conform thereto.

The greatest part of this Year being spent in ordering and settling these
Matters, Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Abul Feda Abul Faraghius p. 103.
toward the end of it Mahomet took a Journey in Pilgrimage to Mecca, and entered
thither on the Tenth day of Dulhagha, which is the great day of that Solemnity,
where a great concourse of people resorted to him from all parts of Arabia,
whom he instructed in his Law, and then returned again to Medina. This
Pilgrimage of his is by his Followers called the Pilgrimage of Valediction,
because it was the last which he made.

But although he was arrived to this height, yet he wanted not Opposers, who
gave him great disturbance in this his new acquired Empire. For several others
seeing how he had advanced himself to be a great King, by pretending to be a
Prophet, thought to do so too. Abul Faraghius p. 103. Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1, and
2. Disputatio Christiani cap. 17.
Among whom the Chief was Moseilema, who set himself up with this Pretense in
the City of Tamama, and gathering a great Company after him, preached to them,
That he was associated with Mahomet in the Prophetic Office, and sent with the
same Commission to reduce them from Idolatry to the true Woship of God; and in
order thereto he also published his Alcoran among them. For which reason the
Mahometans call him the Lying Mosoilema, and speak of him always with
detestation. However he increased to a very considerable Power, leading a great
Army after him. Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1, and 2.
And at the same time Aswad started up in Hamyar, or the Country of the
Homerites, with the same Pretense, and seized on Sanaa, Nasra, and Tayif. And
after him Taluha, and others, thought to have played the same Game, but could
not hit on the same Success, being all in their turns subdued and brought to
nothing. But this Work Mahomet not being able to undertake himself, was forced
to leave it to his Successor.

For after his return Abul Faraghius p. 103. Elmacin lib. 1. c. ^. Eutychius
Tom. 2. p. 251. Abul Feda Al Jannabi Al Kodai Sharestani, etc. Heg. 11. March
28. A. D. 632.
to Medina from his late Pilgrimage, he began daily to decline through the
force of that Poison, which he had taken three years before at Caibar, which
still working in him, at length brought him so low, as forced him on the 28th
day of Saphar (the second Month of their Year) to take his Bed, and on the
twelfth day of the following Month he died, after having been Sick thirteen
days. The beginning of his Sickness was a slow Fever, which at length made him
delirous, whereon Bochari. Sharestani. Al Jannabi Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p.
178, 179.
he called for Pen, Ink, and Paper, telling them that he would dictate a Book
to them, which should keep them from erring after his Death. But Omar would not
admit this, saying, the Alcoran suffices, and that the Prophet, through the
greatness of his Malady knew not what he said. But others, who were present,
were of another mind, and expressed a great desire, that the Book might be
wrote, which their Prophet spoke to them of, whereon a Contention arose between
them, some being of Omar's mind, and some of the contrary, at which Mahomet
taking offense, bid them all be gone, telling them, That it did not become them
thus to contend in his presence. So the Book was not wrote, the loss of which
was afterward lamented by some of his Followers as a great Calamity to their
Cause.

During his Sickness Abul Feda Ebnol Athir Ebn Phares Al Jannabi.
, he much complained of the bit which he had taken at Caibar, telling those
that came to visit him, That he had felt the Torments of it in his Body ever
since; that at times it brought on him very dolorous Pains, and that then it
was going to break his very Heart Strings. And when among others, there came to
see him the Mother of Bashar, who died on the spot of that Poison, Al Jannabi
Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 190.
He cried out, O Mother of Bashar, the Veins of my Heart are now breaking of
the bit which I eat with your Son at Chaibar. So it seems notwithstanding the
intimacy he pretended with the Angel Gabriel, and the continual Revelations,
which he bragged that he received from him, he could not be preserved from thus
perishing, by the Snares of a silly Girl.

On his Death there was great Confusion among his Followers. Many of them Abul
Feda Sharestani Al Jannabi Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 179.
would not believe that he could dye. For, said they, how can he dye since he
is to be a Witness to God for us? It cannot be so, he is not dead, but is only
taken away for a season, and will return again, as did Jesus. And therefore
they went to the Door of the House, where the dead Corpse lay, crying out, Do
not Bury him, for the Apostle of God is not dead. And Omar being of the same
mind, drew his Sword, and swore, that if any one should say, That Mahomet was
dead, he would immediately cut him in pieces. For (said he) the Apostle of God
is not dead, but only gone for a season; as Moses, the Son of Amran, was gone
from the People of Israel for forty Days, and then returned to them again. For
the composing of this Disorder, Abu Beker came in, crying out unto them, Do you
worship Mahomet, or the God of Mahomet? If you worship the God of Mahomet, he
is Immortal and lives for ever; but as to Mahomet, he certainly is dead. And
then from several Passages in the Alcoran, he proved that he must dye as well
as other Men. Which having satisfied Omar and his Party, they then all took it
for granted, that Mahomet was dead, and no more to return to Life again till
the general Resurrection of all Mankind. What goes so current among us, as if
the Mahometans expected Mahomet again to return to them here on Earth, is
totally an Error. There is no such Doctrine among them, nor are there any of
them, that ever fancied such a thing, since the time that Omar was convinced of
his mistake herein.

But this disorder was no sooner appeased Abul Faraghius, p. 103. Ahmed Ebn
Yusef Abul Feda Sharestani Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 180.
, but another arose to a much greater heat about his Burial. The Mohagerins,
that is, those who accompanied him in his Flight from Mecca, would have him
carried thither to be buried in the place where he was Born. The Ansars, that
is, those of Medina, who joined with him, would have him buried there where he
died. And there were others, who had a phansy to have him carried to Jerusalem,
and there buried among the Sepulchers of the Prophets. For that, said they, was
the City of the Prophets. And while each Party strove to have their own way
complied with, the Contest grew so high, that they had like to have all gone
together by the Ears; but that the wisdom of Abu Beker composed this matter
also. For he coming in, told them, that he had often heard from the Prophet
himself, that Prophets were to be buried in the place where they died. And then
without more ado commanded the Bed whereon he lay to be plucked out, and a
Grave to be immediately dug under it, to which all consented, and there they
buried him forthwith in the place where he died, which was in the Chamber of
Ayesha, his best beloved Wife at Medina, and there he lies to this day without
Iron-Coffin or Loadstones to hang him in the Air, as the Stories which commonly
go about of him among Christians fabulously relate. There was indeed Plinius,
lib. 34. c. 14.
one Dinocrates, a famous Architect, that had a device by building the Dome of
the Temple of Arsinoe at Alexandria, of Loadstone, to make her Image all of
Iron hang in the middle of it, as if it were in the Air; but there was no such
attempt ever made as to Mahomet's Carcass. For that being buried in the manner,
as I have related, has lain in the same place without being moved or disturbed
ever since, only they have built over it Appendix ad Geographiam Nubiensem cap.
8. Thevenot part. 1. Book 2. chap. 21.
a small Chapel, which joyneth to one of the Corners of the chief Mosque of
that City, which was the first that was ever erected to that impious
Superstition, Mahomet himself being the first Founder of it, as has been before
related. Here such Pilgrims, as think fit, on their return from Mecca call in
to pay their Devotions, but there is no Obligation from their Law for it. The
Pilgrimage which that enjoins being to be performed to the Caaba at Mecca, and
not to the Tomb of the Impostor at Medina, as some have erroniously related.

And thus ended the Life of this wicked Impostor Eutychius Tom. 2. p. 251
Elmacin lib. 1. c. 1. Abul Faraghius, p. 103. Abul Feda Al Jannabi Al Kodai,
etc.
, being full Sixty three years old on the day in which he died, that is,
according to the Arabian Account, which make only sixty one of our Years. For
twenty three years he had taken upon him to be a Prophet, of which he lived
thirteen at Mecca, and ten at Medina. During which time, from very mean
beginnings, he arose by the impulse of his Ambition, and the sagaciousness of
his Wit to that height, as to make one of the greatest Revolutions that ever
happened in the World, which immediately gave Birth to an Empire, which in Eighty
years time extended its Dominions over more Kingdoms and Countries, than ever
the Roman could in Eight hundred. And although it continued in its strength not
much above Three hundred Years, yet out of its Ashes have sprung up many other
Kingdoms and Empires, of which there are three at this day, the largest, and
most Potent upon the face of the Earth, I mean the Empire of Turkey, the Empire
of Persia, and the Empire of the Mogul in India, which God has permitted of
his All wise-providence still to continue for a Scourge unto us Christians, who
having received so Holy, and so Excellent a Religion through his mercy to us in
Jesus Christ our Lord, will not yet conform our selves to live worthy of it.

He Elmacin. lib 1. c. 1. Abunazar. Abul Feda. Al Kodai. Schikardi Tarich, p.
32.
was as to his Person of a proper Stature, and comely Aspect, and affected much
to be thought to resemble Abraham. He had a very piercing and sagacious Wit.
And for the accomplishing of the Design which he undertook was thoroughly
vested in all the Arts, whereby to insinuate into the favor of Men, and
wheedle them over to serve his purposes, to which he chiefly owed the success
of his undertaking.

For the first part of his Life Bartholomaeus Edessenus. Disputatio Christiani,
etc.
he led a very wicked and licentious Course, much delighting in Rapin, Plunder,
and Bloodshed, according to the usage of the Arabs, who mostly followed this
kind of Life, being almost continually in Arms one Tribe against another, to
plunder and take from each other all they could. However the Mahometans would
have us believe, That he was a Saint from the fourth year of his Age. For then
Liber de Generatione and nutritura Mahometis. Johannes Andreas, c. 1.
Bellonius, lib. 3. c. 1. Guadagnol. p. 169. E^libro Agar. Ecchilensis Hist.
Arab. Part 1. c. 23.
say they, The Angel Gabriel took him from among his Fellows, while at play
with them, and carrying him aside, cut open his Breast, and took out his Heart,
and wrung out of it that black drop of Blood in which, say they, was contained
the Fomes peccati, so that he had none of it ever after. And yet in the Forty
eighth Chapter of his Alcoran, he brings in God giving him a large Charter of
Pardon for all his Sins past and to come.

His two predominant Passions were Ambition and Lust. The course which he took
to gain Empire, abundantly shows the former; and the multitude of Women which
he had to do with, proves the later. And indeed these two run thorough the
whole Frame of his Religion, there being scarce a Chapter in his Alcoran, which
does not lay down some Law of War and Bloodshed for the promoting of the one;
or else give some liberty for the use of Women here, or some promise for the
enjoyment of them hereafter to the gratifying of the other.

While Cadigha lived, (which was till the fiftieth year of his Age) I do not
find that he took any other Wife. For she being the rise and foundation of his
Fortunes, it seems he durst not displease her, by bringing in another Wife upon
her. But she was no sooner dead, but he multiplied them to a great Appendix ad
Geographiam Nubiensem, c. 8. Johannes Andreas, c. 7. Bellonius, lib. 3. etc.
number; besides several Concubines which he had. They that say the fewest,
allow him to have married Abul Feda. Al Kodai. Almed Ebn Yusef.
Fifteen, but others reckon them to have been Vide, Gentium in notis ad
Musladinum Sadum, p. 568.
one and twenty, of which five died before him, six he repudiated, and ten were
alive at his Death. But the tenth, with whom he contracted but a little before
his Sickness, was never brought home to his House. The Names of the other nine
were, Ayesha, the Daughter of Abu Beker; Haphsa, the Daughter of Omar; Zewda,
the Daughter of Zoma; Zainab, the Daughter of Hasheth; Sephia, the Daughter of
Hai; Em Selema, Em Haliba, and Maimacna.

Ayesha, the Daughter of Abu Beker, was his best beloved Wife. He married her
very young, as has been before related; and although she was a very wanton
Woman, and* Disputatio Christiani, c. 6. Commentatores in Alcorani, c. 24.
given to hold amorous Intrigues with other Men, and on that account Mahomet
was moved to put her away; yet his love to her was such that he could not part
with her. But to salve her Reputation, and his own in keeping her, the Twenty
fourth Chapter of the Alcoran was composed, and brought forth as sent from God
to declare her Innocent; wherein he tells his Muslemans, That this Charge
against her was an Imposture, and an impudent Lie, and forbids them any more to
speak of it, threatening a severe Curse, both in this Life, and that which is to
come, against all those who should accuse of Immodesty, Women Chaste, Innocent,
and Faithful. Mahomet marrying her young, took care to have her bred up
Appendix ad Geographiam Nubiensem, c. 8.
in all the Learning then going in Arabia, especially in the Elegancy of their
Language, and the Knowledge of their Antiquities, and she became one of the
most accomplished Ladies of her time in that Country. She was a Disputatio
Christiani, c. 6. Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 4. Abul Faraghius, Abul Feda, etc.
bitter Enemy to Ali, he being the Person that discovered her Incontinency to
Mahomet, and therefore employed all the Interest she had on every Vacancy, that
after happened, to hinder him from being chosen Caliph, although, as Son in-Law
to the Impostor, he had the fairest pretense thereto; and when at last, after
having been thrice put by, he attained that Dignity, she appeared in Arms
against him; and although she prevailed not that way, yet she proved his ruin
by causing that Defection from him, which at length was the undoing of him and
all his House. She For she died the Fifty eighth Year of the Hegira, Elmacin.
lib. 1. c. 7.
lived Forty eight Years after the Death of Mahomet, and was in great
Reputation with her Sect, being called by them the Prophetess, and the Mother
of the Faithful. And in most points of difficulty concerning their Law, they
had recourse to her, to know what had been the Sense of the Impostor while
alive, in the particular doubted of; and whatsoever Answer she gave, went for
an Johannes Andreas, c. 3.
Authentic Tradition among them ever after. For all their Traditions, which
compose their Sonnah, are pretended to be derived either from her, or some of
Mahomet's ten Companions, that is, those ten who first came in unto them. But
her Testimony to a Tradition is reckoned the most Authentic; and next her,
that of Abdorrahman Ebn Auf. For Gentius in notis ad Musladinum Sadum, p. 578.
being of all others, the most familiarly Conversant with the Impostor all the
time that Scene of Delusion was acting by him, and a Person of extraordinary
Memory; he was most confided in for the giving of an exact account of all his
Sayings and Doings relating to his Religion, and there are reckoned no fewer
than 5340 Traditions among them which are built upon his Authority only. This
Abdorrahman is also called Abu Hareira, that is, the Father of a Cat, which
Name Mahomet gave him for the fondness he had for a Cat, which he was used most
an end to carry with him in his Bosom wherever he went. For it is usual in
the Arabic Tongue when a Man is remarkable for any one particular thing, thus
to express it by calling him the Father of it. Bochartus in Hierozoico.
And so Chalid, who was Mahomet's Host when he first came to Medina, was for
his remarkable patience, called Abu Job, that is, the Father of Job, or of the
Patience of Job. And this is that Job, Elmacin, lib. 1. c. 7.
who dying at the Siege of Constantinople, when besieged by the Sarazens, was
there buried under the Walls of the City, and has his Tomb there to be seen
even to this day, Ricaut's History of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire,
Book 1. Chap. 2. Smith's Brief Description of Constantinople.
where all the Grand Signiors go forth to be inaugurated, when they first take
upon them the Regal Authority.

Haphsa, the Daughter of Omar, was next to Johannes Andreas, c. 7.
Ayesha, most in favor with him, and her he entrusted with the keeping of the
Chest of his Apostleship, wherein were laid up all the Orignal Papers of his
pretended Revelations, out of which the Alcoran was composed, as has been
already said; and the Original Copy of that Book, Abul Feda. Hottingeri
Bibliotheca Orientalis, c. 2. Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 362.
Abu Beker, after the finishing of it, delivered also unto her to be kept in
the same Chest, which proves the mistake of Johannes Andreas De confusione
Sectae Mahometanae, cap. 2.
, in assigning the keeping of this Chest to Ayesha. For it is not likely that
Abu Beker would have dispossessed his own Daughter of this Office, which was so
honorable among them, had she first been entrusted with it by the Impostor.
Haphsa was much the elder Woman, and for that reason probably preferred to this
Trust. For when she died, which was toward the later end of the Reign of
Othman, she was sixty six Years Gentius in Notis ad Musladinum Sadum, page 568.
old, and therefore must have been at the Death of the Impostor, at least forty
Years old, when Ayesha was not fully twenty.

Sewda was in least favor with him of any of his Wives Gentius in notis ad
Musladinum Sadum, p. 568.
, and he intended to have put her away; but she earnestly desired him that she
might still have the Reputation and Honor of being his Wife, promising him, if
he would grant her this, she would be content no more to lie with him, but to
give her turn always to Ayesha, which condition he willingly accepted of out of
that great love which he had for Ayesha, and so permitted her to continue in
his House as long as he lived.

Zainab, was first the Wife of Zeyd, his enfranchised Slave, who being a Woman
of great Beauty Al Jannabi. Abul Feda. Al Kodai. Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab.
p. 182. Richardi confutatio, c. 8. Disputatio Christiani, c. 6. Ecchelensis,
Hist. Arab. Part 1. c. 5. Confutatio Mahometis Edita per Le Moyne. Johannes
Andreas, c. 6. Guadagnol. Tract. 2. c. ^. Sect. 3. etc. 10. Sect. 2. Zamach
Shari Bidawi and alii Commentatores, ad cap. 33. Alcorani. Liber Almawa Keph.
, the old Lecher fell desperately in love with her. But for fear of the
Scandal, which his taking of her might give, he did all he could to suppress
his Flame, till at length being able to resist no longer, he did break the
matter to her, and caused Zeyd to put her away, that he might take her to Wife.
Which he being forced to submit to; this gave great Offense to all his
Followers, that he, who called himself a Prophet, and an Apostle of God sent to
teach Men his Law, should for the gratifying of his Lust, do so scandalous a
thing. But to salve the matter, out comes the thirty third Chapter of the
Alcoran, called the Chapter of Heresies, where God is brought in declaring,
That he had married Zainab to Mahomet, and given him free liberty to enjoy her
according to his desire; and also rebuking him, that knowing God had given him
this thing, he should abstain so long from her out of regard he had to the
People, as if he feared them more than God. However this could not clear him
so, but that many of his followers are hard put to it, to excuse him from the
Scandal of this fact, even unto this day; and there are some of them who make
no doubt to charge him with Sin on the account hereof. Zainab hereon becoming
the Wife of Mahomet, lived with him to the time of his Death, always glorying
and vaunting her self above his other Wives, that Ecchelensis Hist. Arab. p. 1.
c. 5.
whereas they were married to Mahomet by their Parents and Kinsfolk, she was
married to him by God himself, who dwells above the Seven Heavens.

How he married Juweira, has been already related. Disputatio Christiani, c. 6.
Saphia was a Jewish Woman, and descended of the Race of the Priests, on which
account she was used to brag, that she had Aaron for her Father, Moses for her
Uncle, and Mahomet for her Husband. Of the rest of his Wives, I find not any
thing said.

Besides these, he had a Concubine, whom he much loved. She was an Abul
Faraghius, p. 103. Johannes Andreas, c. 8. Bellonius, lib. 3. c. 8. Richardi
Confutatio, c. 12. Cantacuzeni, Orat. 2. Sect. 8. Guadagnol. Tract. 2. Cap. 10.
Sect. 2. Commentatores, in c. 66. Alcorani.
Egyptian Woman, and a Christian of the Jacobite Sect. The Governor of Egypt
having occasion to Treat with him about some matters, and being informed of his
brutish Passion, to gratify him herein, and thereby the better incline him to
his purpose, sent him this Maid for a Present, she being then only fifteen
years old: He immediately fell in love with her. But how secret soever he
managed the Amors for fear of his Wives, Ayesha and Haphsa found it out, and
catched them together in the Fact. Whereon they reproached him bitterly for it,
that he who called himself a Prophet sent from God to teach Men Righteousness,
should do such a thing; at which being much confounded, he swore a solemn Oath,
That in case they would conceal the matter, and not say any thing of it to
raise a Scandal against him among his Musslemans, he would never have to do
with her more. On which Oath they were content to pass the matter over, and say
nothing of it. But Mahomet's Lust being of greater force with him than his
Oath, he could not long hold, but was catched again with her by his Jealous
Wives. Whereon they flew out into a desperate Rage against him, and after
having loaded him with a multitude of Reproaches, both for his Perjury, as well
as Adultery, went from him to their Father's Houses, which raising a great
Noise, and many being offended with him for it; to smooth the matter again, he
has recourse to his old Art, and out comes a new Revelation to justify him in
it, the Sixty sixth Chapter of the Alcoran, called the Chapter of Prohibition,
wherein he brings in God allowing Mahomet, and all his Musslemans to lie with
their Maids when they will, notwithstanding their Wives. The first words of
that Chapter are, O Prophet, why do thou forbid what God has allowed thee,
that thou may please thy Wives? God has granted unto you to lie with your
Maidservants. Which Law being published, it gave such content to his
licentious Followers, that no more words were made of this matter; but all
gladly laid hold of the liberty which he had granted, and ever since it has
been an established Law among all of that Sect, besides their Wives Ricaut 's
History of the Present State of the Ottoman. Empire, Book 2. Chap. 21.
Theveno^, Part 1. lib. 1. c. 41. Bellonius, lib. 3. c. 8. etc. 10. Clenardi
Epistolae, p. 2^, 30, ^0, and 66.
, to keep as many Women-slaves for their Lust, as they shall think fit to buy;
and the Children of the one are as legitimate as the Children of the other. And
the Grand Signior, who never marries, has all his Women under this later
Notion, that is, as his Slaves, and he keeps none but such in his Seraglio;
only after they have born him a Son, he sometimes gives them the Name of
Sultana, which is, Queen. Avesha and Haphsa finding the matter to go thus, and
that Mahomet had in the same Chapter threatened them with Divorce unless they
submitted, and were obedient; they sent their Fathers to him to make their
Peace, and again returned to his House, and totally submitted for the future to
his Will in all things; and from that time he lay with his Maid, Mary, as often
as he pleased without their any further Contradiction or Control, and had a
Son by her, who was called Abraham. But after the Death of the Impostor no
account was had of her, or her Son; but both were sent away into Egypt, and no
mention made of either ever after among them. I suppose, Ayesha, out of the
hatred which she bore her, procured of her Father, who succeeded the Impostor
in the Government, to have her thus disposed of.

One of the main Arguments Ahmed Ebn Zin.
, which the Followers of Mahomet make use of to excuse his having so many
Wives, is, that he might beget young Prophets; but notwithstanding this, the
left no young Prophet nor Prophetess neither behind him of all his Wives. Of
Abul Faraghius, p* 103.
six Children, which he had all by Cadigha, his first Wife, and none by any of
the others, they all died before him, excepting only Fatima, the Wife of Ali,
and she survived him only sixty Days.

As the gratifying of his Ambition, and his Lust, was the main end of his
Imposture, so they both continually appear through the whole Contexture of it.
At first his Ambition had the predominancy in him; but when that began to be
somewhat satisfied by the Power he had attained to, his Lust grew upon him with
his Age, and at length he seemed totally dissolved into it. And there are
strange things said of him this way Guadagnol. Tract. 2. Cap. 7. Sect. 1.
Richardi confutatio, c. 8. Disputatio Christiani, c. 6.
, as that he had in Venery the strength of forty other Men, and that he knew
all his Wives, when he had eleven of them, one after another in an Johannes
Andreas e libro Assamail, cap. 7. Guadagnol ex eodem libro, Tract. 2. Cap. 7.
Sect. 1.
hours time. Whatever Laws he gave to restrain the Lust of other Men, he took
care always to except himself, resolving it seems to take his full swing herein
without let or control, according as the violent bent of his brutish
Appetite, this way, should lead him. For,

1. He Alcoran. c. 4.
would not allow any other to have above four Wives, but to himself Alcoran. c.
33. Johannes Andreas, c. 7. Guadagnol Tract. 2. c. 10. Sect. 3.
he reserved a liberty to Marry without restraint, as many as he should think
fit, and he had ten together at the same time, when he died.

2. He obliged Alcoran, c. 4.
all others, who have two, three, or four Wives, to use them all equally alike,
both as to their Clothing, Diet, and the Duties of the Marriage Bed. And in
case any Wife thinks her self unequally used in any of those particulars, and
that the Husband does not as largely dispense to her of them, as to his other
Wives, it is allowed through all Mohammedan Countries, that she make her
Complaint to the Judge, and the Law will give her redress herein, and force the
Husband to do her Justice. But Mahomet reserved liberty to himself to do as he
should se sit as to this; and therefore when some of his Wives were aggrieved,
because he showed more favor to the others, and particularly to Ayesha than to
them, and made complaints against him on this account: To still their Clamours,
he brings in God in the Thirty third Chapter of his Alcoran, giving him full
liberty to deal with his Wives as he should think fit, to go in to which he
pleased and abstain from which he pleased; and commanding them to be content
herewith, and also to be well-pleased with whatever else he should do in
reference to them, accepting as a favor from him, whatsoever he should give
them, and take Exceptions at nothing which he should be pleased to order
concerning them.

3. In the fourth Chapter of his Alcoran, which is called the Chapter of Women,
he forbids his Musslemans to marry with their Mothers, their Mothers-in-law,
the Wives of their Fathers, their Daughters, the Sisters of their Fathers, the
Sisters of their Mothers, the Daughters of their Brothers, the Daughters of
their Sisters, their Nurses, their Foster-sisters, the Mothers of their Wives,
the Sisters of their Wives, the Daughters of their Wives by other Husbands, the
Daughters of Women whom they have known, and the Wives of their Sons, and the
married Wives of other Men. And yet in the Thirty third Chapter he brings in
God exempting him from this Law, and giving him an especial Privilege to take
to Wife the Daughters of his Brother, or the Daughters of his Sister, and to go
in to any other Woman whatsoever of the Believers, that shall be willing to
prostitute her self unto him. But he there takes care to appropriate this
liberty so particularly to himself alone, that he excludes all others
whatsoever from it. For it seems, the old Lecher feared his Lust should not be
sufficiently provided for, if any thing less than the whole Sex were allowed
him for the gratifying of it; and therefore would endure no restraint or
limitation upon himself herein, how strictly soever he lays it upon others. In
the abovementioned Law he forbids the Marrying of the Wives of other Men; and
abundant Reason there is for it, that no Man should be allowed adulterously to
take to Wife, her that is at the same time the Wife of another; and yet he
transgressed it in marrying the Wife of his Servant Zeyd. But to allay the
Scandal and Offense, which was taken at it; and to secure others from fearing
the like Injury and Violence from him, he was content after that to lay a
restraint upon himself to do so no more; and therefore brings in God, telling
him in the same Thirty third Chapter of his Alcoran, that it shall not be
lawful for him for the future to take another Man's Wife, how much soever he
may be taken with her Beauty.

As he was thus brutishly enslaved to the love of Women, so was he as
excessively Jealous of those whom he had taken to Wife. And therefore to deter
them from what he feared Alcoran, c. 33.
, he threatens them with double the punishment of other Wives, both here and
hereafter, in case they should be false unto him. And when some of his
Followers made too frequent resort to his House, and there entered into
discourse with some of his Wives, this gave him that Offense, that to prevent
it for the future, out comes, as from God, those Verses of the Alcoran Alcoran,
c. 33.
, wherein he tells them, That they should not enter into the House of the
Prophet without permission, and that if invited to Dine with him, they should
depart as soon as Dinner was over, and not enter into discourse with his Wives;
that although the Prophet be ashamed to bid them be gone, yet God is not
ashamed to tell them the truth. And in the same Chapter he forbids his Wives to
speak to any Man, unless with their Faces veiled. And this his jealousy
proceeded so far, as to go beyond the Grave. For he could not bear, that any one
else should have to do with his Wives, though after his Death; and therefore
Alcoran, c. 33.
strictly forbids all his Followers ever to go in to any of them as long as
they should live. So that although all other Women when repudiated, or become
Widows, had liberty to Marry again, all his Wives were excluded from it. And
therefore all those, whom he left at his Death Johannes Andreas, c. 7.
, lived Widows ever after, although some of them were very young; as
particularly Ayesha, who was not then full twenty Years old, and lived above
eight and forty Years after, which was in that hot Country looked on, as a very
hard restraint put upon them.

In all these instances I have mentioned, it appears how much he made his
Imposture serve his Lust. And indeed almost the whole of his Alcoran, was
Richardi Confutatio, c. 12.
in like manner framed to answer some purpose or other of his, according as
occasions required. If any new thing were to be put on foot, any Objection
against him or his Religion to be answered, any Difficulty to be solved, any
Discontent among his People to be quieted, any Offense to be removed, or any
thing else done for the Interest of his Designs, his constant recourse was to
the Angel Gabriel for a new Revelation, and out comes some Addition to his
Alcoran to serve his turn herein. So that the most of it was made on such like
occasions to influence his Party to what he intended. And all his Commentators
thus far acknowledge it, that they are on every Chapter very particular in
assigning for what Causes, and for whose sakes it was sent down from Heaven
unto them. But hereby it came to pass that abundance of Contradictions got into
this Book. For as the Interest and the Designs of the Impostor varied, so was
he forced to make his pretended Revelations to vary also, which is a thing so
well known to those of his Sect, that they all acknowledge it; and therefore
where the Contradictions are such, as they cannot salve them, there they will
have one of the contradicting places to be revoked. And they reckon in the
whole Alcoran Johannes Andreas, c. Guadagnol. Tract. 2. Cap. 7. Sect. 3.
, above an hundred and fifty Verses which are thus revoked, which is the best
shift they can make to solve the Contradictions and Inconsistencies of it. But
thereby they do exceedingly betray the Unsteadiness and Inconstancy of him that
was the Author of it.

In the beginning of his Imposture, he seemed more inclined to the Jews than to
the Christians, and in the first forming of his new invented Religion, followed
the Pattern of theirs more than any other. But after his coming to Medina, he
took that disgust against them, that he became their bitter, and most
irreconcilable Enemy ever after, and used them with greater Cruelty in his
Wars, than any other he had to deal with.

But to the Christians he ever carried himself with as much favor as could be
expected from such a Barbarian; and wherever they fell under his Power, they
had always good Terms from him. His general Rule, and which he laid as a strict
Obligation upon all his Followers, was to fight for the Propagation of his
Religion. And there Alcoran. c. 4. c. 9. etc. Disputatio Christiani, c. 8.
Richardi Confutatio, c. 1, 6, 7, and 10. Cantacuzeni, Orat. 1. Sect. 11.
were only two Conditions on which he granted Peace to any he had to do with,
and these were either to come in to his Religion, or submit to be Tributaries
unto him. They that did the former, were admitted into the same Privileges and
Freedoms with the rest of his Followers: But the later had only the benefit of
his Protection, as to their Goods and Persons, and free Exercise of their
Religion, without any other privilege or advantage whatsoever, for which every
Man paid an Annual Tribute. But those, who would not come in, and make Peace
with him on one of these two Conditions, were by his Law to be put to the
Sword. And this Law in every one of its particulars is still observed in all
Mohammedan Countries, even to this day. At first few submitted to him, but such
as he forced by Conquest; but when his Power grew to be formidable, then
Multitudes both of Christians, and other Religions, flocked to him for his
Protection, and became his Tributaries. And there has in this last Age been
published, first by Sionita at Paris, and after by Fabricius at Rostoch, a
Writing in Arabic, which bears the Title of an Ancient Capitulation of the
Christians of the East with this Impostor, which is said to have been laid up
in the Monastry of Mount Carmel in Palestine, and from thence brought into
France, and reposited in the French Kings Library. But In Epist. ad Gallos.
Grotius rejects it as a Forgery; and good reason he had so to do. For it bears
date in the fourth Year of the Hegira, when Mahomet was not yet in a condition
to speak in that Language, which he is made to do in that Writiting; nor was
his Power then so formidable, as to move any to pray his Protection, he having
not long before been overthrown and beaten at the Battle of Ohud; and at the
time this Instrument bears date (which was the fourth Month of that Year) not
fully recovered from that Blow; but in the lowest Circumstances, he had at any
time been since his taking the Sword for the propagating of his Imposture. And
there is another particular in it, which manifestly discovers the Forgery. It
makes Moawias, the Son of Abu Sophian, to be the Secretary to the Impostor, who
drew the Instrument; whereas it is certain, that Moawias, with his Father Abu
Sophian, was then in Arms against him; and it was not till the taking of Mecca,
which was four Years after that they came in unto him, and to save their Lives
embraced the Imposture. This Instrument is to be read in English in the History
of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire, Book 2. Chap. 2.

However this is certain, that the Christians had better Terms from him than
any other of his Tributaries, and they enjoy them, even, to this day; there
being no Mohammedan Country where their Religion is not esteemed the best next
their own, and the Professors of it accordingly respected by them before the
Jews, Heathens, or any other sort of Men that differ from them.

As the Impostor allowed the Old and New Testament, so would he fain prove his
Mission from both. The Texts which are made use of for this purpose by those
who defend his Cause, are these following,

Deuteronomy, c. 33. v. 2. It is said, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up
from Seir unto them; he shines forth from Mount Pharan, and he came with ten
thousand of Saints; from his right hand went a fiery Law for them. By which
words they will have Sharestani Safioddinus, Pocockii Spec. Hist. Arab. p. 183.
meant the coming down of the Law to Moses on Mount Sinai; of the Gospel to
Jesus at Jerusalem, and of the Alcoran to Mahomet at Mecca. For say they, Seir
are the Mountains of Jerusalem where Jesus appeared, and Pharan the Mountains
of Mecca where Mahomet appeared. But they are here much out in their Geography,
for Pharan Ptolomy.
is a City of Arabia Petraea near the Red Sea, toward the bottom of that
Gulf, not far from the Confines of Egypt and Palestine, above five hundred
Miles distant from Mecca. It was formerly Geographia Sacra Caroli a Sancto
Paulo, p. 317.
an Episcopal See under the Patriarch of Jerusalem, and famous for Theodorus
Acta Concilii Laterani sub Martino Papa.
, once Bishop of it, who was the first that in his Writings published to the
World the Opinion of the Monothelites. It is at this day called Carolus a
Sancto Paulo ubi supra. Geographia Nubiensis, Clim. 3. Part. 5.
Fara. From hence the Deserts lying from his City to the Borders of Palestine,
are called the Deserts, or Wilderness of Pharan; and the Mountains lying in it,
the Mountains of Pharan, in Holy Scripture, near which Moses first began to
repeat, and more clearly explain the Law to the Children of Israel before his
Death; and to that refers the Text abovementioned.

Psalm 50. v. 2. We have it, Out of Sion the perfection of Beauty of God has
shined. Which the Syriac Version reads thus, Out of Sion God has showed a
glorious Crown. From whence some Arabic Translation having expressed the two
last words by Echilan Mahmudan, i. e. an Honorable Crown; by Mahmudan they
understand the Name of Mahomet, and so read the Verse thus, Out of Sion has
God showed the Crown of Mahomet.

Isaiah, c. 21. v. 7. We read, And he saw a Chariot with a couple of Horsemen,
a Chariot of Asses, and a Chariot of Camels. But the old Latin Version has it,
Et vidit currum duorum Equitum, Ascensorem Asini, and Ascensorem Cameli: i. e.
And he saw a Chariot of two Horsemen, a Rider upon an Ass, and a Rider upon a
Camel. Where by the Rider upon an Ass, they understand Jesus Christ, because he
did so ride to Jerusalem; and by the Rider on the Camel, Mahomet, because he
was of the Arabians, who use to ride upon Camels.

John 16. 7. Our Savior tells his Disciples, If I go not away, the Comforter,
will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. By the
Comforter, the Mahometans will have their Prophet, Mahomet, to be here meant;
and therefore among other Titles; which they give him in their Language, Al
Jannabi. Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 185.
one is Paraclet, which is the Greek word here used in this Text for the
Comforter, made Arabic. They also say, That the very Name of Mahomet, both
here, and in other places of the Gospel was expressly mentioned, but that the
Christians out of Malice have blottd it out, and corrupted those Holy Writings;
Pocockii Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 186.
and that at Paris there is a Copy of the Gospels without these Corruptions, in
which the coming of Mahomet is foretold in several places, with his Name
expressly mentioned in them. And some such thing they had need say to justify
the impudent Lie of this Impostor, who in the Sixty first Chapter of his
Alcoran, entitled, The Chapter of Battle, has these words, Remember that
Jesus, the Son of Mary, said to the Children of Israel, I am the Messenger of
God, he has sent me to confirm the Old Testament, and to declare unto you,
that there shall come a Prophet after me, whose Name shall be Mahomet.

There needs no Answer to confute these Glosses. The Absurdity of them is
sufficiently exposed by barely relating them. And since they could find nothing
else in all the Books of the Old and New Testament to wrest to their purpose,
but these Texts abovementioned, which are to every Man's apprehending, so
exceedingly wide of it: This shows at how vast a distance the true word of God
is from this Impious Imposture, and how much it is in all its parts contrary
thereto.

And thus far I have laid together, as exactly and particularly, as I could out
of the best Authors, that treat of this Impostor, all that is credibly related
of him, and those Methods which he took for the framing and propagating that
Impious Forgery, which he has imposed upon so large a part of Mankind, as have
been deluded thereinto. And what is my Design in the present Publishing hereof,
is shown in the ensuing Treatise.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Authors quoted in this Book.
Arabic Authors.
ABul Faraghius, a Physician of Malatia in Lesser Armenia, of the Christian
Religion, and the Sect of the Jacobites. He is an Author of eminent note in the
East, as well among Mahometans as Christians. His History of the Dynasties is
from the Creation of the World to the Year of our Lord. 1284. It was published
at Oxford with a Latin Version by Dr. Pocock, A. D. 1663. He flourished about
the time where his History ends. His name at length is Gregorius Ebn Hacim Abul
Faraghi.

Abul Feda, an Author of great repute in the East for two Books which he wrote;
The first a General Geography of the World after the Method of Ptolemy; and the
other a General History, which he calls the Epitomy of the History of Nations.
He was born A. D. 1273. He finished his Geography A. D. 1321. Twenty years
after that he was advanced to the Principality of Hamah in Syria, from whence
he is commonly called Shahab Hamah, i. e. Prince of Hamah, where after having
Reigned three Years, two Months, and thirteen Days, he died A. D. 1345. being
Seventy two years old. He was by Nation a Turk, of the Noble Family of the
Jobidae, of which was Saladin the famous Sultan of Egypt. His name at length is
Ismael Ebn Ali Al Melec Al Moaiyad Amadoddin Abul Feda. Ecchelensis quotes him
by the name of Ismael Shiahinshiah.

Abunazar, a Legendary Writer of the Mahometans, much quoted by Hottinger.

Agar, a Book of great Authority, among the Mahometans, says Guadagnoi (page
165.) wherein an Account is given of the Life and Death of Mahomet. Johannes
Andreas makes great use of it under the name of Az^er, as does Bellonius in the
Third Book of his Observations under the name of Asaer. Guadagnol, who had a
Copy of the Book, calls, it the Book Agar, and takes most of what he objects
against the Life and Actions of Mahomet out of it.

Ahmed Ebn Edris, an Author that writes in the defense of the Mohammedan
Religion against the Christians and the Jews.

Ahmed Ebn Yuseph, an Historian, who flourished A. D. 1599. for then he finished
his History.

Ahmed Ebn Zin Alabedin, a Nobleman of Hispahan in Persia of this last Age, who
has wrote the sharpest and acutest Book against the Christian Religion, in
defense of the Mohammedan, of any they have among them on this Argument. It was
published on this Occasion. Ecbar the Great Mogul, Great Grandfather to Aurang
Zeb, who at present reigns in India, for some Reasons of State making show of
encouraging the Christian Religion, did in the Year 1595. write to Mathias de
Albuquerque, then Viceroy of the Portuguise in India, for some Priests to be
sent to him to his Court at Agra. The Persons pitched upon for this Mission
were Jeronimo Xavier, then Rector of the College of the Jesuits at Goa, and
Emanuel Pigneiro and Benedict de Gois, two others of that Society. On their
coming to Agra, they were very kindly received by the Mogul, and had a Church
there built for them at his Charges, and many Privileges and Immunities granted
unto them, which on the death of Ecbar (which happened A. D. 1604.) were all
confirmed to them by his Successor Jehan Guire. At the Command of this Ecbar,
Xaverius wrote two Books in Persian (which is the Language of that Court); The
first the History of Jesus Christ, collected for the most part out of the
Legends of the Church of Rome, which he intended to be instead of the Gospel
among them; and the other called A Looking-Glass showing the Truth, which is a
defense of the Doctrines of that Gospel against the Mahometans. What the former
is, those who have the Curiosity to see what kind of Gospel the Jesuits preach
in the East, may satisfy themselves, for the Book is translated into Latin by
De Dieu, and was published by him with the Original, A. D. 1639. This Gospel of
the Jesuits was first presented to Ecbar by Xaverius at Agra, A. D. 1602. But
the other Book was not published till a Year or two after. When it first came
abroad, it unluckily fell into the hands of this Learned Persian Gentleman, who
immediately wrote an Answer to it, which he calls The Brusher of the
Looking-Glass, wherein he makes terrible work with the Jesuit through the
advantages which he gave him by teaching the Idolatry and other Superstitions
and Errors of the Church of Rome for the Doctrines of Jesus Christ. When this
Book came abroad, it so allarmed the College de propaganda Fide at Rome, that
they immediately ordered it to be answered. The first who was appointed for
this Work was Bonaventura Malvasia, a Franciscan Friar of Bononia, who
published his Dilucidatio Speculi verum monstrantis, in answer to this Brusher,
A. D. 1628. But this, I suppose, not being judged so sufficient by the College,
they appointed Philip Guadagnol, another Franciscan Friar, to write a second
Answer thereto. And on this occasion he composed his Book styled Apologia pro
Christiana Religione, which was published at Rome first in Latin, A. D. 1631.
and after in Arabic, A. D. 1637. For this, I suppose, meeting with better
approbation from the College, they ordered it to be translated into that
Language, and it being accordingly done by the same Author, they sent it into
the East to be dispersed among the Mahometans for the defense of the Jesuits
Looking-Glass against this rude Brusher of it. But his Performance does by no
means answer the Design, abundance of his Arguments being drawn from the
Authorities of Popes and Councils, which will never convince an Infidel of the
truth of the Christian Religion, how much noise soever they may make with them
among those of their own Communion.

Al Bochari, an Eminent Writer of the Traditionary Doctrines of the Mohammedan
Religion. He is reckoned by Johannes Andreas, c. 3. and Bellonius, lib. 3. c.
4. to be one of the Six Doctors, who by the appointment of one of the Califs,
meeting at Damascus, first made an Authentic Collection of all those
Traditions which make up their Sonnah. His Book contains the Pandects of all
that relates either to their Law or their Religion, digested under their
several Titles in Thirty Books, and is the Ancientest and most Authentic which
they have of this matter, and next the Alcoran, of the greatest Authority among
them. He was born at Bochara in Cowarasmia, A. D. 809. and died A. D. 869.

Al Coran, i. e. The Book to be read, or the Legend, it is the Bible of the
Mahometans. The name is borrowed from the Hebrew Kara or Mikra (words of the
same root as well as signification with the Arabic Al Coran) by which the Jews
called the Old Testament, or any part of it; And so any part of the Mohammedan
Bible is called Alcoran. The whole together they call Al Moshap, i. e. The
Book, which also in respect of the Chapters, into which it is divided, they
call Al Furkan, from the Arabic word Faraka, which from the Hebrew Pharak
signifies to divide or distinguish; but others will have that Book to be so
called in respect of the Matter or Doctrine therein contained, because, say
they, it distinguishes Good from Evil.

Al Fragani, an Astronomer of Fragana in Persia, from whence his name Al
Fragani, i. e. Fraganensis, by which he is commonly called. His name at length
is Mohammed Ebn Katir Al Fragani. He wrote a Book called, The Elements of
Astronomy, which has been several times published in Europe at Nurenburgh, A.
D. 1537. at Paris, A. D. 1546. at Frankfort cum Notis Christmanni, A. D. 1590.
in Latin; and afterward by Golius in Arabic and Latin at Leiden, A. D. 1669.
with large Notes of great use for the understanding of the Geography of the
East. He flourished while Al Mamon was Calif, who died A. D. 833.

Al Gazali, a famous Philosopher of Tusa in Persia. He wrote many Books, not
only in Philosophy, but also in the defense of the Mohammedan Religion against
Christians, Jews, Pagans, and all others that differ there from, whereof one is
of more especial note entitled, The Destruction of Philosophers, which he wrote
against Al Farabius, and Avicenna, and some others of the Arab Philosophers,
who to solve the Monstrous Absurdities of the Mohammedan Religion, were for
turning many things into Figure and Allegory, which were commonly understood in
the literal sense. Those he violently opposes on this account, accusing them
of Heresy and Infidelity, as Corrupters of the Faith, and Subverters of
Religion, whereon he had the name of Hoghatol Estam Zainoddin, i. e. The
demonstration of Mahometism, and the honor of Religion. He was born A. D.
1058. and died A. D. 1112. His name at length is Abu Hamed Ebn Mohammed Al
Gazali Al Tusi.

Al Jannabi, an Historian born at Jannaba, a City in Persia, not far from
Shiras. His History comes down to the Year of our Lord 1588. and therein he
tells us, that he went in Pilgrimage to Mecca, and from thence to Medina, to
pay his Devotions at the Tomb of the Impostor, in that Year of the Hegira which
answers to the Year of our Lord 1556. His name at length is Abu Mohammed
Mustapha Ebnol Saiyed Hasan Al Jannabi.

Al Kamus, i. e. The Ocean, a famous Arabic Dictionary, so called, because of
the Ocean of words contained in it. It was written by Mohammed Ebn Jaacub Ebn
Mohammed Al Shirazi Al Firauzabadi. He was a Person of great esteem among the
Princes of his time for his eminent Learning and Worth, particularly with
Ismael Ebn Abbas, King of Yaman, Bagazet King of the Turks, and Tamerlan the
Tartar, from the last of which he received a Gift of Five thousand pieces of
Gold at one time. He was born A. D. 1328. being a Persian by birth, but he
lived mostly at Sanaa in Yaman. He finished his Dictionary at Mecca, and
dedicated it to Ismael Ebn Abbas, under whose Patronage he had long lived, and
afterward died at Zibit in Arabia, A. D. 1414. being near Ninety years old.

Al Kodai, an Historian. He wrote his History about the Year of our Lord 1045.
and died A. D. 1062. his name at length is Abu Abdollah Mohammed Ebn Salamah
Ebn Jaafar Al Kodai.

Al Masudi, an Historian. He wrote an History called the Golden Meadows, but in
what time he lived, I do not find. His name at length is Ali Ebn Hozsain Al
Masudi. He wrote also another Book, wherein he makes it his business to
discover and expose the Fraud which the Christians of Jerusalem are guilty of
about lighting Candles at the Sepulcher of our Savior on Easter Eve. For then
three Lamps being placed within the Chapel of the Sepulcher, when the Hymn of
the Resurrection is sung at the Evening Service, they contrive that these three
Lamps be all lighted, which they will have believed to be by fire from Heaven,
and then a multitude of Christians of all Nations are present with Candles to
light them at this holy Fire, which has been a fraudulent Practice kept up
among them for many hundred years. And the Emperor Cantacuzenus was so far
imposed on by this Cheat that in his Third Apology for the Christian Religion
against the Mahometans he makes mention of it, and urges it against those
Infidels, as a Miracle, which being annually performed in their sight, ought to
convince them of the truth of the Christian Religion, and convert them thereto.
But the Imposture has all along been too well known to the Mahometans to be of
any such effect with them. For the Patriarch of Jerusalem always compounds with
the Mohammedan Governor to permit him to practice this Trick for the sake of
the Gain which it brings to his Church, and annually allows him his share in
it. And therefore, instead of being of any effect to convert them, it becomes a
matter of continual scandal among them against the Christian Religion. And not
only this Author, but Ahmed Ebn Edris, and most others of the Mahometans, that
write against the Christian Religion, object it as a reproach thereto (as in
truth it is) and urge it with the same earnestness against the Christian
Religion, that Cantacuzenus does for it. Al Mansor Hakem Beamrilla, Calif of
Egypt, was so offended at it, that A. D. 1007. he ordered the Church of the
Resurrection at Jerusalem, wherein this Chapel of the Sepulcher stands, to be
for this very reason pulled down and rased to the Ground, that he might thereby
put an end to so infamous a Cheat. But the Emperor of Constantinople having by
the release of Five thousand Mohammedan Captives, obtained leave to have it
rebuilt again, the Imposture has still gone on at the same rate, and it is
there to the great sport of the Mahometans, (who come in Multitudes every Year
to see this Farce) acted over in their sight in the same manner as is above
related even unto this day. Thevenot, who was once present at it, gives us a
large Account of this whole Foolery in the first Part of his Travels, Book II.
Chapter 43.

Al Mostatraf, the Name of a Book, written by an unknown Author.

Al Motarrezi, the Author of the Book called Mogreb, he was born A. D. 1143.
and died A. D. 1213. His Name at length, is Nasir Ebn Abil Macarem Abul Phatah
Al Motarrezi. He was of the Sect of the Motazali, and seems by his last Name,
Al Motarrezi, (by which he is usually called) to have been by Trade a Tailor,
that being the signification of the word in Arabic.

Assamael, a Book much quoted by Johannes Andreas, and also by Guadagnol.

Bidawi, a famous Commentator on the Alcoran. He died A. D. 1293. His Name at
length, is Naseroddin Abdollah Ebn Omar Al Bidawi. His Commentary is written
for the most part out of Zamach Shari.

Kazwini, an Arabic Author, so called from the City Kaswin. His Name at length
is Zacharias Ebn Mohammed Ebn Mahmud Al Kazwini. In what Age he lived, I cannot
find.

Dialogus Mahometis cum Abdollah Ebn Salem, a Book wrote in Arabic, containing
a great many of the Fooleries of the Mohammedan Religion, under the form of a
Dialogue between Mahomet and this Jew, who was his chief helper in forging the
Imposture. It was translated into Latin by Hermannus Dalmata, and that Version
of it is published at the end of the Latin Alcoran, set forth by Bibliander.

Disputatio Christiani contra Saracenum de Lege Mahometis. It was written in
Arabic by a Christian, who was an Officer in the Court of a King of the
Saracens, to a Mohammedan Friend of his, who was an Officer with him in the same
Court, and contains a Confutation of the Mohammedan Religion. Peter, the famous
Abbot of Clu^y in Burgundy, who flourished A. D. 1130. caused it to be
translated into Latin by Peter of Toledo; an Epitomy of which is printed with
the Latin Alcoran. by Bibliander, taken out of the 24th Book of the Speculum
Historiale of Vincentius Bellovacensis.

Elmacinus, an Historian of the Christian Religion. His History is from the
Creation of the World to the Year of our Lord, 1118. The later part of it,
which is from the beginning of Mahometism, was published by Erpenius, under the
Title of Historia Saracenica, A. D. 1625. He was Son to Yaser Al Amid, who was
Secretary of the Council of War under the Sultans of Egypt, of the Family of
the Jobidae, for 45 Years together, and in the Year of our Lord 1238. (in which
his Father died) succeeded him in his place. His Name at length is Georgius Ebn
Amid; and for his Eminent Learning, he was also styled Al Shaich Al Raiis Al
Macin, i. e. The prime Doctor solidly Learned. The last of which Titles,
Almacin, was that whereby Erpenius (who pronounces it Elmacin) chose to call
him; but by others he is generally quoted by the Name Ebn Amid.

Ebnol Athir, a Mohammedan Author, who was born A. D. 1149. and died A. D. 1209.
His Name at length is Abussaadat Al Moharac Ebn Mohammed Al Shaibani Ebnol
Athir Al Jazari Magdoddin.

Ali Ebnol Athir, an Historian, Brother to the former Ebnol Athir. His Name at
length is Abul Hasan Ali Ebn Mohammed Al Shaibani Ebnol Athir Al Jazari
Ezzoddin. He was born A. D. 1160. and died A. D. 1232. His History, which he
calls Camel, is from the beginning of the World to the Year of our Lord, 1230.

Ebnol Kassai, Author of the Book called Taarifat, which is an Explication of
the various Terms used in Arabic by Philosophers, Lawyers, Divines, and other
sorts of learned Professions among them.

Ebn Phares, a Mohammedan Author, who died A. D. 1000.

Eutychius, a Christian Author of the Sect of the Melchites, his name in Arabic
is Said Ebn Batrik. He was born at Cair in Egypt, A. D. 876. and became very
eminent in the knowledge of Physic, which he practiced with great reputation,
being reckoned by the Mahometans themselves to have been one of the Eminentest
Physicians of his time. But toward the later part of his life giving himself
more to the study of Divinity, he was A. D. 933. chosen Patriarch of Alexandria
for his Sect (for there was another Patriarch of that place for the Jacobites
at the same time) and then he first took the name of Eutychius. But he happened
not to be so acceptable to his People, for there were continual Jars between
them until his death, which happened seven years after, A. D. 940. His Annals of
the Church of Alexandria were published at Oxford in Arabic and Latin by Dr.
Pocock, A. D. 1656. at the Charge of Mr. Seldom, and this is the meaning of
these words in the Title Page, [Johanne Seldeno Chorago] for he who was the
Choragus in the Play, always was at the Charges of exhibiting the Scenes. And
therefore Mr. Seldom having born the Expenses of this Chargeable Edition, the
most Worthy and Learned Author of that Version acknowledged it by those words
in the Title Page, which several having mistaken to the robbing him of the
honor of his Work, as if Mr. Seldom had begun the Translation, and Dr. Pocock
finished it, I cannot but do this justice to that worthy Person, now with God,
as to clear this matter. For he needed no Partner in any of his Works. The
Translation was totally his, and only the Charges of printing the Book Mr.
Selden's. Mr. Seldom did indeed publish a Leaf or two of that Author, which he
thought would serve his purpose to express his Spite against the Bishops of
the Church of England, in revenge of the Censure which was inflicted on him in
the High Commission Court for his History of Tithes; but he made those slips in
that Version, that Dr. Pocock was not at all eased of his labor, by having
that little part of it translated to his hands.

Liber de Generatione and Nutritura Mahometis, a most frivilous and silly
Tract, wrote originally in Arabic; and being translated into Latin by Hermannus
Dalmata, is published with the Latin Alcoran by Bibliander.

Geographia Nubiensis, so the Book is called by Sionita and Hesronita, who
published it in Latin with a Geographical Appendix annexed thereto, A. D. 1619.
But this Book is only an Epitomy of a much larger, and much better Book written
by Sharif Al Adrisi, at the command of Roger, the second of that name, King of
Sicily, for the explaining of a Terrestrial Globe, which that King had caused
to be made of a very large Size all of Silver. He finished this Work A. D.
1153. and Entitled it Kelab Roger, i. e. the Book of Roger, from the name of
him who employed him to compose it. The Author was of the Race of Mahomet, and
therefore is called Sharif, which word signifies one of a Noble Race,
especially that of Mahomet, and was descended from the Noble Family of the
Adrisidae, who reigned in some parts of Africa, and therefore he is called Al
Adrisi, that is, of the Family of Adris. His name at length is Abu Abdollah
Mohammed Ebn Mohammed Ebn Adris Amir Olmuminin. There was a very fair Copy of
this Book among Dr. Pocock's Arabic Manuscripts.

Georgius Monachus, Abbot of the Monastery of St. Simeon. He wrote a Tract in
defense of the Christian Religion against the Mahometans, which is a
Disputation he had with three Mahometans, of whom the chief Spokesman was
Abusalama Ebn Saar of Mosul.

Jauhari, the Author of a famous Arabic Dictionary, called Al Sahah: His name
at length is Abu Naser Ismael Ebn Hammad Al Jauhari. He was by Nation a Turk.
He died A. D. 1007. This is reckoned the best Dictionary of the Arabic Language
next Kamus. Golius makes his Arabic Lexicon mostly out of it.

Jalalani, i. e. the Two Jalals. They were two of the same name, who wrote a
short Commentary upon the Alcoran, the first began it, and the second finished
it. The first was called Jalal Oddin Mohammed Ebn Ahmed Al Mahalli; and the
second Jalal Oddin Abdorrahman Al Osynti. This later on the death of the former
finished the Book A. D. 1466. and was also Author of an History called Mezhar.

Shahrestani, a Scholastical Writer of the Mohammedan Religion. He was born at
Shahrestan A. D. 1074. and died A. D. 1154.

Safioddin, the Author of a certain Geographical Dictionary in the Arabic
Tongue.

Zamach Shari, the Author of the Book called Al Ceshaf, which is a large
Commentary upon the Alcoran, and that which is of the best esteem among the
Mahometans of any of its kind. His name at length is Abul Kasem Mohammed Ebn
Omar Ebn Mohammed Al Chowarasmi Al Zamachshari. He was born at Zamachshari, a
Town of Chowarasmia, A. D. 1074. and died A. D. 1143.

Hebrew and Chaldee Authors.
CHaldee Paraphrase, an Interpretation of the Old Testament in the Chaldee
Language. That of Onkelos on the Pentateuch, and that of Jonathan on the
Prophets are ancient, being written according to the Account which the Jews
give of them before the time of our Savior. But those which are on the other
parts of Scripture, as also that which bears the name of Jonathan on the Law,
were written by some later Jews. The Author of the Chaldee Paraphrase on Job,
the Psalms, and Proverbs, was Rabbi Joseph Caecus.

Sepher Cozri, a Book written by way of Dialogue between a Jew and the King of
the Cozars, from whence it has its name Sepher Cozri or Cozari, i. e. the Book
of the Chozar. The Author of it was Rabbi Judah Levita, a Spanish Jew, who
wrote the Book originally in Arabic about the Year of our Lord 1140. and from
thence it was translated into Hebrew by Rabbi Judah Ebn Tibbon, in which
Translation it was published by Buxtorf with a Latin Version, A. D. 1660.

Rabbi David Kimchi, a famous Jewish Commentator on the Old Testament. He was
by birth a Spaniard, Son to Rabbi Joseph Kimchi, and Brother to Rabbi Moses
Kimchi, both men of eminent Learning among the Jews, but he himself far
exceeded them both, being the best Grammarian in the Hebrew Language which they
ever had, as is abundantly made appear not only in his Commentary on the Old
Testament (which gives the greatest light into the literal sense of the Hebrew
Text of any extant of this kind) but also in a Grammar and Dictionary which he
has wrote of the Hebrew Language, both by many degrees the best of their kind:
The first of these he calls Miclol, and the other Sepher Shorashim, i. e. the
Book of Roots. Buxtorf made his Thesaurus Linguae Hebraeae out of the former,
and his Lexicon Linguae Hebraeae out of the later. He flourished about the Year
of our Lord 1270.

Maimonides, a famous Jewish Writer, his Book, Yad Hachazakah, is a Digest of
the Jewish Law according to the Talmudists. His Book Moreh Nevochim, contains
an Explication of Words, Phrases, Metaphors, Parables, Allegories, and other
Difficulties, which occur in the Old Testament. It was first Wrote in Arabic,
and after Translated into Hebrew by Rabbi Samuel Ebn Judah Ebn Tibbon, from
which Translation it was published in Latin by Buxtorf, A. D. 1629. He was Born
at Corduba in Spain, A. D. 1131. but lived mostly in Egypt; from whence he is
commonly called, Rabbi Moses Aegyptius, where he Died, A. D. 1208.

Mishnah, a Collection of all the Ancient Traditions of the Jews to the time of
Rabbi Judah Hakkodish, the Compiler of it, who flourished about the middle of
the second Century in the Reign of the Emperor Antoninus Pius. This Book is the
Text to the Talmud, and that a Comment on it. The Jerusalem Talmud was Compiled
by the Jews who dwelt in Judaea about 300 Years after Christ; and the
Babylonish Talmud by those who dwelt in Mesopotomia about 500 Years after
Christ, according to the account which the Jewish Writers gives of them. But
there are several things contained in the later, which seem to refer to a much
later date. These Three, with the Two Chaldee Paraphrases of Onkelos and
Jonathan, are the ancientest Books which the Jews have next the Bible. For how
much noise soever may be made about their Rabbinical Writers, there are none of
them above Seven hundred years old. There are some of them indeed lay claim to
a much ancienter Date, but without any reason for it.

Greek Authors.
ARistotelis Ethica and Politica.

Bartholomaei Edessini Confutatio Hagareni, a Greek Tract against Mahomerism,
published by Le Moyne among his Varia Sacra. The Author was a Monk of Edessa in
Mesopotamia. In what Age he lived, it does not appear.

Cantacuzenus contra Sectam Mahometicam. This Book contains four Apologies for
the Christian Religion, and four Orations against the Mohammedan. The Author had
been Emperor of Constantinople, but resigning his Empire to John Palaeologus
his Son-in-Law, A. D. 1355. he retired into a Monastery, where being
accompanied by Meletius, formerly called Achaememid, whom he had converted from
Mahometism to the Christian Religion, he there wrote this Book for the said
Meletius in answer to a Letter written to him by Sampsates a Persian of
Hispahan, to reduce him back again to the Mohammedan Superstition.

Cedreni Compendium Historiarum, An History from the beginning of the World, to
the Year of our Lord 1057.

Chrysostomi Homiliae.

Confutatio Mahometis, a Greek Tract, published by Le Moyne among his Varia
Sacra, the Author not known.

Dionysii Halicarnassei Antiquitates Romanae.

Eusebii Historia Ecclesiastica and Praeparatio Evangelica.

Hierocles, the Fomenter and chief Manager of the Tenth Persecution against the
Christians. He was first Governor of Bithynia, and after of Egypt; in both which
Places he prosecuted the Christians with the utmost severity; and not content
herewith, he also wrote two Books against them, which he called (...), wherein,
among other things, he compared Apollonius Tyaneus with Jesus Christ, and
endeavored to prove him in working of Miracles to have been equal to him; to
which particular Eusebius wrote an Answer, which is still extant among his
Works; but these Books of Hierocles are now wholly lost, excepting some
Fragments preserved in the said Answer of Eusebius.

Josephi Antiquitates Judaicae, and de Bello Judaico.

Origines contra Celsum.

Philostratus de vita Apollonii Tyanci.

Phlegon Trallianus, a Freed man of Adrian the Emperor. He wrote a Chronicon or
History, which he called the History of the Olympiads. It contained 229
Olympiads, whereof the last ended in the Fourth year of the Emperor Antoninus
Pius. But there is nothing of this Work now extant, except some few Fragments,
as they are preserved in such Authors as have quoted it. That relating to the
Ecupse of the Sun at our Savior's Crucifixion is preserved in Eusebius's
Chronicon, and is also made mention of by Origin in his 35th Tract on St.
Matthews Gospel, and in his Second Book against Celsus.

Plato.

Plutarchi Vitae.

Strabonis Geographia.

Socratis Scholastici Historia Ecclesiastica.

Sozomenis Historia Ecclesiastica.

Theophanis Chronographia. This is one of the Byzantine Historians, and
contains a Chronological History of the Roman Empire, from the Year of our Lord
285. to the Year 813. The Author was a Nobleman of Constantinople, where he was
first an Officer of the Imperial Court, but afterward turning Monk wrote this
History. He was born A. D. 758. and A. D. 815. died in Prison in the Island of
Samothracia, a Martyr for Image Worship, for which he had been a zealous
Champion in the Second Council of Nice.

Zonarae Compendium Historiarum. Another of the Byzantine Historians. It
contains an History from the beginning of the World to the Death of Alexius
Comnenus, Emperor of Constantinople; which happened A. D. 1118. when the Author
flourished. He was first a Prime Officer of the Imperial Court at
Constantinople, but afterward became an Ecclesiastic, and is the same who
wrote the Comment on the Greek Canons.

Latin Authors Ancient and Modern.
AMmiani Marcellini Historia.

Anastasii Bibliothecarii Historia Ecclesiastica. The Author was a Priest of
the Church of Rome, and Library Keeper to the Pope. He flourished about the
Year of our Lord 870.

Bellonii Observationes de locis ac rebus memorabilibus in Asia. The Book was
first published in French, A. D. 1553. and after in Latin, A. D. 1589.

Bocharti Hicrozoicon.

Busbequii Epistolae, the Author was Ambassador from the Emperor Ferdinand the
First to the Port, from whence he wrote his Epistles.

Buxtorfii Lexicon Rabbinicum.

Buxtorfii Synagoga Judaica.

Clenardi Epistolae. The Author of these Epistles was the famous Grammarian of
his Age. Out of love to the Arabic Tongue, he went to Fez of purpose to learn
it, A. D. 1540. when well advanced in years, from whence he wrote many things
in his Epistles of the Manners and Religion of the Mahometans. He died at
Granada in Spain as soon as he returned.

Cusani Cribratio Alcorani. The Author of this Book was the famous Nicolas de
Cusa, the eminentest Scholar of the Age in which he lived. In the Year 1448. he
was made Cardinal of Rome, by the Title of St. Peter's ad vincula, and died A.
D. 1464. about Ten Years after the Turks had taken Constantinople. Which seems
to have given him the Occasion of writing this Book, that so he might provide
an Antidote against that false Religion, which on that Success had gotten so
great an advantage for its further spreading it self in those Parts of the
World. For it appears by the Dedication, that this Book was not written till
after the loss of that City; it being dedicated to Pope Pius Secundus, who
entered not on the Papacy, till the Turks had been about Three Years in
possession of it.

Abrahami Ecchelensis Historia Arabum. This Book is subjoined to his Chronicon
Orientale, in Two Parts, collected out of the Arab Writers. The Author was a
Maronite of Mount Libanus in Syria, and was employed as Professor of the
Oriental Languages, in the College de Propaganda Fide at Rome, from whence
about the Year 1640. he was called to Paris, to assist in preparing the great
Polyglott Bible for the Press, which was there publishing, and made the King's
Professor of the Oriental Languages in that City. The part assigned him in this
Work, was that which they had before employed Sionita in, a Man of thorough
Abilities to perform it; but on some distaste taken against him, they
discharged him, and sent to Rome for Ecchelensis; of whose Performance herein,
a Learned Sorbonist making a Censure, truly says, Ibi peccatum est toties ac
tam enormiter in apponendis vocalibus and apiculis, ut quod ibi primum inter
legendum occurrerit summam sapere videatur Tyronis alicujus oscitantiam. He was
indeed a Man but of little Accuracy in the Learning which he professed, and
shows himself to be a very Futilous and Injudicious Writer, in most of that
which he has published.

Abrahami Ecchelensis Eutychius vindicatus; which Book is in Two Parts; the
first writ against Mr. Selden's Eutychij Patriarchae Alexandrini Ecclesiae suae
Origines; and the second against Hottinger's Historia Orientalis. The greatest
skill which he shows in this Book, is in railing. It was published at Rome, A.
D. 1661.

Forbesij Instructiones Historico-Theologicae, published at Amsterdam, A. D.
1645.

Golij Notae ad Alfragani Elementa Astronomica; which are exceeding useful for
the understanding of the Geography of the East. The Book was published at
Leiden, A. D. 1669.

Philippi Guadagnoli Apologia pro Christiana Religione, contra Objectiones
Ahmed Filij Zin Alabedin Persae Asphahensis. Of which Book I have already given
an Account, in what I have written of Ahmed Ebn Zin, against whom it is written.

Gentij Notae ad Musladini Saadi Rosarium Politicum; published at Amsterdam, A.
D. 1651.

Grotius de Veritate Christianae Religionis; and Epistolae ad Gallos.

Hottingeri Historia Orientalis. Of this Book there are two Editions; the first
A. D. 1651. and the second A. D. 1660. the later is much enlarged. The Author
was Professor of the Oriental Tongues, first at Zurich in Swisserland, and
afterward at Heidelbergh; from whence being called to be Professor at Leiden,
he was while on his removal thither, unfortunately drowned in the Rhine. He was
a Man of great Industry and Learning; but having written very much within the
compass of a few Years (for he died young), his Books want Accuracy; though all
of them have their Use.

Historia Miscella, a Roman History begun by Eutropius, continued by Paulus
Diaconus, and finished by Landulphus Sagax.

Johannes Andreas de Confusione Sectae Mahometanae. The Author of this Book was
formerly an Alfaki, or a Doctor of the Mohammedan Law; but in the Year 1487.
being at Valentia in Spain, converted to the Christian Religion, he was
received into Holy Orders, and wrote this Book in Spainsh against the Religion
which he forsook; from whence it was translated into Italian, by Dominicus de
Gazelu, A. D. 1540. And out of that Translation, it was published in Latin by
Johannes Lauterbach, A. D. 1595. and reprinted by Voetius at Utrecht, A. D.
1656. He having thoroughly understood the Religion which he confutes, does much
more pertinently write against it, than many others do, that handle this
Argument.

Macrobij Saturnalia.

Caij Plinij Secundi Naturalis Historia.

Caij Plinij Caecilij Secundi Epistolae.

Pocock: The Famous Professor of the Hebrew and Arabic Tongues at Oxford; who
was for Eminency of Goodness, as well as Learning, the greatest Ornament of the
Age in which he lived, and God blessed him with a long Life to be useful
thereto. He was born A. D. 1604. and died at Christ-Church in Oxford in the
Month of September, A. D. 1691. He was for above sixty Years a constant Editor
of learned and useful Books. The first which he published contains an Edition
of four of the Catholic Epistles in Syriac, i. e. the second of St. Peter, the
second and third of St. John, and the Epistle of St. Jude, with Versions and
Notes, which was printed at Leiden, A. D. 1630. by Vossius, to whom he
presented it the year before at Oxford, on his coming thither to see that
University; and the last was his Commentary on Joel, which came forth the year
in which he died. His Specimen Historiae Arabicae, which I frequently make use
of in this Tract, was published A. D. 1650. and is a most accurate and
judicious Collection out of the best Arab Writers, relating to the Subject
which he handles.

Richardi Confutatio Legis Saracenicae. The Author was a Dominican Friar, who
in the Year 1210. went to Bagdad of purpose to study the Mohammedan Religion out
of their own Books in order to confute it; and on his return published this
Learned and Judicious Tract concerning it. Demetrius Cydonius translated it
into Greek for the Emperor Cantacuzenus, who makes great use of it, taking
thence most of that which he has of any moment in his four Orations against
the Mohammedan Religion. From this Greek Version of Demetrius Cydonius, it was
Translated back again into Latin by Bartholomaeus Picenus, which Translation is
published with the Latin Alcoran of Bibliander, and that is all we now have of
it, the Original being lost. This and Johannes Andreas's Tract de Confusione
Sectae Mahometanae, are the best of any that have been formerly published by
the Western Writers on this Argument, and best accord with what the Mahometans
themselves teach of their Religion. Others have too much spent themselves on
false Notions concerning it, for want of an exact knowledge of that which they
wrote against.

Roderici Toletani Historia Arabum. It contains an History of the Saracens from
the Birth of Mahomet to the Year of our Lord, 1150. The Author was Archbishop
of Toledo in Spain, and was present at the Lateran Council, A. D. 1215. His
History from the Tenth Chapter is mostly confined to the Saracens of Spain, and
is but of little Credit, where he relates any thing of them out of that
Country. It was published with Erpenius's Historia Saracenica at Leiden, A. D.
1625.

Schekardi Tarich, seu Series Regum Persarum, Tubingae. A. D. 1628.

Spanhemii Introductio ad Historiam Sacram. Amstel. A. D. 1694.

Scaliger de Emendatione Temporum, and Notae ejus ad Sphaeram Manilii.

Valerius Maximus.

Vaninus a famous Atheist. He was by birth a Neapolitan, and came into France
on purpose to promote the Impiety he had embraced, of which being convicted at
Toulouse, he rather chose to become a Martyr for it, than renounce it; and
therefore was publicly burnt in that City, A. D. 1619. persisting to deny the
being of a God with a wonderful obstinacy even in those very Flames in which he
perished. He wrote two Books, the first was published A. D. 1615. Entitled
Aeternae Providentiae Amphitheatrum; and the other the next Year after, which
is his Dialogi de admirandis Naturae, in both which he serves that Cause for
the sake of which he died.

English and French Authors.
PUrchas's Pilgrimage.

Ricaut's History of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire.

Smyth's Remarks upon the Manners, Religion, and Government of the Turks.

Thevenot's Travels.

FINIS.

