A CALL, In the Universal Spirit of CHRIST JESUS, TO ALL THE Wicked and
Impenitent Sinners in the World: But more especially to the Inhabitants of
England WITH THE City of LONDON, That they all may Repent and turn to God, with
all their Hearts, before his Wrath be more kindled, and his future Judgments
more appear to Punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for their manifold horrible
Sins and Transgressions.

This came upon me to write, at the apprehension I had of that sudden Fear
which many People were Surprised with, at the late Earthquake, of what should
befall them.

J. P. Isa. 29.6. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts, with Thunder, and
with Earthquake, and great Noise; with Storm and Tempest, and the Flame of
devouring Fire.

Romans 2.5. But after thy Hardness and Impenitent Heart, treasurest up to thy
self Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the Righteous Judgments
of God.

London, Printed, and Sold by T. Sorole, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holywell-Lane, in Shoreditch, 1692.

A Call in the universal Spirit of Christ Jesus, to all the Wicked and
Impenitent Sinners in the World, etc.
O! Fear, Tremble, Quake, and be Astonished all ye Inhabitants of the Earth,
and the Sea, unto whom Woe and Calamity belongs, when you perceive or hear of
the Lords shaking the Earth, and causing it to quake: Quake and Tremble, you
that so much have scoffed at and contemned Quaking and Trembling at the Word of
the Lord; now he is come terribly in his Judgments, and his Hand is lifted up
in Judgment, he causes the Earth to tremble at his dreadful presence; and now
his Judgments are in the Earth, that the Inhabitants thereof may learn
Righteousness; and be awakened to Righteousness, by the many Warnings that the
Lord gives this Generation of Evildoers: Ah! quake and tremble in this hour of
Gods Judgments, all you Proud and Wanton ones; you Stiff-necked and Rebellious
ones; you Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, and Cursed speakers, who call God to Damn
your Souls: Howl, howl, lament, lament with great Lamentation and Weeping,
you Covetous ones, whose Hearts and Affections are set upon the Earth and
Earthly things; and all you High-minded, Heady, Mockers and Despisers of those
who are good, the Lord is much grieved with your Works of Darkness and great
Abominations, which you continue in, filling up the measure of your Iniquity,
wherewith you cumber the Ground; and many appear as if they were fitted for
Destruction. What know you how soon the Earth, which God has shaken, may open
upon you and swallow you up quick, and you come to perish in your Sins; you who
have in a high degree abused, and slighted the Lords Mercies, For bearance and
Long-suffering to you-ward, and set at naught his Counsel, and would have none
of his Reproof; you have despised his Correction, refusing to take Warning from
the Lord God, who sent many faithful Servants in his Name and Fear to warn you.

Therefore is the Righteous and Just God filled with Indignation, and come to
plead with you in his Wrath and Vengeance; for Vengeance is his, and he will
repay it for the Evil and Wickedness done, and the Provocations wherewith the
Inhabitants of the Earth have provoked God to wrath, for the Wrongs and
Injuries against him, and one to another; for they that do wrong, shall receive
for the Wrongs that they do; for God is no respecter of Persons nor Parties,
such as every one sows, such must he reap from the righteous Judge of Heaven
and Earth, who will do all men Right, and is Equal in all his Ways, and will be
Righteous in all his Judgments for evermore; when his Judgments are in the
Earth, He will punish the Wicked in his Wrath, and vex them in his sore
Displeasure; Although the merciful God has a long time strove with you by his
good Spirit, and spared you, you will not always find it so, you Mockers at
Quaking and Trembling at the Word of the Lord; now is the Lord making you to
quake and tremble, and Pailness of Face and Horror must come upon you, and take
hold of you suddenly.

In the time of the EARTHQUAKE that came from God, the 8th Day of the 7th
Month, 1692. in London, and many other places of this Nation of England, as
well as other Countries, I saw in London many struck at that present with a
sudden Fear of what might come upon or befall them, but few minded or rightly
considered what they had done against Almighty God, to provoke him to Anger and
great Displeasure: few were prepared to dye the death of the Righteous then, if
Death had come upon them, which many feared greatly, when by the Earthquake so
many Houses in the City of London, with the Subborbs, were so terribly shaken,
that many People were in expectation that their Houses would fall down upon
them, and others fearing that the Ground would have opened to sink them down: I
was in a great concernment and trouble of mind, for to hear and behold so many
People in a sudden expectation of the Death of their Bodies, whilst unsensible
of there being dead in their Sins and Trespasses, and so much unprepared for
such a final Change or Dissolution of their outward man, they having not
Repented of their Wicked Works, nor turned from the Evil of their Ways and
Doings; and but few did I see that did turn their Minds toward the Lord, to
feel him inwardly, or that did turn to him with all their Hearts, who by his
great Power did shake the Earth outwardly; but few Rent their Hearts or
considered their Ways, to turn to God, to look to him and wait upon him in
Humillity, Reverence, and a Godly Fear; but many did I behold with stretched
out Necks, and wanton Eyes, full of Pride, Vain Glory; and great Abominations
were acted and committed in the Fairs at Smithfield and Southwork, and other
places, as if God did not see, nor yet regard it. Ah! sinful City and Nation!
will you not see? will you not consider nor lay these things to Heart, and
Repent of your Crying Sins and great Abominations? Have not your Sins long
cried for Wrath and Vengeance to fall heavy upon you?

O! that you would once come to hear and obey the Voice of the Lord, and his
threatening more Judgment and greater Calamity yet to come upon this City and
Nation, if speedily you do not Repent, and turn to God, from all your
Transgressions and horrible Abominations wherewith he is so much provoked, and
the Name of Christ Jesus, which you profess in Words, dishonored: Be ye all
asured, that the Judgments come and threatened, are not intended or sent where
they come, that any should slight or disregard them, but seriously to consider
them as so many Warnings from God, to the Wicked, for them to beware and take
heed how they continue any longer in Sin, Rebellion and hard Heartedness
against the Lord, lest sudden Destruction come upon you, that you will not be
able to escape or flee from; you that declare your Sin as Sodom, what know you
how swiftly the Destruction may come? O! remember and forget not that great
Calamity which God Almighty of late brought upon Port Royal in Jamaica, and how
many Persons in a moment perished, who may be were not more wicked then many in
England are: O! why will you dye in your Sins, by remaining and abiding
therein? Why do you retain your Hardness and Impenitency of Heart, treasuring
up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and the Judgment of the great Day? Will
neither past, present, nor future Judgments alarm or awaken you? Will you
still stop your Ears, close your Eyes, and harden your Hearts against the Lord?
Have not many of you made your Hearts as an Adament? Are you not past feeling
of what God intended for the awakening of you [out of your sleep in Sin and
Death] by that great and lamentable Plague and Fire in this City, and other
Places? And is not War a heavy Judgment and Calamity wherever it continues
long? Do you forget these things, and him that sends or suffers them to come
in any Nation as he pleases?

O! tremble before the Lord! fear and dread his holy Name! Weep and howl for
the Misery that will come upon you speedily, except you Repent, except you
Cease to do Evil, and Learn to do Well, in your time and day given you of God
to Repent in; you seed of Evildoers, and Children that are Corrupters, you
Proud and Wanton Ones, you Stiff-necked and Rebellious Ones, you Drunkards,
Swearers, Liars, Whoremongers, and cursed speakers, who call God to damn your
Souls; Cease from the Evil of your cursed speaking, with all the Evil of your
Ways and Doings: Repent, repent, and lament bitterly for so often Pierceing,
Villifying, and putting to shame the Lord of Life and Glory, Christ Jesus, of
whom you make some outward Profession, but God searches and knows your
Hearts; he hears all your cursed blasphemous Words, and sees all your wicked
Ways and Doings, whereby you provoke the Lord to wrath in a great degree of
Wickedness, and foul Abominations acted and committed daily by many against the
Lord, which will prove your Ruin, who do not take warning in your day and time,
which is but short, that God will allow you in this World; consider the
precious time God already has afforded you, and call to mind the many Warnings
you have had from God, through his faithful Servants, who have been stirred up
in the Spirit of the Lord to pronounce his Woes and Judgments that should fall
upon the Wicked and Ungodly, that did refuse to take warning, and amend their
ways.

Consider the Eternal Power of the Lord, which he is come to make known in the
Earth, and in the Kingdoms of men, and over all he has appeared to shake the
Earth, and the Heavens, and all Nations; the Lord is come with Power and great
Glory, to shake the Earth inwardly that is set in man's Heart, that it may be
removed out of the Heart, and so preparation may be in the Heart for the Lords
appearance, to shake and remove that which is to be shaken, either inwardly or
outwardly, and so People may come to the Knowledge of that which cannot be
shaken with the Wind. O Earth, hear the Word of the Lord, and be astonished ye
Heavens, fear and dread before him all ye Nations of the Earth, and People of
all Languages and Persuasions whatsoever, put no longer the Evil day afar off
from you; you high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, that have caused the
Seat of Violence to draw near; but put far from you all your Envy, Wrath,
Bitterness and Cruelty that so long has had place in you, and has been vented
forth by many of you in Words and Actions against the appearance of the Lord,
and that which is good, wrought by him in People, and in the World; which you
should have received, loved, and made choice of; you that have been and are
Gainsayers and Opposers of the Appearance and Work of the Lord in your day, how
have you called good evil, and evil good; put Light for Darkness, and Darkness
for Light; Sweet for Bitter, and Bitter for Sweet, being unacquainted with the
Eye Salve, you cannot see aright into the things of God, nor distinguish them
from the contrary: So you Justify the Wicked, and would take away the
Righteousness of the Righteous from them, in your Blindness and Darkness that
you are in; you have shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men, would neither
enter in your selves, nor suffer them that would; Woe unto you whited Walls and
painted Sepulchers, you appear beautiful to People, led into and kept in
Darkness by you; but the Lord has a Controversy with you, you
Idol-Sheepherds, who seek your Gain from your Quarter, but seek not the Iost
Sheep, nor watch for the Soul: What account can you give of your Flooks which
you are set over by men, and come to them as sent of men, by whom you expect to
be upheld? Are not many of your Flocks starved, instead of being fed by you?
Wherewith will you have to Answer the chief Sheepherd and Bishop of Souls,
Christ Jesus, whose Ministers followed his Example, and fed the Sheep and Flock
of Christ with Spiritual Meat, whom they had the oversight of; they labored
with great diligence to beget People that heard them, to God, that they might
believe to the saving of the Soul; they did not turn any from, but to the Light
of Christ Jesus, that they might love it, believe and walk in it, and become
Children of it: But the Ministers made and sent by Man, have stumbled at, hated
and rebelled against this Light, and some in their blind Zeal, without divine
Knowledge, have contemned it, and encouraged there Hearers, in their contemning
of the Light of Christ, with which they are lightened, instead of turning People
from Darkness to the Light of Life, which is the Cause why so many Nations,
Peoples, Kindreds and Tongues yet sit in Darkness, and under the region of the
shadow of Death; and is the very Cause why so much Sin and Error is spread
over the Nations and Kingdoms of this World.

Now are the Nations and People made Drunk, and stagger with the Whore's Cup,
which she has put into their Hands to drink, which is the cause of there
stumbling, and so much falling into the Pit, and why so many are still snared
and taken in that which is Evil, which by the Light of the Lord, the Light of
the World, if they would turn to it, they might all see, and also avoid the
appearance of Evil in the temptation thereunto; and Peoples being in Darkness
from this Light, is the cause why they do not see the Hand of the Lord, when
lifted up in Judgment; it is but few will regard it before they feel it come
heavy upon there Heads; although God be laying waste Countries near us, and has
brought Desolation in the Earth, yet little is this laid to Heart by such as at
present are spared from being so smitten, as some Countries have been and still
are, although possibly not greater Sinners, or more sinful Nations then this,
and yet sorely punished, wasted and spoiled by the present Hand of the Lord in
Judgment. And if the People of this Nation go on in these grievous Sins and
Trespasses in Rebellion against God, he will certainly make them sick in
smiting of them, and put them in Fear, and Astonish them more and more, and lay
their Honor and Glory in the Dust, as he has done in other Countries already;
for how soon can he work Wonders to the Amozement of People and Nations! How
soon can he lay a City on Heaps, and make a strong Nation desolate! What is a
fenced City or strong Nation before the Lord! when he in his Wrath enters into
Judgment, and pleads with People in his sore Displeasure: who can turn away
his Wrath, or stop him from pouring out his Fury and Indignation? of which now
the Inhabitants of this City and Nation are apparently warned by the late
dreadful Earthquake, that you all might prepare for whatsoever may follow after
it, and not perish in your Pride, you Proud Ones, nor you Drunkards in your
Drunkenness, nor you filthy unclean persons in your Filthiness and Debauchery,
nor you Swearers, Liars, Cursed Speakers, or Covetous Ones, might dye in your
Iniquity, nor any Evil which the City and Nation even so horribly abounds with.

And Repent, Repent all you Backsliders, who are revolted and slidden back from
the Truth and Way of God; and love and have chosen the Way of the Wicked, which
is Darkness, whereby you have been led, and have walked in Crooked Ways and
By-pathes, and taken a liberty out of the Truth, and use it to your own and
other Peoples hurt, and to the grief of the pure and holy Spirit of the Lord
God eternal. I have Compassiod truly in my Heart toward some of you, that have
a Sincerity remaining yet in you that know the Truth, and that no Lie is of it,
how beit ye do not obey it, nor do after the pure Requiring of it; the Lord is
angry with you, and will now plead with you in his Wrath, except you Repent and
turn to the Lord and his Truth (with your Hearts) which you own and profess in
Words, but are gone from the Life and Power of it. I know some of you began
well to run in the Heavenly Race, that God by his Light set before you, and
walked many Years on with the Flock of God, in the Path of the Just, in much
Love, Unity and Concord; but afterward departed in your Hearts from the Lord,
his Truth, and the comfortable Society of his People, and the Lord is much
displeased with your Spirit of Separation and Division; and you Backsliders in
heart shall be filled with your own Ways and Evil Devices, your separation
will become Loathsome and an Abhorrence to all who are spiritually minded, and
the longer you cleave to it, the worse you will be, more hardened and separated
from God and your own good, being separate from the Spiritual Fellowship and
Communion of the faithful Flock of Christ Jesus, the only Savior and Redeemer:
your shelter in the World and spirit of it will fail, when Calamity comes upon
Evildoers, lean thereon never so much, and flee to it as much as you will for
help, that help will stand you but in little stead, in this dreadful Day of
God's Judgments, you will be judged; and your Works of Darkness punished, by
the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, who will Reward every man according to his
Works.

And all you great Pretenders to Reformation, who are out of the Life and Power
of God, and are even strangers to the divine Nature of Christ Jesus, and know
not him within you, the Hope of Glory, being Ignorant of the Life and Power of
Christianity, which you do profess in Words, and outward Appearance; Repent,
repent, the Lord has a Controversy with you; he will afflict and punish you
yet more and more for your Sins, which you stand charged with, and are found
guilty of in the Eye of the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, especially you
that have afflicted or helped forward the Afflictions the of Righteous and
their Sufferings, as Evil Instruments in the hand of Satan, and by his Power;
the Lord will afflict you, and sorely punish you for your Iniquity and
Wickedness, which you have acted and committed against the Lord and his
Faithful Servants, when Persecution did arise because of the Word: How many
pretend Preachers, or Ministers of the Word, who have in their Malice and Envy
raised or spread abroad false Reports against the Truth and Innocent Professors
thereof, to hinder the progress and spreading of the Truth of God, with their
Lies and Scandals against the Upright and the Just, who have been and are Doers
of the Truth, and Faithful Followers of Christ Jesus: Woe, woe, from him is
coming upon you, you whited Walls and painted Sepulchers, and all you Daubers
with untempered Mortar, your inward Darkness and Blindness of mind is seen,
that you are black inwardly; you whited Walls, your Whitening wherewith you
white your outside, is seen and discovered with the Light of Christ Jesus; your
painting your selves with the Prophets, Christ's or the Apostles Words, whilst
you are from the Life of the Word, and the safe Guidance of the Spirit of
Truth, that will profit you little, nor cover you in the day of the Lords
Wrath; God will shake and undo your Directory or Church-Faith, made by Men,
whereby many have been kept from waiting for the Spirit of God, and to receive
Faith from him, which purifieth the Heart, whereby the only true God is
pleased; you may appear fair and beautiful before men, you Idol-Sheepherds, and
principal of the Flocks, and gatherings together about worship of God, whilst
you do not Spiritually know him; the Shame of your Nakedness will shortly
appear to the People, blindly led and deceived by you, and daubed over with
your untempered Mortar; howling and bitter Lamentation will come upon you; many
are desiring Eye Salve that they may see, and such who buy that, will see, and
more loathe and hate your Merchandise, how finely painted or daubed soever it
may appear outwardly to Men, you Wolves in Sheeps clothing, many do see, and
Nations will abhor you and your dishonest Gain, which so long you have sought
and gaped after: People comes to see your Deceit, and are ashamed of your
Covetous Practices, and your Works of Darkness.

I was constrained in the Spirit of the Lord God at this time to write, and
upon the occasion and Remembrance of the Judgments of the Lord already past, as
well as what now is; with a deep Consideration of what may yet proceed from
God, as Threatened by the late Dreadful EARTHQUAKE, to call all People to
Repentance and Amendment of Life speedily, before it be too late; that those so
very grievous provoking Sins and Abominations now committed in this City and
Nation, with many other Cities and Nations, may be Repented of, which indeed
has kindled Gods fierce Wrath to that degree, which may bring great Ruin and
Desolation, if you continue therein; but if by Repentance, Weeping and
Lamentation, you yet turn to God with all your Hearts, and put away the Evil of
your Ways and Doings from before the Eyes of the Lord, from the highest to the
lowest, both Rich and Poor, Bond and Free; and not add Sin to Sin, as you have
long done, and which now abounds almost every where; who knows yet but God may
turn away his Wrath now threatened to be poured forth and executed. So Rent your
Hearts, and not your Garments; be truly humbled under the Hand of the Lord,
that is now lifted up in Judgment: Fear the Lord, and believe in his Name,
cease from Evil, and do Good in your time, for upon such the Lord will have
Mercy, they will not dye in their Sins when they dye, but will dye in the Lord
the Death of the Righteous, and will have the Reward of the Righteous, even
Everlesting Rest and Peace: Which that you all may come to know and Inherit,
and that it may go well with you in this World, and that which is to come, is
the real Desire of your Friend, and a faithful Well-Wisher of all Mankind;

James Park.

THE END.

