THE PROCEEDINGS OF HIS MAJESTY'S Justices of Peace, At the SESSIONS of Oyer
and Terminer; Held at Hicks's-Hall, September the 6 th, 1684. for the Trial of
the Constables, etc. of the Hamlets of Spittle-Fields, and Bethnal-Green.
Midd.ss. Ad Sessionem Oier and Terminer tent' pro Com' Midd' per adjorn: apud
Hicks-hall in St. John's Street, in Com' praed' die Sabbati, sexto die
Septembris, Anno Regni Dom' nostr' Caroli secundi, Dei Gratia, Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regis, Fidei defensor' etc. Tricesimo sexto,
coram Will. SmithBaronetto, Rich. Downton Milite, Johan. Berry Milite, Thom.
Row, Thom. Harriot, Armigeris, ac aliis sociis suis Justic. dicti Dom' Regis,
etc. ibidem.
IT is thought fit, and ordered by this Court, That a brief account of the
Inducement to the proceedings, and of the proceedings against the
Parish-Officers hereafter named, at the Sessions of Oier and Terminer, be
published and Printed, as follows.

That the Tower-Hamlets consist of Nineteen Parishes and Hamlets; which Hamlets
are as numerous as most Parishes in England.

That the people for the most part consist of Weavers, and other Manufacturers,
and of Seamen, Watermen, and such who relate to Shipping and Sea-service; and
are generally very Factious and Poor.

That there were about Sixteen great and public Conventicles within the said
Hamlets, and Houses built for them as big as most Churches; and fitted up with
Pews and Pulpits, as Churches.

That the Justices of Peace of Middlesex, living in the said Tower-hamlets,
could never prevail with the Constables and Parish-Officers to suppress the
said Conventicles; nor during the time of the Ignoramus Juries, could invent
any way to suppress them; in regard, that if any Fine had been laid upon any of
the Hearers or Preachers, above Ten shillings, there lay an Appeal, which was
to have been tried by a Jury, which would certainly have gone against the
conviction of the Justices; and thereby the Justices would have been Derided,
the Government Baffled, and those Factious persons who frequented those
Conventicles, made more Insolent and Rebellious.

That as soon as there were Loyal Sheriffs of Middlesex, and consequently hopes
of good Juries, the Justices went in person, and did in a little time suppress
those public and bold Conventicles.

That the said Justices were forced, to their great trouble and charges, to
keep frequent Sessions in the Tower-Hamlets for the preservation of the peace;
without which, in all probability, the Factious people there in those times,
had got into Rebellion, being ripe for it.

That notwithstanding this Care of the Justices, and although, the public
Conventicles were suppressed, yet the Factious people got together in great
numbers in private Houses, and held Conventicles there, and those in great
numbers; of which none of the Parish-Officers would make any discovery, nor
execute any of the Justices Warrants to that purpose; which did enforce the
Justices to employ strangers in that Service, and by them the Justices have had
intelligence where those Conventicles have been kept, and have been forced to
repair to the places themselves to suppress them, not daring to trust any
Parish-Officers; which was so great a trouble and toil to the Justices, that
they did resolve to keep a Sessions in every Parish and Hamlet, to the intent
they might make a full enquiry into all places, and a perfect discovery of
those Factious and Rebellious persons, who contemned all Authority; and this
they were more inclined to do, because they did apprehend, that some of those
Traitors and Miscreants, who were in the late Horrid Plot for the Murder of
His Majesty, and His Royal Brother, might lurk in some of those places; And
therefore sent out their Warrants to the High-Constable, requiring him to issue
forth his Warrant to the Officers of the several Parishes and Hamlets, to give
notice of a Sessions, and to require them to bring in a List to that Sessions
of the Inhabitants, Housekeepers, and Inmates, to the intent a discovery might
be made what they were, and who they were who did disturb the Government, and
would not conform to the Laws; And to their great charge and trouble, the
Justices went through most of the Parishes and Hamlets, and kept Sessions, at
last they came to the Hamlet of Spittle-fields, and there on the thirtieth day
of July, Sir William Smith Baronet, Sir John Berry Knight, Charles Osborne Esquire
Arnold Brown Esquire and Abraham Bailey Esquire Justices of the Peace, Living in the
Tower-hamlets, held a Sessions, to which the Parish-Officers were summoned, to
give an account upon Oath of the Inhabitants, Housekeepers, and Inmates,
within that Hamlet, which is the most Factious Hamlet of all the
Tower-Division, having had many Conventicles in it, which it still has; and
which the Justices could never prevail with the Parish-Officers to suppress or
Discover; and being then required to take an Oath to that end, they being
Fifteen in number, unanimously refused (to the great contempt of Authority, and
the disappointing the Justices of that discovery they hoped to have made there;
for which contempt the Justices demanded of them to find Sureties to appear at
the General Sessions, to answer the Contempt; and in the mean time to be of the
Good Behavior; which they likewise unanimously refused to do; for which the
Justices committed them to his Majesty's Gaol of New-Prison; and as they went
out of the Court, in great scorn they bid the Justices look to the Poor; and
the very next day, the poor in great numbers, in a Mutinous and Rebellious way,
came to the Houses of Sir William Smith, Sir John Berry, and Arnold Brown, to
demand money of them, and likewise to the Minister of the Parish of Stepney,
and threatened they would come a great multitude of them on Sunday to the
Church, to demand Relief there; and did declare they were encouraged to this
mutinous proceeding, by the instigation of some of those Officers in prison.
Which practice might have had an ill consequence, if by the Justices Care it
had not been prevented. That the said Officers continued in Prison about three
weeks, and did not apply to any of the Justices of the Peace to be Bailed; but
stayed until one of His Majesty's Judges of the Kings Bench came from the
Circuit, and then put in Bayl before him to appear at this General Sessions,
where by a Commission of Oier and Terminer they were tried, and upon a full
hearing of the King's Council, and of the Parties and their Council, they were
found Guilty, and Judgment given against them, as follows, viz. Edward Binns
fined an Hundred pounds, John Cartwright an hundred pounds, David Waine an
hundred pounds, Roland Trion, Christopher Tooley, William Cowley, John Hilton,
Richard Skingley, Laurence Culliford, Samuel Winnet, Fifty pounds a piece;
William Sumner, John Newit, and John Miller, who confessed the said Indictment,
Five marks a piece; George Henwood thirteen shillings and four pence; and all
committed to New-Prison, until they have paid their said Fines; and John Child,
the Head Beadle of the said Spittle-fields, to be set Twice in the Pillory.

That for the same Offense, Five other Officers of the Hamlet of Bethnal-Green,
had Judgment given against them as follows, viz. James Pittman, who would not
Plead or Answer to the Indictment, has Judgment given against him by Nihil
dicit, is fined Two hundred pounds; William Malin, Richard Stratford, and
William Palmer, who confessed the Indictment, are fined five marks a piece, and
all committed to New-Prison, until they have paid their respective Fines;
Samuel Wheeler, Beadle of Bethnal-Green, to be set Once in the Pillory.

That if Exemplary Justice had not been done upon these Offenders, neither
Justices of Peace, nor any other Officers His Majesty should have employed in
those Hamlets, would have been able to have done any Service for the
preservation of the Peace, and suppressing these Tumultuous Meetings, and
Riotous Assemblies, but they would have been in danger to have been knocked
of the head by the Mobile.

Per Cur' SMITH.

LONDON: Printed by R. R. and are to be sold by Randall Tailor, near Stationers
Hall, 1684.


