The Magnanimious, and High-borne Prince, James Duke of york etc. Borne
October the 14th. 1633


The PARIS Gazette.
Paris, Anno Dom. 1490.
THe Emperor Maximilian having courted Anne sole Daughter and Heir to the Duke
of Britain, prevailed at last with the young Lady, and with the principal
Persons about her, as the Marriage was consummated by Proxy, with a Ceremony at
that time in these parts new. For she was not only publicly contracted, but
stated as a Bride, and solemnly Bedded; and after she was laid, there came in
Maximilian's Ambassador with Letters of Procuration, and in the presence of
sundry Noble Personages, Men and Women, put his Leg (stripped naked to the Knee)
between the Espousal Sheets; to the end, that that Ceremony might be thought to
amount to a Consummation and actual Knowledge. This done, Maximilian (whose
property it was to leave things then, when they were almost come to perfection,
and to end them by imagination; like ill Archers, that draw not their Arrows up
to the Head; and who might as easily have bedded the Lady himself, as to have
made a Play and Disguise of it,) thinking all now assured, neglecting for a
time his further proceeding, and intended his Wars. Mean while, the French
King (consulting with his Divines, and finding that this pretended Consummation
was rather an Invention of Court, than any ways valid by the Laws of the
Church,) went more really to work, and by secret Instruments, and cunning
Agents, as well Matrons about the young Lady, as Counselors, first sought to
remove the Point of Religion and Honor out of the mind of the Lady her self,
wherein there was a double labor. Maximilian was not only Contracted unto the
Lady, but Maximilian's Daughter was likewise Contracted to King Charles; So as
the Marriage ^alted upon both feet, and was not clear on the other side. But
for the Contract with King Charles, the exception lay plain and fair; for that
Maximilians Daughter was under years of Consent, and so not bound by Law, but a
power of Disagreement left to either part. But for the Contract made by
Maximilian with the Lady her self, they were harder driven; having nothing to
allege, but that it was done without the consent of her Sovereign Lord King
Charles, whose Ward and Client she was, and he to her in place of a Father; and
therefore it was void, and of no force, for want of such consent. Which defect
(they said) though it would not evacuate a Marriage, after Cohabitation and
Actual Consummation; yet it was enough to make void a Contract. For as for the
pretended Consummation, they made sport with it, and said, That it was an
argument that Maximilian was a Widdower, and a cold Wooer, that could content
himself to be a Bridegroom by Deputy, and would not make a little Journey to
put all out of question. So that the young Lady; wrought upon by these Reasons,
finely instilled by such as the French King (who spared for no Rewards or
Promises) had made on his side, and allured likewise by the present Glory and
Greatness of King Charles, (^eing also a young King, and a Bachelor) and loath
to make her Country the Seat of a long and miserable War, secretly yielded to
accept of King Charles. Those of the Court of Britain her Subjects and
Familiars, insinuated into the Ladies mind the invalidity of a Marriage by
Proxy, that there was more of Solemnity and State in those contracts, then
Obligation. That She ought not to make any Scruple of Conscience about the
point, where the good of her self and Subjects was so much concerned. However
in such accidents, the Pope who has power over all Laws Ecclesiastical, would
easily be brought to dispense with such Covenants not personally performed, to
prevent the miseries that grow by War. L. Bacon Hist of Henry vii. page 80, 81.
de Serres life of Charles viii. The supplement of Phil. Comines chap. 6. A. D.
1489.

The Case.
Ditto 1506. Lewis the twelfth K. of France, had one only Daughter, whose name
was Claude, the which by virtue of the Salique Law was excluded from inheriting
the Crown: the presumptive Heir being Francis Duke of Valois, Earl of
Angoulesme. This Claude being not yet come to Age, was betrothed to Charles
(the eldest Son of Archduke Philip) and the same Marriage De Serres in the Life
of Lewis XII.
confirmed by more then one Legacy, they entituling themselves Kings of Naples,
and Dukes of Apulia and Calabria. After all this it was debated in the Kings
Council, and in all the Parliaments of France, whether the said Espousals
should be annulled? And whether it were not most convenient for the Realm, that
Francis Duke of Valois should marry Her, He being the undoubted Heir of the
Kindom.

Arguments upon each side.
King Lewis thought the Case to contain matter of much difficulty. In the first
place he thought it repugnant to the Majesty and Grandeur of France, that he
should violate his Royal Word and Faith plighted with the Eldest Son of the K.
of Castile: And therefore He said that He could not upon any terms condescend
and yield unto the Humble Request and Petition of his Peers and Parliaments,
who did, (and that rationally) conclude that it would exceedingly contribute to
the Peace and Welfare of France, if Francis of Valois did marry with Claude.
The Nobles and respective Parliaments proceeded upon this ground. That Claude
after the decease of King Lewis would as Inheritrix possess sundry Territories
and Lordships in Italy, France, and the Netherlands, which if they should be
alienated from the Realm of France by her Marriage into Castile, it would prove
an unspeakable loss to the Crown of France. For what was this else but to
deliver up the Keys of the said Realm unto the Castilians, the Hereditary
Enemies of France, for Preservation or the Recovery whereof there must needs
arise most grievous Wars betwixt the immediate Successor of King Lewis, and the
Crown of Castile? It did not seem credible unto them, nor did they think the
Councels of France ought to proceed on such uncertain Measures, that the
Alliance aforesaid would produce any great and durable Amity betwixt the two
Nations. There being nothing so Sacred or Solemn in the Leagues and
Confederacies of Princes which does not yield to their Ambition. Enlargement of
Empire is the Supreme consideration in their Councels; and from those desires
even the most firm bonds of Friendship are daily violated. Wherefore least the
Territories of such Importance should come into the possession of the
Castilians, and their already potent Neighbor should receive so great an
accessional of strength, they thought the Espousals did not only deserve to be
annulled, bu ought in point of Right and Equity to be invalidated, For the
which they alleged two most powerful reasons. First, they resolved it, that
His Majesty would proceed most exactly according to the dictates of Honor and
Conscience; if, out of a tender regard unto the welfare and safety of his
people, He did insede from those Counsils which he had either presipitously
assented unto, or entertained upon the Exigency of a special juncture of
Affairs: That He was obliged to comply with the humble request of his natural
Subjects, aiming at the general, rather than by too strict a respect unto His
Word, given unto a Forreigner, to endanger the whole Realm. That the most
obligatory and powerful toys upon Princes, are those whereby they stand
engaged to their people, whereunto for Him to adhere, 'twas true Honor and
Conscience. Secondly they argued against the Marriage, that in such Contracts
above all others there ought to intervene a voluntary consent, which She at
those Years was incapable to give; and therefore the Contract was null by the
Civil and Canon Law.

The Resolution taken.
King Lewis being overruled by these reasons, and by a particular concernment
for the welfare of His Realm, did annull the said Contract; and to answer the
Peace and Tranquillity of his Dominions did give Her in Marriage unto Francis of
Valois, who did afterward succeed him in the Realm of France.

The Event.
It was found by Experience that the designs of the Castilians which they had
formed to the prejudice of France, and which were founded upon the hopes of
consummating the said Marriage, were all at once defeated therewith; And
Francis together with Claude did quietly possess himself of those Hereditaments.

The Authors observation thereon.
In the Marriage of the Royal Family unto Foreign Potentates, two things ought
especially to be considered. First, How much passes away with the Daughter
affianced. Secondly, What benefits may accrue, or be justly expected from the
Farreigner with whom such Alliance and Marriage is to be Contracted. Zuerius
Boxhornius disquisit. Politic. cas. 2.

Metz. The Princess of Heidelberg being formerly Affianced unto the D of
Orleans, brother to the present King of France, no sooner arrived at this
place; but His most Christian Majesty sent express word unto Her Highness, that
albeit according to the Articles of Marriage, She were to continue in the
Protestant Religion until by the persuasions and instructions of Her Aunt the
Princess Lovyce; Yet such was the pleasure of His most Christian Majesty, that
She should either omit those formalities and delays, and immediately turn Roman
Catholic, or else return to Heidelbergh without any consummation of Marriage.

Oxford 1600. Albaricus Gentilis in a Discourse of His to Chancellor Egerton
about Marriages by Proxy, denies them to be of any validity. For howsoever the
Canon Law does admit of such, as good; Yet the Civil Lawyers are generally of
another opinion. Because that in Matrimony there ought to intervene the special
and present consent of both Parties; but in such cases the Proxy only gives his
immediate consent. And whereas it is said that any Action may be executed by
Proxy which a man may execute by himself; the Rule is not true in cases of
Matrimony, but in Patrimonial Causes; which alone admit of Procurations; And
Jason the Civilian writes foolishly, where he admits of Marriage by Proxy. Etsi
dicitur actum quemlibet posse per pracuratorem posse explicari in s^quid alitur
vetitum sit. Tamen and illa est regula, ut quae non sint Patrimonij, ea per
procuraeorem non fiant; Atque quod excipiat ab hac regula Matrimonium Jason,
aut quisquis alius ineptum est. Alberic. Gentilis de nuptijs l. 2. c. 14.

Amsterdam 1666. Upon the question concerning the validity of Marriage by
Proxy, it is resolved that Espousals may be made by Proxy, but not Marriage.
For, that a thing be done by Proxy, It is requisite that the Action arising
from the Contract be such as may be fixed in the Proxy, and by him may
reciprocally revert unto him by whom he is delegated. l. 4. 2. D. de adquirend.
vel omittend. possess. l. 8.. final. D. mandat. But though in Espousall the
Action be such as may be surrendered up to the principal and delegating parts;
yet such is the bond of Marriage (which is the eonsummation of Espousals, and
puts an end to that Ceremony) that it terminates in the person of a Proxy, nor
is it a thing imaginable in Nature, that ever it should fall under the
possi^ility of any Surrender. Henricus Bronwer I. C. de jure connubior. l. 1.
c. 20. 11.

Anjou 1584. If both parties be present and give their mutual consents in
Marriage, without Cohabitation; Though the Law terms this a good Marriage, yet
I do determine that the man in this case does not acquire the Rights of an
husband. For accruing to the resolution of the Divines and Canonists, whose
Authority is the greatest in these points. Whenever we speak of the Rights of
Marriage, there is not any notice or regard taken of those Marriages which are
not consummated by Co-habitation. Joan. Bodin. de repub. l 1. c. 3.


