THE Printers CASE: Humbly submitted to the Consideration of the Honorable the
House of COMMONS.
IT is Humbly conceived, That the Tax of One Penny upon a Half Sheet, and Two
Pence upon a Sheet of every Paper and Pamphlet, is not intended as a Method for
preventing Libels; because a Remedy for this is Proposed, by obliging the
Bookseller and Printer of every Paper, to set their Names and Places of Abode
to the said Papers.

THAT after the said Duty (of about Twenty Papers of Half Sheets which come out
every Week, besides many other Occasional ones) there will not Two be
published, by reason of this Tax; which will advance every Penny Paper to Three
Pence, or Two Pence Halfpenny at least, and every Pamphlet in Proportion.

THAT of many Hundred Master-Printers and Journymen in this City, two Thirds do
entirely depend upon the Printing of small Papers and Pamphlets, especially the
latter; by which all Britain is supplied with Sermons, and other Tracts of
Devotion, at a cheap Rate: And therefore two Thirds of the said Printers, with
their Families, must be entirely Ruined.

THAT, with all Submission, nothing will contribute more to the Spreading and
Publishing Seditious Libels, than the said Tax; because, it is to be feared,
that many of the poorer Printers, to prevent their Families from Starving, will
be tempted to Print whatsoever shall be offered them, by any Person who will be
at the Charge of the Impression, though at never so great a Hazard.

THAT the intended Tax upon Paper (which to the Buyer will amount to near 30
per Cent.) is apprehended to be a sufficient Load upon the Printers, and
perhaps equal to that upon any other Trade.

THAT Paper, after it is Printed, is of no intrinsic Value at all, but depends
merely upon the Humor and Opinion of People; and that there are few Printers
in this Town, who have not many Thousand Copies by them, which they daily sell
for waste Paper.

THAT the Printers are heartily disposed to correct all Abuses in their Trade;
and have herewith annexed their humble PROPOSALS to that End, to this
HONORABLE HOUSE; which they doubt not will prove the most effectual Means, for
preventing the Publishing of all Seditious Libels and Pamphlets.

The Printers PROPOSALS For a Regulation of the PRESS.
I.THAT all Printing Presses be Registered, with the Names and Places of Abode
of the Proprietors thereof, and all the Rooms wherein such Presses are set up;
this to be repeated as often as any Press shall be removed out of one Room into
another, or the Interest thereof transferred to the Use of any other Person,
and not one Sheet to be Printed off till such Registry be first made, under the
Penalty of II. That every Printer shall have a particular Mark to be registered
also with his Name and Presses, which said Mark he shall always be obliged to
Print visibly at the Bottom of the first Page of every Sheet or Half Sheet by
him Printed, under the Penalty of III. That all Title Pages shall contain some
Registered Printer's Name, and Place of Abode, with the Year when Printed,
under the Penalty of (...) And if any thing Printed after (...) without such
Name and Mark in the Title Page, and also the proper Mark or Marks of every
other Printer in all other Sheets thereof, placed as is before directed,
(though such Papers or Books be otherwise never so inoffensive) shall be found
in the Custody of any Person whatsoever, either for Sale, or to be given away,
or kept for private Use, it shall be at the Liberty of any Person seeing the
same, to seize and carry away such Paper or Papers, Book or Books, or Parts of
Books, and deliver them to the next Justice of Peace, and not only be exempted
from any Action or Actions, but also receive for so doing, a Reward of (...) to
be levied on the Person in whose Custody such Goods shall be so found, who
shall also be further liable to all the Penalties of this Act, unless he shall
discover the Person from whom he had them. And if it be pretended by the
Persons on whom such Seizure is made, that the Papers were Printed before the
Commencement of this Act, let them be obliged to make out the Truth of such
Allegation sufficiently testified on Oath, within (...) Days, or otherwise the
said Justice to cause the said Papers or Books to be burnt or destroyed. IV.
That every Printer over and above the Penalties of this Act, shall be subject
and liable to all other Prosecutions for any thing offensive contained in
whatsoever Sheet, or part of a Sheet he shall Print, with his Mark or without,
unless he shall discover the Author, or the Party from whom he had the Copy. V.
That every Person who shall presume to counterfeit or make use of the Mark or
Name of any other Printer, shall be guilty of (...) and all Persons accessory
to such a Cheat, liable to the same Punishment, except the first Discoverer.
VI. That no Persons be admitted to Register any Printing Press or Presses, nor
be taken into Copartnership with, or have any Interest in or Title to any such
Register, or the Benefit thereof; but such only as themselves have, or the
Widows or Children of such as have served Seven Years Apprenticeship to the Art
of Printing.
N. B. Most of the Papers lately Published, which have given Offense, were
Printed by such as have not served an Apprenticeship to the Art of Printing,
though they keep Printing Presses.

The First Article prevents all Private Presses.

And the Second discovers the Printer of every Sheet, though a Book should be
divided among many Printers, as is sometimes practiced.

The Third suppresses the Publication of all Treason, Sedition, or Scandal,
which will be the only things attempted to be Clandestinely Printed, and
consequently prevents the Printing thereof; for no Person will print what
cannot be dispersed, nor will any one receive what cannot be safely kept in his
Custody.

And then the Fourth Article will be a sufficient Caution to all Printers to be
careful of what they undertake so Print, and for whom; when the Publication
will be so difficult, and the Means of discovering so easy.

The Fifth Article will prevent an innocent Person suffering for the Faults of
another's Forgery.

All which is Humbly submitted to the Consideration of this HONORABLE HOUSE,
by the PRINTERS of LONDON; who as they are willing and desirous a Stop should
be put to the Publication of all Papers or Books that may be offensive; so they
humbly hope and beseech your HONORS, that if by these Proposals the Evils of
the PRESS shall be prevented, they may be permitted the innocent Exercise of
their Callings; without being obliged to Print the Name of the AUTHOR in the
Title Page of every Book, which will very much discourage the Publication of
many excellent Treatises, through the excess of Modesty in some, who will
rather stifle their Performances, than suffer their Names to appear in Print,
though to a Work deserving the greatest Applause. And on the other hand, some
very good Books will be lessened in the Esteem of many Readers, through a
Prejudice to its AUTHOR, both which will be very prejudicial to them, and they
hope your HONORS will not think it necessary to be insisted on. Nor are they
without Grounds inclined to believe that your HONORS will please to desist
from further loading them with the intended Duty of Stamps on all Pamphlets,
when you shall be satisfied it can by no Means raise any Advantage to the
CROWN, but only suppress the Printing of all such small Tracts; many of which
if Printed and Sold at a reasonable Price, might be of great use to the Public.

THE Printers CASE: WITH THEIR PROPOSALS FOR Regulating the PRESS.


