A SERMON PREACHED before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord MAYOR AND COURT of
ALDERMEN, AT GVILD-HALL-CHAPPEL, July the 23th. 1682.

By THOMAS PARGITER D. D. Rector of Greetworth in Northamptonshire.

1 THESE. 4.6. That no Man go beyond and Defraud his Brother in any matter,
because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such. LONDON, Printed for A. Green,
and are to be Sold by most Book sellers in London and Westminster, 1^^^

TO THE READER.
I Suppose that which has made several Worthy Persons very Earnest and
Importunate for the Publication of this Sermon, is the exceeding great Honesty
of it, it being directly Levelled against all manner of Fraudulent and
Injurious Practices. In it the great, but very much neglected Duty of Doing no
Harm or Wrong to one another, is as thoroughly and fully Pressed upon us, as it
could possibly be in so short a time as is allowed for a Sermon; and the hopes
that it may do some good toward the making of Men more Just and Righteous in
their Dealings than generally they are, has been the chief and prevailing
Cause of the Printing of it: And surely the sending abroad of a Discourse upon
this Duty of not Wronging one another, cannnot be thought Unseasonable or
Impertinent in such times as these, wherein the Hearts and the Wits of Men are
so much set upon doing Wrong.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Lord Mayor, AT GUILD HALL Chapel, July 23. 1682.
ON
1 THESSALONIANS. iv. 6. That no man go beyond and Defraud his Brother in any matter,
because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such.


THESE Words will afford us very good and fit Matter for a serious, useful, and
practical Discourse; and that the ensuing Sermon upon them may be altogether
such, I shall observe in them these two things.

1. A Duty. And,

2. The Enforcement of that Duty.

The Duty here enjoined us by St. Paul, is, that we must not go beyond and
Defraud our Brethren in any matter. And this Duty the Apostle enforces upon us
by such a dreadful Argument, as may well terrify and affright us all into a
careful Performance of it; for he tells us, that if we do go beyond and Defraud
our Brethren in any matter, the Lord will be the Avenger of us: God will not
then suffer us to go Unpunished, but will most surely Execute his Vengeance
upon us.

There is some Controversy among Expositors about the Duty of the Text, and
they are not fully agreed what it is that St. Paul does here enjoin us, when he
charge us not to go beyond and Defraud our Brethren in any matter. Some of
the ancient Expositors, and a late Learned one of our own, do here very much
contract and straiten the general signification of the words (...) and (...),
which we translate go beyond and Defraud, and in this place restrain and
determine the sense of them only to the matter of Uncleanness, and think that
that which the Apostle here enjoins us, is, that we must not injure and wrong
our Brethren in the matter of Uncleanness, either by Defiling their Bed, or by
drawing them to Commit such unnatural Filthinesses with us, as are not to be
named: And that which chiefly Induced them to make this Interpretation of the
Words, is St. Paul's speaking against the Sin of Uncleanness, both before the
Text, and also immediately after it. But notwithstanding this, the generality
of Ancient and Modern Expositors do not think fit thus to straiten the
signification of the Words, nor see reason enough to make such a narrow and
scanty Interpretation of the Text, as if it respected only the matter of
Uncleanness: But they take the words in a larger and more general Sense, as
they may be Applied to any Matter or Business whatsoever that we may have with
one another, and so make the meaning of the Text to be, That we must not
transgress and overpass the Bounds of Justice in our Dealings with one another,
we must not go beyond and overreach our Brethren in any matter; we must not
Defraud and Circumvent others in any thing whatsoever; we must not any ways
wrong them, nor in any kind be Injurious to them. And in this Sense surely the
Words may well be understood, and we shall the rather believe that this is the
right meaning of them, if we do but consider that this Duty of not Wronging and
Defrauding our Brethren, is a thing that St. Paul was very strict and severe in
Pressing upon others, and in Practicing himself: He chides the Corinthians, and
Rebukes them sharply for their Neglect of this Duty, and seems to upbraid them
with a great deal of Indignation for their breach of it, 1 Cor. 6.8. Nay, you
do wrong and Defraud, and that your Brethren. Nay, in the foregoing Verse of
that Chapter, he Presses this Duty farther and with more strictness upon them,
than most men are now willing to hear of; for he is there so far from allowing
them to do any injury to others, that he earnestly persuades them rather to
take Wrong, rather to suffer themselves to be Defrauded, rather to lose
something of their own Right, than to go to Law with others upon every Trespass
and Offense. And to show these Corinthians how rigid and strict he himself had
been in the Performance of this Duty, and how clear he had always kept himself
from unjust and dishonest dealing with others, he solemnly Protests to them his
own Innocence in this matter, 2 Cor. 7.2. He there washes his Hands clean
before them from the doing of any wrong, and lets them know that no unjust Gain
had ever cleaved to his Fingers; Recieve us, (says he) we have wronged no man,
we have Defrauded no Man.

I shall take it for granted then, that the meaning of the Text is that which
our own and most other Translations speak it to be, and that the Duty enjoined
us here is to this effect; That we must not Encroach upon the Rights of our
Brethren, nor Defraud them of their Substance, nor Injure them at all in any of
their Possessions, but must suffer them to enjoy their own Goods in all
quietness and security. We must not take Advantage of the Ignorance or
Unwariness, the Unskilfulness or Credulity of others, to beguile them and do
them wrong; we must not stretch our Wits and Inventions to hurt them, nor any
ways to overreach and Circumvent them in our Dealings with them; we must not
endeavor by any cunning Devices to take or Detain from them that which is
their due; we must not use any subtle Arts or Policies either to get or to keep
from them that which is their own, and does of Right belong to them; or in
short, We must not do any manner of Wrong to them, nor in any thing deal
Injuriously with them. And that I may the more successefully enforce upon you
this Duty of not Wronging others, and the more effectually bring you all over
to the Performance of it, I shall handle it both in a Doctrinal and in an
Applicatory way. For,

1. I shall fully Prove it to you, not only by the Apostles, but also by some
other Arguments, that we must not do any manner of Wrong to others, nor in any
thing deal Injuririously with them. And then,

2. I shall bring this Duty yet farther home to you by some close words of
Application.

1. I shall clearly and fully prove it to you, not only by the Apostles, but
also by some other Arguments, that we must not do any manner of Wrong to
others, nor in any thing deal injuriously with them. And,

1. We must not do this, Because that Nature it self teaches us not to do any
Injury or Wrong to others. We are not born Wild and Savage Creatures, and
Beasts of Prey: We have not naturally a Disposition in us to bite, and tear,
and devour one another: The State of our Nature is not a State of Rapine and
Violence, Cheating and overreaching are not any of the Principles of it; as a
late Monster of Men and Shame of Mankind, the great Leviathan of Atheism, that
vile Asperser and Slanderer of our Humane Nature, has scurrilously asserted in
his Works, to make way for some other of his wretched and forlorn Principles:
But on the contrary, our Nature would lead us to all kind of fair and just and
honest Dealings with one another, if we our selves did not stifle the Dictates,
and suppress the Inclinations of it: Whatsoever the forementioned Traducer of
our Nature, or any of his Disciples may or can say to the contrary, we are not
left at Liberty by the Principles of our Nature to do what hurt and Mischief we
can to one another; but there are natural Principles of Honesty written in
legible Characters upon all our Hearts, that would check, and curb, and
restrain us from doing wrong, if we were not continually razing them out of our
Hearts, by giving way to Pride, and Ambition, and Lust, and Worldly-mindedness;
We must wink hard, and be wilfully blind, blinder than ever the Heathens
themselves could be, if we cannot find a Law of Nature within us, that plainly
Instructs us in this Duty of not wronging others, and strongly Prompts us to
the Performance of it. For this Doctrine of doing no Injury or harm to others,
is a Doctrine that was always Current, not only at Jerusalem but at Athens
too; not only in the Church of God, but also in the Gentile World: This is a
Lesson that was taught not only in the Schools of the Prophers, but in the
Schools of the Philosophers also; a Lesson that we may learn not only out of
the Word of God, but likewise out of the Writings of Heathen men; for many of
the Heathens themselves, who had only the Light and the Law of Nature for their
Guide, have spoken very excellent things of this Duty of not wronging others,
and have been very serious and earnest in pressing the Performance of it, as
might easily and abundantly be showed to you out of their Writings: Nay, these
Gentiles who were mere Strangers to the Grace of God and his written Word, who
had nothing else but the Dictates of their Nature, and the Principles of their
Reason, and their Inbred Notions of good and evil to go by, were so far from
allowing the doing of any injury to one another, that they had amongst them
very severe Laws against Rapine and Violence, against Theft and Cozenage,
against Fraud and Deceit, and against all manner of injurious and dishonest
Dealings, and were also very strict and punctual in the Execution of those
Laws. And therefore we are obliged not to wrong others for this reason, because
the wronging of them is a plain violation and breach of that very Law of Nature
which is written upon all our Hearts, and such a Sin as the Heathens
themselves, who were any ways careful to follow the Di^^^^^ of their Nature,
were quite ashamed to be guilty of. And let us Christians have a care, and look
to it, that the Heathens do not rise up in judgment against us in this matter
at the last Day, and then in the face and hearing of all the World confound and
condemn us in it. But then,

Secondly. We must not do any manner of wrong to others, nor in any thing deal
injuriously with them, because that this is a thing that is not only taught us
by the Law of Nature, but is expressly required of us also by the Word of God.
The Will of God in this matter is sufficiently re^aled to ^o in the Scriptures,
and his Commands both in the Old and in the New Testament are very full and
frequent to this purpose, that we must not imagine mischief in our Hearts
against others, nor do them any wrong, nor injure them at all. The Law of
Wioses is plain to this purpose, as plain at words can make it, Levin. 19.13.
Thou shall not Defraud thy Neighbor and again in the Thirty fifth Verse of
that Chapter, Ye (...) do no unrighteousness in Judgment, in Mete-yard, in
Weight, or in Measure, that is, Ye shall not allow of any manner of falsehood
and wrong amongst you, nor give way to any kind of Fraud and Deceit whatsoever
in any of your Dealings and concerns with one another.

And perhaps this Duty of not wronging others was dearly signified to the Jews
under the Law, by the very Nature and Temper of those Living Creatures which
they were to offer in Sacrifice: For none of the Birds of the Air, or Beasts of
the Field were chosen and appointed by God for Sacrifice, but such as were
harmless and inoffensive, and of a mild Temper, and of a gentle and good Nature
and Condition: And the appointment of such only for Sacrifice might be to teach
the Jews, that they ought to be Tenderhearted, Loving, and Gentle toward one
another, and to live in all peacableness together, and to do no hurt, or
injury, or wrong to one another.

And then as for the Prophets, they are very full and express in enjoining this
Duty of not doing any wrong, and it would be endless to instance in places out
of them to this purpose; for they do all with open and with one Mouth exclaim
and inveigh against the Jews for those injurious practices and unrighteous
Dealings which they were given to, and call aloud upon them to lay aside their
unjust and fraudulent cours^s, and to live uprightly, and deal honestly with
one another. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets, says our Savior, Matthew.
7.12. that is, this is the very sum and substance of that which the Writers of
the Old Testament have taught us concerning our Duty to one another, that we
should carefully observe amongst us that great Natural Rule of Equity, To do as
we would be done to; that as we would not that others should do any injury to
us, so neither should we do any wrong to them. And this Duty of not wronging
others is very much improved in the New Testament, and our Savior has there
advanced it to an higher pitch than it was before; for he is there so far from
giving us leave to do the least wrong to others, that he has strictly
commanded us to be kind to our very enemies, and to do good to those very
Persons that hate us and deal evilly with us, and to suffer the greatest
injuries from others, rather than to do the least harm to them: And we may
observe that most of the Precepts delivered by him in his famous Sermon upon
the Mount, are such as put us upon a severe honest course of Life, and leave no
room at all for any kind of crooked and deceitful dealin^s amongst us So that
now under the Gospel it is more especially our Duty to be of an innocent and
harmless conversation, to live without Guile and Deceit in the World, and to
keep our Hands pure and clear from violence and wrong, and from all manner of
unjust dealing. The ancient Christians that lived in the first Ages of the
Church, thought themselves strictly obliged, by the Doctrine of Christ to do
so, as plainly appears by that well known and that often cited account which
Pliny gave of them in a Letter to Trajan the Emperor, when he had begun a
Persecution against them; for in his Letter to that Heathen Emperor he tells
him, that all that could be proved against his Christians was only this, that
they used at set times to meet together early in the Morning before day to
Worship Christ; and that they did then bind themselves not to Rob, or Steal, or
commit Adultery; not to break their Word, or falsisie their Trust, or the like.
Thus honest had these former Christians their conversation amongst the
Gentiles; thus harmlesly and inoffensively did they behave themselves in the
World; and thus carefully were they to abstain from the very appearance of
doing any wrong; so that the Heathens themselves, who watched for their
halting, could find no other fault with them, nor charge any other crime upon
them, but only this, that they were Christians. And though the Christians of
our days, to their shame be it spoken, are in their temper and their carriage
very unlike to these Christians of old, yet the Doctrine of Christ in this
matter is still the same, and does as strictly require us to forbear the doing
of any wrong, as ever it did them. But farther yet.

Thirdly, We must not do any manner of wrong to others, nor in any thing deal
injuriously with them; because that it is required of us that we should love
them. The loving of one another is the Royal Law of Christ, and that which is
peculiarly his Commandment. It is indeed an, old Commandment, as old as the Law
of Moses, nay, as old as the Law of Nature it self; for long before Moses made
it Written Law, God himself had made it a branch of the Law of Nature within
us. But our Savior has now so fully instructed us in it, and in such a
special and particular manner obliged us to the performance of it, that he,
calls it his New Commandment. And indeed this Commandment of loving our
Brethren he does every where in the Gospel so strictly enjoin us, so earnestly
recommend to us, and so vehemently press upon us, as if he almost required
nothing else of, us in comparison of this. And if it is thus strictly and
indispensably required of us that we should love others, then to be sure we
must not any ways wrong them, or be injurious to them: for how can the doing
of any wrong to them be any ways consistent with, our loving of them? This
would certainly be but a very cross and untoward way of showing that kindness
and affection to others, that Christ has Commanded us to have for them. But
farther yet than this:

Fourthly, We must not do any manner of wrong to others, not in any thing deal
injuriously with them; Because that it is not only required of us that we
should love others, but also that we should love them as our selves. Indeed
that known Precept, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, respects rather
the quality than the quantity of our Love toward others, and does not command
a parity but a likeness of it; for we are not bound to Love others equally, or
so much as our selves, but with the like manner and kind of Love, that we do
our selves. Our Love then to others, like the Love to our selves, must not be
false, and feigned, and hypocritical; but true and real, and without all manner
of dissimulation. Now if we are commanded to proceed so far in our kindness,
and good will, and affections toward others, as to Love them as truly and
sincerely as we do our selves, then it is past all doubt that we must not do
any manner of wrong to them; for there are none of us that Love our selves so
little, as to be willing that any kind of hurt or injury should be done to us.
But now,

5. To make use of the Apostle's dreadful Argument, to Enforce this Duty, and
set it fully home upon you: We must not do any manner of Wrong to others, nor
in any Matter whatsoever deal Injuriously with them; Because that the Lord will
be the Avenger of all such. There is not one of all those that do so, that
shall escape the Vengeance of God, and go away unpunished; For the God that is
above them, does narrowly observe all the Fraudulent Courses which they take,
and all the Injurious Practices which they use to the hurt of Others, and will
in due time call them to a very strick and severe Account for them, and fully
pay them that which they have Deserved.

They that break through all the Bounds of Equity and Justice to go beyond and
overreach their Neighbors, that use any subtle Arts and Devices to defraud
their Brethren of their Possessions, and endeavor to increase their own
Substance, by the Spoil which they make of other men, are such Transgressors as
God is highly Displeased with, and does usually sooner or later Plague even
here in this World, as well as in the World to come. Sometimes he sends his
secret Curse into their Houses, which there sticks fast by them and like a
Canker eats into their Estates' and wastes away their Goods, and by degrees
devours and consumes all that they have. And sometimes he causes the Hand of
Public Justice to find them out, and to pluck the Spoil out of their Teeth,
and to gripe them, and handle them roughly, and make them Vomit up those
forbidden Morsels, those Morsels of Violence and Deceit, which they had so
glibly devoured.

And sometimes, nay oftentimes indeed, he takes the Matter more openly into his
own Hand, and punishes them in an extraordinary manner, and in some signal way
does Execution upon them, when they think themselves safe from fear, and far
enough from danger.

How secure did Ahab and Jezebel, that wretched Pair of Wrong-doers, think
themselves, when they had overreached Naboth, and defrauded him of his
Vineyard in a Court of Judicature, and under a Form of Justice, and with a show
of a Legal Proceeding against him?

Having this way gotten from him the Ancient Inheritance of his Father, they
thought themselves safe enough in the possession of it, and free from any Harm
that might follow. But a time of Recompense, and the Day of the Lord's
Vengeance came upon them at last, and that with a Witness too, in a very
Remarkable Way and Manner; for, as the Prophet Elijah had foretold, in the
place where the Dogs licked the Blood of Naboth, there they also licked the
Blood of Ahab; and there they not only licked the Blood of Jezebel, but there
they eat her up too, and left nothing of her Carcass remaining, but her Skull
and her Feet, and the Palms of her Hands. And it is farther observable, that
the evil which befell their Son King Joram, did over-take and seize upon him in
the Portion of Naboth the Jezreelite; for there Jehu met him in his furious
march against him, and there he smote him through the Heart with an Arrow, and
killed him; and there he commanded his Body to be pulled down out of the
Chariot, and cast upon the open ground; so that he lay weltring in his own
blood in that very plat of ground, which his Parents had defrauded Naboth of,
and got unjustly from him. And indeed it is usual with God, as the Histories of
all Ages will inform us, to punish those that wrong others even in this World,
either in their own persons, or in their Posterity, or in both, and that in
some strange and fearful manner too: Nay, so strangely is God provoled to
Anger by this Sin of Wronging Others, and so severe is he against it, that he
many times plagues a Community, and punishes a whole Land and Nation for it;
for we cannot read the Prophets with any heed and observation at all, but we
must needs take notice that this is frequently mentioned by most of them, as
one of the main Sins and great Abominations for which God delivered up the Jews
into their Enemies hands, The Jews, as we find up and down in the Prophets,
were strangely bent upon Violence and Wrong; their Houses were full of deceit,
and they were continually setting Traps, and laying Snares for their Brethren,
and devising how they might overreach and defraud one another; and for these
sins especially it was, that the Wrath and Vengeance of God fell so heavy upon
them: For it is very observable, that no sins are so much insisted upon by the
Prophets, as these, to be the Cause of their Desolation, and of those great and
terrible Judgments that came upon them. Nay, it is yet farther observable, that
in the Seventh Chapter of Zachariah, Injustice, and Oppression, and
Wrong-dealing are the only sins that are mentioned, for which God sent them
away into Captivity, and laid their Land desolate and waste: for the Prophet
there tells them, that because they refused to execute true Judgment, and would
not show Mercy and Compassion to their Brethren, but went on still to oppress
the Widow, and the Fatherless, and the Stranger, and the Poor, and to imagine
evil in their Hearts against their Brethren; therefore there came a great Wrath
from the Lord of Hosts: For these sins such a storm of his Anger fell upon
them, as scattered them with a Whirlwind among all the Nations whom they knew
not. But if those that wrong others, and deal injuriously with them, should
escape the Vengeance of God in this World, and go down into their Graves,
without having any remarkable Punishment inflicted upon them here; yet shall
they not for all this always go unpunished; for the Wrath and Vengeance of God
will pursue them into the other World, and there finally overtake them, and
come upon them to the uttermost, and their latter end will be, that they shall
perish for ever. Tho these men may here by their wit or their Wealth, by their
power or their Friends, or by any other means escape the Judgment of Man, yet
shall they not hereafter by all the Arts that they can use, escape the
righteous Judgment of God: for God has appointed a Day, wherein he will judge
the World in Righteousness; and when that Day of recompenses is come, he will
then render to every man according to his Deeds: to those that have done
justly, and have been righteous in all their ways, and upright in all their
Dealings, he will render Glory, and Honor, and Peace, and Immortality, and
eternal Life: But to those that have done wrong, and been unjust; to Oppressors
and Deceivers; to the men that have been Injurious to their Brethren, and
Inventers and Practisers of evil things against them; He will render
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of them. They
that have done Wrong, howsoever they may escape here, shall then receive in
full measure for the wrong which they have done; their violent Dealing shall
then fall down upon their own Heads in Eternal Showers of Vengeance, and God
will for ever pay them home for all their Villainies and Mischiefs which they
have been guilty of. He will then make his whole Displeasure to arise against
them, and will cast the fury of his wrath upon them, and punish them with
everlasting death and destruction from His Presence, and be always terrible in
his doings toward them. He will then turn them into Hell, that frightful place
of torments, where they must always have their Habitation amongst Devils and
damned Spirits, and dwell with devouring Flames, and suffer the Vengeance of
Eternal Fire, and for ever endure the heaviest Plagues and punishments, that
the vindicative Justice of an angry and incensed God can heap upon them.

And so I have done with the First thing, and I think have sufficiently proved
it to you by the Apostles, and by some other Arguments, that we must not do any
manner of wrong to others, nor in any matter whatsoever deal injuriously with
them. And now

2. I shall bring this Duty yet farther home to you by some close words of
Application. And that this may be the better done.

1. Let us suffer a few words of Rebuke, and be persuaded to hear a little, how
very careless and negligent most of us are in the performance of this Duty. And
then,

2. Let us also suffer some words of Exhortation, and be persuaded for the time
to come, to be more strict and careful in the Performance of this Duty, than
hitherto we have been.

1. Let us suffer a few words of Rebuke, and be persuaded to hear a little how
extremely careless and negligent most of us are in the Performance of this
Duty. Though this Doctrine of not wronging others, is very clear and evident,
both from Reason and Scripture, and a Doctrine that cannot be gainsaid, yet it
is not received and entertained amongst us, as it ought to be; for who is there
that believes our report in this matter, that has any regard to what we say in
this thing? or that follows the Advice and Counsel that we give them in it? who
are the Persons, and where are they now almost to be found, that behave
themselves aright in this case, and are as careful as they ought to be, not to
go beyond and defraud their Brethren? Are not the Hearts of most Men fully set
in them to do Evil to one another? Do not their inward Thoughts altogether run
after Mischief? And are they not continually plotting how they may compass
their villainous Designs, and bring about those pernicious Devices which they
have devised to the hurt of others? do not the generality of Men amongst us
make account that their Wits are their own, and that they may use them as they
please for their own Interest and Advantage here? Do not they think that they
may be as wise in their Generation, and as crafty as possibly they can, for
their worldly Gains, and that to enrich themselves, they may overreach their
Brethren in any of their Dealings and Concerns with them? And may not we make
the same complaint of our Age, as Petrarch somewhere does of the Age wherein he
lived; That Hunters and Fowlers cannot use greater cunning in laying their Nets
and Snares for wild Beasts and Fowls, than we do in setting Traps for one
another? For what mysteries of cheating and cozenage have Men nowadays got
amongst them? What Arts and Stratagems do they use to inveigle and ensnare
those that are unwary, and make a Prey of them? And how skillful are they grown
at all the ways of circumventing and overreaching their Brethren? How subtle
and politic are they in their fraudulent and deceitful Courses? What cunning
Fetches and Devices have they to wrong their Neighbors, and do them Harm? And
how many Wiles and Inventions have they found out to work this their Iniquity
by? So many indeed, that if I should declare and speak of them, they would be
more than I should be able to express: Nay, it might justly bring a Man's
Honesty into suspicion to have the Skill, and be able to reckon them up. And
therefore in a word; how busy and active are the Men of this Generation in
invading the Rights of their Neighbors, and injuring them in their Goods and
Possessions? How greedy are they to enrich themselves by Fraud and Deceit, and
to enlarge their Estates, though it be by unjust Gain, and the Spoil of others?
And how ready are they to take every Advantage that they can over their,
Brethren, and to bring any kind of hurt and damage upon them, if by so doing
they may any ways profit themselves? But now,

2. Let us suffer some words of Exhortation also, and be persuaded for the time
to come to be more strict and precise, more exact and punctual in the
performance of this Duty, than hitherto we have been. Let us not hereafter any
ways wrong our Brethren, nor defraud them in any matter, nor in any respect
whatsoever do them the least hurt; but let us walk honestly amongst them, and
in all things deal well and truly with them, and in no kind be injurious to
them. Let us consider what Obligations we have upon us not to wrong others: Let
us consider, that the Law of Nature it self, that very Law that is written upon
all our Hearts, teaches us not to do others any wrong: Let us consider also,
that the Laws of God are very full and express to the same purpose, and that
the Old and the New Testament do abound with Precepts of this nature, that we
must not harm others, nor imagine Mischief in our Hearts against them, nor take
any thing from them that does of right belong to them. Nay, let us consider,
that the Commands of God do carry the business somewhat higher, and oblige us
to love others, and to love them, though not in the same degree, yet with the
same Truth and Sincerity of Love, that we do our selves, and to endeavor their
good, as we would our own. And let us not break these Bonds asunder, nor cast
away these Cords from us, nor sin against these Obligations which Nature, and
the God of Nature has laid upon us, not to be injurious and hurtful to others.
But if these things will not signify any thing with us, as perhaps with many of
us they may not; then let us consider farther, how very great the danger is
that we run, in doing wrong to others. Let us bethink our selves, that if we do
injure and oppress, and defraud our Brethren, it is very likely that the Wrath
of God will break out against us in this World, and that we shall be soundly
punished for it here; but to be sure, we shall smart severely for it hereafter:
for then God will at last come in flaming Fire to take Vengeance on us, and
will condemn us to the Punishments of the other World, to those dreadful Pains
and Torments there that will last to eternal Ages, and never have an end. And
let these Terrors of the Lord scare us out of all our unrighteous Practices,
and fright us from all manner of Fraud and Injustice in our Dealings with one
another. Before we venture upon the wronging of our Brethren, let us consider
it well in our minds, whether we can bear up and support our selves under the
Vengeance of God that will follow. Is our Damnation a thing that we can lightly
pass over, and make no great matter of? Can we withstand the Power of God's
Wrath, when he shall accomplish all his Anger upon us? Can we for ever bear up
under the weight of his Indignation, and without any anguish of Mind lie under
the strokes of his eternal Vengeance and Fury? Can our Hands be strong in the
day that an avenging God shall deal with us in his Justice, and set all his
Terrors in array against us? Can our Hearts endure when he shall come in
flaming Fire to take Vengeance on us, and turn us into Hell for the wrong that
we have done? Can we then with any Comfort dwell in the midst of devouring
Flames and everlasting Burnings? Can we then suffer the Vengeance of eternal
Fire, without shrinking or being daunted at it? Can we then take any
Contentment in the company of cursed Angels, and damned Spirits? And can we
then cheer up our selves against the horror and remorse of our own guilty
Consciences, and with Patience endure the Stings and Bitings of that Worm that
never dies? If we cannot do these things, as to be sure we cannot, then what
desperate Folly and Madness will it be for us to run into the commission of
that Sin, which will most certainly be avenged upon us by such dismal
Punishments as these are.

Surely, if we would sometimes consider how terrible God will be in his
dealings with all injurious Persons, and how dreadful the Works of his
Vengeance will for ever be upon them, we durst not defraud our Brethren, and do
them Wrong so commonly as now we do.

Would any dare to turn aside the needy from Judgment, and take away the Right
from the Poor, and make Widows their Prey, and rob the Fatherless, if they did
but consider with themselves, that a Father of the Fatherless, and a Judge of
the Widows is God in his holy Habitation; and that from thence he sees the
Oppression of the Poor, and hears the sighing of the Needy, and will at length
arise for their defense, and maintain their righteous Cause, and plague all
those that have harmed them wrongfully, and dealt injuriously with them?

Would Men covet Fields, and take them by violence; and Houses, and take them
away: and so oppress a Man and his House, even a Man and his Heritage? Could
they be so very busy and industrious as they are in invading the Rights of
others; in defrauding the Brethren of their Goods, and injuring them in their
Possessions; if they did but once take it into their Thoughts, that they must
be called to a strict account for these things before the righteous Judge of all
the World, who loves Justice and Judgment, and will be sure to punish the
wrong-doer, and break in pieces the Oppressor, and spoil the Soul of all those
that have spoiled others?

How durst the subtle and the cunning Sinners hold fast Deceit, and go on in
their fraudulent and mischievous Courses? How durst they deal so treacherously,
and endeavor by their circumventing Skill to go beyond and overreach their
Neighbors, if they did but call to mind, that God sees all their Fetches and
their Devices, all their lesser and greater Mysteries of Iniquity, and will at
last bring them into Judgment for all those wicked Arts and Stratagems, which
they have so often made use of to ensnare the ignorant and unwary, and make
them fall a Prey into their Nets?

Would Men covet an evil Covetousness to their Houses, that they might set
their Nests on high? Would they go to raise their Families by that which they
wrongfully take from others, if they considered that their ill-gotten Wealth
will bring such a Curse of God along with it into their Houses, as will root
out all their Increase, and quickly be the ruin and Dectruction of them and
their Posterity? Would they dare to suffer any unjust Gain to cleave to their
Fingers? would they not presently with all the haste imaginable, shake their
Hands from holding of it, if they considered further, that the heaping up of
this is but the laying up of Vengeance in Store, and the Treasuring up of Wrath
for themselves against the great Day of Wrath?

Would men be tampering in the very Courts of Justice, and be devising
Subtilties there how they may Circumvent their Brethren, and thrust them out of
their apparent Rights, if they considered that they must in another Court of
Justice, and at Gods own Tribunal, give an Account of this, and there have the
Sentence of Eternal Condemnation Passed upon them for it?

Would any Persons have the boldness to be Givers or Takers of Bribes to
Afflict the Innocent, if they considered that a God of Infinite Justice looks
upon them, when their Hands are either opened to Receive, or Stretched out to
give the Wages of Unrighteousness, and that he will be an Avenger of all those
that use such foul and Indirect Practices against their Brethren?

With what Confidence could any men talk deceitfully, and speak in any matter
to wrest Judgment and pervert Equity, if they did but bethink themselves that
the God of Faithfulness and Truth knows every word that is in their Mouths,
and that he utterly abhorrs all those that love Lying rather than to speak
Righteousness, and will at last Condemn them to those eternal Flames, where
they shall never be allowed one drop of Water to cool their false Tongues,
which have framed Deceit? What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done
unto thee, thou false Tongue? It is David's Question, Psalm. 120.3. And his
Answer to it in the next Verse is very dreadful: Sharp Arrows of the Mighty,
with coals of Juniper: That is, as some of the Jewish Interpreters expound it,
piercing Plagues here, and Hell fire hereafter: This shall be the Portion of
those men whose Tongues devise Mischief, and who love all Devouring words that
will do hurt.

What fearfulness and trembling would seize upon the false Swearers? what an
horrible dread would presently overwhelm them, if they did but call to their
remembrance that the just Lord has taken notice of all their Perjuries, of all
those Oaths which they have Sworn falsely by his Name, to the hurt and
Prejudice of others? And that he will not hold them Guiltless, nor suffer them
to go Unpunished for these heinous Crimes, but will most certainly let loose
the fierceness of his Anger and Displeasure upon them, and pursue them with
Wrath and Vengeance all their days here, and throughout all the days of
Eternity hereafter?

And as for the high and mighty Transgressors, the haughty and imperious
Sinners, that have no regard at all either to the Laws of God or Man in this
case, but do their Brethren hurt with as great a Confidence as others do them
good; how would their Courage sink, and their hearts fail them, if they would
but take it into their Consideration, that there is a great God above them to
whom they must be accountable for all the Hurt and Mischief they have done, and
that he will be no Respecter of their Persons in Judgment, nor Spare them any
more than the meanest Sinners in the day of his Wrath?

And to draw to a Conclusion, for I think it is time so to do; Let us all be
persuaded very frequently and seriously to consider what this terrible place
and Text of Scripture puts us in mind of, That the Lord will be a sure and
severe Avenger of all such as go beyond and Defraud their Brethren in any
matter; and let the fear of his Eternal Vengeance keep us within the strictest
Rules of Equity and Justice, and restrain us from doing the least Injury or
wrong to others. That we may escape that dreadful Wrath of his that is to come,
let us forsake all our overreaching, and fraudulent and deceitful Courses; and
let us do justly, and live honestly, and neither devise nor practice any harm
against our Brethren; and then when God comes to Judge the World, he will not
be an Avenger, but a Rewarder of us; then we may all with Cheerfulness and
Comfort stand before his Judgment Seat at the last and final Judgment of all
the World; for then the Judge of all the World will pass a joyful Sentence upon
us, and before the greatest and most solemn Assembly that ever appeared before,
all the Angels and all the Devils, and before all the Good men and all the Bad
men of all Generations, will Pronounce us Blessed for evermore. And God grant
that we may all be so Just to one another now, that the Lord may be Merciful to
us all at that Day, and Receive us up into his Heavenly Kingdom, to be
Partakers of all the Joys of it, and there to make our Eternal abode in his
most glorious and delightful Presence. Amen.

FINIS.

