THE PROCEEDINGS ON THE King and Queens Commissions OF THE Peace, and Oyer and
Terminer, and Gaol Delivery of Newgate, held for the CITY of London, and COUNTY
of Middlesex, at Justice-Hall in the OLD BAILEY.
On Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday being the 15th, 16th, and 18th Days of
October, 1690. And in the Second Year of Their MAJESTY'S Reign.
THE Sessions of Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and Gaol Delivery of Newgate, held
at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey, on Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday being the
15th, 16th, and 18th Days of October, 1690. Before the Right Honorable Sir
Thomas Pilkington Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of London, and Mr. Recorder, with
several others of Their Majesty's Justices for the City of London, and the
County of Middlesex.

The Jurors were as follow:
London Jury, Isaac Dighton Arthur Eaveley Robert Lion George Dolben James
Stancliffe Richard Blagrove Benj. Johnson Jeremiah Ives Charles Russell Samuel
Chambers James Smith Robert Chapman Middlesex Jury, Richard Cooper John Mirdale
Benj. Boltbey John Bush William Gunstone Edward Weeks Thomas Remidge Abraham
Hedge about John Cave John Preston Richard Brumfeild Edmund Salter
The Proceedings were these:

Philip O Neale was tried for breaking the House of one John Fisher in
Bartholomew Lane, and took away two Pieces of coined Gold, value each 20 s. two
other 10 s Pieces, 22 Guineas, and several other small Pieces of Gold, besides
60 l in Money, etc. The Evidence swore, That he and three others came to the
Prosecutors House to drink, and broke open the Chamber Door, and took away the
Gold. The Prisoner denied that he knew any thing of it, saying that he was not
above Stairs, neither stayed in the House: The Evidence could not say that he
was in the Chamber; so he was favored by the Jury, and thereupon Acquitted.

M -- H -- was tried for Murdering her Male Bastard Child, on the 11th. of
September. last: It appeared that she was a a Servant, and that to prevent
Discovery she put it into the House of Office; which was fully sworn against
her: She had little to say for her self, being a very Ignorant Silly Girl: and
the Evidence said further, That she had confessed the Matter before, so upon the
whole she was found Guilty.

Margaret Kelly was tried for breaking the House of Thomas Eave, in Shoe Lane,
on the 20th of September last, stealing from him one Silver Bowl, value 4 l. a
Silver Cup, value 3 l a Coife, and some other small Lynen. The Evidence was
Mrs. Eave who said, That she could not charge her with the Plate, but she found
some Lynen about her; but she could not affirm that the Window was shut. The
Prisoner denied it, and the Evidence was somewhat circumstantial, so upon the
whole she was found Guilty only to the Value of 10 d.

Thomas Castle alias Casses was Indicted for High Treason, in Counterfeiting
and making 50 Pieces of King James I. Shillings, in March last: He was taken
the 3d of October, and 13 of the false Shillings were found in his House, in
Marygold-Alley in the Strand, in the bottom of a Salt-Box, and some Crucibles,
for melting, and some Clippings, which were found in a Box-Iron, hanging in the
Chimney, and Files and other things, sit for the Trade; all which was fully
proved upon him by several Witnesses, The Prisoner denied it all, and ^sed
several Evasions, where by to extenuate the Crime: but upon the whole matter he
was found Guilty of High Treason.

Edward Stephens was likewise indicted upon the same Account, viz. for Making
and Counterfeiting of 20 Pieces of K. James I. 's Shillings, and 20 pieces of
King Charles I's halt Crowns, which the same Evidences swore, That he struck
the Stamp, with a great Hammer, to make an Impression, and that he saw him do
it 3 or 4 times. The Prisoner denied the Matter of Fact: And no Evidence was
produced that saw him coin only struck the Stemp, which another Person might
easily have done, so he was Acquitted.

Peter Vallard a Frenchman, was tried for High Treason also, in Clipping and
Deminishing the Current Coin of this Kingdom, on the 28th of August. The
Evidence swore, That he was ketched clipping of Money in a Ditch near S.
Mary-le-Bone and that he saw him clip a Shilling almost round. The Prisoner
denied it, but there was a Box of Clipings and a Pair of Shears produced in
Court, as a further. Testimony against him, so in the conclusion he was brought
in Guilty of the Indictment.

Elizabeth Cox was tried for uttering 20 pieces of false Money, on the 5th of
August, which the Witnesses said was given to her to put off by one Wright in
Bloomsbury; and that Wright allowed the Prisoner 29 s of clipped Money for 20 s of
broad Money, and a Penny in a Shilling for putting it off; but they could not
swear that she uttered Money faslly: so she was immediately Acquitted.

John Stephens was indicted for breaking the House of one John Blenthard, about
9 a clock at Night, taking away on the 7th of September last, 2 flaxen Sheets,
value 20 s. a Feather-bed, value 40 s, a Silk Petticoat, and several other
Goods of great value. It was evidenced, That he got into the House, and was
taken before he had carried off any thing; but no Evidence could swear the
Burglary against him, and he denied it, so in the end he was found Guilty of
Felony only.

Elizabeth Fire-bank, of S. Andrews Holborne, was indicted for stealing, from
Mr. Robert Needham, 4 Gold Rings value 40 s. 2 stone Rings, 1 Gold Bodkin, 8
Diaper Napkins, 2 Watches value 50 s. and some other things. The Evidence said,
That she lodged in the Prosecutors House, and had a Person came to her, which
she said was her Husband: The Goods were lost, some of which she owned to have
taken before Sir William Turner, but she denied all at the Trial: The Evidence
being some what promiscuous, she was Acquitted.

Constance Wayne wright was tried for stealing a Silver Tea-Pot value 6 l. from
Paul Hayley, one Silk Petticoat and some other Goods, and 40 s. in Money, from
Thomas Elmor. It appeared, That a Gown was found upon her Back, at Graves-end,
and some other of the Goods, which was a plain Evidence; and she could not much
deny it, so she was found Guilty of Felony.

Elizabeth Vaughan was indicted for stealing several final Goods, Lynen and
Woollen, etc, from one Edw. Powel, on the 16th of September last. The Prisoner
hired a Chamber in the Prosecutor's House, and so took away the Things, which
was fully sworn against her, so she was found Guilty to the value of 10 d.

William Mandrill the younger, Edward Everal, Jonathan Oakley, John Browning,
John Larkin, Thomas White and Richard Cloves, were all seven tried for the
Murder of one Samuel Jackson, giving him a Mortal Bruise upon his Forehead, on
the 12th of August last, of which he dyed on the 18th Day of the same Month.
The Evidence was very numerous on the King's side, who deposed in the General,
That Jackson being pressed and carried into a Boat, a Fewd arose about pressing
some others, in which Scuffle he received a Blow on his Head, the Occasion, us
appeared upon Evidence, was thus. Whilst the four latter Prisoners went ashore
at Mr. Mandril's Dye house, near the 3 Cranes, to press his Servants; the
Deceased standing upright in the Boat with one Foot upon the side of it, in
such a Posture, as if he were about to make an escape: Which Browning seeing,
he gave him a Stroke upon the Head with his Cutlace upon which the Deceased
fell down in the Boat, and immediately bled violently at the Ears, and being
conveyed home, he had a Surgeon to search his Head, who sound a Fracture in his
Skull, which was the occasion of his Death. William Mandrill called some
Evidence, who declared, That the Prisoner Browning, with others, came to Mr.
Mandrills, and pressed the Apprentices, and cut one of them over the Head and
Arm, and carried him away in a very violent manner. There was no Evidence
affected the others, only Browning was found Guilty of killing the said
Jackson, and the Matter was found Special, until their Majesty's Judges shall
determine it, after their further Consideration of the Matter, etc.

Daniel Johnson alias Juxon, was tried for breaking the House of Robert Russell
of Stepney, with an Intention to steal his Goods, on the 24th Day of August
last. The Witness could not swear that he broke the House, for that he was
taken in the Highway before the Door, having no Goods found about him: So a
new Indictment was ordered against him for a Trespass.

John Clarke was tried for stealing a Silver Tailer, value 18 d. and 8 l. in
Money numbered, from John Andgrave of S. James's Westminster, on the 24th of
September fast. This Prisoner was indicted, on the first day of the Sessions.
by the name of Philip O Neale, as aforesaid. He and another came to the
Prosecutor's House, and after they had eat some Pork, the Prisoner took the
Money, and run away with it; but being pursued, the Money was found in 2 Bags
about him. The Prisoner raid, That the Money was given him by another Person,
but he could not prove any thing: He was found Guilty of Felony.

William Wright, an old Man, was arraigned for marrying 2 Wives, the first
named Elinor Fisher, the other Edith Price, Fisher he married in the 32d Year
of King Charles, and Price he married in the 2d Year of King James II. Upon
Enquiry into the matter, he was Acquitted by virtue of their Majesty's most
Gracious Pardon.

Anne Griscall was indicted for stealing a Sheet, a Cupboard-Cloath and an old
Mantle, value about 10 s. from Ralph Dean, on the 6th of August It was fully
proved that she confessed it, and having nothing to say was found Guilty, value
10 d.

Bryant Cane, one of the Gang that robbed Mr. Baker of S. Mary-le-Beae, on the
28th of Feb. last, was tried for the same: And the Evidence for the King said.
That he was one that helped to commit the Robbery, taking away 2 Silver
Tankards value 12 l. a Silver Salver value 12 l. a Cup 9 l. with abundance of
other Plate and Goods, all to the value of between 3 and 400 l. All which was
fully proved against him. The Prisoner denied it, and called for one Mich.
La^bert, John Rogers and Mr. Ambrey, to prove that he was in another Place when
the Robbery was committed, but no one appeared: In the end he was found Guilty
of ^y and Burglary.

David Floyd was indicted for killing one Rotherick Williams on the 2d of
September last, giving him a Mortal Wound upon the Left Eye with a Sword value
5 s. of the length of one Inch, depth 2 Inches, of which he dyed the 4th
Instant: The Prisoner and the Deceased were together in Shandois street, in an
Alehouse, and drew their Swords, and the Prisoner was heard to confess that he
gave him the Wound, which he said he did at one Pass. The Prisoner upon his
Trial said, That the deceased quarrelled with him in the House, and broke open
a Door upon him, calling him Coward, and what he did was in his own defense:
But that did not prevail with the Jury, but he was found Guilty of Manslaughter.

Lucey Jeffiries was tried for robbing Mrs. Mary Megs of Thistleworth of 8
Cambrick Handkerchiefs value 8 s. two Silver Spoons 22 s. 2 Forks 13 s. 2 yards
of Silver Fringe 20 s. with a Gelding colored bright Bay value 8 l. besides
several other Goods of great value, etc. The Evidence was Mrs. Meggs, who said,
That the Prisoner was her Servant, who she entrusted to look to her House, in
her Absence; but she proved false and robbed her: and 2 Spoons and 2 Forks, and
other things Mrs. Meggs found in her Bed, at another House adjoining, being the
Wash-house, where the Prisoner lay: The Horse was brought by a Man near to Mr.
Fluch's Brew house, and given to a Boy to lead, he promising to give the Boy a
Penny, but he run away, and came no more to fetch the Horse. The Evidence was
not very positive as to her, for that she discovered it to her Mistress when
she came from London, viz. That the House was robbed by some, who had reared a
Ladder up to a Chamber Window, for the Window was left open. Upon the whole,
after a distinct Hearing she was Discharged.

Anne Braseby and William Goodspeed, a Boy of about 15 years, were both tried
for robbing the House of John lace Gent. at West Ham in Essex, on the 6th of
September last, of a Silver Cup value 5 l, 4 Spoons value 40 s. The Cup was
found upon them, but the Spoons ( Braseby confessed before the Justice) were
melted down. The Prisoners were Persons that old belong to the Poppet Shows in
Bartholomew Fair: The Woman was taken in More fields, hid under a Bench, and
the Boy was taken in Bartholomew Fair. They had nothing material to offer,
having been old Offenders; yet the Evidence did not affect the Boy so much as
the Woman, so he was acquitted, but she was found Guilty of Felony.

Luke Braseby was tried for a Misdemeanour, for receiving into his Hand half an
Ounce of Clippings, and for Concealing of it, to the great Encouragement of
Clippers, etc. The Evidence swore, That the Clippings were found in the
Prisoner's Breeches, in a little Box, and there was a small File found in the
Prisoner's House besides. The Prisoner denied it, but he was found Guilty.

Richard Haksworth was tried for stealing 11 Deal Boards value 9 s. 2 d. 3
Frames 3 s. and 2 wooden Benches 12 d. on the first of July last, from John
Hare of Stepney; but it appeared that he was employed by the Prosecutor to work
for him, and no Felony could be proved, to he was acquitted,

Henry Chawk of Hillingdon was indicted for stealing a Trunk, containing
several Clothes in it, from Sir Edward Norris Knight, on the first of October
last. He was taken at Staynes, and owned the Fact; so he did at the Trial,
begging the Mercy of the Bench. He was found Guilty of Felony.

Andrew Burnet and Lion Fountain, of S. Martins in the Fields, were both tried
for robbing Mr. Roger Shakesbey, on the 6th instant, of a black Hat value 14 s.
a Peruque 10 s. The Evidence swore, That the Prisoners met Mr. Shakesbey and
some others as they were taking Water at Salesbury stairs, and that Lion
Fountain set upon Shakesbey and beat him, and his Hat and Peruque fell off,
but he could not say they took them; so they were Acquitted. But another
Indictment was ordered to be drawn against them forthwith.

John Lowbridge alias Spencer was indicted for stealing a Mare, colored gray,
price 5 l. on the 9th of Oct^ber instant, from Thomas Hammond: The Mare was
owned to be Hammond's, and the Prisoner sold her to one Cooper for 44 s. and
the Money was paid at the Crown Inn in Watwick-lane. He was Acquitted of the
Middlesex Indictment, and a new Indictment was ordered against him on London
side, upon which he was tried and found Guilty.

James Batrone was arraigned for stealing 3 Silver Spoons, on the 25th of
September last, value 27 s. from Stephen Butcher; which he immediately confessed,
etc.

Jane Eaton and Katharine Jones were indicted for breaking the House of John
Presc^t, on the 10th of September, taking away ^0 yards of Flaxon Cloth value
26 s. and another Irish Piece of Cloth, value about 13 s. There came 3 Women to
the Shop, and whilst the Maid of the House was above Stairs, Eaton was soon to
carry away one Piece of Cloth, which was found upon her, and the other piece
was found upon Jones, they were both found Guilty.

Anne Henderson was tried for stealing a Silver Tankard from Mr. Jeremy Dod,
value 4 l. 19 s. Mr. Dod said, That the Prisoner and another Woman came to his
House and called for Drink, and after the other Woman went away with the
Tankard, and the Prisoner was stopped, but the Tankard was never produced again.
She made a frivolous Defense for herself, and produced some Evidence that gave
a favorable Account of her former Behavior: But she endeavoring to get away
without paying the Reckoning, etc. She was found Guilty.

Thomas Rowland was tried for stealing from William Bird, in the King's
Highway, on the 29th of July last, 1000 Yards of Bone-Lace value 1200 l. The
Evidence was, That the Prisoner did confess the stealing of the Lace to one
Buckle and others, but Bird was not produced against him. The Prisoner urged,
That it was Malice in the Prosecutor, and denied the Fact, but the Matter being
fully proved, he was found Guilty of the Robbery.

He was a second Time indicted for robbing John Christmas, a Carryer, on the
High way of 84 l. 9 s. The Evidence swore, That the Prisoner and 5 more met
Christmas in the Road, and robbed his Wagon, and after they shared the Money;
which was clearly proved, and he had nothing to offer, being an old Offender,
he was found Guilty of that Robbery also.

George Brock and Richard James were both Indicted for stealing 8 Ewe Sheep,
value 4 l. 16 s. from William Breteridge of Kensington: James confessed it, but
Brock pleaded Not Guilty; and the Evidence being called, they deposed, That the
Prisoners offered some of the Sheep to sale to a Butcher in Newport-Market, and
took him to see the rest in Dog and Bitch-yard, in Damnation-Ally; the Prisoner
laid it upon Richard James, and had no Evidence, so he was found Guilty of
Felony.

James Hammond was tried for the Murder of one Francis S^ent of Stepney, with
a Shovel, value 4 d. giving him a Mortal Wound upon the Head, on the 9th of
October last. It seems that the Prisoner threw his Shovel at a Sow in the Yard,
and chanced to give the Deceased the Wound, which the Surgeons declared was the
Cause of his Death. The Prisoner did not deny it, as to matter of Fact, and
called some Evidence, who spoke well of his Behavior. He was found Guilty of
Manslaughter only.

John Ra^d^le was indicted for stealing a Silver Tankard from John Newell, on
the 2 d. of September last: But the Evidence could not swear positively against
him, only that he was a Lodger at the Prosecutor's House, and was going away
without Leave, etc. which gave the Prosecutor occasion to suspect the Prisoner;
and the Prisoner confessed that one Suffolk had the Tankard, and was gone aside
with it, and could not be found; yet the Jury were so kind as to acquit him.

Susannah Sta^ley was indicted for Picking the Pocket or privily stealing from
Thomas Oliver 2 s. 6 d. in Money, on the 3d instant, etc. Oliver said, That she
met him on Tower Hill and asked him to drink, he refusing it she picked his
Pocket, but none of the Money was found about her. The Prisoner denied it, and
said that she was Innocent, and the Court thought the Old Man might mistake the
Person. She was Acquitted.

L -- R -- of Stepney was indicted for robbing Elizabeth Buckstone of 2 Gold
Rings value 17 s. a Nutmeg-grater 7 s. and 7 l. in Money, on the 13th instant.
The Evidence was Mrs. Buckstone and her Son, who deposed, That the Prisoner and
2 other Men came to drink at the Prosecutor's House, and after they were gone
she missed the Money and Goods, they going away without paying the Reckening,
There was no Person in the House besides the Prisoner and the other two; he was
brought in Guilty of Felony.

Anne Armerer was indicted for stealing a piece of Stuff value 10 s. from James
Cummins, but no Evidence appearing against her, she was immediately Acquitted
without paying her Fees, she being a poor Woman, etc.

Thomas Rogers and Anne Rogers were tried for Clipping 40 pieces of Silver. The
Evidence swore, That there were Shears, and Robbers to rub Money, and a File and
some Clipping, etc. found in the Prisoners House in Eling Parish, near Acton;
all which were produced in Court, in Testimony against them, as also a Parcel
of clipped Money, which was found in the bottom of a Chest. The Prisoner urged,
That he found the clipped Money, and they both denied it stiffly, and that they
never used the Tools, neither did they hide them from any Body, using several
extenuating Arguments to stiffle their horrid Crime; which came to no good
Effect, for they were both found Guilty of High Treason.

Thomas Rogers was singly indicted, a second Time, for a Misdemeanour, in
Harboring of Thieves in his House, keeping them from Justice, as High-way-men,
etc. The Evidence said, That several High-way-men used to meet at the
Prisoner's House, at Eling, near Acton, where they were put into a dark Room,
to prevent Discovery, and from thence they were wont to distribute themselves
abroad to rob, etc. And that the Prisoner did once set a Grazier that was going
by his Door, and two High way men went out and robbed him immediately. He had
little to say, but denied all that was sworn against him; he was looked upon as
a notorious base Fellow, for there were several Wagons robbed within this
twelve Months, going that Road, through his Instigation. The Prisoner stood out
to the last that he knew nothing of it, yet he was found Guilty of the
Misdemeanour.

Joseph Jones was indicted for getting Clipings privately into his Custody, and
concealing of them, to the great Encouragement of that Profession. The Evidence
said, That there was a Noise of Filling heard in his Chamber, in the
Nightime; and there was a Box of Clippings found under a Chest of Drawers, by
the Woman that used to clean his Room. The Prisoner denied it, and said that
another Young Man lodged with him, and knew nothing how the Clippings came
there, etc. yet he was convicted of the Misdemeanour.

Elizabeth Firmin was arraigned for stealing a Silver Porringer, value 50 s.
from Arthur Berester: But the Felony being committed in April last, she was
Acquitted by virtue of their Majesty's most gracious Pardon.

ON Thursday Night the Court adjourned till Saturday Morning 8 a Clock, at
which time being set, they proceeded as follows.

Daniel Juxon was indicted for an Assault upon one Robert Russel. It was
evidenced that he came to rob his House, and Russel opposing him he struck him
with a Hammer: The Prisoner could not invalidate it, so he was found Guilty.

Elizabeth Cox was innicted for a Misdemeanour, in putting off 29 Pieces of
false and counterfeit Money: But the Evidence could not swear positively
against her, only that she was wont to change Broad Money for clipped. The
Prisoner pleaded her Innocence, but upon the whole she was found Guilty of
changing bad Money for good.

Edward Stephens was tried for the like Fault, in passing off 36 pieces of
false Money: Which was fully evidenced against him, and that he put off three
pound for 2 Guineas. The Prisoner denied it stiffly, yet that availed him
nothing, for he was found Guilty.

Thomas Dant was indicted for stealing a Silver Tankard, value 7 l. 2 Dram
Cups 5 s. 2 Yards of Flanders-Lace, value 10 s. and other Goods, from
Bartholomew Hunt. The Evidence was Mrs. Hunt and others, who said, That the
Prisoner and another Person came to the said Hunt's House, and being above
stairs, they pretended to write Letters, and a little time after one of them
went away, and the Tankard was gone, and the Prisoner was not presently stopped,
but was taken afterward, and did confess that he took away the Goods: But upon
the Trial he denied it, and said that there were other Company in the Room
besides him, but he had no Evidence to prove it: He was found Guilty.

The Trials being over, the Court proceeded to give Sentence as follows,

Burnt in the Hand 9.

John Stephens, John Clarke, David Floyd, George Brock, Richard James, James
Hammond, L -- R --, Thomas Dant and James Batrone.

To be Transported, 2

Henry Chawke and Anne Brassbey.

To be Whipped 3.

Margaret Kelly, Elizabeth Vaughan and Anne Griscal.

Received Sentence of Death 12.

M -- H --, Constance Wainwright, John Lowbridge, Jane Eaton, Katharine Jones,
Anne Henderson, Thomas Castle alias Cassey, Peter Vallard, Bryant Cane, Thomas
Rowland, Thomas Rogers, and Anne Rogers his Wife.

Thomas Castle, Peter Vallard and Thomas Rogers, were ordered to be Drawn upon
a Sledge to the place of Execution, to be hanged by the Neck, cut down alive,
their Bowels burnt, their Bodies quartered, and to be disposed of at their
Majesty's pleasure. And Anne Rogers was ordered to be burnt alive.

Luke Brassbey fined 10 Groats, and to remain in Prison till he find good
Sureties for his peaceable Behavior. Daniel Juxon was fined 4 Nobles, and to
find good Sureties. Joseph Jones was ordered to remain till he find Sureties
for his quiet behavior for the future. Elizabeth Cox and Edward Stephens were
both finded 5 Pound a piece.

William Hodges having given in Bail for his appearance, to answer what should
be alleged against him, did now move for to be discharged; but the Court being
pleased to tender him the Oaths, he refused to comply; whereupon he was ordered
to continue upon Bail till further Order.

Turner a Bookseller, for publishing a Seditious Libel against the Government,
entitled, A Bargain dear bought, gave Bail to appear next Sessions.

Cap. Rider was discharged from all Recognizances.

Lion Fountain, Andrew Burnet and Elizabeth Firmin, notwithstanding their
being acquitted, were ordered to remain till they find sufficient Sureties for
their better Conversation; Firmin being known to the Court to have been a
notorious Offender.

Mary Ellis of Westminster was indicted for Felony, and called to answer, but
did not uppear, she being lately fled from Justice.

The next ensuing Sessions was ordered to begin at Justice-Hall in the old
Bailey, on Wesnesday the 10th of December.

God Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. THO. PILKINGTON Mayor.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
These are to give Notice to all Persons, for the Benefit of the Public, That
Mr. Elmy, Professor of Physic, and Operator, of known Integrity, and above 25
Years practice. Lives at the Blue Ball in Whale-Bone Court, at the Lower End
of Bartholomew-lane by the Royal Exchange, who most safely and expeditiously
Cures Deafness and Noise in the Ears in any of what Age soever, (if Curable)
and at first Sight, by Inspection, Resolves the Patient if so or not, as most
Eminent Persons of. Quality in this City can Testify. He has likewise a most
excellent Gargarism or Mouth-Water, which will make black or yellow Teeth as
white as Ivory, in a few times using; and it will certainly cure the Scurvy,
and all other Diseases incident to the Mouth, Teeth and Gums, which in many
persons causes a stinking Breath, which (by the Blessing of God, and the use
of this Water) I dare affirm you will be freed from those Maladies before
mentioned, with Directions. His Pills only prepared for the French Disease, and
the Running of the Reins, may be had in Boxes of several prices, with other
Venereal Arcana's, as occasion serves.

There is now Published, The Politics of Europe, or, A Rational Journal
concerning the present Affairs of the Time; giving an Account of the present
State of Europe, with regard to its Two most Active Powers; William the Third,
and Lewis the Fourteenth. price 6 d. The Continuation of which Journal will be
now published every Saturday in a single ^heet. Sold by Langley Curtiss, at Sir
Edmondbury God-fry's Head, near Fleet-bridge.

In Plow-Yard in Gray's Inn Lane, lives Dr. Thomas Kirlcus a Collegiate
Physician, and Sworn Physician to Charles II. until his Death: Who, with a
Drink and Pill, hindering no Business, Cures all Ulcers, Scabs, Scurfs in the
Face, or elsewhere; King's Evil, Leprosy, and Venereal Disease, expecting
nothing if he Cures not Of the last, he has Cured about 500 persons in this
City, many after Fluxing. It quickly and safely Cures it in the beginning,
which cannot be done with Mercury, without danger of Life. The Drink is 3 s.
the Quart, the the Pill 1 s. the Box, which is two Purges. They excel all
Purges, in chansing all Crudities and Impurities, and so prevent and Cure many
Diseases, and especially the G^ut and Stone. In all Diseases he gives his
Opinion for nothing.

SEveral Persons, who were lately Convicted for very Wicked and Notorious
Crimes, did receive the Benefit of their Majesty's Most Gracious Pardon upon
their respective Knees, in open Court: Whose Names are exactly inserted as
follows.

Philip Williams Mary Carry Christoph. Jones Anne Yates Mary Jones William
Banister Philip Mackquear George Crawford Andrew Brown William Rolph William
Bristow John Wilson William Wright James Gardyner William Tippet William Gold
Isaac Vallence Thomas Fisher Richard Bourne Thomas Dod Thomas Read John Carter
Sarah Tailor Mary Quarles William Wilson Joauna Brown Anne Hereford James
Arden Susannah T^rrel Robert Allen.
After which the Court was pleased to give them a good Exhortation, To beware
how they abused the King's Mercy, by returning to their former Course of Life,
for if so, they must expect no Pardon, but be brought to a severe and condign
Punishment.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtiss near Fleet-bridge. 1690.


